Julio Mazarin



THE HISTORY OF THE MANAGEMENTS OF Cardinal JVLIO MAZARINE, Chief Minister of
State of the CROWN of FRANCE. Written in Italian by Count Galeazzo Gualdo
Priorate. And Translated according to the Original. In the which Are Related
the Principal Successes Happened from the Beginning of His Management of
Affairs till His Death.

Tom. I. Part I.

LONDON: Printed by H. L. and R. B. in the Year 1671.

To their most Serene HIGHNESSES the Duke and Duchess Regent of Modena and
Regio, etc.
CArdinal JULIO MAZARINE'S Government of Affairs, has deserved all the
Applauses that Fame can give. The World has admired him as the Product of a
Phoenix. I have writ his History; And as he has been the Splendor of our
times, I think it proper to bring him to the Feet of your Highnesses of Este,
who are the most splendid Ornaments of all Italy. In the Heroic Actions of so
great a Minister your most Serene Highnesses may behold your own proper Glory;
take therefore (as I most humbly supplicate) this testimony of my observance,
with that benignity which is proper to the Greatness of your most Serene
Family, known for thousands of years to be the true Seminary of Heroes. There
is no room for Panegyricks in this short Dedication, neither ought your Modesty
to be wronged by my weak Pen, with inferior Praises to your unexpressible
Merits; and therefore with a most humble submission, asking Pardon for this my
boldness, I rest,

Your most Serene Highnesses most humble and most obsequious Servant, Galeazzo
Gualdo Priorato.

TO THE Reader.
THE HISTORY of the Managements of Cardinal Julio Mazarine is a matter most
proper and most curious for Posterity. The Rules this man went by will serve for
a most profitable Example to whomsoever shall have the Fortune to pass thorough
the degrees of the like Sphere. Histories do mention many Statesmen with
Applause and Veneration, and the Managements of the late Cardinal Richlieu are
Celebrated with more then humane Attributes, as if Nature had given him the
preeminence of all her Graces.

Without doubt Richlieu was a great Politician, a great Minister of State; and
a man may truly say, that for Humane Prudence France never had his equal. He
knew, loved, and had in so much esteem the vivacity of Mazarine, that
oftentimes he has been heard to say, that this man by his ability and his
fortune would surpass not only his Master, but the most sublime Wits that have
guided States and Monarchies. Richlieu was not at all deceived, for whoever
compares their Actions, shall not find them equal.

Richlieu was a Frenchman, Minister of State to a King in his Majority,
strengthened by Kindred, Friends, and Parties. Mazarine an Italian, Minister to
a King in his Minority, and to a Regent of an emulous and suspected Nation,
without Relations, and no other friends but his own spritely Wit.

Richlieu was at the Helm when France was assisted by the Conjunctions of
Swedeland, Holland, the Protestant Princes of Germany, the Royal House of
Savoy, and many others; and enjoyed an entire obedience of its subjects: When
England naturally emulous of the Greatness of France was embroiled by Intestine
troubles, and when there was a perfect Correspondency with Pope Urban VIII.

Mazarine governed in a time that Holland was reconciled to Spain, that the
major part of the Princes of the Empire had deserted the Cause, the Swedes
abated in their Power, the English become formidable by their Victories; In the
heat of the Revolutions of the Kingdom, Persecuted by the Princes of the blood,
by the major part of the Grandees; by the Parliaments and by the People, and
under the Pontificate of Innocent X. little affecting his Person.

Richlieu acted with Rigor, and with too high Pretensions, ending his life in
no good opinion with the King his Master, disgusted with his vast Aims, and
left the War unquenched.

Mazarine deported himself with Affability and kindness, and exercised Humanity
more then Austerity. He died in complete favor with their Majesty's, who
lamented his loss with tears, and was he wailed by his very Enemies. He gave
his King a great Queen for his Wife, and with her the Peace so longed for by
the Kingdom; with so great advantages, and so much Reputation, that the most
Christian King Lewis XIV. may rightly be instyled the Great; being that France
has never had greater strength in Forces, nor a greater King for Valor, and
all other Eminent Virtues. The Reader will pardon the feebleness of my Pen, if
it has not sufficiently expressed the merits of so great a man for his
Actions, having brought forth Effects above the order of Nature, would require
a Style Supernatural, not to say Divine, to celebrate them.

The HISTORY of the Managements of Cardinal MAZARINE. Lib. I.
HE was born in the Year 1602, at Piscina in Abruzzo the 14th. day of July, son
of Peter Mazarine, and Hortensia Buffalini.

In his Infancy he was instructed in the Rudiments of that tender Age, and by
little and little in all those Exercises befitting a Gentleman.

In the Jesuits College at Rome he so cultivated his Understanding, that the
vivacity of his Wit, and the sublimity of his elevated Mind, shined forth even
to Admiration.

He completed his course in Philosophy, at the Age of 17. maintaining
Conclusions in the most subtle Points, to the Wonder of all men.

His courageous heart began to be inflamed with desire of new things, and to
see and be informed of the Manners and Qualities of foreign Nations; for that
purpose he accompanied Don Girolamo Colonna, (now a Cardinal) into Spain, and
together with him studied the Law in the University of Alcala, and in a short
time he became perfect in the Spanish Tongue. While he was intent upon his
Studies, it happened that his father, being accused of a certain Homicide, was in
some trouble, and having no other sons, (for Alexander the younger brother was
become a Dominican) so that he was obliged to return to assist his father in
his troubles, where he arrived with all diligence, and bestirred himself in his
Defense so efficaciously, that he was cleared from his accusations.

He had no sooner Accomplished the Age of 20 years, when as his Heroic Genius
excited him to the desire of Arms, and being favored by the House of Colonna,
he obtained to be chosen Captain Lieutenant of the Colonels Company in the
Regiment of the Prince of Palestrina; he led his Company to Milan, where he
came acquainted with Giovanni Francesco Sacchetti, Commissary General of the
Popes Soldiers, sent to take possession of the Valtoline; and in the
management of diverse smaller Affairs he made appear so much Ability, that he
was soon employed in matters of greater moment, performing them to the entire
satisfaction of those who employed him, and of the parties with whom he
Negotiated.

He made a Relation of the Occurrences in the Valtoline, full of such exquisite
Observations, that Torquato Conti, General of the Popes Forces, sent them to
his Holiness, that perused them with much satisfaction and commendation of
Mazarine, who by his sweet carriage, and by Gaming, in which Fortune was very
favorable to him, he increased his acquaintance with great men, and gained the
good will and esteem of all that conversed with him.

The Pope afterward being desirous to disburden himself of the charge of the
War, sent Giovanni Ginetti, brother to the Cardinal of that name, to the
aforesaid General Conti, and to Commissary Sacchetti, with order to disband the
Soldiers, which being done, Conti returned into Germany, and the two Brothers
Sacchetti retired to Fano, where Cardinal Sacchetti was Bishop, Mazarine being
their great friend and familiar Acquaintance accompanied them.

The Cardinal was made Legate of Ferrara, and Superintendent of the Military
Forces of that Government; Giovanni Francesco Sacchetti being bred a Soulider,
commanded the Militia, and took Mazarine along with him, in whom he confided
above all others.

Giovanni Francesco afterward returning to Rome, Mazarine went also along with
him, and endeavored by all means to enter into the Service of Cardinal Antonio
the Popes Nephew, knowing how generous and obliging he was toward his
Servants, but he was hindered by the malice of those that envied his Endowments.

He strove likewise to put himself into the Court of Cardinal Francesco; but
there also he received little encouragement, that Cardinal not being inclined
to favor so Aspiring a Wit.

Perceiving therefore that he had no luck in that Court, and having failed of
making his Fortune by his Sword, he returned again to his Studies; declaring
that Virtue, although she be suppressed by Envy, yet he is always Master who
possesses her, nor can she be taken away by any thing but Death, which levels
all men.

In a years time he made a great progress in the study of the Laws, improving
still his Friendship with the Family of Sachetti.

In the mean while the war of Mantua brake out by the death of Duke Vincenzo
last of that Line; whereupon the Pope resolved to dispatch Giovanni Francesco
Sachetti to Milan, with whom likewise went Mazarine, who quickly introduced
himself into the management of those weighty public Negotiations, with entire
satisfaction of Sachetti, and of all that treated with him, having a Genius so
applicable to the humor of all Nations, that when he negotiated with the
Ministers of Spain, he knew how to form himself to their garb, and with the
Frenchmen according to their mode; but withal he had so pleasing a manner in
his Discourse, accompanied with so modest a Civility, that every one was
ambitious of his Conversation.

The occasion being come (which I call Fortune) that Sachetti was to depart for
Rome by reason of his Indisposition, and afterward by the death of one of his
Brothers, the Superintendency of all those Affairs was by him (in his absence)
left in the hands of Mazarine, by which means he had a large Field to give
proof of his Parts and Capacity, advertizing continually the Court of Rome of
what passed, by Letters so well indicted and relishing, that the Pope greatly
delighting in them, resolved to continue him in his Service, omitting to send
any other in the place of Sachetti, who was graced by His Holiness with the
Government of his House, which Place was vacant by the death of Sachetti his
brother lately deceased.

The rumors of the War afterward increasing, Urban deliberated to send
Cardinal Antonio his Nephew, Apostolical Legate into Piemont, and gave him
Monsignor Panziroli for his Coadjutor, with the Title of Nuntio, who was
afterward Cardinal and Secretary of State in the Pontificate of Innocent X.

Mazarine having notice of this, went in all haste to Bologna, to inform the
Cardinal of what had passed, and from thence to Rome, to give His Holiness a
distinct Account of all those Negotiations, with due Reflections thereupon.

The Pope was highly satisfied with his acute Discourse, and judged it
necessary to make use of him, as one who besides his being well instructed in
all things, had already acquired great credit and esteem amongst them with whom
he had negotiated; wherefore he dispatched him back to Cardinal Antonio,
ordering him to make use of his Service, having found him capable of all
Employment.

He found the Cardinal still at Bologna, and in a long Discourse together, His
Eminency rested so highly satisfied, that immediately he sent him to Count
Collalto, the Emperors General, who quatter'd at St. Benedetto in the
Territories of Mantua. He insinuated himself so far into the favor of the said
Count, that having dispatched Piccolomini for some Affair to Cardinal Antonio,
gave him to understand, that he was so well satisfied with Mazarine, that he
would rather treat with him then with any other, declaring himself not at all
content with the austere manner of proceeding of the Nuntio Panzirolo.

In the mean time Don Gonzales de Cordoua, Governor of Milan, was gone with
the Spanish Army to besiege Casal in Monferat, but with ill success; for that
place being well fortified, and well defended by Monsieur de Toiras, held out
so long, till the French Army passing the Alps, it behoved the Spaniards to
quit the Siege and retire.

The Catholic King, much unsatisfied with Don Gonzales, recalled him into
Spain, and sent thither Governor and Captain General Marquess Ambrosio
Spinola, the famous Soldier in the Wars of Flanders.

In the mean while the Pope and the Cardinal Legate efficaciously endeavored
to divert the approaching ruin of Italy, by seeking an Accommodation. Mazarine
was before all others employed, and knowing how to lay hold on the occasion,
labored to ingratiate himself with all parties, and amongst the rest he
captivated the good will of Charles Emanuel the potent Duke of Savoy, in such a
manner, that that wise Prince finding him capable of the most important
Affairs, desired him to make a Voyage into France, to endeavor by his
perspicacious Wit to prevail with Cardinal Richlieu to stop the French Army
from passing over the Mountains.

Thereupon he went with leave of the Cardinal Legate and the Nuntio to Lions,
where Richlieu was already arrived with the French Army; He had conference with
his Eminence, proposed diverse Expedients, and used all Art to stop him, but all
in vain.

This was the first time that ever Richlieu saw Mazarine, and although his
Proposals were little to his liking, nevertheless he was extremely pleased with
his so pertinent manner of discourse, affirming that he had found him far
beyond what he expected; so that in those few days Mazarine staid at Lions, he
so well knew how to deport himself with that great Minister of State, that he
ingrafted himself deeply in his favor. But failing to serve the Duke as he
heartily desired, he endeavored at least to render him another service of no
small moment, which was to persuade Prince Thomas his son, who was then at
Chambery in Savoy, to return into Piemont, to avoid an open breach with the
Crown of France, which his Presence in those parts might occasion.

The Duke labored by all means, with the assistance of the Spaniards and
Imperialists, to oppose the designs of the French; Mazarine had his eye
continually on the Liberty of Italy, and on the Conservation of Mantua at that
time besieged; which was one of his principal Instructions; and seeing the
maintaining Duke Charles of Nevers in the possession of his Hereditary
Countries in Italy depended on the Protection of the French, he advertised the
Ministers of the most Christian King of the powerful Forces of the Confederate
enemies, that Cardinal Richlieu might opportunely provide against them, and
shun the approaching danger. To this, and to the easier Acquist of Pignerol,
Spinola's clashing with the Duke of Savoy, and refusing to assist him in such
manner as he desired, did not a little conduce; and was cause that he died
afterward with discontent; and that the Imperialists missed of obtaining their
designs.

The Duke sent the Abbot Scaglia into Spain, to represent to the Catholic
King, that Spinola giving ear to the Propositions of the Cardinal Legate for an
Accommodation, occasioned all the ill success, and that the French through his
fault were got on this side the Mountains, for which the King being full of
indignation against Spinola (in opposition to whom there wanted not the
Suggestions and Arts of those that envied his Employment) resolved to take from
him all Authority and Command of the Army, which through so great experience of
his worth he had conferred upon him.

Mazarine continuing a Mediator between each party, demeaned himself with such
exquisite Sagacity, and with so sweet a manner Negotiating, sometimes with one,
sometimes with another, that he rendered himself equally beloved and confided in
by all; and continuing by Play and Familiarity to acquire every ones
Friendship, he came at length to penetrate into the most hidden Caballs, and to
discover the most secret Designs. He by this means seasonably advised the Duke
of Mantua's General of the Surprisal, the Imperiallists were plotting against
that City on the side of the Mincio, not over carefully guarded by the
Besieged. Spinola in the mean while had laid siege to Casal with a most
flourishing Army, and had begun very much to streighten it. Mazarine brought on
new Treaties, and persuaded Spinola to condescend to some honorable and honest
Accommodation. He formed a Writing to the satisfaction of the Duke of Savoy, of
Spinola, and of Colalto, and immediately went to find the King of France at St.
John di Moriana, (who staid there expecting the yielding up of Montmelian
attaqu'd by his Forces) and brought back from the King what he desired.

He returned into Piemont, but in those few days of his absence the face of
Affairs being changed by the surprise of Mantua, as also by the death of the
Duke of Savoy; and that Spinola was far advanced in the siege of Casal, his
first Projects were confounded, and he was forced to mould new ones, with which
he went back to the most Christian King at Paris, by order of his Patron
Cardinal Antonio.

He was received there with great Honor, and demonstrations of high Esteem for
his Person, and obtained His Majesty's assent to the Agreement, with which he
hastened to find Vittorio Amadeo the new Duke of Savoy and Collalto.

He demonstrated to them the good inclination of the King to the accord, and
left them satisfied and inclined to the Peace. But because Spinola longing to
take Casal, seemed likely to withdraw himself from the Treaty; Mazarine went
again to find him at the Camp, and with convincing Reasons disposed him to the
Agreement. He requested that for the Honor of the King and himself the City
and Castle of Casal might be deposited in his hands, the French retaining still
the Citadel, promising to resign up the said City and Castle within the term
of 15 days; and that Mantua should likewise be delivered up to that Duke: for
the performance of which he offered in Hostage his own Son.

The King of France condescended to the Proposals of Spinola, and gave order to
his Lieutenants Generals to conclude the Treaty; but in the very point of
effecting it the King of Spain sent an Express, depriving Spinola of all
Authority: At which he was so much cast down and struck with grief, that when
Mazarine returned to give him an account of his Negotiation, and how he had
accomplished what Spinola had desired and proposed, he could get no other
Answer from him then these two words: V. S. es hombre da bien pero, jo tambien.
Your Lordship is an honest man, and I am so too.
And thus walking to and fro, and stamping, he showed himself to be agitated by
a most fierce and secret grief. Wherefore temporizing with artificial Excuses,
he gave no other Answer then the former words often reiterated.

Finally, Cardinal Antonio resolving to see the end of it, with the approbation
of the Duke of Savoy and Collalto, sent back Mazarine to Spinola, who was sick
in bed, and prevailed so much, that Spinola in the end not being able to resist
the force of the Reasons produced by Mazarine, broke out into a grievous
lamentation in defense of his Honor: saying, M' hanno levato l' honor.
They have taken away my Honor.
Then calling one of his Servants, he ordered the King of Spains Letter to be
brought, by which all his Power was taken from him, and showed it to Mazarine,
that he might know the true cause of his Irresolution, and said again, M' hanno
levato l' honor.
They have taken away my Honor.


Afterward turning himself to the other side of the bed (with the Letter in
his hand) he aggravated his Misfortune, and the injury done to his Reputation,
and the Merit of so many Services performed by him to the Crown of Spain for 40
years together.

The business being in this posture, Mazarine by order of Cardinal Antonio
entered upon new Negotiations, and proposed a Suspension of Arms, but Spinola
being dead, and the Marquess di Sante Croce entering upon his Command, who
found all things in disorder by the death of the General, underwrit the Truce,
which was already subscribed to by the Duke of Savoy and Collalto. In the mean
while the French Army descended into Piemont, to relieve Casal, and each Party
hoping to win by their Arms, the business was in a ready way to be decided by
them.

To that purpose the French Army advance within sight of the place. The Legate
made use of Mazarine also in this occasion, who flying like Lightening, now to
one side, now to the other, behaved himself with such dexterity, that in the
very instant that both Armies were ranged in Battalia ready to engage, he
concluded the Peace, to the general satisfaction of all, and with so great
applause for himself, that by this action the way was opened to those Grandeurs
which afterward he arrived at, becoming in a manner absolute Moderator of the
greatest Affairs of the World.

Upon putting the Peace in execution the Spaniards by their slow departure out
of the Territories of Monferat, giving some apprehension to the French, they
presently conveyed several Troops into the Citadel of Casal, contrary to the
Articles of the Stipulation, whereat the Duke of Feria taking Alarm, advanced
part of the Army to fall upon the French in their disorderly return into
Piemont. Cardinal Antonio having advice thereof, so ordered the matter, that
Mazarine not only gave notice to the chief Commanders of the French Army, but
likewise by gentle means delayed Galasso and Piccolomini, who were advancing to
fight them; so that the French had time to retreat without any disturbance.

With new windings and Negotations he finally adjusted every thing, and by his
means the Peace was fully concluded at the Treaty at Chirasco, in which
Mazarine was the person that by the Popes order negotiated secretly with the
Duke of Savoy, and caused him to deliver up Pignerol to the King of France,
whereat the Spaniards took so great distaste, that calling him Traitor made
bitter complaints against him to the Pope and Cardinal Barbarine; who ignorant
of the private Orders given to Mazarine by His Holiness, and believing that he
had gone beyond those of his Patron, began to favor the Spaniards complaints,
denied to give him Audience, and solicited the Pope that he would appoint that
a Process might be drawn up against him.

The Pope to please the Cardinal his Nephew gives way to it, but underhand
encouraged Mazarine not to fear any thing, who was shunned and murmurr'd
against on all sides by the wicked and hollow-hearted Courtiers; Truth lying
hid, and Lies taking place, to please those on whom they had dependence.

At length, being admitted to the Audience of Cardinal Barbarine, with
sweetness of language and much respect he lamented the wrong done him, and the
slender Acknowledgments he had received in recompense of all his pains and
eminent services, performed to the Holy Church and all Italy; and so
efficacious were his Reasons, that the Cardinal was much mollified: but as
there was an Antipathy between their Genius and his malignant Enviers never
ceasing to torment him, the aversion he had conceived against him could never
be eradicated out of his heart.

Mazarine in the mean time by his courteous carriage and affability made it his
business to gain Friends and Acquaintance, declaring that men's Fortunes did
depend on their good Friends, who are preserved by means of Services and
Civilities, the most proper Instruments to captivate men's Affections.

And therefore putting in practice this Maxim, he began to gain the good will
of many, that were ambitious of his Friendship; by which means having at last
overcome all oppositions, and abated the bitterness of Barbarine, That
Preferment was offered him both by this Cardinal and his brother Cardinal
Antonio, that at other times he had sought after, and could never obtain; and
the Election being in his own power, he chose rather to serve Cardinal Antonio
then Francesco, their Humors suiting better together, for Antonio was of a
magnanimous spirit, and generous in the highest degree.

The Place he gave him was Vice-Treasurer, with an Assignment of 800 Crowns a
year, but His Eminence afterward having changed the Office of Treasurer to be
Legate of Avignon, declared him his Auditor, setting a high value on him for
those Affairs. And a little after the Pope willing to give him some sign of his
not-forgotten thankfulness, made him his Household Chaplain and Vice-Legat of
Avignon, and afterward sent him Nuntio Extraordinary into France, to solicit
the most Christian King for the Restitution of Lorrain to that Duke; as also to
endeavor to prevent the War which began to break out betwixt the two Crowns,
by the surprisal of Philipsbourg, and afterward of Treves, with the
imprisonment of that Elector.

But before he went from Rome he married two of his Sisters, Marguerit the
Elder to Count Girolamo Martinozzi of Fano, and Girolama the younger to Lorenzo
Mancini, both of them of ancient Families. Monsignor Mazarine taking his Voyage
toward France, in the Quality of Apostolical Nuntio Extraordinary, was kindly
received, and splendidly treated, by all the Princes thorough whose Dominions
he passed; but especially he found an extraordinary kind Reception in the Royal
Court of Savoy.

No sooner arrived at Paris, but he revived his Friendship with his former
Acquaintance, and suddenly gained a Sympathetical correspondence with all the
Statesmen and Grandees of that Court, and particularly contracted an intimate
Friendship with the Count de Chavigny, principal Secretary of State, Cardinal
Richlieu's greatest Confident and most employed by him.

The King, the Queen, and Richlieu himself, esteemed him highly, and the
Cardinal was never better pleased then when any occasion offered it self to
discourse with the Nuntio, in whom he admired the Acuteness, Eloquence, and
handsome way of representing of business. Chancing once to fall sick, the King
himself honored him with a Visit.

The Popes Mediation for Peace proving ineffectual by reason of the too high
Pretensions of both Parties, at the end of two years His Holiness recalled
Mazarine; who notwithstanding in his Nuntiature did not omit to perform many
important Services for the Holy See. He went directly to Avignon, where he
staid about six Months, demeaning himself with seemly decorum, and with all
affability: He finished and adjusted many things, and did not neglect to
cultivate a most intimate correspondence with Cardinal Richlieu, oftentimes
presenting him with diverse choice things from Italy.

Finally, having obtained leave to return to Rome, he went by Sea; and having
given the Pope and the Cardinal Nephew an account of his Negotiations, he was
received by them with all demonstrations of Esteem.

The Pope, who was a Prince of a deep understanding, taking delight to
discourse with a person of so lively a Wit, enriched with the knowledge of the
Affairs of the world, admitted him often to Audience, entertaining him for many
hours together. Cardinal Barbarine growing jealous of so great esteem and
familiarity, and not enduring that any one should insinuate himself so far in
his Uncles favor, rigorously forbid him his so frequent Visits, and cajoling
His Holiness with his Discourses, by which he had wrought upon him to be
content that Cardinal Antonio might be honored by the most Christian King with
the Protectorship of that Crown, to the great disgust of the Spaniards and
their Party, who increasing their disdain against Mazarine, as the Contriver of
this blow, they began to study by what means they might lessen him, and avoid
those prejudices to their Interests which they did prognosticate by his
professed Devotion to France. Though he did not enjoy the good Graces of him
that was prevalent in the Popes affections, yet by his extraordinary ability he
still maintained the Reputation he had merited for his good Services toward
the Holy See, and continued his Protection under Cardinal Antonio. Some
differences happening betwixt the House of Medici and Don Filippo Colonna, by
his Mediation they were composed.

And it was no small matter he did in hindering greater disorders, when that
unfortunate accident happened of the Gentleman of the Horse to the Marshall
d'Estree the French Ambassador. But as the best qualified and ablest men are
most envied, and most liable to Persecution and Malice, so he being watched on
every side, could not advance himself to those Honors, which the Malignity and
Emulation of others hindered him from. Whence the King of France perceiving
that this Person (for being well affectionated to his Crown) was persecuted by
the Spaniards, and esteeming it a dishonorable thing to keep idle and depress
an Understanding so sublime, took him near himself, with profession of great
esteem, and with offers of support, honor, and assistance.

Many other Princes of Italy proffered him considerable advantages in their
Courts. Vittorio Amadeo Duke of Savoy, a very intelligent Prince, particularly
invited him with much benignity to his Court. Resolving finally to pass into
France, he went thither in the beginning of the year 1639. and arrived just at
the time when Father Joseph the Capucine died, one (for his great Parts and
Experience in the Affairs of State) employed with great assurance by Cardinal
Richlieu in the Intrigues of the Kingdom. The King had nominated him to a
Cardinalship, and his Promotion was with all earnestness solicited by
Mazarine, whose Fortune it was not to obtain the Scarlet for Father Joseph,
seeing that the King named him instead of the other, declaring by this the
great esteem he had for him, in preferring him before any other of his Kingdom,
qualifying him besides with the Title of his Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of
the General Peace, which Mazarine valued more then his Recommendation to the
Cardinalship.

Few days after his Arrival in France His Majesty sent him Extraordinary
Ambassador into Piemont upon business of Importance, and particularly to win
to the French fide Prince Thomas, and to reunite those Princes to the chief of
their House. He dexterously achieved them both, though that which concerned
the first with Prince Thomas had not then its effect, for some impediments
which he could not suddenly surmount: but he fixed the second in such manner,
that France thereby received many advantages.

Returned from Piemont he waited upon Cardinal Richlieu into Languedoc,
honored by that great Politician with an entire Confidence; and his Zele for
the Kings Service was succesful, not only in the Affairs of that Voyage, but
also in remoter parts; for at the same time by his Negotiations he reduced the
strong Town of Sedan into the Kings power, which was a receptacle of
Malcontents. He was the man that designed the Attempt of Tortona in the State
of Milan, and took upon him to provide all things necessary for the gaining of
that City; and it was he likewise that drew the Prince of Monaco to the French
Party.

Finally, on the 16th. of December 1641. with universal Applause, he was
promoted to the purple robe, to the particular satisfaction of the King, and of
Richlieu, who was pleased to see him his Companion in the Ecclesiastical
Function, whom he already presaged his Successor in his Ministry. He prepared
for his journey to Rome, to receive the Hat, and to perfect many important
Commissions. But Richlieu's indisposition of body increasing, and the
machinations of his enemies growing stronger, to justle him out of the Kings
favor; he thought fit to cause him stop his journey, to make use of his help
and council (of which he had so good experience,) very useful in that rugged
conjuncture.

The King perfectly knowing Mazarines abilities: in the foreseen failing of
Richlieu, had oftentimes thoughts to make use of him, in direction of the
Affairs of the Crown, and had also discovered this his intent to some of his
Confidents, extolling him for the most able he knew to undergo this burden;
which gave much trouble to Mazarine, doubting with himself that such
manifestation of his Majesty might give Richlieu some jealousy; it being for
the most part the humor of Courtiers, to look with a scouling brow on those
they deem able to sustain the same charge with themselves; and therefore he
urged anew for leave to go to Rome, which was still denied him by the King, and
opposed by Richlieu himself, quite contrary to Mazarines expectation; besides,
Richlieu, before his death, assured His Majesty, that he could not better
trust the Management of his weighty Affairs to any, then to Mazarine.

Richlieu dying, the King immediately began to make use of Mazarines Advice and
Council, with open show of the value and confidence he had of his ableness and
fidelity, and to qualify him higher, caused him one day to sit in his
Presence, an honor that was never bestowed on Cardinal Richlieu in so many
years of his Attendance.

The King desirous he should take notice that the Choice he had made proceeded
solely from himself, assured him that of his own proper inclination he had
chosen him out from amongst so many excellent men of his Kingdom.

The Cardinal being very wary in his demeanor, conformed himself so well to
the humor of his Majesty, that he did not give him the least doubt of that
odious power, that he had abhorred in his Predecessor; from whence it happened
that he became in a short time disposer of the Kings Will and Trust.

By how much the more he saw himself advanced in his Princes favor, so much
the more did he reflect on his tottering Fortune; for while the King lay under
a languishing condition, he began to weigh what a difficult passage it would be
from a firm to a wavering Government, by the disorders, changes and
turbulencies, commonly happening in Minorities, especially the Queen Mother,
being of a Nation so much exposed to the jealousy of that Country.

The first trial the King made under the direction of Mazarine, was to render
his Armies victorious the next Campania; to the intent that the world might not
attribute his past Victories totally to the Government of Richlieu. Mazarine in
this occasion gave great proof of his dexterous abilities, by obtaining that
the Command of the Army in Flanders might be conferred on the Duke d' Anguien,
eldest son of the Prince of Conde, notwithstanding his Majesty had some
aversion against it.

The Kings sickness increasing with little hope of recovery, calling for
Mazarine, he communicated to him his intent of forming a Council without the
Princes of the blood; of which he intended to make him President. The Cardinal,
though astonished at so great honor, was not at all dazzled with the ambition,
but with great reverence demonstrated to his Majesty the disorders such a form
might cause; and with convincing reasons framed his answer in favor of the
Queen, comprehending also the Princes of the blood, as for what concerned his
own person, he beseech'd his Majesty that others might share in that honor,
which he thought too far exceeding his merit, and too probable to excite envy
against him, being a stranger.

The King, notwithstanding continued resolute, in his purpose, to limit at
least the Regency of the Queen, with Restriction of the Council to the
plurality of Voices; he was confirmed in this determination by the Prince of
Conde, who by the Authority he had above the other Counselors, imagined to
turn and wind all at his pleasure; wherefore the Council of Mazarine for the
uncontrolled Authority of the Queen, conformable to the examples of former
Regencies remained fruitless.

That which only remained to settle the Kings mind, was to have an assurance
that the Cardinal would not return into Italy after his death, wherefore having
earnestly besought him never to abandon his sons, importuned him to a direct
promise, as likewise the Queen, not to permit him upon any pretext whatsoever
to quit the Affairs; and to engage him the more, he was pleased that he should
answer for the Dauphine at the Holy Font in Quality of Godfather, together with
the Princess of Conde, confessing that he did it more straightly to oblige him to
his sons service. His Majesty well knowing the need he should have of him in
his unripe years.

The King dead, it seemed not convenient to the Queen, to suffer that Authority
to be retrenched in such manner which other Queens had enjoyed freely,
wherefore she permitted her self to be persuaded, against the sense and counsel
of the Cardinal, to make the Parliament annul the Will of her late husband;
which Mazarine foreseeing would prove a mortal blow to the State, and highly
prejudicial to the Regent her self, did not only forbear to appear in
Parliament, but likewise prepared himself to retire, which was by no means
assented to by the Queen, who having the Authority of the Regency confirmed to
her, not only assured him of an entire confidence, but engaged him also to
remain, minding him of his promise made to the King, never to depart from his
children, and notwithstanding the great oppositions made against Mazarine by
the enemies of Richlieu, and by the disaffected he carried himself so well,
that in a short time he engrossed all Affairs.

The Bishop of Beauvais, whom the Queen had added to the Council (where, in
those few days of his direction all things were fallen into disorder) being
excluded.

On the contrary, Mazarine entered upon the business of the Kingdom with very
lucky beginnings, when many important considerations would have been enough to
have discomposed the stoutest mind, in so dangerous a condition of so Infantine
a Minority.

The unquiet nature of the French desirous of Novelties, easy to be drawn into
sedition, the Court full of turbulent spirits, many prisoners set free, many
returned from their exile; others, who before, for their rebellious attempts,
durst not so much as show their heads now so arrogant, as to pretend a share in
the Government.

The Parliament depressed and discontented, desirous to recover their luster,
and dilate their power. The Provinces oppressed by the grievances of a long
War, more inclined to disloyalty then obedience; the Princes disposed to the
most desperate attempts to make their advantage of these Conjunctures, the
people animated to shake off so weighty a yoke. The apprehension not ill
grounded, that the Confederates of France fearing the unstable Resolution in a
woman's Regency, and for their own proper Interests, were ready to relinquish
their former Union. And lastly, all the Concerns of the Crown threatening on all
hands fear and terror. Yet nothing could dismay the courage of the Cardinal,
resolved to despise all danger for the Royal service. He applied himself
suddenly to strengthen and conserve the external and internal vigor of the
Kingdom. And procured in the first place to confirm the Confederates in their
Adherence to the Crown, writing to all with such assuredness of the stability
of the Regency in the established mutual Union, and with such motives of honor
and profit to themselves, that he easily confirmed them in their
Confederations; thus in that beginning was established to the Crown the Amity
of the Swedes, of the Duke of Savoy, of the Langrave of Hesse, of the States of
Holland, of the Catalonians, and of the Portugals, a League which rendered the
Power of France so much the stronger and feared, and which at last did so much
cooperate to the Conclusion of the Peace. And secondly, considering that
intestine evils are most dangerous, and aptest to destroy the Individual; and
foreseeing how much Civil discords do indamage a State, he placed all his care
to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom, by uniting the Royal Family, which was
easily brought to pass for some years.

To handsel the Regency with some egregious deed, he propounded, and against
the opinion of every one, undertook the Siege of Teonville, a place of great
importance, which happily succeeding, he gained great commendation.

Frieburg afterward being attacqued by the Army of the Elector of Baviere, with
manifest danger to be lost: he opportunely provided to relieve it, causing the
Queen to command the Duke of Anguien to join speedily his Troops to those of
Marshall Turenne, and to bring timely succors, which succeeded prosperously,
by which means not only the possession of that City was kept, which had already
capitulated; but also other considerable Conquests were acquired. The French
Armies passing beyond the Rhine, the Danube, and the Lech; and the Duke d'
Anguien having gained a singular victory; they overran Spire, Ghermensain,
Landau, Bindemo, Cronach, and Magonza.

By like advantages in those parts the Confederates were got in a condition to
lend their helping hand at any time of need, who by making themselves Master of
a great part of Franconia and Suevia, they became much stronger then their
enemies, but chiefly by the taking of Hoilbrun, yet an Imperial City of very
grear importance, confirmed to them by the Treaty of the Truce concluded at
Ulme, with the Elector of Bavaria.

He cooperated afterward to the Peace of Munster, and quickly saw it concluded,
with notable advantages to the Crown of France, to which he established the
possession of both the Alsatia's, and the two very strong places of Brijac and
Phillipsburg near the Rhine, opening a Pass into Germany at their pleasure.

By this Peace there did accrue to France the three Bishoprics of Metz, Tul
and Verdun, and by the creating Metz a Parliament, heretofore found a matter of
much difficulty, firmly established the controverted Jurisdiction of them, with
an absolute and perpetual possession ratified by the Emperor, and the several
Orders of the Empire.

The cares of the Cardinal were not restrained to these Expeditions only: but
at the same time he was likewise intent upon the Caballs of the Cabinet,
finding himself compelled by the Court-Intrigues, to apply himself to
extinguish in the beginning every spark of Civil trouble, and oft-times to ward
his own life from the treacheries of his enemies.

By this his care he saved himself from the Conspiracy contrived against him by
the Duke of Beaufort, who thinking the Cardinal an obstacle against his high
designs, by the occasion of a certain Collation which the Count of Chavigny
had prepared for the Queen at the Castle of Vincennes, which was in his
Government, whether the Duke came accompanied by many followers, with design to
murder him; the Cardinal Advertized of it, forbore to appear to the Treat,
saved himself in the Louvre, where the day following he caused Beaufort to be
arrested, and sent him with a strong Guard to the said Castle of Vincennes.

With admirable subtilty he raised a glorious Envy betwixt the Dukes of Orleans
and Anguien, enticing the former to the Incommodities of War, as well by the
Allurements of Glory, as by the diligent furnishing him with all things
necessary, to make it less irksom to him; by this means making use of the
Triumphs of the one, to moderate the haughtiness of the other, which was one of
his greatest Artifices, to enjoy the benefit of a well-concerted Union.

Hereupon the Duke of Orleans, marched into Flanders at the head of a most
puissant Army, and after the taking of Graveling, Mardike, and Dunkirk, by all
men esteemed impossible; he opened a way into the heart of Flanders, passed the
River Colma, and brought in a short time under the French Dominion Lens,
Bourbourg, Merville, Bettunes, St. Venant, Armentieres, Bergues, Courtray,
Ypres, la Bassee, Dixmude, Landresy, Furnes, and other places.

He put them upon few Undertakings that did not succeed; and though he failed
in that of Cambray, attempted by the Count d' Harcourt, yet it cannot be said
but that he merited great praise for the most accurate diligence that he showed
they ought to use in those Conjunctures, which in all probability would have
rendered the defense of that place more difficult, then the taking it, if his
Orders had been put in execution, according as he directed.

He caused to be sent to the Catalonians a considerable assistance, with which
they got Tortosa, Roses, and other places, and to give that people a fuller
assurance of the firm Protection of France, he made his brother the Cardinal of
Sancta Cicilia Governor of that Province.

In Italy after the Kings death many enterprises were begun by his directions
and Counsel, and many things done to the great benefit of the Crown. The Town
and Citadel of Aste were suddenly recovered; they gained great advantages in
the Siege of Turin, in the Enterprise of Pontestura and Vigevano, and many
other Expeditions prudently undertaken, although some were unsuccessful,
whether for the ill fortune of Prince Thomas of Savoy in the War of Italy, or
for the variable Accidents of War.

Considering moreover how beneficial the friendship of the Princes of Este
would be to the French in their Affairs of Italy, and making use of the happy
Conjuncture, when by the phlegm of some Ministers of Spain those Princes
thought themselves not treated according to their merit. He bent his thoughts
to draw them to the French party, beginning luckily with the Acquisition of
Cardinal Rinaldo d' Este, a Prince in earnest very worthy of that high esteem,
which he enjoys in the opinion of all the World, causing him to be honored by
the King of France with the Protection of that Crown in the Court of Rome; and
afterward obliging Duke Francesco his brother, by giving him the charge of
General of the Army of his most Christian Majesty in Lombardy: Both these, by
their generous actions have always upheld, (the one in Rome, the other in the
Army) the Reputation of the Crown of France, to their eternal glory and merit.

Mazarine, well knowing, that to attaque the Spaniards in their holds of Italy
would touch them to the quick, caused to be set out to Sea a very potent Fleet,
and aiming to gain some Post on the Shore of Tuscany, caused Orbitello to be
beleagured by the Army under Prince Thomas of Savoy by Land, and by the Navy
commanded by the Duke of Brese by Sea. But the Duke of Brese being slain at the
very first by a Cannon-shot, and the Prince probably ill served by his
Officers, the Action succeeded not, which otherwise was well designed by the
Cardinal, intending by the gaining of this place to facilitate the Enterprise,
which he had plotted against Naples, and to hinder the communication betwixt
that Kingdom and the State of Milan.

Likewise, in the other attempts made upon the same Kingdom by the Duke of
Guise they found no better fortune, for the sinister correspondencies of those
giddy headed Napolitans with the Crown of France, together with the contrariety
of their humors that hindered all good operations; yet whether they succeeded
or not, Mazarine gave not over to make his advantage of them, as potent
diversions for the Enterprises of Flanders, which were of greatest concerns,
being nearest to the heart of the Kingdom.

Mazarine desirous to recover the Glory of the French, which the ill success in
Italy had much eclipsed, with an incredible and unexpected resolution; that
Navy which was supposed incapable to appear in the Mediterranean for a long
time, was seen to return again the year following more formidable then ever,
under the Command of the Mareschals de la Milleray, and Plessis Pralin, with
which in a few days they possessed themselves of Piombino and Porto Longone in
the Isle of Elba, half belonging to the King of Spain, and half to the Duke of
Tuscany; by which Victories the Reputation of the French was much recovered,
the Applauses and Fame of the Victors echoing every where, to the great
advantage of the Neighboring Princes, especially of the Cardinals Barbarini,
who flying the indignation of Innocent the tenth, had sheltered themselves
under the Protection of the King of France; by the efficacious and powerful
Offices of Cardinal Mazarine; who by a noble Example of Gratitude upheld that
Family, which newly fallen from a potent and long Dominion (a warning to
elective Princes) knew not whether to turn themselves for a friendly Sanctuary.

Thus by the help of Mazarine, they saw themselves honored with the Protection
of the most Christian King; by which means they were in a short time
re-established by the Pope himself, and with a strange Metamorphosis embraced
again. The Comedy of their wandering ending in a strict Union and Alliance, by
the Marriage of one of the Popes Nieces Daughters to Don Maffeo Barberino, to
whom Don Carlo Prince of Pellestrina, renounced his Titles and Honors, himself
being promoted to the Scarlet, whereby he had a fair pretense to free himself
from the engagement wherein he had promised to wed no other then the Countess
Martinozzi, Mazarines Niece, who finding in this as in all other occasions the
usual experiment of working good out of evil, saw afterward his said Niece more
highly matched in the Family of Este, and Duchess of Modona.

It will not be amiss, since we are entered upon the discourse of this Family,
to give a touch of what Cardinal Mazarine, being chief Minister of State, did
in favor of the Barbarini in the War with the Duke of Parma, with whom most of
the Princes of Italy were joined in League, for the aversion that they bore to
Cardinal Barbarini, with whom they were generally dis-satisfied.

The War being kindled, the Fire seemed unextinguishable, not only because it
chiefly arose, as the common report went, from private passion, and particular
envy; and the flames daily increasing from those puffs of anger, the
discontents grew still higher, which according to the Contingencies of War
administered new matter of rancour. But also on the Popes Account, that he being
the Common Father, should with a constant resentment pretend a just title to
disturb the quiet of Italy by arms, when all Christendom, groaning so long
time under the weight of innumerable miseries, thought they might expect from
his Piety a paternal and serious application, to compose the inveterate motions
of War, and not to excite new ones. On the other side the interessed
Confederates, longing to abate the temporal power of the Ecclesiastical
Princedom; and to give a wholesome Admonishment to those, that being destined by
God to enjoy it for a season, are oftentimes unmindful of returning again to
their private condition, were resolved to maintain with all perseverance the
reputation of their Arms.

For this cause the mediation or the Spaniards and the Emperor for a
pacification proved a long time ineffectual; the King of France not omitting to
interpose his his Authority, for the service of her, to whose Assistance his
Ancestors had so often passed the Mountains, dispatched, by the Counsel and
dictates of Mazarine, the Marquess of Lionne to the Confederate Princes, to
whom he delivered his Message with such vigor and reputation, that by his
prudent Negotiations he ripened that fruit which Cardinal Bichi (who was
ordered by the King to manage the Treaty) afterward had the good fortune to
gather, by the Conclusion of the Peace, as acceptable and advantageous to the
Barberines, as afterward the memory of that War proved prejudicial to them.

The Cardinal likewise got no small reputation by composing the differences
between the Kings of Swedeland and Denmark, who were entering into a most cruel
War.

He showed himself also very constant in overcoming all the difficulties which
happened upon the Marriage of the Princess Maria Gonzago with Uladislao King of
Poland, brought to an end by his great Prudence. While the Affairs of France
went thus prosperously on, and that all Europe had their eyes fixed on the
greatness and power of that Crown, admiring the Ascendant Fortune of the most
Christian King, with the same Reflections wherewith heretofore were admired that
of the most victorious Emperor Charles the Fifth; on a sudden she saw her self
overwhelmed by those Civil broils which have always been the most powerful
mischiefs to depress her.

The first ground from whence these turbulent Revolutions arose was from the
Treasurer Emery, who was the Person that disposed the minds of the
Parlementarians of Paris to Commotions, by troubling them in their places,
hereby to raise money, not without the opinion of many, that he did this with
an intent to overthrow the Cardinal, who vigorously opposed such his dangerous
Undertakings, knowing the nature of the French to be most extremely violent for
their particular benefit.

For this cause therefore the Parliament of Paris having declared against the
Kings Government, the Queen thought to destroy this growing Hydra, by punishing
three of her Heads, giving order for the Imprisonment of the Counselor
Brussel, and the Presidents Blamenil and Charton, though Mazarine did greatly
impugn it, well perceiving that it was not yet time to stir the Humors, when
there was no likelihood to dissipate them, and it succeeded just so as he
foresaw; for the People having taken Arms and chained the streets, compelled
the Court to set free the prisoners, and to turn out Emery, to the great
prejudice of the Royal Authority, and to the emboldening of the Seditious to
undertake new Villainies.

The Cardinal on this occasion maintained, but it did not help him, that by the
rule of good Government they ought constantly to adhere to their resolutions
once taken, although they were not assumed with their due precautions, it being
always hurtful to Princes to recede from that which they have once pretended to
be observed by their Subjects.

From the like beginnings the Alterations plotted by the restless minds of
those who hoped to advance their private Fortunes greatly increased.

These disorders were fomented by the Coadjutor of Paris, allured by the hopes
of Mazarines ruin, to enter into his place of Chief Minister, being a person
of an high spirit, and very intelligent in the Affairs; and by the Count de
Chavigny likewise exasperated, seeing himself by the Queens aversion to him,
not in that full Credit and Authority which he had in the Consultations in the
time of Richlieu's Government: So that all things being in a confusion, and
impossible to provide against the disorders without. That flourishing and
potent Kingdom at the height of its greatest glory became a Scene of most
lamentable miseries, losing in one Campania the fruits of many others,
purchased with so much sweat, with so much blood, and with so great expense of
money.

The Cardinal sought nevertheless to hinder what he could the growth of these
disorders, and knowing how dangerous it would be to France if England should
declare for Spain, as it was by all Arts endeavored by the Spanish Agents, he
knew so wisely to manage the business, that he frustrated the Enemy's design,
and preserved the friendship of the English, though ever emulous and no
well-willers to the French.

The Events that after these commotions rent in pieces the Regency and all
France were infinite and deplorable; for although Mazarine with all sweetness
and gentleness did endeavor to smooth their minds by temporizing till the
Kings Majority, but the more he endeavored by these means to appease the
Animosities of the Seditious, the more they were hardened in their insolence,
and by open violence opposed the Orders of the Regent: whereupon by his advice
the Queen resolved to remove from Paris with the King, which she did on
Twelveth-night 1649.

For this cause the City was in a great commotion, and the Court in a state to
recover its due regard; but hereupon their Animosities against the Cardinal
grew higher, suspecting him to be (as indeed he was) the Author of this
Retreat; whence the fury of the People and Parliament breaking out against him,
he was by the later ordered to depart within eight days.

The Court stoutly supporting the Cardinal, resolved to block up Paris with the
Army, as it was forthwith done by the Prince of Conde, who, though he had his
Brother, his Sister, and his Brother in Law on the Parlements side, yet held
himself always united with the Regent and Mazarine, who failed not in the mean
while accurately to watch how to compose the differences. In this occasion
Cardinal Mazarine made manifest the height of his Intellectuals, the excellency
of his Skill, his Wit, and his Craft, joining himself now with the one, now
with the other Party, and finally crushing them both, remained Conqueror in
the field, and obtained the Laurel of a glorious victory.

Finding himself amidst these Intrigues, the Prince of Conde agrieved with the
Cardinal for breach of his promise, as he said, in not procuring the Government
of Pont de l' Arche for the Duke of Longueville his Brother in Law, declared
publicly, that he would not come to Court while the Cardinal was chief
Minister; who to take from the Prince all pretense of breach with the Regent,
offered his readiness to retire: but Conde afterward revolving in his thoughts,
that if the Cardinal absented himself, none could enter into the Ministry but
the Coadjutor, or the Marquess of Chasteauneuf, his most bitter enemies,
resolved to reconcile himself with Mazarine, obtaining beside the Government of
Pont de l' Arche for Longueville, with a promise not to proceed further in the
overture of Marriage between one of his Nieces and the Duke de Mercure; and
moreover to send his three Nieces out of France, which two years before with a
Nephew he had caused to come to Court; in pursuit of which the Cardinal
cloystered his Nieces in a Nunnery in the Suburbs of S. German.

For all that the Duke of Longueville and others gave not over to demonstrate
to Conde, that to obtain their ends of Mazarine suitable to the Conjunctures,
it would be convenient to necessitate him to procure his own concern. Whence
out of these contrarieties there arising nothing but diffidences, suspicions,
and jealousies, all their minds were agitated by secret passions, bending only
to their own private Interest. The Prince bore still a hidden malice against
Mazarine, who likewise being aware of it, behaved himself daily toward him
with more refined dissimulation; and Conde having drawn upon himself the
public odium of the Parisiens, for having discovered by his reconciliation
with the Cardinal (at least in appearance) that he preferred his private
Interest before the Public good, (which was to see the chief Minister of State
suppressed) a great many began to wish the ruin of the Prince himself. And the
greatest Politicians grew amazed at the shifting of this Scene.

The Frondeurs seeing in the mean time their hopes of a change in the
Government (which they longed for) frustrated, went watching all opportunities
to draw the people of Paris to some considerable commotion; and to that purpose
they contrived with the Counselor Joly, that he should cause a Harquebuss to
be discharged at an appointed time, to provoke the people to an Insurrection,
the Marquess de la Bollaye making himself Head of the Faction, who endeavored
(though in vain) in diverse parts of the City to stir them up by his
Exclamations.

This Essay becoming frustrate, and it being told at Court, that there were
some Horsemen in Arms upon the new Bridge, they made the Prince believe, who at
that instant was at Court, that doubtless there was Treachery intended him from
the Frondeurs; and to make proof of it, the Queen detaining him in her
Lodgings, caused him to send his Coach empty with his Pages and Laquays after
the accustomed manner, to observe what those armed men did there: this was
done, and the Coach was no sooner on the Bridge, but some came up to it to
discover, and not finding the Prince, letting it pass, discharged diverse Shot
at the Coach of the Count de Duras, which followed it, and killed a Laquay.

The news of this accident arriving at Court, the Prince was furiously enraged,
and filled with desire of revenge against the Frondeurs. And the Cardinal
profiting himself of this lucky hit, failed not to instigate Conde, nourishing
betwixt him and the Frondeurs a distrust, which afterward turned into open
enmity.

The Prince complained to the Parliament of the Coadjutor, the Duke of Beaufort,
and others, as Authors of this Assassinate; and seeking to extinguish that
Faction* fondly hoped to ruin afterward the Cardinal. But he most vigilant
knew to govern himself in such manner, that laying hold on the opportunity,
obliged the Court to think of moderating Conde's Authority, which he daily by
little and little increased.

The Prince having in contempt of the Regent concluded the Marriage betwixt the
Duke of Richlieu and the Marchioness of Pons, furthered this Application. The
Court surmizing that this was done, that he might the easilier afterward get
the Fortress of Havre de Grace out of Richlieu's hands, of which he was
Governor, or at least to have it at his devotion on all occurrences.

The Frondeurs perceiving themselves persecuted by the Prince, offered to piece
with the Cardinal, to lessen him, being thereunto solicited by the Duchess of
Chevreuse, offended with Conde because of the aforesaid Marriage, in regard she
had designed her own daughter to be Duchess of Richlieu, for the love the Duke
himself bore him.

The Coadjutor, chief Head of this Faction, propounded to have the Prince
imprisoned; for he being weakened, he reckoned that Mazarine might be the
easilier ruined, who still carrying it fairly on with dissimulation, thought of
nothing more then to shock one Party against the other, and to sustain
intemerate the Authority of the Regent.

The Duchess of Chevreuse wishing the Princes ruin in what manner soever, had
already obtained to this end, the Duke of Orleans consent, enjoining him not to
communicate the secret to the Abbot della Riviera, as one not to be trusted;
for the strict correspondence which he held with the Prince of Conty upon the
account of his Cardinalship, and by consequence with the Prince himself.

The Coadjutor, in the same time that he counseled and solicited the
imprisonment of the Prince, persisting nevertheless in his desire first to
abase the Cardinal, (of whose subtilty he was more apprehensive then of the
other) he sought with great diligence to reconcile himself to Conde by means of
Friends, Submissions Protestations, and Offers; but all his Attempts proving in
vain, by reason of the strong Antipathy that the Prince had against his person,
as likewise against Beaufort: they resolved to join with the Cardinal to the
prejudice of Conde, with a full intention afterward to destroy him too.

With these Preparatives for a change began the Year 1650, and all things being
already well disposed. The evening before the 18th. of January, that was
allotted for securing not only the Prince of Conde, but likewise his Brother
and Brother in Law.

These Princes upon some preceding rumor among the people that they should be
imprisoned, agreed among themselves never to appear at the Council all
together, and till that time they observed that rule.

Mazarine this notwithstanding was so much his Crafts master in dissimulation,
and so well feigned himself a stranger to any such resolution, that finally
with a most subtle artifice he so wrought, that the Prince himself prepared the
Guards, under pretext to imprison one Coutures, and became instrumental to his
own imprisonment.

The Prince that very morning had been in the Cardinals Appartiment, in the
instant that Monsieur de Lionne was writing the Warrant for the Arrest of him,
his Brother, and Brother in Law.

The Cardinal showed not the least alteration in his Countenance, received the
Prince with all demonstration of affection and sincere friendship: and Conde
complaining to him of the bruit spread thorough the City, that he was not his
true friend, and sought his ruin: Mazarine with the greatest protestations of
sincerity and friendship assured him of the esteem he had for him, and of his
affectionate and loyal correspondence, redoubling still his Asseverations, that
he never had the least thought of being against him; and yet at the same time
Mons. de Lionne was writing the Order.

To entice the Duke of Longueville to transgress the Agreement made with his
brothers in Law, never to appear all three at the Council they made him
believe, that in the evening of the 18th. of January 1650, the Affair
concerning the Marquess of Beveron his great Confident would be debated; so
that for his care to favor his friend he forgot his own concern, and
notwithstanding that Mons. Priolo his familiar Acquaintance advertised him not
to go to the Council, yet would he not be persuaded, so that all three came
thither one after another, though Conde and Conty were dissuaded by the
Princess their Mother that very morning; the Prince not apprehending any thing,
as well for the Cardinals demonstrations of his true friendship, as for his
confidence of the Abbot della Riviera, who would have told him all, supposing
that the Duke of Orleans without his assent would have taken no such
resolution; and though it had been taken, would have communicated it to the
Abbot his bosom-friend.

They went together to wait on the Queen, who feigning her self not very well
was lain down to repose her self on her bed; wherefore they suddenly withdrew,
and staying awhile in the Antichamber, the Queen being alone with the King,
and sollicitous for what she knew must happen, prayed the King to shut the
door, which he did. The Princes going afterward into the Gallery where the
Council was held, they found every one there but the Cardinal, who was in his
own Appartement discoursing with the Abbot della Riviera, ignorant of this
business, after which he found himself openly in disgrace, with the Duke of
Orleans his Patron, who likewise came not to Council, as they had agreed, for
fear of what might happen abroad.

The Sieur de Cominges Lieutenant of the Queens Guards entered immediately into
the Gallery with the Sieur de Guitault his Uncle, and Croissy, who told the
Princes the Orders they had from the King to secure their persons.

They standing amazed at such news, the Prince of Conde requested to speak a
word with the Queen, but being refused, as also to speak with the Cardinal,
they were constrained to descend by the Backstairs that leads to the Garden,
without the least noise or suspicion given to any, although the Halls,
Chambers, and Courts were full of the Princes friends and followers.

They were carried away in a Coach with a Guard of Horse to the Boys de
Vincennes. The Partisans of the Princes were exceedingly astonished at this
news, which was presently noised in the City, the sign being given by
discharging a Cannon, that the prisoners were arrived at Vincennes, whereupon
the whole City was immediately in Arms, the people believing that the Duke of
Beaufort was likewise secured, as the friends of the prisoners did artificially
divulge, to exasperate the people against Mazarine; so that Beaufort was
obliged that very night to ride thorough the City by Torch-light, that he might
be seen which pacified and much contented the people, who rejoicing at the
imprisonment of the Princes, made Bonfires in several parts of the Town, with
such Acclamations as if the Kingdom had been redeemed from all misery and
affliction, and all blessed the Cardinal for so pious a resolution.

But the more reputation he gained by this act, the more did he awaken their
envy, and incited the Frondeurs to contrive his destruction, since they had
obtained their intent in seeing the Prince of Conde's Party laid low, pursuing
still their former design of getting the sole management of Affairs in their
own power.

After this there arose new disturbances in diverse parts of the Kingdom,
stirred up by the Prince of Conde's Mother the Duchess of Longueville, and
many other Princes and Noblemen of their Kindred and Friends in the Provinces
under their Government; and in Paris it self the favorers of the imprisoned
being assembled in the House of the Princess Palatine, consulted about the
properest remedies to draw them out of prison. The Coadjutor and Beaufort
concurred with them in this Consultation, on design to ruin also Mazarine, and
remain sole Masters.

The Cardinal finding himself more at liberty to act, began to practice the
ways how to arrive at his intent, which was to destroy the Faction of la
Fronda, serving himself to that end with his wonted dissimulation, excellently
by him practiced, to make appear his reconciliation with the Duke of Beaufort
seem candid and sincere, who at that time was in the highest degree of Esteem
and Veneration with the Parisiens: and with design to make them diffident of
him he went publicly to pay him a Visit, unusual for him to do, for which the
Frondeurs murmured against the Duke, calling him a Mazarine, which much
lessened his credit and esteem with the people and the Faction of la Fronda.

The Friends and kindered of the Princes ceased not at the same time to raise
new commotions in the other parts of France; so that the Tumults of Normandy,
Champagne, and Burgundy were scarce appeased, when as those of Guienne and
chiefly of Bourdeaux began to break out.

Mazarine being no less agitated by the commotions of the Kingdom, then by
those in Paris, where the people were more and more set on to Seditions, he
thought fit to cause the K: to leave the City again, under pretext to oppose
the Preparations of the Spaniards, who were united with the Malcontents on
the Confines of Flanders. Whereupon the Court went to Compeigne; and because
the Spaniards at this time had besieged Guise, a place of great importance, the
Cardinal thought it convenient to go in person to the Army, and attempt to
relieve it; which successfully he performed, having encourage the Soldiers and
Officers with money, and many Presents distributed amongst the principal
Commanders, by which kind of dealing he kept the Soldiery always
well-affected, and faithful to the King and his own person.

Upon this good success the Cardinal took courage to go with the King to
chastise the Rebels of Bourdeaux, and drew the Duke of Orleans and all the
Council to his Opinion.

This resolution displeased the Frondeurs, for the advantages they foresaw the
happy execution of this Enterprise might bring to the Court and to Mazarine,
and by consequence the damage and prejudice to their own Party. Whereupon they
began to divulge new calumnies against the Cardinal, namely that this Progress
was for no other purpose then to establish the Matrimony of his Nieces, who
after the imprisonment of the Princes were taken out of the Monastery, and
brought to live in the Palace Royal with the Dukes of Mercure, and Candale only
son of the Duke of Espernon, so that they plotted all they could to hinder the
chastisement of those of Bourdeaux, and to reconcile themselves to the Princes,
and to release them, with design to fall altogether upon the Cardinal; and
having ruined him to fall upon the Princes, and remain sole in the Government.

To this end, they flattered the Duchess of Chevreuse with hopes of marrying
her daughter to the Prince of Conty; and she being in great credit and esteem
with the Duke of Orleans, by her means they gained the good will of that Duke,
and with various Artifices persuaded him to press the Queen, that the Princes
might be brought from Vincennes to the Bastile, of which place the Counselor
Brussel (one of the chief of the Frondeurs) being Governor, they thought by
this means to get the Princes into their custody, and to unite themselves with
them, to confound the Cardinal; or if they should be able to ruin the Cardinal
of themselves, then to detain the Princes still prisoners, and keep the
dominion in their own power.

They joined themselves thereupon in a stricter union, and diligently labored
to hinder the King from going into Guienne, using innumerable devices, to
frustrate this intention of the Cardinal, who for all that, mocked at all the
tricks of his enemies, and with more discerning and wise Counterplots deluded
them.

Their endeavors to hinder the Voyage into Guienne not succeeding, they found
out another pretext to stir up the people, giving out that Mazarine was the
only Obstructer of the Peace, and that they ought to consider of the means to
force him to conclude it; the the Duke of Beaufort with like pretexts
endeavored to regain his credit with the people, from which he was much fallen,
ever since the Cardinals Visit.

The Court at this time went into Guienne. The Duke of Orleans remained in
Paris in quality of Lieutenant General of the Crown. The Cardinal, though he
found himself strong enough in forces to chastise the Bourdelese, yet did not
omit according to his wonted custom to seek by fair means and by treaty to
quiet these differences, knowing the ill consequences that follow the bloody
remedies of Arms, against ones own Subjects.

But the Bourdelese that were backed by the Parliament of Paris, by the Faction
of the Princes, by the Frondeurs, and by the very Spaniards, obstinately
prepared themselves to a defense.

The Spaniards, making advantage of this diversion, recovered Piombino and
Portolongone in Italy. And in Flanders, joining with Marshall Turenne they
took Rhetel, and la Chappelle overrunning the Country within ten Leagues of
Paris.

The Frondeurs rejoicing at this Progress of the enemy, thought of nothing more
then of the delivery of the Princes, to counterballance the Cardinal, hoping
that the Obligation, in freeing them from Prison, would cancel the demerit of
making them Prisoners.

None was more zealous to serve the Duchess of Chevreuse then the Coadjutor,
who by means of Letters reciprocally conveyed to and from the Princes, had
gained a promise from the Prince of Conty to marry her Daughter.

Hereupon the Duchess pressed the Duke of Orleans that he would likewise set
his helping hand to their liberty.

But the Persuasions of Monsieur Tillier, Secretary of State, (left by the King
at Paris to assist the Duke of Orleans) prevailing with the Duke, and knowing
the danger, that if the Spaniards should advance as far as the Castle of
Vincennes, they might set the Princes at liberty, consented, that they should
be remove to the Castle of Marcoussy, to keep them still in the Kings Power.

The Spaniards making use of this favorable conjuncture, for their interests,
thought to increase the animosities of the Parisiens, by sending a Trumpet from
the Archduke, with Letters to the Duke of Orleans, inviting him to a Treaty
for a General Peace, with a show of sincere intentions.

The Duke willingly lent an ear to this invitation, hoping thereby to acquire
no less glory abroad, then credit and good will amongst the French: wherefore
dispatching several Courriers to Court, they to please him sent him Power and
Authority to Treat; the Cardinal not doubting but that quickly (as it
afterward happened) he should discover the Arts by which this Engine was
levelled.

The Princes friends in the mean time did not let slip this opportunity to
instigate the people so much the more against Mazarine, affixing several papers
in diverse parts of the City, in the Marshall de Turenne's name, containing in
substance that there being in the Cardinal as great a reluctance to the peace,
as in the Archduke and the Spaniards there was a readiness and inclination for
it, they ought by no means to lose this opportunity of enjoying again so great
a happiness; aggravating withal the miseries and ruin that by the
continuation of the war hovered over all France.

To this effect the Marquess de Bagni Apostolical Nuntio, with the Count d^
Avaux went to Soissons to confer with the Archduke about the first Overtures.
Where they not only found none on the part of the Catholic King, but also
were slightly answered by Don Gabriel di Toledo, that it behoved them to expect
Orders from Spain; whilst the Archduke made account he had been
Plenipotentiary, having made the invitation with such earnestness and
importunity.

Those of Bourdeaux in the mean while were reduced to great streights by the
assault made upon the Town by the Kings Army, so that they inclined to an
Accommodation; nor did the Court show much aversion thereunto, for the
apprehension they had of the commotions of Paris: wherefore the King granted
them a general Amnesty, without giving ear to their importunities for the
delivery of the Princes; but giving them the satisfaction in the removal of the
Duke of Espernon from that Government, the rest remaining in the same state.

This Peace of Bourdeaux was received with unexpressible bitterness by the
Frondeurs, who jealous that the Cardinal would set the Princes at liberty
without acquainting them, they united themselves afresh with the Duke of
Orleans, and sought by all means to set him at odds with Mazarine, whom they
gave to understand that the Court should return Paris, and this with intent to
hinder him of those advantages that he might reap by the Voyage of Toulouse and
Provence, which was of the Cardinal for many weighty reasons, who preferring
the urging desire of the Duke of Orleans for the Kings return to Paris, and the
necessity of providing for the securing of the Princes (in causing them to be
transported to a safer place then Marcousy) before any other consideration, he
brought back their Majesty's toward Paris, and they remained at Fountainbleau,
whither the Queen invited the Duke of Orleans to consult Affairs of great
importance; but in effect it was only to win him to the removal of the
Princes; a thing dreaded by the Frondeurs, who foreseeing it, had made the Duke
promise them never to consent to it: but the easy nature of that Prince
submitting after his accustomed manner to the Genius of the Queen, and to her
Caresses, he could not deny to give his assent for the transport of the
Princess to Havre de Grace, which was done the 15th. of November following, the
Count d' Harcourt being their Convoy.

This blow much confounded the Frondeurs, and therefore they sought anew to
possess the Dukes mind with fears and suspicions, and joined themeselves again
(with all the Princes Kindred, Friends, and Partakers) with the Duchess of
Chevreuse, the Marquess of Chasteauneuf, the Duchess of Orleans, and
Mademoiselle, and employed all their thoughts on the liberty of the Princes.

But they doubted by what course to attempt it: Some were of opinion that they
should gain the Cardinal; for the Prisoners once delivered, and la Fronda
uniting himself with them, they might ruin him at pleasure: But the major part
concluded, that they ought to make use of la Fronda's power. The first way was
tried, but proved in vain, Mazarine opining, that for the safety of the Kingdom
they ought not to trust them at liberty till the Kings Majority: wherefore they
had recourse to the second making the Duke of Orleans Head of the Caball; who
at length having by his entreaty won the Queen to remove to Paris, gained a
great step to the designs of the Frondeurs.

By these intestine distractions France continued to feel in diverse parts more
and more the effects of the present calamities, losing at the same time Flix,
Miravet, and Tortosa in Catalonia, and Mouzon in France.

The Cardinal to recover these losses, and to clear Champagne from the enemy,
who was fortified there, upon the gaining of the Rhetel, resolved to go in
person to regain that place, which he accordingly did about the end of November
with 12000 Soldiers, and recovered it within the space of five days, to the
great glory of the Marshall du Plessis Pralin, who commanded the Army. The
Opinions were various, whether they should prosecute the Victory by giving
battle to Turenne, who was drawn near to succor it: the Cardinal concluded
contrary to the rest, that they ought to fight him, which they did, and gained
a remarkable Victory, with the total rout of Turenne, taking prisoner Don
Stephano di Gammara, a Cavalier of considerable condition, and General of the
Spanish Troops that were united with Turenne.

The Cardinals enemies considering, that notwithstanding all their Machinations
he had the hap in a few months, and in the heat of the greatest troubles, to
imprison the Princes, to secure their Towns, to relieve Guise, to conserve
Havre de Grace, to recover the Castle of Dijon, the Towns of Danvillers,
Bellegarde, Clermont, St. John de l'Ausne, Verdun, Caen, Diepe, to confirm
Rouen in the Kings obedience, which had began to rebel, to quiet Bourdeaux,
and put an end to the commotions of Guienne, and lastly driven the Spaniards
from Rhetel: Successes able to bring his enemies to the greatest despair; but
which (quite contrary) gave occasion to his friends to do him that mischief by
their flatteries, which the others could not do by their persecutions; for
while he was resolved to continue yet some time with the Army, those that had
an affection for him invited him with great importunity to return to triumph in
Paris, to the end that (as they said) by the splendor of his glory he might
dim the eyes of his Maligners; which so awakened their envy, rancour, and
jealousy, that minding nothing else but his ruin, judged there could be no
better way to compass it then to free the Princes; so that all uniting
themselves with the Duke of Orleans and the Parliament, they caused this last to
make a Remonstrance to the Queen for the Princes liberty.

Her Majesty very prudently endeavored to gain time, hoping by these means to
effectuate her designs, but the Combiners continued their Assemblies, and after
diverse Treaties they concluded with the Duke of Orleans; and by engagements of
Alliances and other ways took the boldness whatsoever came on it to have the
Princes out of prison.

The Cardinal was not well served in the management of these Treaties, not
having those Advertisements that were necessary; for if he had been thoroughly
informed of their designs, there is no doubt but he would have found ways to
have frustrated them.

The Coadjutor appeared in Parliament the first of February 1651, and enlarged
himself in an eloquent speech in favor of the Princes, giving weight to his
discourse by showing that it was wholly conformable to the sentiment of the
Duke of Orleans: whereby he more and more disposed the minds of the
Parliamentarians in favor of the Prisoners, and confirmed the Duke in his
resolution, persuading him openly to avow to the Court, not to appear any more
at Council, so long as the Cardinal came there with whom he showed himself
extremely offended.

The Court was much perplexed at the found of so many Alarms, and knowing that
the present constitution of Affairs disabled them to shun the blow, they
resolved to prevent it, by setting the Princes free before it came to force of
Arms, wherefore the Marshall de Gramont, the Marquess de Lionne, and Secretary
Goulas were dispatched away secretly to treat with them.

The Coadjutor in the meanwhile was much afflicted that the Parliament could
not be induced to decree against the Cardinal, whose innocence appeared so much
the more clear, that notwithstanding the most diligent Inquisition of his very
enemies, they could not find any proofs of the accusations laid to his charge.

Finally, another invention was found out to incense the Parliament more
highly, which was to make them believe that the Cardinal had publicly
communicated those Counsels with Fairfax and Cromwell, which so exasperated
even those that had yet some kindness for him, that they not only voted the
innocence of the Princes, but also the Cardinals Condemnation; aggravating that
he had dissipated the Treasure, hindered the Peace, and aspersed the Parliament
with injurious and dishonorable words; propounding in conclusion, to
supplicate the Queen to send him away from Court: and accompanied this their
deliberation with public cries and clamours against Mazarine.

The Duke of Orleans went after to the Parliament, to confirm what the Coadjutor
had delivered in his name, and solicited for the effectual removal of the
Cardinal, and for setting the Princes at liberty, earnestly speaking in their
behalf, and with great sharpness against the Cardinal, which emboldened the
Parliament to persist in their deliberations against him, although the first
President Molle (a well-meaning man) did seek to allay those too licentious
discourses: but he himself was constrained to go to the Queen, to remember Her
Majesty of her promise to free the Princes; to whom the Queen answered that she
did continue in the mind to set them at liberty; and to that purpose had
dispatched Gramont and Lionne to Havre de Grace, to treat with them about it,
but that they ought not to pretend nor expect the execution of it, without due
precautions for the security of the State; aggravating withal, that all the
suppositions brought in against the Cardinal were seditious, lies, and
calumnies.

But the Regents exaggeration availed nothing: for the delivery of the Princes,
and the removal of the Cardinal, were decreed anew by the Parliament

All the three Factions were at this time united against that of Mazarine, who
was upheld by the sole Authority of the King and Queen, and Forces of the
Kingdom; and being in this straight, his only Meditation was how to put in
practice the laudable Maxim of temporizing.

The Court, by reason of the general uniting of so many Seditious, was
necessitated to give way to so many contrivings, in which the Duchess of
Chevreuse acted her part to the life, stimulated by interest, and by the
ambition of the aforesaid Marriage; for, setting that aside, she was the
Cardinals intimate friend. And feigning her self still so, told him
confidently, that if he did withdraw himself for some short time, he should by
that means appease these first passions of the Duke of Orleans, who returning
to the Council, the Queen would soon win him to her party; and in few days he
would be recalled again, knowing the nature of the French, that having obtained
their desire, they presently grow weary, and change their minds.

The Cardinal suffering himself to be lulled asleep by the harmony of this
Siren, and not to put to hazard the public Tranquillity, resolved his
Departure, and went to impart it to the Queen, advising her to stand firm in
her resolution of keeping the Princes fast, while he, securing his own person,
should take away all pretext from the Malcontents to proceed further; and
leaving her many good Memorials for the service of the King and the State, with
a Letter from the Regent to the Sieur de Bar (who had the custody of the
Princes) containing a precise Order to obey the Cardinal in every particular,
he went in all diligence toward Havre de Grace, with design that if he could
not handsomely secure the detaining of the Princes, to cause them at least to
acknowledge him the Author of their liberty, and by this act to oblige them to
a gratitude, making the Count de Servient and Monsieur le Tillier partakers and
actors in this and other secrets.

The evening before the 6th, of February 1651, he got on Horseback, with only
three persons, and passed out by the gate of Richlieu, without which he found
diverse Gentlemen, to the number of 400 Horse, that expected him; and with these
he went to St. Germans, whence he dispatched a Courrier to the Marquess de
Lionne at Havre de Grace, to understand the issue of his Negotiations, and to
Monsieur le Tillier, putting him in mind to give way to the Princes delivery,
till he had adjusted what they had agreed upon amongst themselves; which being
come to the knowledge of the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, he making use of it for
his own benefit, hoped by rendering himself the principal Author of the Princes
liberty, to delude the designs of the Cardinal; who being advised of the
streights to which the Queen was more and more reduced, resolved no longer to
defer the Princes releasment.

The 12th. of February he hasted away to Havre de Grace, where he was received
with all demonstration of Honor, and entering where the Princes were, with
much frankness uttered these words, Jo porto per ordine della Regina la liberta
a V. V. A. A. senza alcuna condition; I bring by the Queens Order your
Highnesses liberty without any reserve: yet adding, S.M. vi prega pero d'amar
lo Statto il Re, la di lei persona; Her Majesty prays ye to love the State,
the King and her Person; delivering all this in a posture of Respect and
Reverence, yet not unbeseeming his Quality and sweet manner of speech.

The Prince answered in name of them all, with a cheerful but grave
countenance, Noi si chiamamo obligati a S. M. della giustitia che ci rende;
serviremo sempre il Re, la Regina: We hold our selves obliged to her Majesty
for the justice which she renders us; we shall always serve the King, the
Queen; and embracing the Cardinal, ancora voi Signore, and also you Sir.

The Prince of Conde resolved to dine before he went out, wherefore the
Princes, the Cardinal, Gramont, Palleau, Lionne and Goulas sat down to dinner,
entertaining one another with mutual familiarity, in which was verified the
saying of Caesar, speaking of the French Humor.

After dinner the Cardinal had private Conference with the Prince, and
immediately going out of the Fort they entered into Marshall de Gramonts Coach,
the Prince of Conde, going in last, placed himself in the Boot, and hearing the
Cardinal to with him a good Voyage, did not answer him with the least show of
courtesy, making the Coach drive on without saying any thing: giving the
Cardinal quickly to understand the requital he was to expect, for the kind
embracements with which he received him on the day of his imprisonment, with
Protestations of a sincere friendship, when at the same instant he made the
Marquess of Lionne write the order for his Arrest.

Upon the News that the Cardinal was gone from Paris, the people were presently
up in arms, running tumultuously to the Palace Royal, and suspecting that the
King and Queen were also upon departure, they placed 2000 men in Guard: and the
diffidence and impudence of the Frondeurs went so far, that they placed Guards
even at the Kings bed-fide, who ever and anon opening the Curtains observed if
he slept, and if he were there.

The Cardinal being departed, the Queen sent to invite the Duke of Orleans to
the Council, who under several pretenses refused to come, for fear lest the
Queen should gain him, and send for the Cardinal back; who caused his Nieces
also to be conducted out of Paris.

Mazarine's Enemies greatly fearing his return, insisted that Orleans should
receive a promise from the Queen, that he should return no more, about which
the Parliament framed a most rigorous Decree, by which they enjoined him to
depart the Kingdom within 15 days, as likewise his Kindred and familiar
Friends, under a great Mulct to any that should receive them; procuring this
Order to be confirmed by all the Parlements of France.

The Cardinal lingered some time at Havre de Grace, consulting with his friends
to what part he should retire, upon which occasion they that coveted his Charge
reported, that he staid there to make himself Master of that place. Wherefore
to take away all pretexts of their Exclamations, and being daily more convinced
of the ill will of the Prince of Conde, who spoke injuriously of his Person, he
resolved to depart with many Gentlemen his Friends, who together with several
Soldiers made up the number of near 100 Horse, and traveling with great
hardship and incommodity by reason of the sharp season, he went to Dorlans a
Town in Picardy, under the Government of the Sieur de Bar, who was one of those
that followed him, being received with great honor and civility in all those
Provinces.

He stayed there some time to resolve where he might best retire out of the
Kingdom. The Parisiens renewing their clamours to the Queen, constrained her to
write to the Cardinal, that for the good of the State he would speedily go out
of the Kingdom, inducing her moreover to make a Declaration, that all
strangers, though naturalized, should not for the future be capable of being
admitted into the Council of State, some insisting that even the French
Cardinals should be comprehended; and this chiefly to keep off the Coadjutor
from being Chief Minister of State (to which he aspired together with the
Cardinalship) who was really more hated then loved, being held to be a man very
violent, and hardy in his resolutions, though he was doubtless one of the
bravest Persons of France.

This Declaration was passed in Parliament, but by reason of the contrariety of
opinions in the particular of the French Cardinals, according to the
inclination of those Counselors, (thought it passed also in this particular)
it was moderated, and had not its full force, and was put in execution, only
against Mazarine, who staying still in France, expecting his Passport from the
Spaniard, gave new occasion to his adversaries to murmur, who induced the Queen
again to solicit his departure out of the Kingdom, to which the Cardinal
showed himself most ready, though his friends offered him 10000 fighting men to
defend him against the persecution of his enemies; and even the Spaniards
themselves promised him all vigorous assistance, with a Pension not inferior
to what he had in France.

The Cardinal rejected all most generously, into whose Heart the French (his
Enemies) with all their injurious dealings could never introduce the least
sense of revenge to the damage of France, since that the sense of gratitude
toward their Majesty's, and his Cordial affection for those that were Loyal,
were too prevalent in his Noble Soul. He departed therefore speedily from
Dorlans, from whence he wrote two very handsome Letters, which were seen in
Print, on to the Queen, and the other to the Count de Brienne, at that time
chief Secretary of State, full of cordial expressions of his constant fidelity
to their Majesty's, and of prudent counsel for the good of the State; the
tenor of which Letters moved a tender compassion in the minds of his Friends,
and inwardly convinced and staggered his Enemies. From thence he went to
Perone, not without some inconvenience, where he found his Nieces conducted
thither in safety by the Abbot Ondedei. He went with them to la Fere, and
thence to Rhetel, from whence Generel Rosa with 300 Horse conducted him to
Barleduc. Where in sequence of the Honors done him in every place in this his
Retirement, by an express Courrier he received the most courteous proffers of
the Elector of Colen, who sent to invite him, offering him his whole State to
be at his service, with all the kind expressions that could possibly be
expected from a generous Prince and a true Friend.

For which having given to that Prince most affectionate thanks, he proceeded
on to Clermont, by the assistance of the Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre, who
in that Rencounter gave him many authentic proofs of a loyal and faithful
friendship, which he made more particularly appear in refusing to put the Town
into the hands of two Gentlemen of the Prince of Conde's, who had brought him
the Kings Order, the Marshall excusing himself by telling them that he had too
much cause to believe, that that Order was extorted by violence, and that
therefore he would not give credit to it unless he were commanded by him that
entrusted it with him, which was as much as to say the Cardinal, who
understanding this, notwithstanding the foresaid reflections, to show how much a
Kings Order ought to be respected, prayed the Marshall to obey it, which
immediately he did.

From Clermont he went to Sedan, where once more by the importunity of his
enemies receiving the Queens Orders to depart quite out of the Kingdom, he went
to Boullon in the State of Liege, convoyed by Don Antonio Pimentelli, Major
General of the Spanish Army, with 500 Horse; the Spaniards themselves
concurring to demonstrate to the world, that they understood the Merits of the
Cardinal, and the Honors due to the Sacred Purple better then the French.

From Liege he continued his journey toward Aix la Chapelle, and from thence
he passed to Brul, a place belonging to the Elector of Colen, who sent
immediately to complement him, offering him all manner of courtesy; and being
Royally received in the Electoral Palace, he was first visited by all the
Cannons of the Archbishopric of Colen, the principal Gentlemen of the Country,
and afterward by the Elector himself, who came expressly from Bona place of his
residence. The Cardinal went to return his Visit, where he was received with
all the Honors that could be done to the greatest Prince, and came back to
Brul infinitely obliged to the Elector for his civilities.

Here he fixed his abode, and the concourse of all sorts of people that came to
see him was such, that that place seemed a great Court. He was complemented
here by Expresses from the King and Queen of Poland, from the Queen, of
Swedeland, from the Electors of the Empire, and finally from most of the
Princes of Europe, who sent to offer him their Dominions; to the great
mortification of his enemies, who the more they, sought to abase him by their
passionate resolutions, the more they saw him honored and extolled by all the
world.

The Princes in the interim arriving at Paris, and the Queen with the King
remaining in a manner prisoners in the Palace Royal, where they were begirt on
all sides by the armed Parisiens, all the concourse of the Cavaliers was at the
Prince of Conde's, and of the Ladies at the Duchess of Longueville's, so that
there seemed to be no such thing as a King. But although the Cardinal was
absent in person, yet he was virtually present, applying himself continually
with the greatest artifice to divide the minds of the Frondeurs from the Union
of the Princes: and the Duchess of Chevreuse being the person, that together
with the Coadjutor governed the whole Caball, he applied himself to those means
that might draw her from the Prince's party, or indeed make her their enemy;
for which he knew no better way then to frustrate the Match betwixt the Prince
of Conty and her daughter. Taking this business in hand, he suggested to his
Confidents at Paris such items, which being by them punctually observed, they
made Conty believe that the Princess of Chevreuse was not of that Quality
besitting his birth, and they intimated to the Prince of Conde, that if the
Prince his brother should marry, it would much prejudice the Revenue of his
Family, by the division of the common Patrimony. Besides, the Prince of Conty
being of a bleak complexion and tender, Marriage would shorten his days.

These discourses did so far prevail with both the Princes, that Conty declared
that he would not marry.

Upon this repenting, and going off from their word, the Duchess of Chevreuse
swelled with such disdain against the Princes, that she soon withdrew her self
from the Union, together with the Coadjutor, who was likewise much nettled at
it. They joined themselves with the Duke of Orleans, and endeavored (which at
length they accomplished) to reunite him to the Court, reconciling themselves
to the Cardinal, all things being agreed on as hereafter shall be declared.

The Duke of Espernon in the mean while foreseeing the disorders inevitable in
a Province against which he had shown himself so opposite, and drawn upon
himself the general odium of those people, he made a Proposal to the Prince of
Conde, to exchange his Government of Guienne for that of Burgundy, where the
Prince was Governor, who at first did not show any inclination to it, but
afterward understanding that Mazarine having an inkling of it with strong
reasons had dissuaded the Queen from it, he was more earnestly bent upon it.
And although most of the Statesmen were of Mazarine's Opinion, not to permit
such an Exchange, nevertheless the politic Reasons alleged by the Count de
Servient prevailed for it, who soon, after perceived his error, in believing
to gain the Prince, by satisfying him in this particular, which clean contrary
rather proved an incitement to him to pretend to greater things; for he had no
sooner obtained the Government of Guienne, but he immediately requested to make
an Exchange of Champagne, under the Government of the Prince of Conty, that of
Provence; but in this (it being of greater importance then the other) he met
with a general opposition of all the other Ministers of State, and of Servient
himself.

The Cardinal (though absent) was nevertheless secretly informed of all the
Affairs of the Crown, as if he had been present; he highly aggravated the
concession of Guienne, and reproved those that unadvisedly had given ear to the
other pretensions for Provence, it being a business too prejudicial to the
Kings service and the Commonwealth, for the consequences that might follow.

The King on all occasions experimenting the refined prudence of Mazarine,
thought on nothing more then his return, continually giving him notice, and
assuring him of this his fixed resolution.

The Prince of Conde himself cooperated to this desire of the King; who being
disgusted with the Duchess of Chevreuse, about the Marriage of her daughter
with the Prince of Conty as also with the Princess Palatine, for many
dissatisfactions past betwixt them, by reason that the Princess having
interposed for the reconcilement of the Prince with the Court, and having
received some promise upon the effecting it, she complained that she had been
mocked.

These two Princesses therefore were united with the Queen for the depression
of the Prince, who permitted himself in this occasion to be led away by the
Malcontents of this Court, and in particular by the Count de Chavigny, who
had been thorough Mazarine's counsel at his departure out of the Kingdom
recalled by the Queen; to oblige him in that manner to depend on her, lest if
Conde should have caused his return, it was to be doubted that he would not
hearken to the Proposals that were made him on the Kings behalf, to alienate
him from the Frondeurs, and the other Malcontents.

These two mettled Princesses thus joining with the Queen and the Cardinal,
drew along with them the Coadjutor, promising him a Nomination to a
Cardinalship, and to cause the Marquess of Chasteauneuf, a great Confident of
the Duchess, and the Prince's Enemy, to be recalled to the Council, upon the
gaining of these persons, intimate friends of the Duke of Orleans, the Court
resolved what e're came on it to recall the Cardinal, who was wished for at that
time by his very Adversaries for their particular Interests, (men of spirit
laying hold on all occasions that seem opportune to them for obtaining that
which is not to be had by other means.)

To which end Bertet (a Confident of Chasteuneuf's) was dispatched with this
Negotiation to find the Cardinal: who, the better to establish the business,
and to assure himself thoroughly of the Queens mind, sent the Abbot Ondedei
privately to Paris, who having run many dangers in his Voyage, arrived there
safe, and without being discovered lying hid in the House of the Marchioness of
Ampoux, he negotiated all this Affair succesfully: He assured Chasteauneuf,
that at the Kings Majority he should be made chief Minister of State; that the
Chief President of the Parliament Mole should have the Seal; the Marquess of
Vieville should be made Superintendant of the Finances; and the Coadjutor
nominated to the Cardinalate.

The Prince having sented these proceedings, began to suspect that the Court
was musing to imprison him anew, and these doubts were fomented by those that
sought to revive the dissentions; wherefore he resolved without saying any
thing to retire to his Seat of S. Maur, whither the Queen dispatched diverse
Lords, to assure him of her sincerity toward him; but all her diligence proved
in vain, the Prince justifying his suspicions to be founded upon good grounds,
and that having been once cousen'd, he durst trust himself no more:
nevertheless he might easily have been pacified, being naturally of a good
disposition. But all his Kindred and Friends threatening to abandon him if he
agreed with the Cardinal; and he considering, that losing these, he should
remain too much exposed to the Arbitrament of the Court, he resolved (though
against his will) to stand firm, declaring nevertheless openly to his Relations
and Friends, that he began a dance that he should not so easily finish, and
that all of them afterward would forsake him. He endeavored then to engage the
Parliament of Paris in his behalf, and pretended to have the Count de Servient
and the Sieurs de Tellier and Lionne removed from Court, taxing them for being
Mazarine's Creatures. To this removal the Coadjutor also underhand assisted,
hoping that these being sent away, who were esteemed the wisest Heads of the
Cabinet, he should with more ease introduce himself into the management of
Affairs.

The Prince concerting with the Duke of Orleans for the expelling of these
three persons, they endeavored to draw likewise the Parliament to their Party,
who refused to interest themselves in this affair. The Sieurs de Servient,
Tillier, and Lionne, to take away all pretexts of new disturbances, resolved to
ask leave of the Queen to retire, to which Her Majesty consented, though very
unwillingly. Hereupon the Prince of Conde returned immediately to Paris, and
going first to the Parliament, to give them thanks for their Protection of him,
went afterward to visit their Majesty's, who received him somewhat coldly;
which moved him to utter these words, That he would return thither no more,
complaining publicly of this reception.

The Duke of Mercoeur in the mean while remaining in Paris after the departure
of the Cardinal, was every night with the Queen when all others were retired,
conferring with Her Majesty about those Expedients that were most urgent; and
seeing his own Affairs but in an ill condition, by reason of the
dissatisfaction of those of his Family for his Interest with the Cardinal, he
supplicated the Queen for the Government of Auvergne. Her Majesty, before she
would gratify him, asked the opinion of one of her Ministers of State, in whom
she confided, who represented to her, that the Duke obtaining what he desired,
might perhaps take an occasion to withdraw himself from the Marriage with
Mademoiselle Mancini, and therefore judged rather to defer it, to gain time,
which ripens all things. Which counsel being embraced by the Queen, caused
Mercoeur (aware of this artificial delay) to protest with much frankness, that
his intent was to consummate the Marriage, and that there was no reason to
doubt of his word, showing all readiness to complete every thing agreed upon.

Upon this they writ to the Cardinal, who though he did not recede from the
terms agreed on, yet knowing that this Parentage would give new occasion to his
Enemies to foment the disturbances, he resolved by any means to prefer the
Kings service before his own private Interest; wherefore he answered the
Advocate Bluet, that he did not approve that the Duke should stir from Paris,
as well to avoid the dangers that might happen in such a journey, and for the
alterations that might follow in that City under this pretext; as also by
reason there was none else at that time nigh His Majesty, with whom the Queen
might discourse freely, and confide in, except himself and the Marshall de
Plessis Pralin. But the Duke seeing his Word and Honor engaged, admitted not
of this repulse, esteeming that to expose himself in so turbulent a time, and
in the greatest heat of the persecutions, to a journey full of danger, would
give a more clear testimony of his Fidelity, and more oblige the Cardinal and
the Spouse to effectuate the Marriage; so that having represented to the Queen
several times his determined resolution, he disposed her at last to grant him
leave to depart, receiving besides a thousand Pistols to help to defray his
charges. Having thus established his departure, and resolved to take his journey
with all secrecy, to shun the Ambushes that might be laid for him on the way,
he sent his Gentlemen into the Country of Vendosme, with semblance that he
would make a journey thither; and feigning himself a Servant of the Sieur de
Siron, a Domestic of the Cardinals, in the beginning of July 1651 issuing out
of the Queens Cabinet, and descending all alone by a private stairs, in the
dusk of the Evening he took Post, and with the Sieur de Siron rode to Peronne,
and from thence with a Spanish Passport passed to Brules, where on the 12th.
of the same Month the Marriage was celebrated and solemnized by the Archbishop
the Elector of Colen; after which with the same celerity he returned to Paris,
where it being understood, that there was an Ambush laid for him on the way,
the Marchioness d'Ampoux, by an express Courrier (borrowed of the Venetian
Ambassador) advertized him of the danger, whereupon he returned to Paris
another way, and remained there hid for some time in the house of the said
Marchioness.

At the news of this Match a great rumor was spread in Paris, arguing probably
from this, that Mazarine's return was no more covertly, but publicly
endeavored: but because by their Majesty's Declaration, and by the Decrees of
the Parliament, not only the Cardinal, but also his Kindred were condemned,
they persuaded themselves that the Marriage ought to be held invalid, since
that (as they said) a Prince of France could not marry without the Kings
consent, and much less with an exiled person, and an enemy of the State; not
reflecting that if this Contract was not valid, neither ought the Decrees of
Parliament to be esteemed valid which were made without the Kings assent, and
not ratified by his Authority.

Upon the account of this Invalidity the Parliament met often, and the business
would have run a greater Praecipice (notwithstanding the Duke was not wanting
in his own concern) if for the change that followed, and that obliged the
Parliament to think of something else, this Affair had not been laid aside; for
the which Mercoeur being called as Duke and Peer of France went to the
Parliament, accompanied with so great a number of Friends, that the Duke of
Orleans and the Prince of Conde arrived not till two hours after, retarded by
putting their Followers in order to appear full as strong as Mercoeur. He being
there very much pressed to clear this Affair, Answered, that he was not obliged
to say any thing else, then that he had not in the least transgressed their
Ordinances, and justified to their faces, that the Duke of Orleans and the
Prince of Conde were the persons that had persuaded him and engaged him in the
aforesaid Marriage; and if afterward the consideration of their Interest^ had
made them change their Opinion, he for his part knew what was to be expected
from a Cavalier and a Prince born, in maintaining his Faith and Word. This
notwithstanding, his Father the Duke of Vendosme was called, who appearing in
Parliament, and being demanded if he had given his Assent, could not deny but
that he had formerly consented to it; and withal said, that he had done it by
the counsel and assistance of the Duke of Orleans, but after the Cardinals
departure there was no more said of it, there being no occasion for it; so that
the Affair rested in this manner without passing further.

For these Controversies Paris being in a great commotion, every one cast their
eyes on the proceedings of the Court, and of the Princes; and their curiosity
was grown to that pass, that whenever the Parliament assembled to treat of
public Affairs, and against the Cardinal, and infinite number (as well of the
People as of the Nobility) ran to the Palace with all sorts of Weapons to
assist, some the one, some the other Party; by which the dangers daily
increasing for the variety of Interests, which divided and incensed their
minds, the Parliament decreed, that every one should retire upon pain of death,
and the Kings Officers were charged to see the Decree observed.

The Queen courted the Duke of Orleans at this time to concur with her for the
Election of a Council to assist the King: the Duke answered that he would speak
with the Prince of Conde, but Her Majesty would not consent that he should
communicate any thing to him, holding him for one of her bitterest Enemies.

The Parliament met again, and went on to treat about the Marriage of the Duke
de Mercoeur, to whom it was given in charge, that within the space of three
days he should put into the hands of the Secretary of the Parliament the
Circumstances of his Espousals, with the Avouchment of them, to be communicated
to his Father the Duke of Vendosme: that all the Decrees against the Cardinal,
his Domestics, and Kindred should be renewed, and particularly against
Mademoiselle Mancini, who especially was prohibited to return into France, and
if she were there to depart within 8 days.

The Declaration that the King was to set forth against the Cardinal was
likewise read, and the Duke of Orleans made them add, The damage which ensued
upon his hindering the General Peace; as also for undertaking the War against
Bourdeaux without his consent. The Prince of Conde obtained to be added, That
his imprisonment was for no other cause, but that he would not consent to the
Marriage of the Cardinals two Nieces with the Dukes of Mercoeur and Candale.

Upon the retirement of Servient, Tillier, and Lionne, the Regent saw it
necessary to elect a new Council, to which the Duke of Orleans assenting,
(counseled thereunto by the Duchess of Chevreuse and the Coadjutor, who had
pressed him a great while before they could prevail) it was resolved on to call
the Marquess de Chasteauneuf to exercise the charge of Chief Minister, the
Marquess of Vieville to be Superintendent of the Finances, and to confirm the
Chief President, Keeper of the Seal; and the Coadjutor was nominated to be
Cardinal.

Chasteauneuf taking upon him the Management of Affairs, began immediately to
think upon those means that might hinder the Cardinals return, which were to
make the King to go into Berry, and from thence toward Poictu; for the further
off he was, the more difficult and impracticable it would be for the Cardinal
to return, as well for the Animosities of the Parliament, as for the ill season
of the year, being to pass 14 Rivers; and by keeping the King absent he should
put the Duke of Orleans into the Government of Affairs, which was his principal
end.

These designs of Chasteauneuf being suspected by the Cardinals Confidents, who
discovering that there were but few in the Council which delivered their mind
cordially, (the rest only in appearance, and to gratify the Queen, professed
themselves good friends) concluded, that there was no better Expedient for
their Majesty's, and for the Cardinal himself, then to make use of their power,
and to get that by force which they could not obtain by reason and fair means.
To this intent the Abbot Ondedei by the Kings Order (who with reiterated
Letters had recalled the Cardinal to Court) hasted to Brules, to let Mazarine
understand the necessity of taking this course, and to inform him really of
what past, assuring him of their Majesty's good intentions, for whose service
it was absolutely necessary he should return to his Charge, it being manifest
that there was no person served them with more readiness and cordiality.

The Cardinal hearkened to what the Abbot delivered; for having found him in
all occasions of an ingenious, free, and sincere nature, he much confided in
him: but he rested somewhat doubtful in his resolution, for fear of making a
greater alteration in Affairs, and of giving new matter to the Malcontents
and to his Enemies, to raise pretexts for Seditions and Tumults, to quiet which
he thought it best to remain in exile, with the loss of all he had gained
hitherto. But in the end the reasons alleged by the Abbot prevailing, who with
an equal zele to his hearty affection labored to make him comprehend the
necessity of his return, he determined with his own money, to make without delay
a Levy of four or five thousand Soldiers, giving the command of them to the
Mareschals at la Ferte, Seneterre, and d'Hoquincourt, the Counts de Novailles
and Broglio, his intimate friends, and persons of great integrity, who took
upon them the command, and with all diligence applied themselves to serve him,
desiring earnestly to see him readmitted to his former State, to his Enemies
shame and reproach.

This being resolved on, the Cardinal desired a Passport of the Spaniards to
return to Bovillon, which was by them delayed, foreseeing perhaps of what
prejudice his return to Court might prove. Wherefore departing suddenly from
Brules, instead of going to Juliers (without drawing bit) he rode to Duren, a
City belonging to the Duke of Newbourg, from thence to Aix la Chapelle, and so
to Liege, to Huy, and lastly to Dinan, whither the Counts of Novailles and
Iroglio came to him to agree on the Levies, for which he there disbursed the
Moneys, and in 40 days time that he staid there they raised their whole number
of Soldiers.

Upon this news the Parliament renewed the Decree against the Cardinal, laying
to his charge that he had infringed their Order, by levying of Soldiers to
enter again into France, and did what they could to hinder his return; but he
continuing at Dinan, hastened with all diligence the new Levies, that he might
accompany them to reinforce the King: and the time of his motion drawing nigh,
he renewed his request to the Spaniards for a Passport, but it not appearing,
one night unexpectedly in 18 hours riding (without drawing bit) he came to
Bovillon, not without danger of being snapt by the Prince of Conde's Troops,
who watched diligently to intercept him, skirting ever and anon the adjacent
Campaign.

From hence he sent word to advertise the Spanish Commanders that he was gone,
and since they had not favored him to with the desired Pass for himself,
desired that they would at least vouchsafe one for his Nieces, which was
immediately granted, and with much Honor they were served, and conveyed to
Bovillon by Don Antonio Primentelli; and from hence arose the good
correspondence betwixt him and the Cardinal, which afterward so much conduced
to the Peace of the two Crowns, to which the Elector of Colen contributed much,
by encouraging Mazarine to so pious and holy a work. He went on to Sedan, and
determined as soon as might be to advance with his levied Soldiers, and with
those the Marshall d' Hoquincourt had gathered, who had Order from the King to
join with him, and with one Body to enter into France.

This novelty made a great noise in Paris, but alarmed most the Frondeurs, the
Parliament, and the Dukes of Orleans and Beaufort; who being surprised when they
least imagined with clamorous complaints, gave out that it was a thing not to
be endured, that the Court should so notoriously infringe their Promise and
Word so often given, and that the contempt was too remarkable, to see
themselves so palpably deluded.

The Parliament therefore decreed, that in prosecution of the Judgment concluded
four days before against the Cardinal, to depute some with a Message to their
Majesty's, to complain of what was acting on the Frontiers against their
service, by levying of Soldiers, distributing of Money, and bruit of Mazarine's
return, all contrary to the Kings Declaration and his Royal Word, for the
maintaining of which they should beseech him with all earnestness, that the
commotions likely suddenly to arise to the destruction of the Peace and the
public good, might be avoided: and the Duke of Orleans was entreated to join
some of his with the said Deputies, mutually to importune that the Cardinal
might be kept at distance.

By a public command they did prohibit all Cities, Towns, and all those who
were in Authority on the Frontiers not to receive him, nor give him any
assistance upon pain of High Treason. Though they reaped small benefit from
these deliberations, because every one laughed at it, reputing it mere madness
and folly, to pretend to control with scribbling and papers, where the Kings
lawful power was predominant, backed with the strength of Arms; nevertheless
they were so intoxicated with a most sottish pretension of Authority, and so
instigated by their Passion, that they persuaded themselves that an Order of
Parliament was sufficient to bring the whole Kingdom under obedience; and so
passing from one absurdity to anothet, to end this year 1651, the 29th. of
December, in virtue of the aforesaid Declarations, of the 7th. and 9th. of
February, the 11th. of March, the 2d. and 8th. of August last past) and of
those and some other Parlements against the Cardinal, he was by the Parliament
of Paris declared guilty of High Treason for returning to Sedan, contrary to
the Prohibition; and for putting himself in a posture to return into France:
ordering moreover to finish the selling his Library, and all the Furniture of
his House, with the Confiscation of all his Ecclesiastical Emoluments,
depositing 50000 Crowns to be given to him that should kill him, or deliver him
alive to Justice, petitioning His Majesty in such case to give his Grace to the
Assassine, who if by his misfortune in giving the blow should not escape, but
be killed himself, that his Heirs should be capable of the reward, making their
account that so great a recompense would invite some desperate Villain to take
away his Life: a thing never heard of, and unworthy to be decreed, nay not to
be proposed in a Catholic Parliament, the bounds of whose Authority extended no
further then to judge of Civil and Criminal causes, and not in the least to
interest themselves in the Affairs of State. It was therefore looked upon with
detestation, that they should proceed to the condemnation of so conspicuous a
Statesman, so dear to the King, and by His Majesty's Council known to be so
advantageous to the good of France, and adorned with the Dignity of Cardinal.

All Europe abhorred this Action, and every good Catholic was scandalized,
that the Life of a Prince of Holy Church should be exposed to sale, so
acceptable to the King, by whose express Order only he acted. And many
foresaw, that the Authors of these execrable doings, though Humane Revenge
should fail, would find in their season (no less then those English who
condemned their King to death) the chastisements of Heaven, for the little
respect that they bore not only to the Cardinal, but also to the King and the
Holy Church.

This Decree (as far as could be guessed) passed not without the secret
intelligence of the Count de Chavigny, who believed by such means to hinder the
Cardinals return, supposing that if the Order had but issued out a little
before, he would not have entered again into the Kingdom. The Count was the
first that tasted Gods judgment, dying a while after in despair, conscious of
betraying the Court, and the Prince of Conde his greatest Confident, in one and
the same time.

All this was represented to the Court of Rome, supposing that the Sacred
College would not allow that such an Example should remain in the memory of the
present Age, much less be transferred to posterity, without those remedies and
punishments which belong to the Popes Authority. But the Romanists considering
that if the success should not answer the attempt, the reputation and dignity
of the Apostolical See would be too far engaged; wherefore they passed it over,
palliating it with dissimulation: for Mazarine had his back-friends in Rome as
well as in France, and the Pope himself was his Enemy,

These news coming to the Court, they rejoiced at the seditious Parisiens, and
valued little their words and inconsiderable strength, and had frequent
Consultations about this business; and although few pressed the return of
Mazarine, yet finding the King was resolved to have him near about him,
according to the Court custom, where they flatter more the Fortune then the
Person, they began with an affected ostentation to show, that they desired as
much; some of them persuading the Queen to hasten his return, constraining
their own inclination, that they might appear to be his most cordial friends.
But Prince Thomas (being a little before come out of Piemont into France) the
Marshall de Plessis Pralin, the Sieurs de la Ferte and Seneterre, the Count de
Servient, the Sieur de Lionne, and other Noblemen of a clear Fidelity,
ingenuous Disposition, and true Friends, delivered their minds with affection
and sincerity; as also the Princess Palatine, the Secretary Tillier recalled to
Court by the means of the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, and of the Marshall de
Villeroy, which vexed those at heart who persuaded themselves that they might
be useful in that charge, and beheld with an evil eye that Mazarine's Affairs
proceeded so smoothly on to his reestablishment. They that chiefly opposed his
return in the Council were the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, who exercised the
charge of first Minister of State, and deliciously relished the Applauses and
the Honors, which to it paid Tribute as Rivers to the Sea; but he veiled his
thoughts with the pretext, that yet the conjuncture of Affairs was not ripe for
his return, because the unseasonableness of it would color the pretenses of
the Prince of Conde, and of the other Malcontents, with the face of Justice,
and would ferment new grievances and revolutions, not only in Paris, but in
other parts of the Kingdom; and said, it would be better counsel to seek first
to remove out of the way the Prince and his Party, that he might return with
more security.

The Proposition truly in it self looked well; and if at that time nothing had
been innovated about Mazarine's coming back, the Prince had been totally
ruined, the whole Kingdom standing firm for the King: but when it was
considered, that if while the Cardinals return was delayed, the business of the
Kingdom, and the present state of Affairs should be mitigated, and the Prince
destroyed, the reasons for his return as a necessary Minister would not have so
much vigor as when it might be averred, that the King had no person about him
sufficient to undergo so weighty a Charge. For this reason Chasteauneuf's
Opinion did not take place, and their counsel was embraced who supported the
Cardinals Interest; alleging that his presence was of great importance for the
better carrying on the Affairs, besides the recruit of a Body, of old Soldiers
levied by him, to hasten the depression of Conde; it not seeming decent to the
Greatness of the King, who was Master, not to be able to have near him such as
he liked best. And albeit any other consideration might require, that the
Cardinal should continue out of the Kingdom, the pretensions of the Parliament
and the Frondeurs were sufficient, that to confound them the contrary should be
done, by which means the Sovereign Authority (independent from all other) might
shine with greater luster, and not to permit so scandalous an Example, that the
Servants should impudently give Law to their Master.

These Reasons were fomented by the first President more then any other, being
no friend to Chasteauneuf, and alienated from the Prince, for having no greater
passion then that of his service to his King. He had a principal part in this
resolve, sufficiently knowing the need that they had in Court of a prime
Minister thoroughly informed of all the Affairs of the Kingdom.

The President was called to Poictiers, with the Marquess of Vieville. The
Parisiens and the Parliament regretted their departure so much the more, by how
much they knew it prejudicial to their Party, that a person of so high
estimation had totally given himself up to the Kings Interest and the
Cardinals. Chasteauneuf for this cause not being able to make good his Maxim,
he took himself to those Arts, which were suggested to him by his many years
experience in the Affairs and Interests of the Court. To disturb then
Mazarine's return, he writ to the Sieur de Fremont, Secretary to the Duke of
Orleans, to dispose his Master to come to Court, because by his presence,
giving countenance and support to them that opposed the Cardinal, he should
easily prevail to hinder the designs of those that adhered to him. But the
Coadjutor on the contrary foreseeing, that the Duke would be quickly brought
about to the Queen, and instead of opposing would condescend to her
satisfaction, he opposed the counsel of Chasteauneuf, and with great sagacity
diverted the journey of His Royal Highness, who had undertaken it, if instead of
writing to Fremont he had writ to the Count of Chavigny and the Secretary
Goulas.

In that interim the Marshall de Hoquincourt had rendezvouz'd his Troops about
Laon to join with the Cardinal, who was ready with others under his pay to
enter into France; wherefore having agreed to meet about Derlans and Espernay
upon the Marne in the beginning of January, the Marshall began to move the
18th. of December, and the Cardinal leaving his Nieces at Sedan, advanced
likewise toward Espernay with 5000 chosen fighting men, and there calling a
Council of War it was concluded, that the Marshall with 1000 Horse should
secure the Passes on the Rivers Aube and Seen, which he accordingly did,
passing luckily without any opposition by l' Anglure and l' Aube, and crossed
the Seen at Merry, where the Regiments of Horse and Foot under the command of
the Sieur de St. Mor joined with him, and receiving intelligence that the Duke
of Orleans had sent out four Companies to Pont sur Son, Hoquincourt charged
them, routed some Horse which infested the road to Sens, and compelled the
Sieur de Morandiere, Commander of the Dukes men, to quit his Post and retire.

It was thought that the Princes did not do all their endeavor to hinder this
return; for perceiving that their Affairs were in a most desperate condition,
(the whole Kingdom concurring in favor of the King) they knew that nothing
could keep them from their last tottering, but some new pretext that might give
an honest color to their Cause, and retard the Subjects from the assistance
which they contributed to their Sovereign. And it was suspected, that instead
of providing to defend the Passes with some competent Forces, which they might
sooner have gathered together, they delayed so long till the Cardinal was far
advanced into the Kingdom; and it was believed that not only the Princes that
were in Paris promoted this design, but that it was also secretly fomented by
the Prince of Conde, it being known that he had made Gourville and others to
solicit the Cardinal to undertake his return to Court, hoping that this would
serve him either for a pretext to justify his proceedings, or for an occasion
to piece with him, because he had rather have to do with Mazarine then with
Chasteauneuf.

The thoughts in the mean time of the Coadjutor were to induce the Duke of
Orleans to frame a third Party of Malcontents, and Enemies to Mazarine, which
perhaps might be seconded by the Courtiers that were averse to him; and
therefore he used all industry to make the plot succeed: imagining that the
Queen being intimidated by the Duke, more firmly adhering to Conde, she would
be necessitated to keep the Cardinal further off; in which case ( Orleans
uniting himself to the Interest of the Court, and fortifying himself with the
Troops of Lorrain) he should totally ruin the Prince.

But the Count of Chavigny, and the rest of Conde's friends kept Orleans firm,
making him understand that he could not sustain himself but by uniting with the
Prince; and though they should not fully make sure of him, they hoped at least
to prevent him, by closing with the Court, in which case he would hardly be
able to uphold himself. In the interim the Duke of Nemours coming to Paris,
confirmed in the name of the Prince of Conde the Treaty with Orleans, and the
result was for the keeping out of the Cardinal, and to make peace with Spain.

The news being spread in Paris of Orders given out by the King different to
his former Declarations, it is not to be imagined how the contrary Spirits were
enraged; yet they could do no more then make a noise, so long as the Kings
Authority was prevalent in the Kingdom: but however the Cardinal was thwarted
by the one side, yet he was animated by the other; for the Parliament of
Britain being solicited by that of Paris, to frame a like Ordinance in favor
of the Princes against the Cardinal, they ordered quite contrary, that all
Proceedings against him should be suspended till the Prince returned to his
duty, and the Spanish Troops were departed the Kingdom. The Tumults of the
Frondeurs continuing, the Parliament decreed to proceed to the sale of the
Cardinals goods, and not to ratify the Kings Declaration against the Prince,
till that against the Cardinal had first taken effect; from whence it behoved
that he should again quit the Kingdom, if they meant that the Parliament should
pass the Declaration. They had many Consultations great in appearance, but weak
in substance, and some Overtures to the King succeeded them. The Court talked
in ambiguous terms, and amused them still with hopes, because Time (which
ripens all things) they hoped would also maturate the bitterness of the
turbulent minds. The Queen afterward sent to exhort the Duke of Orleans to
retire from Paris, to remove the umbrage that they had of him: but the design
succeeded not, and increased the distrust, whereat the others taking Alarm
became much more audacious and undertaking.

The Parliament added to the Instructions given to their Deputies, dispatched to
the Court to urge the release of the Counselor Bitant; and that the Marshall
de la Milleray could be advanced to the Dignity of Duke and Peer, if first he
did not give the pretended satisfaction to the Parliament of Britain. Moreover,
that no Duke, Marshall of France, or other Officer of the Crown, should hence
forward be admitted to their Function, if the Cardinal were not first withdrawn
out of the Kingdom. It was thought that this was done to lessen the Interest
that he had by disposing of the Offices of the Crown; thereby to gain those
Officers to their Party. But of this the Gentry and Nobility of the Kingdom
made no reckoning; but by how much the more the Parliament showed themselves
eager against the Court, so much the more contemptible they rendered
themselves, no body regarding their Decrees, so long as the Authority of the
King could annul them, and render them invalid; and therefore they who sounded
the Affairs to the bottom, found it better counsel to keep the straight way of
Obedience, then to walk in rugged paths and praecipices.

In this manner the Princess Palatine Anna Gonzaga, from being first Conde's
Friend became the Queens greatest Confident, and the Cardinals, to which the
King corresponding called her to Court, to foment by her ready and smart Wit
the Parties proper to destroy the Caballs of the Malcontents. She arrived
there, as likewise diverse other Lords did, who openly condemned the Opinion of
those, which could not but in the end be losers, yet obstinately followed the
Game.

In the mean while the Cardinal at the Head of the Army departing from Pont sur
Saone, came to Chasteaurenart, and from thence advanced to Gien upon the River
Loire. The Soldiers of the Marquess of Sordis, who were entered into the Town,
upon news of his March, quitted it. The Cardinal passed the River over the
Bridge, and was civilly received by those Inhabitants. He went thence to
Vierron, where he left the Army under the command of the Count Broglio, to
continue their March toward Guienne; and His Eminence, accompanied with
Hoquincourt and Grancay Mareschals of France, with a great number of other
principal Officers and Persons of Quality, went in diligence toward Poitiers,
where the King was, and drawing near was met by His Majesty without the City.
The King light out of his Coach, and embraced him with so much affection, that
the Honors were greater which the Cardinal received by that benign Reception,
then his misusage by so many Decrees of the Parliament. His Majesty took him
into his Coach, and conducted him to kiss the Queens hand, where the joy of the
Court was redoubled.

By how much the more splendent the Applauses and Contentments were in this
part, by so much the more the hatred was dismal and cloudy in other parts; and
in no City greater threatenings appeared then in Bourdeux, whose Parliament after
the example of that of Paris, persevering in their Assemblings, and unlawful
and seditious Decrees, drove from the City the persons and whole Families of
those who were esteemed faithful to the King, and did all that Rebels and
Enemies of their lawful Sovereign could do.

THE HISTORY Of the Managements of Cardinal MAZARINE. Lib. II.
MAZARINE being entered into France the 16th. of January 1652, the King
cancelled and annulled the Decree of the Parliament of Paris, of the 29
September 1651, with express prohibition to put it in execution, and not to
attempt any thing against him upon pain of death.

He forbad also not to proceed to the sale of his Goods, nor Books; the
Transgressors in this case being to lose what they had paid, and ^0000 Livres
penalty: declaring ^^at the said Decree was contrary to His Majesty's
intention, to the ordinary Forms of Justice, to the Customs of the Kingdom, and
injurious to the Sacred College of Cardinals, to the Head of the Church, and to
the Holy Apostolic See, toward which he protested, following the example of
the Kings his predecessors, always to observe an unalterable devotion and
reverence: that the Cardinal was entered into the Kingdom by his express Order,
to conduct a good Body of an Army levied at his own proper charges, to serve
him in the present Emergencies; and that he being a Sovereign King, and
absolute Master of all, he ought to be obeyed by his Subjects without any
limitation.

In Poitiers, after the arrival of the Cardinal, diverse Consultations of War
were held, which were reduced to the examinations of two points: The one, to go
with all the Forces into Guienne, to bring under Bourdeaux, and totally to
suppress the Prince of Conde's Party: the Queen and the Cardinal were of the
same judgment. The other was, to go toward Paris with the greatest part of the
Forces, to disperse those of the Duke of Orleans, encourage the well-affected
Citizens, and hinder the passage of the Duke of Nemours Soldiers, who were
about to enter into France. Diverse Reasons were alleged for both these
Opinions, and it was resolved on to pass into Guienne, but the City of Angers
being up in Arms by means of the Duke de Rohan Chabot Governor of Anjou, the
Cardinal judged it more opportune to direct their course that way: so that
unexpectedly on the 6th. of February the Court hasted to Saumeur, to the great
resentment of the Marquess de Chasteauneuf; who seeing that in the Kings
Council it was resolved on to march into Guienne, and afterward, without
consulting him, they changed their resolution for Anjou. He thought they made
little Account of him, and that the Cardinal was become again the sole Disposer
of all Affairs; wherefore he took free leave of the Court, and retired to live
privately at Tours, whereby Mazarine remained to direct all as before, without
any companion, but not without the envy and jealousy of some of his friends,
who could not brook the preeminency of a stranger.

The Court having finished the Enterprise of Angers, which was reduced to the
Kings obedience, possessed themselves also of Pont de Ce, and secured the
Provinces beyond the Loire; the News coming of the Duke of Nemours Arrival in
France, with some Troops out of Flanders; the Cardinal thought fit not to defer
time, but to provide carefully for the Affairs of those parts, where all their
friends desired the Kings Presence. The Court then departed from Saumeur, the
7. of March 1652, and settled at Tours, whether from diverse Provinces and
Cities came several Persons of Quality, deputed to confirm to the King their
fidelity and obedience; and amongst others the Archbishop of Rouen Chamvallon
Primate of Normandy, deputed by a great Assembly of Prelates met at Paris upon
the Decree against the Cardinal, to demonstrate to his Majesty the wrong that
was done to the Church of Rome, and the injury she received in the person of
one of her Members out-raged. The Archbishop had a favorable Audience. This
Deputation was very famous, not only for the quality and importance of the
matter, but for the merit and prerogative of the said Prelate, who exaggerated
highly the Ptoceedings of the Parliament, in treating with so much rigor, and
such unusual courses, a Prince of the Holy Church, without considering, that
these were forms prohibited by divine and humane laws; and that which appeared
admirable in his discourse, was, that openly praising and yet oblikely touching
the Parliament, he obliged the whole Ecclesiastical Order. While the Court was
at Tours, the Count de Servient was restored by the King to his Charge of
Minister of State, who being a very able and experienced person, it turned too
much to the damage of the public interest to keep him at such a distance; but
the Sieur de Lionne his Nephew was not recalled, by the prevailing of his
particular enemies, to whom the Court was willing at that time to give that
satisfaction. From Tours the Court removed to Blois, and made some stay there,
which was very prejudicial to it, since those of the contrary party had time to
provide for the Conservation of Orleans (into which City Mademoiselle entered)
and for the defense of Chartres, proposed and considered by the Cardinal, for
the shortest way to approach near Paris.

Not being able therefore neither to pass to Orleans, nor to go to Chartres, it
was determined to take the way of Gergeau, because the Bridge of Beaugency was
broken by the swelling of the River, happening a little before, with very great
floods: but that of Gergeau being likewise spoiled, the only Pass that remained
was that of Gien, whereupon the Court went to Sully, and the Army to Sandilon,
a little distant. According as this moved toward Gien, that of the Princes went
continually coasting on the other side the river, to dispute their passage, and
interrupt their design. They mustered in the Princes Camp betwixt nine and ten
thousand, four thousand chosen and old Soldiers, most part of them Infantry of
the Duke of Orleans, under the Command of the Duke of Beaufort, and the rest
under the Duke of Nemours; and these were partly French of the Prince of
Conde's, and partly high Germans and other Nations levied by the King of Spain.
The Dukes of Beaufort and Nemours did not agree together, though they were
Kinsmen, and should have fought a Duel near Orleans, if it had not been
prevented by Mademoiselle, who by her interposing made them friends; wherefore
the Prince of Conde, who was in Guienne thought fit to convey himself to this
Army, not only moved thereunto for this cause, but for diverse other reasons,
amongst which were the following; First, that by making this diversion all the
Kings Forces would be drawn that way where the Prince was, and by that means
Bourdeaux would be out of danger. Secondly, because the condition of Paris
stood in need to be strengthened by his Presence, chiefly suspecting that the
King would come thither, and to oppose himself to cross the designs of the
Coadjutor, who used all his endeavor to disjoyn the Duke of Orleans from him.
And, what obliged him most to go, was to see, whether it would turn to best
Account, to reunite himself to the Court, or to adjust with the Coadjutor; or
at least to render his Intrigues with the Duke of Orleans unuseful. With these
considerations, and with thoughts of piecing with the Coadjutor, he took a
journey the most difficult and most dangerous, that could possibly have come
into his thought, being like to have been taken Prisoner by the Sieur de Saint
Mor, dispatched from Court with 300 horse to track him, and seize on his person:
nevertheless he came safe thither, and the News of his coming being spread
abroad, the Army was as much joy'd and pleased, as the Prince confounded and
troubled at the dissension of his Generals. From hence he gave advice to the
Duke of Orleans, and to the Parliament of his welfare, and had thoughts of
passing thither, to resolve what was to be done, to encourage his party, and to
settle the peoples inconstancy, accustomed to vary, according as the Accidents
that nourish it do alter. But having afterward understood, that by the Arrival
of the Duke of Bovillon, and many Cavaliers and Soldiers from diverse parts,
the Marshall of Turenne was constituted their General by the King, and by this
means the Court was recruited no less in courage then in forces. He stayed with
the Army, not a little discomposed by the differences amongst the Commanders;
wherefore the Court was not a little troubled, seeing that their designs of
their Generals upon the ill-ordered Camp of the Princes were vanished. The
Discipline being established in the Army by Conde, and their minds reincouraged
upon the confidence that every body had of his valor, he caused Montargis to
be be attaqued, and took it, by which Post he opened a Passage into Burgundy,
and made feasible his designs. The Royallists lodged betwixt the River Loire,
and the Canal of Briare. The Quarters of the Marshall d' Hoquincourt were a
little distant, and exposed to the enemy. The Prince made semblance to march
toward Chasteaurenard, to go into Burgundy; but altering his March he went
toward Blenau, Hoquincourts quarters, and unawares surprised him in the night,
in such sort that he routed him, and took all the Baggage.

At this News, the Marshall de Turenne caused sound to horse throughout all
his quarters, and speedily drawing the Troops together, advanced toward the
Posts assaulted, to succor them; but having notice of those that fled, of the
disorder and disaster, wont always to be increased by Fame, being confirmed to
him by diverse Officers, with the foresight of a great Captain he thought it not
fit to hazard a new Engagement: wherefore he took the way of Osoy on this side
the Canal, where was the quarters of Novailles, with design to put himself into
a safe Post, they had diverse skirmishes, marches, and counter-marches, and all
day the Armies faced one another, without engaging otherwise then by the
Exchange of many Cannon-shot.

The Cardinal being informed of the suceess, gave sudden account to the King
how things stood, moderating the vapourings which were cunningly spread abroad.
His Majesty with a generous heart, and courage of a great King, leaping out of
his bed, said that himself would be at the head of his Army. All mounted on
Horseback, and no man that had a sword by his side stayed in Gien. The Cardinal
very undauntedly gave all expedient Orders, and dispatched the Duke of Bovillon
to the Camp, with a Squadron of Gentlemen Volunteers, and afterward advanced
with the King to the Army of Turenne, by whose means not only the dispersed
troops of Hoquincourt were rallied, but also the Princes were constrained to
retire into Estampes, which afterward was attaqued by the Royallists.

The Prince of Conde went to Paris, where the number of Malcontents daily
increased, heightened by the hopes that they had of the coming of the Duke of
Lorain's Army. Every one desired to establish his own interest by diminishing
the Royal Authority, supporting themselves with the pretext, that Mazarine was
the ruin of the Kingdom; and all Paris was full of seditious Libells,
Satirical Verses, lying Stories, and Politic Discourses, which tearing the
name of the Cardinal, and other Ministers of State, did redound to the contempt
and disgrace of their Royal Majesty's; and with such forms those seditious did
seek to make sinister impressions in the people, ignorant of the Mysteries of
State. On the contrary, all the streets and corners of the City did echo forth
the Praises of the Princes, and of the Archduke himself, celebrated in prose
and verse by a number of Writers, with the Title of Deliverers of the oppressed
people; and many Preachers getting into the Pulpits, wearied themselves with no
less liberty, speaking detractingly of the present Affairs; and all this to
imprint sinister apprehensions in the people, which redounded more to the blame
of the Superiors, which tolerated them, then of those that recited them. The
Parliament continuing still in their purpose to reduce Mazarine to the last
extremity, dispatched the President Nesmond, with other Counselors, to Sully,
to represent to the King what they thought necessary for his removal from
Court, in conformity to their first Deliberations and His Majesty's Word: but
the Court was not at all moved for any of these instances, judging it a
petulancy and too great an impudence of the Parlementarians, in pretending to
give Law to their Master.

In the mean while the Spaniards making use of these favorable conjunctures,
which the discord in the Kingdom of France gave them, they possessed themselves
of Trino in Italy, taken by the Marquess of Caracena, and in Flanders of
Graveling, gained by the conduct of the Count of Fuensaldagna, who commanded
under the Archduke.

The Cardinal did his utmost to succor Graveling, a place of great importance:
but the remedies are too weak, in a time that the Court was miserably
distracted by domestic broyls, when the Foreign enemy from many parts assailed
her with powerful Forces, and in a conjuncture that the Seditious of the
Parliament (to render the Malady more incurable) diverted the Kings revenues in
such manner, that oftentimes he was reduced to great necessity, not having
wherewithal to provide even for the Court it self.

In Paris the disorders continued more then in any other part. The Prince of
Conde being come thither, it is impossible to relate with what Applauses he was
received; whereat the Kings faithful servants and the Cardinals friends were so
much astonished, that they durst not set their foot out of doors.

These sent Dispatches to Court, supplicating their Majesty's to draw near the
City with all speed, otherwise (the Faction of Conde growing stronger) they
should be constrained to abandon it, and let all their consultations fall to
the ground. The Kings Council being moved by these Solicitations, and much
more persuaded by reason to preserve by all means that great and potent City,
determined to approach nigh it.

In order hereunto their Majesty's came to Auxerre, from thence to Sens, to
Montreul, to Melun, and other places near; and in the Kings Council it was
debated to famish Paris, by taking away the commerce of the River, but this was
not assented to by the Cardinal, who knowing well that these Extravagancies of
the Citizens proceeded from the Arts of a few Seditious people, more covetous
to advance their particular Interests, then desirous (as they gave out) of the
public good; and that suddenly they would perceive their error, and put
themselves again in their due obedience to their King: adding that it was not
good by rigor to exasperate the people of that City further, and precipitate
them by despair to declare for the Princes, which was the Card they called for,
without which their Party was weak and declining. That the people ofttimes
changed their minds, and sometimes for the better, as there was some hopes they
would do now, when they continually invited His Majesty to return to his Royal
Palace, having to that purpose sent the Sieur de Lerygue. But the Cardinal was
not for embracing that counsel, it not behoving to trust the Kings Person on
the word of the people and la Fronda without good caution; he consented
nevertheless to hold the Parisiens in hand with hopes and fair words, without
coming to any particular Declaration. And thus by Mazarines dexterity Paris was
in effect kept Neutral, though in outward appearance it seemed the contrary, by
which they gained time to perfectionate those things, which afterward followed
to the Kings advantage.

The Court departed from Melun, and came to Corbeil, and thence by the way of
Chily to St. Germains, still under covert of the Army.

Though Paris was not in open breach with the Court, they nevertheless
continued to keep a good correspondence with the Princes; the Inhabitants took
Arms, and began to keep guard, held consultations and made preparations for
War; And among other Assemblies, they held a General one, of the Body of the
Citizens, assisted by the Deputies of the Parliament, in which was decreed,
that when the Cardinal should be driven out of the Kingdom, with security not
to return again, they would presently lay down their arms: but as they made use
of this pretext, only to make their actions appear innocent to the people, and
that they directed their intentions to no other end, then to the public
relief, by sending farther off that Minister, to whom they imputed all their
grievance, and continuance of the War: so the Court, admitting they did
deprive themselves of the Cardinal by licensing him to depart, knew that they
should be at the same pass that they were the last time he left the Kingdom.
And by yielding to the pretensions of subjects, they sensibly wounded the Royal
Authority, which ought to be kept absolute and independent, wherefore they
pretended on the contrary, that it did not belong to any one to give laws, but
to receive them from their Sovereign; and that the sole pretension that the
King should serve himself of Ministers of their appointing, deserved as much
blame and correction, as it was contrary to the Maxims of good Government, to
permit that any body of His Majesty's Council should depend on any other then
on the King himself; so that they cried Out on it, as too great an impertinency,
to require that one should be driven away (of whom his Patron did profess
himself well served) to put in another that probably would not please him, and
who might perhaps study more the Interest of particular persons then the
public good and the Crown's; it manifestly appearing, that to deprive the King
of the Cardinal, was to take away from him all satisfaction, and to make him
depend on their pleasure. And therefore not to give so pernicious an example
(though he had had a mind for other causes to put him away) he ought not to do
it; but to uphold him, that the world might know that he was Master.

The Parisiens the day following had another general Assembly, and selected
some Deputies to desire their Majesty's to remove the Cardinal further off, and
to return to Paris; but it was to no purpose, the Court standing firm in their
resolution not to sully the Royal Authority, endeavoring to gain time, and to
keep Paris Neutral, that they might not supply the contrary Party with Men and
Money, of which they stood in need enough. The Princes and the Parliament on the
other side studying to maintain themselves in the Peoples favor, did not omit
to employ all their industry to stir up the people against the Kings Ministers;
and because it was necessary (to keep afoot the commerce of Paris) to hinder
the Kings Army from passing the Seen, they made some Levies, which joined with
some other Troops of the Princes to scower the neighboring Campania. The Army
of the Princes possessed themselves of the Country of Estampes, situated betwixt
Orleans and Paris, where they found a great quantity of Corn; and here they
intended to abide and fortify themselves with hopes, by maintaining this Post
to keep Paris and Orleans faithful, which was the main scope of all.

While the Kings Army lay quartered at Chartres and thereabouts, they cast
themselves into Estampes, with their Lieutenants Generals; for the Prince and
the Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort were gone to Paris, where they staid to make
sure of the Frondeurs and their Party, a good part of whom desiring the Kings
return, hearkened willingly to the Treaties that thereupon were had about the
entry and reception of His Majesty, who if at that instant he had frankly shown
himself, he would have been received with all joyfulness and applause, and the
Princes and their Party chased away, since the Citizens were at last weary of
these hurly-burlies, but nothing was done, the King not daring to venture
himself on the peoples instability, nor willing to let the Cardinal depart as
he often pressed, to take away all pretext from the Malcontents.

The Kings Army besieged that of the Princes in Estampes, where followed diverse
skirmishes, and amongst the rest a very bloody one in possessing themselves of
the Suburbs.

The Court fixed at St. Germains, and here the first Deputation which was sent
was in the name of the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde, who dispatched
thither the Count de Chavigny, the Secretary Goulas, and the Duke de Rohan
Chabot; Chavigny was for the Prince, Goulas for Orleans, and Chabot for both.
At first they declared, that they would not treat with the Cardinal; but this
was only a show, for they had secret order to see him, and to seek all ways to
come to an Agreement with him, with a firm resolution to gain him to their
particular interests, supposing, that he to continue in France, and in his
Ministry, would easily condescend to their pretensions. They were secretly in
the Cardinals Cabinet, treated with him, and Chavigny, a person of great worth,
propounded to the Cardinal to make an entire Agreement with the Prince, by
granting him four Demands. One was to make the Count d' Ognon Duke and Peer;
the Count de Marsin a Marshall of France; the Prince of Conty Governor of
Provence; and the Prince himself Plenipotentiary for the General Peace. To the
two first the Cardinal did comply, because they simply concerned only
honorable titles: But the Government of Provence, and the Plenipotentiary of
the Peace, he did wholly reject, declaring, he would never consent, that for
his particular interest the Kings Authority and Service should be prejudiced.

This Deputation was of huge prejudice to the Princes, because it was made in a
time that the Parliament and the Parisiens were more incensed against the
Cardinal, and when all the Sovereign Courts had deliberated to require his
removal, and that the Commonalty of Paris were of the same mind; in a time that
the Duke of Orleans and the Prince had declared in Parliament, that for a
general satisfaction they desired nothing but the banishment of the Cardinal:
so that the people seeing them act against such express Declarations, from
thence forward they were not a little jealous of their carriage, and many that
were very well inclined toward them began to be more wary in their
proceedings, which was afterward one of the principal causes of their fall.

In the neck of this Deputation the Deputies of the Parliament appeared at St.
Germains, with their Remonstrances to their Majesty's about giving the Cardinal
his Conge, against whom the President Nesmond spoke with great liberty. The
King heard them with much civility, and afterward told them that he was very
well informed of the good intentions of the Parliament, and wished that they
were as well persuaded of his. That he would confer with his Privy Council, and
in three days they should understand his will; with such words and general
terms concluding nothing, the Deputies returned to Paris. The same day those
sent from the Chamber of Accounts and Court of Aids had Audience, and the
Answer was the same he gave the Parliament; also the Provost of Merchants, the
Sheriffs, the Attorney General, the City-Notary, and others deputed from the
Communalty, presented themselves before his Majesty, representing to him the
unhappy state of his Subjects, and of the necessity of dismissing the Cardinal,
the sole cause of all the distasts and differences. The Keeper of the Seals
answered, that his Majesty was assured of the good affection of the City of
Paris, and to satisfy them he intended to return thither so soon as the Passes
should be open; and this he said to give them a wipe, that in the same time
they made these Addresses, they endeavored to hinder his coming, cutting off
the Bridges of the Seen and Marne. The King therefore not yielding to
condescend to such licentious demands, the Malcontents took occasion to
exclaim against his Council, who on the other side complaining of the Subjects
Proceedings, every thing went more and more into confusion, and all the faults,
which indeed did concern only a few interessed people and Malcontents, were
charged upon Mazarine, against whom their hatred and fury not abating, he was
commonly called The root of all evil, and The cause of all the miseries of that
flourishing Kingdom; which would have been more unhappy (wanting the protection
of the Cardinal, and the power of the Princes and of the Parliament increasing)
if the Kings Authority had been diminished, which the more independent and
absolute, the more profitable to Subjects, who are always most miserable where
there are most Masters.

The Parliament Assembled to hear the Answers that the Deputies brought from
Court, where were present the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, with
all the chief of the Faction, when the News came, that the Royallists were
assaulting the Bridge of St. Cloud, defended by a little Fort; whereupon the
Prince of Conde, mounting suddenly on Horseback, with several Gentlemen, and
above eight thousand Parisiens, made them retire, and from thence marching
toward St. Denis, where were 200 Swisses of the Kings Guards in Garrison, and
assailing those old and rotten walls, they made themselves Masters of it,
taking those soldiers prisoners, which were led to Paris in triumph. But this
City was soon recovered by the Kings Forces, commanded by the Sieur de Renville
Colonel of Horse, after which a Neutrality was granted to the Town of St.
Denis, upon condition that the Princes should also, leave free the Passes of
St. Cloud, Neully, Charenton, and St. Maur.

After these diverse successes the Parliament assembled again, and having heard
the Relation made by the President Nesmond, they determined to send him back to
St. Germains to receive the Kings Answer, which he had promised in three days:
But it being to the advantage of the Court to gain time, Mazarine with great
subtilty prolonged the Resolutions, keeping still the Treaties on foot, not to
put the people in despair, and necessitate them (when they should have no more
hopes) to declare for the Princes; and for that cause the Duke d' Anville made
diverse journeys from Court to Paris on the Kings behalf, managing dexterously
the Treaty with the Princes, who pressed more and more the Cardinals departure.

The Prince of Conde, who by a particular gift of Nature was no less endowed
with a most prudent faculty of discerning, then with a mavelous and
unparalled valor in Arms, observing the instability of his Party, grounded on
uncertain and wavering designs, he inclined to an agreement in any manner, even
without the removal of the Cardinal from the Ministry, considering it better to
treat with him who was of a sweet and gentle nature, then others of a violent
Genius, as the Cardinal de Retz was reputed to be. But the good intention of
the Prince was diverted by his Kindred and Friends, who declared that in such
case they would forsake him; and lastly, by the Duke of Orleans, solicited
thereunto by the Cardinal de Retz, who was accused that for his private
advantage he equally desired the ruin of the Prince and of Mazarine; so that
His Royal Highness vigorously opposed it, and was cause that this Overture took
no effect.

From S. Germain the Court removed to Melun; for this City being upon the Seen,
and nearer to Estampes, they might from hence with more ease send Supplies and
Recruits to the Kings Camp, stopping in the same time the Provisions which are
wont to be brought down the River from those fertile Fields to Paris: and here
the King gave Order to Marshall Turenne to endeavor what er'e came on it to
expugn Estampes, and defeat the Army of the Princes, who defending themselves
bravely, there followed many hot Skirmishes, with no small slaughter of
Soldiers and considerable Captains on either side: wherefore the Princes
perceiving that their Army would subsist a long time in Estampes, solicited
the Spaniards that the Army of Duke Charles of Lorrain might advance to their
succor. The Ministers of Spain cheerfully assenting to uphold the Party of the
Princes, and keep afoot the Civil War in France, presently set themselves about
it.

The Duke of Lorrain was wont every year to make a bargain with the Spaniards
for the next Campania, by which they obliged him for a certain sum of money
to serve them with his Troops. This year therefore 1652 they engaged him to
pass into France, to succor the Princes. In pursuance of which accord he
marched with his Army of 4000 Foot, and about 5000 Horse, with some Pieces of
Artillery, thorough Champagne toward the Seen, to raise the Siege of Estampes:
leaving his Forces at Lagny, he went to Paris, where he was received with all
the Honors wont to be given to a Prince of whom they stood in need.

At this news the Cardinal began to set his Wits at work, and to give necessary
Orders for securing the most important places. He sought to gain Duke Charles
by the mediation of the Duchess of Chevreuse his Ally, and of the same House.

She being a Lady of great sense, and full of Intrigues, making use of the
natural jealousy wont to be betwixt the Princes of the Blood and the Dukes of
Lorrain, and especially betwixt Conde and them, who was much esteemed amongst
the Spaniards, she gave the Duke to understand, that it would not turn to his
benefit to assist them. The Duke was convinced by her Reasons, and inclined to
embrace her counsel, so he could find a sufficient pretext to disingage himself
from the Spaniards, to whom he had promised to succor Estampes. Mazarine sent
the Marquess de Chasteauneuf to negotiate secretly with the Duke, and they
agreed together, that to disingage his word, and to keep himself from the blame
he might incur, he should raise the Siege of Estampes; and the morning
following that Turenne should retire from thence, the Duke promised to retreat
to the Frontier of the Kingdom, (to make a show that it was not by compact, but
by reason of the State of the Kings Army, that obliged him to take this course)
to which purpose they should furnish him with all necessary provisions. The
Princes knew him by his Conduct, and by the difficulty he made in passing the
Seen, that he had intelligence with the Court; wherefore they went to find him
at his Camp, and oblige him to pass the River; but he represented to them, that
they ought to rest satisfied if so be he raised the Siege of Estampes; and
having some hopes that the Court would take the same resolution, it was not
necessary to engage himself further. The Prince of Conde gave him to
understand, it was a small matter to cause the Siege to be raised, if he did
not give them the opportunity to put their Troops in safety, because they could
no longer subsist in a ruinated place, so that after many Discourses the Duke
permitted himself to be engaged before he was aware, to give in writing a
Declaration to the Princes, by which he obliged himself to stay yet some days
in the same Post upon the River Seen, that in the mean while the Princes might
withdraw their Troops from Estampes, and come nearer Paris.

The Kings Army being retired from the Siege of Estampes, and the Court seeing
he failed in performing the private Treaty concluded with Chasteauneuf; the
Marshall de Turenne by advice of Mazarine moved his Camp with expedition
toward Corbeil, with design to fight the Lorrainers, before they should pass
the River to join with the Princes Forces, and they faced the Enemy so
opportunely, that being surprised and astonished, doubting they should be
engaged in fight, they presently retired, taking the advantage of the high
Hills of Ville nieufve and S. George, and putting themselves under covert of a
little River, that discharges it self into the Seen. The Kings Party advancing
toward Corbeil took several prisoners, which obliged Duke Charles to desire
the Sieur de Beaulieu, who was present with him, to procure the fulfilling of
the Agreement, and to let him know the reason why they brought the Army against
him, while he was in Treaty with the Court. Turenne returned him answer, that
he supposed there was no more Treaty with him, he having failed of his word, or
at least retarded to perform his promise; yet if he would stand to the Treaty
in good earnest, he would advance no further, and granted him four hours to
consider on it, which being past he was acquit of his word. The term expired
without any Answer, and without any effect; and therefore without delay the
Kings Army marched hastily (leaving their baggage behind) against a Castle upon
the River held by the Duke, half a League distant from his quarters, and took
it upon discretion; and casting a Bridge over the River, passed it with the
greatest part of the Foot and Cannon, making the rest of the Troops foard it a
little above, and came within Cannon-shot of the Lorrainers; which the Duke
seeing, and being resolved not to fight, and hazard the defeat of his people,
which was all he had to trust to, he sent my Lord Germain, a principal Officer
of the King of England's, (who was one that mediated in the said Agreement with
the Marshall) to let him understand that he was reayd to fulfill the Treaty
concluded. Turenne told him, that this was good the day before; but that then
being upon the point of fighting, and having drawn back his word, they ought to
speak no more of preceding Treaties, matters being now changed; and dispatched
the Sieur de Varennes to let him understand, that he would not defer any longer
to attaque him, if he did not suddenly yield up the Bridge of Boats which he
had upon the Seen, if he did not forbear to fortify himself, and if he did not
immediately depart out of France within 15 days by the way he should appoint
him, giving responsible Hostages for the performance. The Duke, after he had
made some difficulty, and sought to prolong the Affair, being pressed anew with
positive threatenings, determined to assent to all that was required him,
conditionally though, that Turenne should not make use of the Bridge which he
put into his hands, to march against the Army of the Princes; and that the
Troops that he had with them of theirs should have Pass-ports to go to Paris;
that they should give him Billetings for his March, and 15 days time to get out
of the Kingdom. All was concluded. The Duke gave for Hostage the Count de
Linville, and the General of the Ordnance. On the Kings part were given to the
Duke the Chevalier of Marcousse, and the Sieur de Vaubecourt.

In this manner the Treaty with Turenne being agreed on, to his great glory, at
the head of the Armies, the Lorrainers began without delay to file off toward
Brie Comte Robert. The Duke having in this manner deluded the Princes and the
Spaniard they were thereat highly disgusted; and this was one of the chief
motives that caused the Court of Spain to resolve his imprisonment, as shall be
related in its due place.

The Parliament of Paris believed by the coming of the Lorrainers, that they had
won the Game, and therefore raising more and more their pretensions, they
deputed again to Court the President Nesmond, to insist upon sending away the
Cardinal; who coming with the other Deputies to Melun, they made their
Remonstrance on the same subject, adding that it was a small matter for the
King to deprive himself of one Statesman, to gain the obedience of all who for
that one reason had withdrawn themselves from him.

The King returned answer in writing, that having diverse times heard the
Remonstrances made him by his Parliament, he let them understand, that he had
always in his thoughts what they represented to him, being assured that as the
Parliament were very much concerned for the maintaining of the Royal Authority,
so he should have no other thought, then to contribute all his power for the
advantage of his service; wherefore perceiving that the wound would prove
incurable without present remedy, desired that the Deputies or others that were
chosen should join with those of his Royal Council, and together procure to
find a remedy for the threatening inconveniences to ward his Subjects, from the
evident ruin into which (for the caprice of a few disturbed by their own
Ambition) they were ready to cast themselves, His Majesty having nothing nearer
his heart then the desire of Peace and Union, and to restore his Kingdom to its
pristine splendor. Nesmond having read this Answer, replied, the only means
to quiet all was the putting further off the Cardinal. The King instantly
interrupted him, and with a serious grave brow told him, You have understood my
Will, and so brake off. The Deputies returned to Paris, where they rendered a
distinct account to the rest of their Members of what had past, they differed
in their Opinions, whether they should accept of the Conference proposed, and
many assented to it: but Brussel with a pretense of Zele for the public good
stood firm, that there was no need of other Conference, nor of other Treaties,
seeing that all was reduced to this one point, which was, the departure of
Mazarine, who being the only occasion of all the distastes, they ought to
stand upon that, which being obtained, all the other Controversies would be at
an end. And the more they perceived the King averse to deprive himself of that
Statesman, the more clamor they made about it; not that they really much
desired it, but because they saw it was the way to nourish the distrusts, and
keep alive the differences. It being manifest enough, that if the Parliament had
believed, that the King by sending away Mazarine would unite the Princes to his
service, they would never have wished it, but rather underhand have endeavored
his stay, it not being for their advantage that the Princes joining with the
King should so much the more strengthen his Authority, and by consequence
weaken their pretensions. Holding therefore to the Opinion of Brussel it was
decreed, that without any delay the Deputies should return to declare anew to
His Majesty, that they had nothing to add nor to propose, then the effective
removal of the Cardinal, conformable to the Decrees and Declarations of His
Majesty, and the Protests of the Princes, who replied in full Assembly that
they were ready to lay down their Arms so soon as Mazarine should be out of the
Kingdom. To the same Deputies were consigned also the Queen of Swedeland's
Letters to the Parliament (brought expressly by one of her Gentlemen) to deliver
to the King, the Contents of which contained an offer of her Mediation to bring
them to an Agreement, as a Friend and Confederate of the Crown of France, whose
troubles did much grieve her. The Deputies appeared at Melun (where the Court
was) the 12th. of June, they had Audience two days after, and represented the
desolation of the State to proceed from the return of Mazarine, who was the
sole occasion of all these disturbances. The Affair was remitted to the Council
of State; they examined the Answers. The Cardinal renewed his instances diverse
times made for leave to depart, alleging that it was not convenient, that for
him alone the tranquillity of the Kingdom should be discomposed. He was opposed
by the King himself, saying that he was Master, and would be served by them
that liked him best, nor did he acknowledge any to give him Laws but God. The
Sunday following the Deputies returned to the Audience of the King, who
plucking out from under his Garment a Writing said, that by that they should
know his Will. Monsieur de la Vrilliere Secretary of State read it, and
afterward delivered it to the President Nesmond, who returned with it to Paris.

It contained that the King did wonder very much, that having in his Parliament
so many persons endued with so excellent understanding and acuteness, they did
not discern, that the request of removing the Cardinal was only a specious and
varnished pretext, since it was manifest, the true cause of the present
disturbances was the Interest and Ambition of them that had taken Arms, and
kindled the Civil war, when the Cardinal was as far as Germany from the Court
and Ministry; which made it clearly appear, that the evils of a State were not
to be healed so long as they rested upon pretenses, whose roots do produce as
much as are lopped off; wherefore the only remedy left was, to pluck up the
deepest and most principal. That if His Majesty should resolve to permit the
Cardinal to retire upon some employment abroad, and with due reputation to his
Honor; what Security should he have, that the waverings of the unquietness of
the Malcontents should calm, since it was fresh in memory, that his departure
in the beginning of the last year had rather augmented then moderated the
Troubles; which if they were not allayed by his going then (though it was
proposed for the only remedy:) nor ought he less to believe that it would
succeed otherwise, if he were sent away a second time, unless at the same
instant the occasion was taken away that caused these matters. That the
prudence of His Majesty sought a prompt and permanent repose to his Subjects,
that they might not fall again into the same inconveniences, of which they had
too much felt the sad effects: It being very well known, that in the same time
that the Princes declared themselves ready to lay down their Arms if the
Cardinal was sent away, they endeavored to fortify their party by fomenting
of strangers, and drawing other of His Majesty's Subjects from their obedience.
That the Declaration made a few days before by the Duke of Orleans to the
Communalty of Paris, showing that he had no Authority over the Forces of the
Duke of Lorrain, which he boasted he had drawn into France, was not conformable
to that he made in Parliament. That the Treaty concluded by the Prince of Conde
with the Spaniards did not speak of laying down their Arms when the Cardinal
should be sent away; nor could it be mentioned, for when it was concluded,
Mazarine was in Germany. That in the mean while therefore it behoved to have
real and positive Security of the Princes for the entire performance of what
they offered; and therefore he desired to know if they would renounce all their
Leagues and Associations contracted with strangers, and all Treaties concluded
in particular with his Subjects against his Royal Service. If they would make
no other pretensions after the departure of the Cardinal. If this being done,
they would repair to His Majesty to serve him according to their duty. If they
would cause the strangers they had brought in to depart the Kingdom, and would
promise that the Spanish Troops and the Duke of Lorrains should retire, without
giving them that they might pretend to, in prejudice of the King and the State.
If the Soldiers, that under their name made war against His Majesty, should be
disbanded. If those of the King of Spains at Stenay, at Bourg in Guienne, and
in other places, should retire, and refusing to do it what way should be taken
to force them. If the Prince of Conty and the Duchess of Longueville would
return to their devoir, and whether the Prince of Conde had power to promise
for them. If the Prince of Conty would lay aside all pretensions. If they have
jointly the power from the Persons of Quality that have engaged with them, to
give Security for their obedience. If the Cities and Fortified places kept in
the name of the Pr. of Conde should be put into the same state and being that
they were before. If the City of Bourdeaux would return to its duty. If the
Establishment made against the Kings service since these present troubles
should be revoked. And finally, all things settled in their former state,
according to the Articles in the Kings Declaration of December, 1649.
Concerning which Points when His Majesty should receive full assurance of their
performance, without cavils and and new pretenses, he should be induced to
believe, that the Malady which afflicted the Kingdom might be easily remedied.

This Answer being read in Parliament, with the twelve Questions in reply to
that of the Princes, the Duke of Orleans said it was all of the Cardinals
dictating, who (ill-inform'd of the Customs of France) framed Questions to the
Princes of the Blood in form of Interrogatories, which was never yet seen
practiced; and having declared over and over, as they did now again, to lay
down their Arms so soon as the Cardinal should be out of France, there was no
need of other Security, since all was done with sincerity, and without any
doubleness. They disputed a great while upon this subject in the Assembly, in
which it was proposed by those on the Kings side, that they ought to send again
Deputies to His Majesty, with Authority to treat of Peace so necessary to the
State. The Counselor Brussel stood still fixed in his averseness to the
Conference, and to hold themselves simply to the Declaration. There followed
other Disputes and Contests in words amongst some of the Counselors, and the
21th. of June the Chambers met again, where they made two Propositions, one to
seek a way to maintain the poor, and the other to raise 150000 Crowns for the
price of the Cardinals head, having thoughts that there would be some rash
enough to offer themselves to kill him; but this was laid aside as then, as an
unworthy thing and detestable in Christians: and all that was done was to raise
100000 Crowns for the relief of the poor, every Counselor taxing himself 100
Livres.

Many of these poor people were paid expressly to clamor at the Parliament door,
and raise some tumult, to oblige the Assembly to a declared Union with the
Princes, which was the design of these, to necessitate Paris to provide Moneys
and other necessaries for sustaining the War. As the Counselors came out of
the Palace People began to cry, Bread and Peace, and no Mazarine. Some of them
they shut in, and misused others. The Duke of Beaufort returning into the
Palace-hall, spoke in a loud voice to the people, that that was not the right
way of proceeding, but that they ought to assemble in some place, and there
deliberate of what was fitting to be done to bring the Mazarinists to reason;
wherefore he invited them all that evening to the Palace Royal, where he would
be himself, and there every one should propound his Opinion.

There assembled about 5000 people: Beaufort told them it was not handsome to
make a noise about the Palace, and pretend with weapons to force Justice, in
that manner oppressing the good as well as the bad; but they ought to make a
distinction, and 24 of them to frame a Request, whereby to oblige the
Counselors to declare whether they were Mazarinists or not; that so being
able to distinguish those that were on the contrary party, and taking
particular notice of them, they might easily disperse them, attaquing them on
all sides. He found the people well disposed to follow his counsel, and every
one willingly embracing those resolutions which did square with their humor,
he had no trouble to dispose them all unanimously to fury and sedition; which
being aware of, he ended briefly his Discourse, saying he expected them the
next morning at the Palace.

The Parliament being advertised of this, the Provost of Merchants gave notice
presently to all the Wards, and to the Colonels, with order to have the Chains
prepared, and the Inhabitants in a readiness to take Arms upon the first Order
they should receive.

In the mean while they talked up and down the streets of nothing but of
falling upon the Parliament, wherein they said there were diverse Mazarines that
would not declare themselves.

The same People cried out when the Prince of Conde entered into the Parliament,
that they would have Peace; to whom he answered, that he desired it himself,
and that he took pains to that purpose, (but without Mazarine.) The Parliament
intimidated by the Sedition begun at the Palace Royal, forbore to assemble (as
they were wont to do) the 22th. of July.

The Frondeurs nevertheless met, but the Presidents convened at the House of
Bailleul, to consider what to resolve on: which being understood by the Prince,
he went himself to desire them in his own and the Duke of Orleans his name,
that they would be at the Palace after dinner, but they excused themselves,
being informed of the Plot laid for them, for which reason they could not be
secure. All the Presidents were of this Opinion, without being a jot affrighted
at the threatenings of the Princes: but being again entreated by the Duke of
Orleans and Conde, with a promise that they should have no wrong, they
assembled the 25th. following, and here the Princes declared, that they were
willing to lay down their Arms, and ready to fulfill all that the King desired
in the Writing brought by the Deputies, so soon as His Majesty should send away
Mazarine, according to the Contents in his Declaration of the 6th. of September
last past.

After this Declaration of the Princes there remained no more difficulty in
this Affair, but only in the form that they ought to keep in sending it,
whether by those that were for the King, or by the Deputies of the Parliament
that had been there already, or by others that they should choose out of every
Chamber. To all which the Princes agreed, excluding only the President
Nesmond, impeaching him to have been corrupted by the Cardinal. This clause
occasioned in the Assembly no little confusion, it seeming strange to the
Counselors, that they should be limited in their Deliberations at the
pleasure of the Princes, in which they ought to be free, and depend upon none
whosoever. The Debate lasted three hours, and the gravest of them considering,
that the pretenses of the Princes were insupportable, deplored the miseries of
the times, clearly seeing, that by flying the Obedience of the King they
slipped into the Subjection of the Princes: wherefore they saw it necessary to
make use of the same Maxim toward these as the Court practiced with them,
boldly refusing whatever seemed to depend on the Authority of others; for in
such cases (by little and little) Entreaties became Commands, and he that would
not be persuaded to obey, ought not to suffer himself to be governed. It was
therefore resolved to send again Nesmond with the other Deputies, to
remonstrate to the King, that upon sending away the Cardinal according to His
Majesty's Declaration of the 6th. of September, the Princes would lay down
their Arms, and put in execution the Articles contained in the Writing sent by
His Majesty to the Parliament. In this manner ended that Assembly, coming out of
which the Counselors were beat back by the people that were gathered together
in great number at the Entrance, who cried out, Peace and Union with the
Princes; which did evidently show that their design was to have the Parliament
and the City publicly engaged on their side, it being known that many of the
Princes Soldiers were shuffled in among the people, who occasioned a dangerous
Commotion against the Parliament, the Counselors of which were pursued by the
Rabble with great hazard of their Lives into the neighboring houses, where
they saved and absconded themselves, not without marvel that they escaped
unhurt from the thick hail of shot that was discharged against them: diverse
innocent persons were slain outright, besides many others hurt; and amongst
these the President Novion saved himself by great good fortune, followed by the
people three or four streets. The Lieutenant Civil retired himself into the
Chastelet with some Counselors, where he was beset by the Multitude, who
determined to set it on fire, not being able to enter (prohibited by the great
number of Archers that defended it;) which they would have effected if they had
not been opposed by Monsieur de Miton, Colonel of that Quarter, who with his
Company made the Multitude retire. Other Presidents and Counselors saved
themselves as well as they could, and the Sedition lasted till the shutting in
of the Evening, no less to the horror and distraction of the Parliament then of
the Civil Inhabitants, fearing what might be the issue of the fury and
insolence of the baser sort of people, kindled with rage and desire of
Innovation. This action was highly complained on, not only in the Parliament,
but also in the Townhouse: they detested the enormity of it, and and lamented
the public misery, occasioned by the phantasticalness of a few particular
persons; and it was resolved on to provide for the public security. The
Parliament was convocated, and a Decree made, that Monsieur de Champrond (a
Counselor) should form a Process against the Heads and Authors of the
Sedition, as also against those that had printed and published any infamous and
abominable Libells against the Court and Parliament, an Ecclesiastical Monitory
was likewise exhibited against the Accomplices of these proceedings. And the
Provost of Merchants, the Consuls, the Sheriffs, with the other Heads of the
Citizens, being assembled, they ordered that the Colonels and Captains of the
several Wards should have their Companies ready, and a Court of Guard placed
about the Palace to hinder greater insolences, and conserve the Liberty of the
Parliament, whose power was too weak to preserve the Peace, since the number
that followed the Party of the Princes was greater then those who adhered to
the Parliament and the Common Council of the City. It was concluded on to have a
general Meeting of all the Inhabitants the 4th. of July, to resolve on the most
convenient Expedients for the Indemnity of Paris, and of the Parliament.

In the mean while the Duke of Lorrain was discamp'd from Ville neufue St.
George the 17th. of June, and already out of the Kingdom. Which unexpected News
greatly surprised the Parisiens, fearing that the said Duke had abandoned and
betrayed the Princes, from which arose great rumors and no ordinary
Trepidation in all those that were against the Court-Faction, suspecting that
the Kings Army apprehending nothing from the Lorrainers, should beleaguer
Paris, and the Princes be necessitated to comply with force. Wherefore the
Prince of Conde caused his Troops that came out of Estampes to march toward
Paris, and encamp betwixt S. Clou and Surenne upon the Seen two Leagues from
Paris; and hither also were sent those few Soldiers that the Princes had about
them in Paris, with the which they formed a Body of about five or six thousand
men, and were provided of all necessaries from the City; but all with the
Princes own Money, for they never could draw from the Parisiens neither Money
nor other sustenance; but only free commerce, popular affection, and shelter
in time of need. Wherefore the Prince knowing that he could not long subsist,
without an open Declaration of the City and the Parliament in his behalf, he
sought all ways to oblige the one and the other to second his designs: but all
was thwarted by the address of Mazarine, who in these fastidious Emergencies
showed in a more extraordinary manner the refinedness of his Wit.

And because the Castle of Vincennes in these conjunctures was of no little
importance, it was reinforced with 100 Soldiers by the Count de Chavigny,
Governor of the said place, who was then in Paris, and in good intelligence
with the Prince of Conde, although (as the same went) he held private
correspondence with Cardinal Mazarine, and by his dexterous carriage his
Enemies were by little and little won over. Diverse other provisions were
likewise made for maintaining their common Interest: to which end by reiterated
Carriers, and by dispatching away several Gentlemen, they solicited the
Spaniards in Flanders for their promised assistance, and to enter into France
with a powerful Army to drive away the Kings Forces from about Paris, who held
the Malcontents in continual jealousy and fear, and filled the Kings Party
with hopes and confidence. But the Count de Fuensaldagna (a sage Politician,
and a Cavalier of a very acute understanding) consented not to give any larger
help then what might suffice to uphold them in their pretensions; thereby to
keep afoot the civil disturbances in France, and be able by such means to
advance the Interest of His Catholic Majesty in Flanders, Italy, and
Catalogne, where it was more behoveful to employ the Armies then in France,
where (by the instability of that Nation) he foresaw that if the Princes by the
assistance of Spain should be made more powerful then the Kings Party, His
Majesty would upon easier terms agree with the Parliament and the Princes
themselves; who afterward would turn with greater zele against those that had
helped them. He continued nevertheless to feed them with hopes, and now and
then with some returns of Money; things not seeming to him to be reduced as yet
to such straits to require so great aid: and that they should neglect their own
business to attend only that of others.

The Princes and the Frondeurs were not wanting to instigate in Bourdeaux the
minds of those who were desirous of novelties; where many of the Citizens being
more and more inclined to Sedition: Ambition and Avarice added more fuel to the
fire. And here it will not happen amiss to understand how among those of the
same Party, by means of Mazarine, many divisions did arise, while in all reason
they ought to have been united as well in Affection as Interest.

It is a common Maxim, that One Absurdity begets another; and he that cannot
submit to a lawful Government, much less will he endure an unlawful Usurpation.
The Frondeurs of Bourdeaux were divided into two Factions, one was called the
little, and the other the great Fronda; each composed of various persons as
well of the Parliament as of the Citizens. These divided the Province betwixt
them, to levy Contributions: Those of the great Fronda had a strong pretext to
accuse them of the losser, for causers of all the disorders. From these two
Factions there sprang another, called the Ormiere, which in a short space being
become more potent then the others, (because followed by the people) there
happened diverse dangerous Seditions. The Princes endeavored to weaken the
Ormiere by the Authority of the Parliament, but this occasioned greater
disorders, and made them more insolent. And the distempers grew so high, that
there followed diverse fierce Conflicts, and greater would have happened without
the pretense of the Prince of Conty, who interposing his Authority many times
quieted the fury of the people, and endeavored to divert those Innovations
which were plotted by some of the most insolent and seditious.

In several Cities of Provence there arose likewise some disorders, but having
none of Reputation to head them, nor sufficient means to support themselves,
they signified little, and by the vigilance of the Duke of Mercoeur, who acted
according as the Cardinal his Uncle (who loved him extremely) advised him; with
a few people, and with little ado, they were suppressed, maintaining that
Province in its due obedience.

The Court in the interim did not lay aside the endeavors for adjusting with
the Princes, and in particular with Conde, upon whom they bottomed their
greatest foundation, as of most repute in respect of his Followers, and the
esteem he had gained by his valor. Nor was it difficult to bring him to an
Agreement, he being very much inclined, and very willing to it: but by the
means of the Cardinal de Retz and others, to whose Interest the Peace did not
suit, all the Negotiations were interrupted, the Cardinal of Retz prevailing
still with the Duke of Orleans to oppose it; and Conde resolving not to abandon
Orleans, having so many times declared always to stand by him, so that all the
proposals were obstructed. Cardinal Mazarine trying all means to render these
Machinations unuseful, the aptest was found to be to make the people of Paris
see their own error, which if he could make them comprehend, he thought it not
difficult to disjoyn them from the rest; for when the support of Paris should
be taken from them, all their fabric would moulder away and be ruined. Upon
these considerations the Court departed from Melun toward the end of May, and
came to S. Denis, a League or two distant from Paris, to countenance the
Managements undertaken by the Kings Party in that City, toward which place, by
the Cardinals counsel His Majesty used as great clemency as if it had been
Loyal, that they might see it was far from the Kings mind to block them up, as
the Princes divulged abroad. He caused moreover the commerce to be kept free
and ordered, so much as the Bread to be convoyed by his own Guards, which in
great abundance is brought thither twice a week. The Kings Army led by Turenne
followed the Court, and being reinforced with 3000 men of the Marshall de la
Ferte Seneterre, who together with Turenne was left to command the Army; they
encamped near S. Denis, on the left hand upon the River toward Paris, which
was in this manner every where beyond the Seen on the West side environed by
the Kings Forces, who at their pleasure could shut up the Passes on the River,
and reduce the City to greater straits for provisions then it was, though they
paid at that time an excessive price for bread and every thing else, not only
in Paris, but in S. Denis and the Camp it self.

This Expedient was thought by Mazarine to be the best, foreseeing that the
people not being able to endure the scantness of Victuals, nor the Citizens to
see their Trade interrupted, by which they have their subsistence; and lastly
wearied out by the desolations which they daily felt in their Territories round
about, equally ill-treated by Friends and Foes, they would resolve to deliver
themselves from such tedious mischiefs; but notwithstanding they suffered so
many miseries and incommodities, yet the obstinacy of the people was such, by
reason of the credit of the Princes and the Frondeurs, that feeding themselves
with hopes to hear suddenly of the ruin of all the Mazarines, (for so they
called those of the Kings Party) they did not mind their own destruction, and
this served to render their grievous sufferings tolerable, which they
experimented very considerably, as well for the continual damages to which
they were daily exposed, as for the interruption of their rest, being obliged
to keep in that vast City 10000 upon the Guards day and night: the Kings Party
then not being able to reduce into a straight path that people backed by the
Army, and encouraged with hopes given them by the Princes. They endeavored to
destroy as soon as might be their Troops, the attempt not seeming difficult,
their Camp being neither fortified nor advantaged by the Situation, and
inferior by more then the half to that of the Kings. The Cardinal provided
what was necessary for the execution of this Enterprise before the Spaniards
should appear with their promised Supplies, and which were continually
solicited for by the Princes. The 29th. of June then the Marshall de Turenne
drew near to the River to make a Bridge of Boats beneath Espinay, and there
passing the Seen to assault the Camp at S. Cloud, which having alarmed the
Army of the Princes, the Count of Tavannes sent 150 Foot, and as many Horse,
and he with the rest of the Troops followed thither. In the same time
advertizing the Prince of Conde at Paris, who suddenly issuing forth put
himself at the head of them, and hindered the Royallists from framing the
Bridge, as likewise their Passage down lower at Poissy; but suspecting that
Turenne should pass at Espinay, and come upon their backs, he resolved to raise
the Camp from St. Cloud, and pass over to Charenton, as a more safe Post,
having the Marne on their backs, and flanked by the Seen. In pursuance of this,
rising from S. Cloud the first of July, two hours before Sunset, he passed the
Seen over the Stonebridge, and another of Boats, and marched thorough the Wood
of Bologne and Chaliot directly to Paris. But finding that Order had been given
to the Captains that were in Guard with their City-companies at the Gate of the
Conference, and all the other Gates, to permit no Soldiers to pass whatsoever,
he caused his Army to advance along the Town-ditch toward the Gate of
Richlieu, continuing his March toward Charenton.

About an hour after Midnight Cardinal Mazarine had advice of it by one of his
Confidents hid in Paris, who made his Servant pass over the Wall to give notice
to Turenne, who without losing time mounted his Cavalry with such diligence,
that at 5 a clock the morning following he encountered the Rere of the Prince
at the entrance of the Suburbs of St. Denis street. The Count de Novailles
charged them so briskly, that the Regiment of Conty was greatly endamag'd, and
another Squadron which was drawn up in Battalia with him near the Gate of the
Temple, was no less ill-handled. The Prince entering into Paris went to confer
with the Duke of Orleans, and issued out afresh at S. Martins Gate, flying like
Lightening from the Van to the Rere of his Army, which was marching to the
designed Post. All the Royal Camp and Court was got on Horseback, being
confident that day to conquer and put an end to the War, not only for the
superiority in Number, but also for the length of the Way which the Prince was
forced to take in regard of the Baggage. The Cardinal upon this confidence
leaving fit Orders with Turenne, conducted the King to the hill of Saronne,
that he might be Spectator of so famous an action, in which they discoursed to
have the Prince dead or a prisoner, his Army destroyed, and the War ended.
Mazarine sent to his party in Paris to be of good courage, and to use all their
industry to hinder that the Gates might not be opened to the Enemies Troops,
nor to the succor that might be sent them from the City.

The Kings Army being arrived at Villette, half a League from Paris, and having
notice that the Forces of the Princes were already past those places, in which
if they could have set upon them they would without doubt have been defeated,
Turenne taking to the left hand passed the hills of Saronne, and came into the
Plain between the Suburbs of S. Anthony and Charenton, putting his men in
order, while the other part of the Army remained on the right hand with the
Marshall de la Pente Seneterre; and although the Prince being in the Suburbs,
and under the Walls of Paris, had the advantage of the Post; nevertheless the
Kings Generals knowing that they could not in the end be able to defend
themselves against their Attaque, and being assured by the Court that they
would not be received into Paris, having been denied the Evening before, they
resolved to advance boldly, and fall upon some Squadrons that were entered into
the Suburbs it self, which they did, and pursued them into the very houses.
Here the Prince, who with an unmatchable valor bore all the brunt of this hot
Conflict, though he declared aloud that the danger was great and inevitable,
using his Wit where Force failed, galloping from Squadron to Squadron, put his
men into very good order. The Royallists pressed on with mavelous courage and
fury, assaulting vigorously the Enemies Posts in two several places, where they
were courageously resisted and beat back for some while. But the Regiments of
Languedoc, Valois, and Langeron, not being able to resist any longer, and
retreating with some loss as far as the Marketplace of the Suburbs, the Prince
himself came speedily to their assistance at the head of his Regiment of Horse
and that of Anguien; and here the Fight was renewed afresh so hotly, that the
Prince gave high proofs of his skill in the art of War, and of his undaunted
Courage, never showing greater boldness, nor more hazarding his Life, then in
this perilous Rencounter, engaging himself as a common Soldier amongst the
Enemies Ranks, killing many with his own hands, and repelling others; so that
to his eternal glory those Regiments assumed new courage, and regained their
Posts, from whence they had been chased.

But in the other Posts commanded by the Count de Tavannes they had not the
like fortune; for the Marquess de St. Magrin, a Cavalier of great courage, with
diverse noble Volunteers, the Light Horse, and Cuirassiers of the Kings Guards,
sustained by a Battalion of Suissers, fell on with such fury, that the Princes
Troops were much shattered, and near being totally routed, if by the death of
St. Magrin the heat of that Onset (which by his boldness was fomented with an
extravagant, not to say bizzarre temerity) had not been abated; for he being in
the Skirmish mortally hurt and unhors'd, was miserably slaughtered by some
Freebooters, who were mingled amongst them: so that the Kings Troops in this
part also were beaten and repulsed by those of the Princes, though with the
expense of much blood, for here happened their greatest loss, many of the
principal Gentlemen of the Army being slain or wounded.

In the mean while the Royallists had possessed themselves of the street
Rambovillet, with some Houses and Barricadoes, notwithstanding the obstinate
defense of the Assailed, to whose succor a Regiment of Germans advancing, they
failed not to perform their parts manfully. The Prince kept the street from the
Gate of Paris to a large place upon the same street environed about with Houses
and Garden-walls; here the Royallists had made holes in the Houses and Walls,
and from thence they galled with shot the Princes people. The Dukes of Nemours
and Beaufort joined both at the same instant with the Prince; and although
betwixt these two Brother-in-Laws there was no good intelligence, they agreed
very well in this Emergency, and were cause that the resolution was taken to
attempt the recovery of the lost Barricado. The Prince, though he suddenly
foresaw the ill success, it being difficult with people weary and worsted to
vanquish those who were under shelter and fresh; yet for all this his Generous
Heart never refusing the most dangerous and difficult bickering, he submitted
to this reason, that though the attempt succeeded not according to their
intent, he should by such a bold and extraordinary an action give his Enemies
cause to look about them, and lengthen the Dispute, which would be the only
remedy for his safety.

They were thereupon attaqued by these two Dukes, together with the Duke de
Rochefoucaut, and the Prince of Marsillac, followed by a Body of Musquettiers,
who refusing to advance further, they dismounted from their Horses, run on
without fear of death, with so much courage, not to say rashness, that the
Royallists being surprised and amazed, they abandoned the Barricadoes, and
those four Princes alone recovered them with admirable Gallantry, and would
have maintained them if the Enemies (flanked on both sides the streets, and
thundering in continually Volleys of shot against the Assailants) had not made
them see it impossible to make a stay in that open place, where the Duke of
Nemours received 13 Musket shot in his Cuirace, and two in his right hand.

The Duke de la Rochefoucaut was wounded in the face betwixt his Eyes, and the
Duke of Beaufort and the Prince of Marsillac being obliged to help the wounded,
were necessitated to abandon the Post; which being observed by the Royallists,
they issued out of the houses in all haste to take them prisoners, which they
had done if the Prince of Conde with his wonted courage had not pressed forward
thorough the cloud of smoke and fire, with some few Gentlemen that followed
him, giving by this means time and opportunity to the wounded Princes to
retire. Many were slain and hurt on the Princes side in this Skirmish, and the
rest would have very hardly escaped, if with the same care as the Royallists
attaqued this side, they had assailed that part behind the Suburbs, putting
themselves betwixt it and the City gate, which was not done, it being not
thought fit to put themselves under the mercy of the shot from the Ramparts of
Paris, full of armed Inhabitants, doubting lest they might have been persuaded
to discharge upon them, or as it was whispered (though upon what grounds is not
known) that some persons did not desire the loss of the Prince with so many
brave French Gentlemen, against whom the Victory could not be but damageable,
it being probable that they finally perceiving their own error, would return
to their duty, and serve His Majesty with as much Fidelity, as now they
expressed Affection for the Party that opposed Mazarine.

In the same time that without the Walls they were fighting with their weapons,
the contest was no less in words within amongst the Citizens; some pretended
that they should not only issue out to help the Princes, but that opening the
Gates they should give them a favorable reception. Others insisted, that
letting the Prince be destroyed (the occasion of all their misfortunes) thereby
they should put an end to those miseries, and settle the City in its former
tranquillity, and be freed from those sad accidents wont to accompany the
confusion of War. Finally, upon these differences that concluded nothing in
favor of the Princes, Mademoiselle d'Orleans came into the streets, went to
the Townhouse, told the Citizens, that without loss of time the Inhabitants
ought to go out to assist the Princes, allowing the Baggage and Troops of their
friends to enter the City; which she urged with such efficacy, that adding
hereunto the lamentable and horrid spectacle of so many Noblemen of high
condition gasping, wounded, and besmeared with blood, they concluded to open
their Gates and receive them; and many crying in the streets they ought to help
the Prince, who with so much valor put his own Life, and the Lives of so many
good Frenchmen, in evident and almost inevitable peril for the public cause;
there issued out about 300 Inhabitants, who were placed by the Prince to guard
certain Posts. One part of the Baggage entered by the Gate of the Temple, and
the other by that of S. Anthony. The Prince gave the Orders for the favoring
and securing their retreat, and sent to Monsieur de Louviere, Commander at that
time of the Bastile in lieu of his father the Counselor Brussel, to cause the
great Guns to be discharged upon the Kings Troops, which being delayed as a
thing unbeseeming a Subject, Mademoiselle came into the Bastile, and mounting
briskly upon the Wall, with an Amazonian courage, as if she her self had
participated of the glory and danger, commanded that in her presence the
Artillery should be discharged against the Kings Army, which was done
accordingly. Thereupon Order being given for the Retreat, the Horse, Foot, and
Canon marched forthwith. It was thought at the first discharge of the Bastile,
that it was against the Princes Troops, the Parisiens, having assured the Kings
Ministers that they would not receive the Princes People; but afterward
perceiving that they shot against the Royallists, and that the Inhabitants
failing of their promise, the Baggage was already safe, and the Troops began to
enter into the City, those of the Kings Party were greatly astonished for the
lost hopes of their assured Victory. The Kings Generals were no less troubled,
as well for some reproofs of their slowness and negligence, as to see
themselves at the very point of their Victory defrauded of their Expectations,
so that they retreated again to S. Denis. The Cardinal being very sad for the
ill success of the Enterprise, and for the mortal Wound his Nephew Mancini
received, of which he died in few days; in which time the King with a
demonstration of singular affection visited him often, as also the afflicted
Lady of S. Magrin.

The Forces of the Princes encamped themselves in the Fields of Yvry, without
the Suburbs of St. Marceau, and in two days time sacked all the Villages and
Houses for three Leagues about. Mademoiselle in this occasion did another mad
prank, which was seconded by all Paris. She stuck a handful of straw upon her
head, and passing through the streets, cried, that was the sign which they that
were not Mazarines, ought to wear; In a moment, not only all the Inhabitants,
but the strangers of every Nation, and of all sorts, even to the Religious Men
and Ministers of foreign Princes were seen to follow this fashion, to secure
themselves from the violence and insolence the people used toward those that
had not this distinction about them.

But this was a fore-running Presage of unhappy events to follow; for
straw-fire being the weakest, and the easiest to be extinguished portended that
that Party should suddenly be dissolved, like straw-fire into smoke.

In this manner ended the memorable Fight in the Suburbs of St. Anthony, the
second of July 1652, in which the quality of the slain and wounded was more
considerable then the number. The Prince of Conde not at all valuing his own
life, running now to one place, now to another, where the fight was most
bloody, and his men in greatest danger, he performed the Office not only of a
General, but of a Common Soldier, and oftentimes was at the Graves Mouth, His
Horse was slain under him, he received several shot on his Armor, his Clothes
pierced through in many places, his Feather and Hair burnt; and yet to the
admiration of all he remained unhurt. The Marshall de Turenne behaved himself
with no less valor, who pressing on with great celerity on every side, gave
worthy proofs of his experience and skill, and he was heard to say, that he had
received order to go and fight the Prince of Conde. But wheresoever he charged
the Enemy, he always found the Prince at the Head of them. All the other
Generals and Captains behaved themselves bravely. And for their extraordinary
boldness, and famous and courageous deeds of both Parties, this was accounted
amongst the noblest and worthiest Exploits that ever happened in any Age.

The Prince of Conde being grown more confident upon the increased reputation
of his Arms, he tried to make them declare openly in favor of his Party,
seeing he wanted money and other necessary assistance to maintain the War. But
because till that time his pressing instances made to the Citizens had taken
little effect, who by Mazarines means were daily more and more gained to the
Kings party, he thought (as it was famed abroad, and the Parisiens themselves
feared) to constrain them by force to do what he desired.

A General Assembly of the Citizens being to be held in the Townhouse at the
Greve, the 4th. of July, in the same year 1652; It was resolved by the Princes
to make the common people fall upon that Assembly, and by putting them in fear
bring them to their will.

All the Officers of the Communalty being come together, which might be about
400 of the chief of the City, the Duke of Orleans sent the Marshall of
Estampes to the Marshall de l' Hospital, who presided in the Assembly as
Governor of Paris, to assure him, that that morning there should happen no
disorder; and that he desired, that laying aside public affairs, they would
consult how to put the Parliament in safety, and give time to their Deputies,
which were gone to Court, promising to be himself within two hours at the
Assembly.

The Marshall answered, that it was fit that his Royal Highness should have
all satisfaction. The Assembly met, the Duke came thither at half an hour past
four in the afternoon, at which time the Greve was full of armed seditious
people, with straw upon their heads; an evident token of some extravagant
disorder, and a Prelude to the funest Tragedy that followed.

The Duke being entered into the Hall, the Marshall resigned his Chair to him,
placing himself upon the Prevost of the Merchands Bench. It is not amiss to
observe, that the Marshall having received the Duke at the foot of the stairs,
seeing him adorned with his bunch of straw, told him boldly; What your Royal
Highness then enters with the mark of sedition into the Kings House. The Duke
replied, he had indeed received that straw, but did not approve of it; they
went up the stairs, and Orleans taking his place, thanked the City for granting
a passage to his Troops, asking them if in a like occurrence they would do it
again. The Prince appeared there also, and spoke to the same purpose. The
Mareschals Answer was, that they should always have the same inclination to
their service; and when they pleased to withdraw, they would take it into their
consideration; in which Speech the Prevost of Merchands concurred. In the mean
time a Trumpet arrived with a Letter with a Seal, in which the King ordered,
that the Assembly should be put off till the 8th. of the same month. The
Marshall caused it to be read, and then asked the Princes and the rest of the
Assembly, if they were in the mind to obey the Kings Orders. The Princes
without answering any thing retired, judging their Party not strong enough to
make them determine on the Union which they desired, and coming out of the
Parquet (so is the Tribunal, or place railed in, where the Lords sit, called)
to accompany the Duke and the Prince, the Marshall was presented by an
impertinent fellow with a posie of straw; with which sawciness being much
incensed, turning himself briskly told him, that if it were not for the respect
he bore to his Royal Highness, he would cause him presently to be thrown out at
the window, and hanged upon a Gibbet.

The Princes going out said, that place was full of Mazarines, who had a mind
to prolong and gain time, which occasioned so great a commotion, that the
Soldiers of the Princes and the seditious people fell to discharge against the
windows and doors.

Some Officers of the Princes to give countenance to this business, had
appointed several Musquettiers with their Leaders, who having attempted in vain
to raise a tumult in some other parts of the City, came at last to this place,
mingling themselves with the people.

One of the people that stood upon the steps of the Cross, in the midst of the
place, happened in this time to be killed by a shot, whether by chance or on
purpose, which much more increased their rage and fury, every one beginning to
cry the Mazarines had made that shot, and therefore they ought to kill them
all, menacing those that were within the Townhouse; and in this hurly-burly
many were heard to cry, Union, Union, and away with the Mazarines; and all
running with the straw in their Hats, like so many possessed with Furies, they
began to commit the accustomed insolences, that the indiscretion and
bestiality of the rabble are wont to inspire. The City-Companies that guarded
the Townhouse fled presently away, which emboldning the seditious more and
more they ran to fetch wood from the next boats, and set fire to the great
Gate, endeavoring to get in, to commit all the insolences that blind passion
could prompt them to. In this danger the Marshall and diverse others
undauntedly resolved, rather to perish gloriously, then to submit and save
their lives weakly and dishonorably; wherefore they prepared for a generous
defense. The Marshall ordered them to make a Barricade of great Pieces of
Timber above stairs at the entrance of the great Hall that looks into the
Court, which was defendde and maintained bravely by the Mareschals Guards. He
gave order likewise to spare their powder till night, and in the mean time they
should defend themselves with the stones of the pavement; but at the same
instant, the great Gate being burnt and fallen down, the seditious assaulted
the Barricade, where Blancart Commissary of the Princes Army received a mortal
wound, of which he died, a little after, with him some other Soldiers of the
Princes were also slain. While this passed, the Prince of Conde was at the
Palace of Orleans, where having notice that the business went contrary to his
intention, which was to put them in fear, but not to carry it on to extremity,
he intended to transport himself presently upon the place, and making them by
his Presence to cease the assault, oblige those within to acknowledge their
lives and safety from him: But the Duke, to whom it seemed not perhaps
convenient that the Prince should hazard his person amongst that mad rabble, or
whether he thought it not expedient he should gain the good will of the
Citizens, by that generous action, and himself to bear all the hatred, detained
him by force, and in no wise would not permit him to go out of his house, so
that to his great discontent he was constrained to remain quiet.

Many in this while seeing the imminent danger, and excited by fear, desiring
to get out of the Palace, attempted to make their way through the thickest of
the people; several of them were killed, but some had the good fortune to save
themselves without hurt. The Duke of Beaufort, and the Marquess de la Bollay,
who were in a house near by, issuing out, called aloud to some of the Assembly
by their names, saying, he came to bring Peace, and free them from the danger
they were in. The Marshall believing this to be only a trick to get out those
of the Princes Party, and leave the rest to the discretion of the peoples fury,
sent to ask him if there was safety; and with a constant and stout mind,
declared that they would all have their lives, or all perish together. The
Assault lasted from five a Clock in the Evening till ten at night; at which
time the Marshall going to the Barricade, found it abandoned, and his Guards
retired, upon the false report spread that he had made his escape. The people
thereupon entered, sacked every thing, and stripped all they met, who were glad to
part with their clothes to save their lives. The Marshall not knowing how to
get out, without being discovered, took the opportunity to put himself among
the people, and so passed into the next Chamber. He had given the Order of the
Holy Ghost to one of his Pages to keep, and changed Hats with him, and having
on a Coat of a dark color, stood in the midst of them, that blaspheming and
raging with madness sought him every where; and by the Address of a friend of
his that called him by another name he got safe out.

At last Mademoiselle being moved to pity for so great a Massacre, with her
wonted generosity (though it was three hours within night) went to the
Townhouse, and took along with her the Duke of Beaufort, where she quieted the
tumult, and caused those of the Assembly to pass out safe and unhurt, to her
great commendation.

The Confusions and Cruelties committed in this Action served only to put the
Prince of Conde in the ill opinion of the Parisiens, whence as the second of
July was the day of Triumph and height of his glory in that City, so the fourth
following was the impulsive cause of his fall; being the Parisiens could never
be got to contribute any money, nor to come to an open rupture with the Court,
complaining generally of the Princes, who to abate the ill esteem, and to
disguise as much as they could the part they had (which was very considerable)
in this deliberation, they imprisoned two Accomplices of the sedition, who were
also executed.

The 6th. of the same month the Assembly was called again to the Townhouse,
but few went; and for all the entreaties the Duke of Orleans made, sending
thither even his own Swisse Guards, none appeared, but some few dependents of
the Princes.

The Prevost of Merchands sent to declare, that he should come no more to the
Councils nor public Assemblies, till the Kings Authority was re-established;
wherefore Orleans substituted the Counselor Brussel in that Charge, making him
take his Oath in form: and the Marshall de l' Hospital, being no more to
exercise his Command of Governor of Paris, that dignity was conferred on the
Duke of Beaufort, and this was the first effect of the foregoing violence, and
the first step the Princes mounted to arrive at their intents.

The Parliament being afterward convened, and although none of the Presidents of
the Mortar appeared there, they did not cease to give Counsel; the Dean of the
Parliament presiding by way of Supplement. The Duke of Orleans propounded four
things, which he said was convenient should speedily be taken care of.

The first to take order about the-Provisions; and particularly, about bread,
which was risen to an exorbitant price. The second, the safety of the City and
Parliament, showing great displeasure for the accident happened at the Townhouse.
The third, to find means to retain those that left the City, (amongst which
were several Officers of the Parliament) in contempt of the Decree, which
prohibited them to depart from their Companions; and the fourth, that it being
a great while, that the Deputies were kept at Court, without being able to
obtain an Answer, they ought to resolve what was to be done upon these Points:
It was resolved, that the Decrees of the fourth of the same month, and others
heretofore made, concerning the ordering the Provisions, should be punctually
observed. That the Officers should be prohibited to depart from Paris, and the
Counselors invited to come and assist in their several Charges. Messieurs de
Lesne and de Gilbert, Members of the Parliament, had order to form a Process
against the Riot committed by the People at the Townhouse three days before;
That no public nor private meetings should be held upon pain of death. And
because the disorders of the Princes Soldiers were insupportable, who sacked
all the neighboring Territory, and rifled all that passed those Highways, it
was likewise ordered to prosecute, not only those who cut or sold the corn in
the fields, but those also that bought it, or helped to convey it away. Besides
these Decrees there followed likewise an Ecclesiastical Monitory against the
Authors and Accomplices of firing the Townhouse, and nothing was forgot to
soften the Parisiens, who were generally offended, there being few Citizens,
that in the late disorder were not concerned either by alliance or friendship.

The Prince seeing the small hopes of subsisting only with his own forces, and
that there was need of speedy help, he dispatched in all haste a Courier to the
Baron de Batteville at S. Sebastian, with advice of what had happened, and of the
urgent necessity of assistance, without which he could not long subsist.
Batteville sending the Letters into Spain, they arrived so opportunely, and
that it was easy for the Spaniards to supply him with a sum of ready money to
finish those enterprises, which without ready coin, they could not bring to
pass. This was the Arrival of the Plate Fleet from the Indies the 8. of July in
this same year, which delivered Spain from a mischief, which without money
could not have been avoided.

Conde sent also into Flanders, to represent to the Ministers of Spain the
state of his Affairs: And they perceiving the Princes party, after the retreat
of the Duke of Lorrain, not a little weakened, and in danger to be suppressed or
forced to yield to an Agreement, which would prove very prejudicial to their
interest; they filled the Prince with great hopes and large Promises, resolving
to strengthen his Faction with a recruit of six thousand men, under the Command
of Prince Ulderic of Wirtemberg, General of the German Horse in Flanders; to
which purpose the Count de Fuensaldagna entering into the Fields, and taking the
common Rode betwixt the Rivers of Sum and Oyse, came under Chauny, where the
Duke of Elboeuf, Governor of Picardy was with many people gathered together
out of the Neighboring Country, to hinder the Spaniards from advancing
further into France, but having no Provisions, nor the place defenceable, they
yielded upon conditions, that he and his Monsieur de Manicamp his Lieutenant
General, with some other of the chiefest Officers, should march out, all the
rest remaining prisoners of War, amongst which there were above a hundred
Gentlemen Volunteers, and about 500 Soldiers, Officers, and some few Horse,
which were all taken. Here the Spaniards stayed several days, as well to enjoy
the benefits of that fertile Country, as to expect a better opportunity to
advance toward Paris, not judging it prudent Council to give further
assistance to the Malcontents while the Treaty was on foot, and nigh being
concluded, lest the Court should condescend to the Pretenses of the Princes;
wherefore they neglected to answer the hopes given to the Princes and
Parliament, levelling their aim, not to fortify them so, thar they might by
their strength make the Court ply to their demands, the Ministers of the
Catholic King considering, that if it should so happen, as there was
likelihood, in stead of adding new fuel to these Civil broils, they should at
their own charge and ruin quite extinguish them.

The time thus passing away, without any resolution on this side, was spent
likewise on the other without any considerable accident; for from the 2. till
the 20. of July, the Kings Army about St. Denis, and the Princes without the
Suburbs of St. Victor, lay quiet without any stirring, all those days being
spent in Treaties of Peace betwixt both parties. The result of which was, that
the King finally declared, that although he did ever believe, and still
thought, that the instances made unto him to send away the Cardinal were only
pretexts to color other designs: Nevertheless, his Majesty wishing nothing
more then the Quiet of the Kingdom, he was content to gratify the Cardinal,
granting him the favor oftentimes requested by him to retire from Court; but
yet not until all things necessary for re-establishing the Peace in France,
should be better settled: to which effect his Majesty ordered the Deputies to
advertise the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, to send some on their
part to discuss the essential points; and they in the mean time remaining at
Court to expect the resolution from Paris: and because some doubt might arise,
if before or after the Ratification the Cardinal should be effectively
withdrawn, His Majesty declared, he should depart immediately upon the
Conclusion of the Treaty, and before the Consummation. This Affair was
variously debated in Parliament. The Duke of Orleans said, the Answer was
ambiguous, and contrived to engage them to a Conference to spin out the
business; That if the Cardinal had really an intent to retire, he ought not to
have kept the Deputies of the Parliament 15 days for an Answer, and in the
Interim betake himself to violent resolutions, as was that of the second of
this Month in the Fauxbourgs of St. Anthony, to destroy the Army, and
afterward cut the throats of all the Parisiens. If he intended to retire,
there was no need of any other Conference upon this subject; for so soon as he
should be out of the Kingdom, according to the Kings Declaration, they asked no
more; nor would they fail to render immediately all duty and obedience to his
Majesty. That to send Deputies in their names was superfluous, since those of
the Parliament being there, in whom they reposed all confidence, they did not
intend to do any thing without the privity of the Parliament, to which effect
they should at all times write their mind to President Nesmond. After which it
was concluded, to return thanks to his Majesty for his favorable Answer, for
sending away the Cardinal, and to supplicate him anew, that it might be done
speedily. That the Princes would be pleased to write to Nesmond, or to some
other of the Deputies, to second this their Declaration, that whenever the
Cardinal should be out of the Kingdom, they should perform what they had
promised, and order the said Deputy to receive what Commands the King should
deem necessary. In this Assembly the Prince was observed to discourse with some
sternness, as if he were angry. Monsieur de Bust proposed to choose new
Deputies, that might find out the most convenient means to send the Troops
farther off, and to do their utmost endeavor to procure the Peace; and
although all things should happen to be agreed on, yet nothing to be done till
the Cardinal was first departed. Upon this the Parliament thought it expedient,
to order their Deputies at Court, to give the King thanks for his Promise of
giving Mazarine license to depart, and to solicit the performance of it: and
to desire the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde to write to the President
Nesmond, with assurance (as they had declared in the Assembly) to lay down
their Arms, and yield entire obedience to his Majesty, so soon as Mazarine
should be gone. Orleans therefore writ, that by the desire of the Court, that
he and the Prince should send Deputies to the King, they could imagine no other
thing, considering with what delays the Audience of the Deputies was retarded)
but that it was a device of the Cardinal to elude his Majesty's resolution in
banishing him the Kingdom, and making Peace with his subjects: that although
the solemn Declarations made and reiterated before the Parliament might suffice,
yet to make it more clearly appear, how sincerely and heartily he had behaved
himself in all those Transactions, he was resolved to let him know by that
Letter, that he might assure and faithfully promise to the King, that he should
punctually make good his said Declaration so soon as ever the Cardinal should
withdraw in good earnest, and without any other shadow of suspicion; and should
send to render him his humble thanks, receive his Orders and Commands, having
no other Agreements or Conditions to make with his Majesty, but only to obey
him, as he was always ready to do, with all respect and submission, according
to the obligation of his birth. The Prince writ also to Nesmond in the same
form, and charged him to give all assurance of the reality of their intentions:
Hereupon Nesmond being admitted to the Kings Presence, spoke in this manner,
Sir, The Assurance that it has pleased your Majesty to give us for the
retirement of Cardinal Mazarine, has filled the hearts of your Vassals with
hope, upon the confidence they have, that the words of Kings, as the Word of
God, bring their full effect, and can never be but profitable. Your Parliament
has given us in charge to testify to your Majesty with all humbleness and
respect their desire; and to request the effecting it, conformable to their
Declaration, and to the Decrees that have seconded it; supplicating your
Majesty to consider, that the miseries of France augmenting daily, and
suffering no delay, it will be an effect of your bounty. Not to defer the
remedy, so desired a benefit, any longer, the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of
Conde have given us in charge, to confirm to your Majesty their first
Declarations, and represent on their behalf, that they have nothing to
propound* by employing Deputies, submitting themselves to obey your Orders with
all obedience, so soon as the Cardinal shall have fulfilled your Majesty's
Declaration. It depends now, Sir, on your Authority, to shorten all these ills,
yielding to this departure at our supplication. We have no more words to
express our grief, the force of which does stop our utterance. The public
disorders, the ruin of the State, the Power of the Enemies, the Misery of the
People, are sensibly obvious to your Majesty's sight, and will yet more touch
your Majesty's heart, to whom we protest that we shall always have an eternal
obligation; for the end of so many mischiefs, and for the Peace the Kingdom.
The King replied, that he would participate all this to his Council, and they
should receive his Answer, which was delivered them the day following in
writing, and read by the Count de Brienne in these words:

That the King had granted the request made him to send away the Cardinal,
though he clearly saw it was only a pretext to disturb the State; if the
Princes had accepted the Articles that were to be performed on their part
sincerely, there would have remained no other stop to the establishment of the
quiet of the Realm: That if his Majesty had believed, that his Answer to the
Deputies, touching that Affair, should have served as an occasion for a new
Decree of Parliament, he would not have given it in any wise, knowng that in the
condition the Parliament was then in, (as well for the absence of a great number
of the principal Counselors, as for the violent Authority usurped by the
Heads of the Rebellion) they were deprived of their freedom, and reduced to
obey other men's wills; since by the Decree of the first of July it was
resolved, not to treat nor determine any thing concerning the public Affairs,
till the Courts of Justice and the City were restored to their freedom; but
instead of providing for their safety, when the Assembly was convened in the
Townhouse to that effect, the burnings, violences, and slaughters, had reduced
the Tribunals and the City to the extremest oppression, so that his Majesty
could no longer regard the determinations made in a Company where the Liberty
of Voices was not free.

The Kings intention in his Answer to the Deputies was to give them
opportunity, that the Princes might send persons of their own, with Authority
to receive Orders for putting the Articles by them accepted in execution, and
to agree upon the time, the manner, and the security for the performance: so
that not without Reason His Majesty was surprised to see Subjects pretend to
obtain things of their Sovereign, that were never practiced even among Princes
that were equal. It was not fit that he should be the first to fulfill on his
part what has been agreed on, till the Conditions which comprehend the true
cause of these distractions be solemnly promised, and cleared as they ought to
be: It being evident that the principal occasion of the Disturbances of the
Kingdom has been the taking up of Arms, the Union of the Princes with the
Spaniards, the introducing them into His Majesty's Fortresses, and the ruins
and desolations caused by the Soldiers of the Princes, and by consequence the
peace can never be re-established till the Hostilities be forborne, their Arms
laid down, the Spaniards driven out of the Kingdom, and the Leagues made with
them entirely broken. It is therefore necessary for all these reasons, that the
Princes do agree upon the time, the manner, and the security for performance of
the Conditions, that they seem to have accepted. And although His Majesty may
in reason insist (as well for the conservation of his Dignity as for Interest
of State) to have all the said Conditions performed by the Princes before he
advance a step further on his part; yet nevertheless the King persisting in his
Declaration, gives his Word again upon their continued instances, to permit the
Cardinal to retire so soon as the Duke of Orleans and the Prince shall agree,
not in general and obscure Declarations, but clearly and in good form, as is
wont to be practiced in occurrences of that importance, and in the manner as
abovementioned, for putting in execution the Articles included in His
Majesty's Answer of the 16th. of June last past; there being no likelihood that
only general Declarations inserted in a Register are of sufficient force to
annul the Princes Treaty concluded and ratified with Spain, for the performance
of which he seemed very much concerned, and from which there is no probability
he will depart, if the Spaniards continue to make good their promise in sending
Soldiers and Money: and when he really should have a mind to break off the
said Treaty, he must necessarily give notice of it to the Spaniards, to the end
that they forbear to execute their Promise. That which the King desires
therefore of the Prince is, that he agree of the time, and manner, how to
declare to the Ministers of Spain, that he intends to be no longer engaged with
them. And this His Majesty finds himself obliged the more earnestly to insist
on, knowing by diverse Letters intercepted, which were shown and verified to the
Deputies, that the said Prince after the Declaration made in Parliament has
solicited the Spanish Generals, as he still continues to do, that they will
enter into France with all their Forces; and it is very hard to believe, that
his intention is to establish Peace in the Kingdom, which he gives out to
depend on the Cardinals removal, making use of the Spanish Forces for the
obtaining thereof. That nothing can be more for the interest and designs of
the Ministers of Spain, then to continue the divisions; wherefore his Majesty's
pleasure is, that the said Deputies do give notice of all this to the Duke of
Orleans, and the Prince, to the end that they may know the Reasons for which
they are obliged to send some one to Court in their name sufficiently
empowered, to declare more particularly their will, for the real effecting
every thing contained in the Articles: and that in the mean time they remain at
Court to expect the Answer, and to be Eyewitnesses of His Majesty's sincerity
in condescending to whatever may conduce to settle the Kingdom in quiet; the
retarding of which can be imputed to none but the Princes, if they refuse to
agree to what has been delivered, with His Majesty's accustomed Clemency,
which shines forth the more brightly, and ought to be the more valued,
considering that he has the absolute power to give Law to whom he please
without condition.

The Court not well satisfied with the Pric^s for sending their ^^p^ties to
receive orders, and adjust businesses which they had declared were agreed upon
they used all art and diligence to inform the people, that not the Cardinal,
but the pretension of the Princes, was the sole obstacle of the Peace, and the
principal cause of all the miseries of the poor subjects, not omitting by the
help of their party, and those servants who had stuck to them, to keep
Intelligence, and put in practice all fit means for the establishment of the
Royal Authority, and for the ruin of the lawless and inconsistent party:
seeing moreover the little effect the Kings near approach to Paris had produced
in all this time; the great scarcity of Provisions, which more and more
incommoded them; the Infection in the Royal Camp, which destroyed many; and the
fear lest that the Spanish Army, keeping along the Oyse, should advance toward
Pontoise, a very important place at that time. By the Council of the Cardinal
His Majesty resolved the 16. of July to dislodge from St. Denis and go to
Pontoise, fix leagues distant, the Cardianal continuing still in his Ministry
by His Majesty's express Command, though he continually pressed for leave to
depart. All the Affairs therefore, being regulated as he saw fit, they were so
well ordered, that those good effects ensued which were seen afterward: but
the Princes and their Favorers continually quarrelling at the doings of the
Court, taxing them, that they studied only tricks to delude the people, and had
very little inclination for the Peace, which depended on the sending away of
the Cardinal; they redoubled their detractions with so much heat and malice,
that it is not to be imagined the conceits spread in public and in private
against the Cardinal and other Officers of Court, continually slandered with
opprobrious language. The Court removing from St. Denis, left there the
Deputies with orders, to expect what Answer his Majesty should think fit to
return them, since they had refused to follow him, upon pretense that they had
not their Equipage, and that it was necessary they should return to Paris to
exercise their charge. The King lay at Pontoise, and the Army in the adjacent
places upon the River, to watch the motion of the Spaniards, who made
excursions into those Territories, to the great damage of the Inhabitants. The
News of the Kings and Armies departure from St. Denis being spread abroad, it
was divulged in Paris (according to the nature of same, which always makes
things appear more then they are) that the Deputies were detained prisoners,
wherefore the Prince of Conde with 400 Horse posted thither, to inform himself
of the business, found there the Deputies at liberty, and offered eo conduct
them to Paris. They excused themselves, that they had engaged their word to
Monsieur de Saintot to stay at St. Denis till further Order from the King, but
the Parliament meeting the day following, and determining to call them back;
Oleans, Conde, and Beaufort went out again with above 2000 persons, and
bringing them to Paris, conducted them to the Parliament with such universal
applause, as if they had returned from some glorious conquest, albeit the King
by express Order had called them to Pontoise, for Affairs of great concern that
happened unexpectedly after his departure from St. Denis. Yet the Malcontents
divulged, that this was an artificial reach of the Court to weary them out by
delays, in stead of giving consolation in good earnest; and to protract time,
by which Mazarine hoped to be able at last to gain the Parisiens by force of
sufferings, accustomed to enjoy peaceably their rich Traffic, and to make
extraordinarily advantage of those commodities that they send to all the parts
of the world.

To take order for all these things, the King with advice of his Council the
18th. of July, after a long rehearsal of all things past, and of the principal
causes of those ill events, decreed, that Information should be taken of the
horrible and scandalous attempt upon the Townhouse the 14th. of the present
month, seeking and finding out the circumstances and dependencies also by way
of Monitory, and to proceed against the Authors and Accomplices of the Massacres
and Violences committed, according to the Statutes and rigor of the Laws; and
in the mean time annulled and revoked the pretended Election of the Counselor
Brussel into the place of Provost of Merchands, whom His Majesty expressly
prohibited to act in that Function upon pain of Death, and he and all his
posterity to be accountable for the disorders happened, or that should happen
since his pretended administration. He declared moreover all the Resolves made
from the first of July, as well in the Parliament as in the Townhouse, touching
the public affairs null and invalid, till the Governor, and the Provost of
Merchands, and the other Magistrates that were constrained to absent themselves
were restored, and that sufficient Provision were made for securing of the due
Administration of Justice, and safety of the City, according to the tenure of
that Decree. The King expressly prohibited all the other Cities of the Kingdom,
and all his Subjects and Servants, not to take any cognizance of any Orders or
Decrees from Paris, so long as it remained under the Tyrannical power of
Rebels. And to the end that the Money destined for the public Uses of the City
should not remain at the Enemies disposal, to make use of it for the War, and
to pay the Spanish troops that they had called in; His Majesty ordered it to
be brought to the place where he should establish his abode, to be put into
Hands of the Pay-Masters of the public Rents, who were commanded to repair to
Court with all the other Consuls and Sheriffs of the Cities, within the term of
three days after the publication of the Decree in the usual manner.

The Princes, the Parliament, and the Frondeurs, were greatly disturbed at this
departure, believing that the Court did but mock at their licentious and
extravagant Pretenses. The Count de Servient had signified to the Deputies in
His Majesty's Name, that if the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde (not
willing to nominate Commissioners of their own) should rather desire to make
use of the Parlements Deputies, that the King was content, and would adjust the
Propositions with them contained in the foresaid Answer, promising to send away
the Cardinal, and that before the Articles should be performed on their part,
provided they could come to an Agreement with their Deputies, or with those of
the Parliament, when they should be empowered. but the Princes, in stead of
accepting this offer, and staying the Deputies at St. Denis, to expect there
the Kings Answer, or to go and find him at Pontoise, as he had ordered, they
were conducted (as has been said) to Paris, where continuing their Complaints
of their being slighted by the Court, they stood firm to have the Cardinal
expelled before any thing else was done, flattering themselves in their own
opinions, and esteeming every thing easy, arising from an overweening
sufficiency.

The Parliament (ambitious to usurp a greater Authority then what became them)
fell at last upon the resolution to choose the Duke of Orleans Lieutenant
General of the Crown, and the Prince of Conde General of the Army under
Orleans, and supplicated His Royal Highness to take upon him this Quality under
pretense of freeing the King from the hands of the Cardinal, who had snatched
him from his people and kept him in constraint. But this determination
profitted them little, as well because it was not embraced by the other
Parlements of the Kingdom, but rather refused and reprehended, as also because
Orleans being of a disposition absolutely contrary to violent courses, would
not imbroil himself in that attempt: but especially because he and the Cardinal
de Retz (the Contriver of all the Plots) promised to themselves, that without
their ruining the Court Mazarine would be gone of himself. The Cardinal de Retz
put this into the Dukes head for fear that the Court being too much depressed,
the Prince of Conde (his irreconcilable Enemy) should rise too high. Retz thus
endeavoring to arrive at the Ministry, first with the expulsion of Mazarine,
and afterward with the ruin of the Prince, (through the re-uniting the Queen
with the Duke of Orleans) was supposed the only and true cause of the total
downfall of that Party, and afterward of his own imprisonment.

The Parliament moreover decreed, that should go in the sale of the Movables
and other things belonging to the Cardinal. The fond was likewise laid for the
50000 crowns, the price of the Cardinals Head, upon a years tax on Cattle. But
whether it was lukewarmness, or the policy of those who endeavored with like
arts to bring to an advantageous conclusion the secret Treaties still managed
in the Princes name by Monsieur de Goucourt, with the assistance of the Duke of
Bovillon, (who insisted earnestly for bringing the Prince of Conde and the
Cardinal to an Agreement, excluding Orleans) or for what other secret respects,
the money was never deposited, and many other things were passed by, by reason
of the concerns of the parties that intervened.

The day following Orleans went to the Parliament, and after many Complements
declared that he would accept the charge of Lieutenant General of the Crown, so
long as the King should be retained by the Cardinal; but desired to have a
Council about him established by the Parliament. The Chambers returned Answer,
that they referred themselves to what his Royal Highness should determine. He
went in the same manner to the Chamber of Accounts, where he declared the same
thing, and made the same request to have some of their Members in his Council;
and here again he had the like Answer, that all was left to his own choice: in
pursuance whereof he took into his new Council of State the major part of the
Malcontents, and the first Consultation that was held was the third of August.

But these Proceedings, so prejudicial to the Crown, were carried on with as
much coldness, as they were embraced with eagerness. And although in appearance
these Decrees of the Parliament, and Actions of the Princes, looked like some
great matter of importance; in reality they were only shadows, which in a short
time vanished of themselves; for by the cunning contrivances of Mazarine, by
little and little the Peoples affections thorowout the Realm, and even in Paris
it self, were won to the King; few being found that would obey the new
Lieutenant General; and the Parliament of Toulouse Metropolis of the Province of
Languedoc and Government of the Duke of Orleans, although they acknowledged
themselves much devoted to his service, decreed against the Ordinance of the
Parliament of Paris, declaring it null and invalid.

All things falling thus contrary to their expectation, and the Princes seeing
their designs begin to fail, the Prince of Conde was in much perplexity; and
little caring to gratify other, while he himself was nigh ruin for want of
money, he used such means, that finally in an Assembly of the Inhabitants by
the assistance of those of his party, he prevailed with them to aid him with a
small sum. There were many ways to draw money from the people with little
noise, but by the vigilance of Mazarine that way was taken, which seeming most
specious and practicable in appearance, but hard and difficult in substance,
might prove ineffectual, and increase the distasts of the Citizens against the
Authors of these Novelties; and this was a tax upon all the Gates of Houses
capable of receiving Cart or Coach, paying twenty five Crowns for the bigger,
the Shops ten, and the little doors five, and this in Paris and the Boroughs
only. By this Collection, which made a great noise and heart-burning, they
could not raise above twenty thousand Crowns, by reason of the avarice or
streights of the Citizens, or both, disheartened by so many pressures and
grievances, but much more for the detestation they had of the War. The Prince
foresaw the ill effect of that determination (as he declared to many) before it
happened. This design therefore did not hit the mark it was aimed at, which was
intended to raise his reputation at Court, and make them believe that he was
Master of Paris, (in which consisted the sum of all the Affairs) to
necessitate them by these jealousies and threatenings to condescend to the
Agreement and yield him his demands, which were the same that were propounded
heretofore, and refused in the preceding Treaties of the Count de Chavigny and
the Secretary Goulas, by reason the Court could not swallow the bitter morsel,
to put Provence, so considerable a Province, under the Government of the Prince
of Conty, nor to make the Count Marcin (a person so diffident and refractory)
Lieutenant General of Guienne; so that this Remedy producing little effect at
Court, helped as little among the Parisiens, who in lieu of contributing Money
brake out into the greatest Maledictions imaginable, against what was done the
4th. of July, accusing the Prince for the Author of it, and that he alone was
the person that disturbed the quiet of the Kingdom. This conceit was so
strongly imprinted in the minds of the Citizens, that it much increased their
hatred against him and his Adherents, and made way for the change that
followed. The Prince and the Duke of Beaufort beginning to decline in their
repute with the people, the Parliament fell likewise into their disesteem,
because instead of seeking remedies against the mischiefs, they exasperated and
abetted them more then the rest.

The Prince of Conde apprehending no more the Kings Forces, they being gone
toward Pontoise, he sent his Troops further off to Jouisy, a Village 4 Leagues
from Paris; but here provisions and forage failing, he came with part of them
to Charenton, and part he sent to Saint Clou.

In this interim the heart-burning and emulation betwixt the Dukes of Nemours
and Beaufort his Brother in Law still continuing, it proceeded to a Duel, where
the Duke of Nemours being slain, it behoved Beaufort to retire from Paris,
those of the Union that opposed the Cardinal remaining in this manner deprived
of two Princes, of the most value and esteem with the people.

There arose likewise a contest and dispute betwixt the Count de Rieux (of the
House of Lorrain) and the Prince of Tarante (of the House of Trimouille) about
precedence in the new Council established by the Duke of Orleans, whose only
Son of about two years old, dying also at this time, those of that Party began
to consider, that God when he purposes to chastise men, takes from them their
earthly comforts, and raises discords and dissentions amongst the most intimate
friends.

The King remained at Pontoise with all the Court from the 17th. of July till
the 19th. of August, during which time what with the incommodities they
suffered in so straight a place, and the scarcity of all things necessary,
diseases multiplied, and many persons died, amongst whom the loss of the Duke
of Bovillon was much lamented for his great capacity, and the entire confidence
betwixt him and Mazarine.

The Spaniards in the mean while taking advantage of the Civil Troubles in
France (seasonable for their Interest) laid Siege to Dunkirk, and began very
much to streighten it. By Land it was impossible to succor it, because the
Royal Army was necessary about the Kings Person; wherefore there remaining no
way open but that of the Sea, the Duke of Vendosme, High Admiral, was commanded
to take care for the relief of it. The French Fleet was gone toward Biscay to
fight the Spaniards, who with 17 Men of War were crusing in those Seas. The
9th. of August both Fleet came within fight of each other about the Pertuis
d'Antioch: the Fight began with the furious discharge of their Cannon. But each
side advancing with a regard not to engage themselves too far where the success
might prove hazardous: the night in the mean time drawing on, and the wind
blowing hard, they were separated. On the Spanish side the Ship called The
Nativity was set on fire, and another Vessel of the Squadron of Naples taken
and sunk. Vendosme would have prosecuted this fortunate Encounter, but wanting
necessary Provisions and Money, he rested himself satisfied in having driven
them out of those Seas. He went ashore at Rochel, and the Fleet returned into
Britain, from whence by Order from the King they hoys'd sail again toward the
English Chanel, and steered their course to give succor to languishing
Dunkirk. The Parliament of England, who were not willing that that place and
Haven should remain in the hands of the French, fell upon the Kings Fleet in
such manner, that taking them unawares in the Road of Calais, without fighting
took all those Ships except three, which getting by the English saved
themselves in Flushing.

The people that were aboard were set ashour by the English on the Coast of
France, and the Vessels retained under the title of Reprisals. Wherefore on the
18th. of September Monsieur d Estrades Governor of Dunkirk, was forced to
march out with Honorable Conditions, And in this manner the Spaniards
recovered that Town; after which the Prince of Ligne advanced toward the
Frontiers of France with 4000 Soldiers, to second the designs of the Princes,
who were encamped about Paris.

The distastes continued still more and more in the minds of the good
Frenchmen, for the affronts and abuses offered them by the Seditious, and for
the little safety that was for them at that time in Paris, where the burning of
the Townhouse had let them see how violent the designs were of the
Malcontents: whereupon Cardinal Mazarine, who continually studied all
opportunities for the service of the Crown, perceived at last that the surest
remedy was to call the Parlements from Paris; of which although he had often
thought, and for some doubt of opposition omitted. At this time he found it
necessary not to defer it any longer. The Cardinal and Monsieur Fouquet the
Attorney General keeping correspondence with each other, and taking the
opportunity, Fouquet propounded and maintained, that the Parliament ought to
remove to Pontoise, which was done by His Majesty's Decree the 6th. of August,
containing first a long discourse upon the Reasons that moved him to it,
annulling and abolishing all the Decrees and Arrests made as well in the
Parliament as in the Townhouse, and particularly those of the 20th. and 24th.
of the same August, prohibiting all persons not to acknowledge the Duke of
Orleans of Lieutenant of the Crown, nor the Prince of Conde for General of the
Army, who made use of these Attributes for scandalous intents, and of dangerous
consequence, forcing the Subjects to execute Orders and Designs tending to the
subversion of the Kingdom. He commanded moreover all the Counselors and
Officers of the Parliament to appear at Pontoise, under the penalty of losing
their Offices, and with express prohibition to all, not to take notice of nor
obey other Orders then those of His Majesty's, nor other Decrees then those of
the Parliament removed to Pontoise.

In order to this the major part of the Presidents went thither, five of six
Masters of Requests, and about twenty Counselors, to whom diverse Counselors
of State joined themselves, with the Dukes and Peers that were at Court: these
formed a Party strong enough to precipitate the whole Faction of the Princes.
This new Parliament then beginning to act, that they might acquire Authority,
and to let the people understand that they desired the public good, they
proposed to the Cardinal that now he would do well to retire himself, since his
stay was the only pretext of the Princes, and of the Frondeurs, so that he
being gone, they would either lay down their Arms, and return to their duty,
(by which means the King would remain absolute Master;) or persevering in their
disobedience, the world would plainly perceive their evil intention, the honest
people would be a weary of following them, and the Parliament of Pontoise, now
acknowledged by the other Parlements for lawful, would give out Decrees against
the Princes and the Rebels, and the King having made it clearly appears that
the Cardinal served merely for a pretext to the Enemies of the Common wealth,
might (the people remaining convinced and satisfied) recall him at his
pleasure. The Cardinal declared that he desired nothing more then the service
of His Majesty, and with much readiness and zele resolved to depart against the
sentiment of most of his friends, and the King himself, who knew not how to
dispose himself to give him leave, which he had so often requested. This the
Parliament did, not only for the Reasons abovesaid, but to surprise the Opinions
that went about concerning the Kings breach of his Word, given heretofore both
in Speech and Writing, for the assuring of the Cardinals departure. Since that,
not seeing it accomplished, they branded the Court with falsness, and the
Princes set a fair color, and strengthened their contumacy with that pretext,
they added moreover, that this retirement of the Cardinal would greatly
facilitate the Negotiation, which was carrying on in Paris for receiving the
King and expelling of Conde. In the managing of this Affair Father Forz Bishop
of Amiens, and Father Bertaut a Franciscan, and Monsieur Prevost a Counselor
of the great Chamber, with others devoted to the King, did interest themselves
with much affection and fidelity, who found the way more open after the
departure of the Cardinal. The wisdom of this Council quickly manifested it
self, because the People (who pierce not so far) took it for granted he should
return no more. With these considerations therefore the King gave the Cardinal
leave to be gone, although at that time there was more need of his presence
then of his departure. But before we proceed any further, it must not be
omitted, that the Kings Council, being greatly disturbed at the resolution of
the Parliament of Paris, in choosing the Duke of Orleans Lieutenant General of
the Crown, and in declaring the King the Cardinals Prisoner, they proclaimed
invalid, not only what the Parliament had done till that time, but all other
deliberations for the future, as unlawful, insufficient, and void of all
Prerogative, and that no other Parliament ought to be acknowledged, then that
which was lawfully called to Pontoise.

The major part of the Counselors that remained in Paris (amongst whom were
diverse of the most seditious) contesting about this matter, several
Declarations were passed in opposition to that of His Majesty, that the
translating of the Parliament to Pontoise was invalid and unlawful, protesting
against it, and maintaining, that the Parliament was never kept out of Paris,
though Charles the VII. once removed it for certain Affairs to Montargis. They
annulled besides, all that was done in the Kings Council about Prohibiting the
levy of the imposition upon the gates of Paris, ordering on the contrary, that
none should be exempt from paying it. They decreed moreover, that the Farmers
of the Salt, should pay the dues of their Farms to the Deputies of the
Parliament; and that the Goods of those Counselors and Presidents that were
gone to Pontoise, should be confiscated if they did not suddenly return to
Paris, to the exercise of their places, and further would they have proceeded,
if force had been coupled to their will, which failing, all those
determinations proved vain and ridiculous.

The Cardinal making haste for his departure, the day before he went, he
procured the Kings Grant for a Brevet of Duke and Peer of France to Monsieur de
Crequy, first Gentleman of the Chamber to the King, to the Marquesses de
Mortmar also first Gentleman of the Chamber, and de Roquelaure Great Master of
the Wardrobe. The Cardinal afterward consigned into the Kings hands particulars
Instructions of all things concerning his Government. Though his Majesty had
given express Order to all the Counselors of the Parliament to assemble at
Pontoise, yet many of them refusing to give their Consents, the thing seemed to
many to have something of impossibility in it, which proved to be the safety of
the Kings party* since those that remained in Paris, not having means to
maintain the War, and to hinder this removal to Pontoise, they were constrained
to yield to all the conditions that were prescribed them by the Court.

The Cardinal left in the exercise of his Charge of chief Minister of State,
with the Kings good liking, Prince Thomas of Savoy, as one, who besides being
his great Confident, was of an incomparable Integrity, in whom the King might
wholly confide without any suspicion; he left also the Count de Servient, a
Person no less Politic then versed in all the Affairs of the Kingdom, Tillier
the Secretary of State, a man of great wit and understanding ready to execute
the Court-orders, with faithfulness and zeal, and these three for the
Negotiations of the State and the War; he left besides with the Queen, for the
directions of the most important and most secret Affairs, the Abbot Ondedei
(who was afterward Bishop of Fregius) Counselor of State to Her Majesty, of
whose known and experienced fidelity and practice in managements, he had full
assurance.

This being done, he took leave of their Majesty's with that tenderness, which
his ardent affection urged him to, and the 19. of August 1652. departed from
Pontoise for Sedan, passing first to the Marshall de Turenne's Camp, to view
the Army, which from Lagny was already advancing into Brie to oppose the March
that the Duke of Lorain was taking, after the Prince of Wirtemberg had sent
back the Count of Fuensaldagna's Spaniards into Flanders; and proceeding in his
journey with a good Convoy, he came to Sedan, and from thence went to Bouillon
where he staid, expecting from time, the fruits of his truth and innocence.

The Prince of Conde understanding that the Cardinal was going, and by
consequence the Pretext of the War ceasing. He sent the Marquess de Jerse to
the Army of Lorain, (to which were joined the Troops that Wirtemberg conducted
to the Princes) with direction to take his time, and set upon the Cardinal in
his journey, and take him prisoner. But the Spaniards upon this becoming
diffident, he was by their means advertized, and shunned the danger, seeing the
Ministry of Spain knew, that it was for their interest that the Cardinal should
subsist, for under this color the civil dissentions in France were kept afoot,
from which they drew much profit.

The same day the King, the Queen, and all the Court went to Compeigne; and the
better to dispose the minds of the Parisiens to join themselves to their party,
the King so soon as he was arrived at Compeigne, put forth a General Act of
Oblivion, the Contents whereof imported, (after a summary Rehearsal of all
things past, from the year 1648. till that time) a General Pardon, and
abollition of all that had been done against his Royal Service, making void and
of no effect, all the Informations, Decrees, Sequestrations, and other
Proceedings following thereupon, by occasion of the disorders from the first of
February 1651. till this time, as also His Majesty's Declarations of the month
of September, and the 8. of October in the same year, upon this Condition, that
the Duke of Orleans, the Princes of Conde and Conty, and all others of their
party, should lay down their Arms within three days after the Publication of
this Act. To this end the Duke of Orleans should send to His Majesty within
the term of three days an Act subscribed with his own Hand, by which he
renounced all Treaties, Leagues and Confederations made with what Prince
soever, without his Majesty's Approbation; the like was enjoined the Prince of
Conde and Conty, who were also at the same time to put into the Kings Hands
necessary Orders, as well to send the Spanish Soldiers out of Stenay and Burg
in Guienne, and other places wheresoever; as also to cause the Enemies Ships to
draw off from the Coasts of France. That the said Duke of Orleans and Prince of
Conde should cause the foreign Troops that were about Paris, to march directly
to the Frontiers of Flanders, and unite their Soldiery to the Army of Turenne,
and la Ferte Seneterre, and all those who were further off, within the space of
fifteen days: declaring, that those who should fail to perform in the space of
three days the Contents of this Amnesty should reap no benefit by it, from
which his Majesty only excepted the Crimes committed betwixt particular
persons, which were to remain as before without other alteration.

This Amnesty with such an Exception at the end of it, was esteemed only as an
Artifice by those that did not desire it: though for that time it took no
effect, for it was published abroad, that, not including those that had fought
in duel, and assaulted the Townhouse the 4. of July, it rested in the Will of
the King to chastise whom he pleased, under color of this Delinquency; yet it
ceased not to leave an impression in many, who understanding the cavil
introduced by the Princes, and the Frondeurs, were much offended, having always
believed, that when the Cardinal should be gone, the Princes and the Parliament
would have cast themselves at the Kings feet. But although those with the
Frondeurs had no thought to receive the said Amnesty, though it should be made
in the form they desired, nevertheless they feined themselves zealous for the
public good, showing themselves very well pleased at the Cardinals departure.
The Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Conde went afterward to the Parliament,
where it was concluded to present the King their thanks for sending away the
Cardinal; and the Sovereign Courts, and the body of the City send Deputies to
the King to the same effect, and to complete all that was necessary for the
welfare and repose of the State.

A little after, the Parliament resolved to desire the King again to return to
Paris, and the Princes declared that they were ready to lay down their Arms,
so an Amnesty were granted them in good form, making the same Protests in the
Chamber of Accounts, and Court of Aids. The Duke of Orleans dispatched a
Courier to the Duke d' Anville his Friend, and a Minister of State very dear to
the King, and most faithful to the Queen, to obtain of his Majesty Passports
for the Deputies that were appointed to negotiate the final Peace: But d'
Anville having kept the Courier a while, sent him back empty, because it did
not seem decent, for the King to enter into other Treaties, since by the
Amnesty he had perfected every thing, and expected that the Princes should
suddenly lay down their Arms, as they had formerly declared to do, so soon as
the Cardinal was gone from Court. D' Anville writ withal another Letter to the
Duke of Orleans, importing, that he believed the Passports would be granted, if
they renewed their requests directly to the King himself, which being done, a
Passport was granted to the Marshall d' Estampes to come to Court, not as a
Deputy, but as a mere Courtier; and at the same time some secret Negotiations
were renewed betwixt the Secretary Goulas, the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, and
the Duchess of Aiguillon, the drift of which was to take off the Duke of
Orleans from the Union with Conde, they clearly perceiving, that the
Declarations that he made to the Parliament and the Court were not sincere,
while at the same time that he professed himself ready for the Peace; he
protested at Madrid and Brussels that he would always adhere to the Crown of
Spain, and hold on the War, negotiating likewise in England to get assistance
to carry on his designs; and therefore it concerned them to take away his
Helps and Associates in France, without which he would remain only a bare
Captain of the King of Spain, and be able to do little against a Kingdom more
potent then any other, when united, and obedient to its King.

In the mean time the Troops of the Princes remained encamped on the other side
the River Seen, betwixt Surenne and St. Cloud, expecting the supplies which
were sent him from Flanders, but those fruitful hills being full of Vineyards,
and the Grapes beginning to ripen, the damage which the Soldiers did to the
people, was very grievous, by whose Solicitation they were drawn out, to the
end of the Suburbs of St. Victor, where in quartering themselves, they fell to
blows with the Citizens, that were upon the Guard at the street end, where four
or five inhabitants, ans^ fifteen or twenty Soldiers were slain, which helped
so much the more to augment the discord amongst them.

But the Cardinal knowing that the safety of the Royal party consisted in
reducing the Parisiens, to seek their quiet, which began to be wished for by
them, The people, the Merchants, and all persons generally being weary of the
calamities they sustained, and tired out by the continual Guards, which without
pay, and with abandoning their traffic they were constrained to keep, he
advised the King to stay at Compiegne, and not to be prevailed on by entreaties
to return to Paris without unquestioned security, that he should not be
detained again; and this was one of the Maxims especially recommended to the
Queen in his absence, and which he particularly gave in charge to the Abbot
Ondedei. He added, that the Kings Army ought to go to oppose the troops of
Flanders, which were marching to assist the Princes, and if they were too weak
so that enterprise, they should remove to Ville neufve S. George on the
North-side the Seen, four leagues from Paris, and fortifying themselves with
good trenches, live upon the provisions, that from Corbeil, Melun, and other
neighboring places, they should get in abundance by means of the River, where
making a stay, the Enemies troops by consequence must lodge themselves
thereabouts; so that the Soldiers sacking and pillaging the Country, and
robbing and killing all that should pass that way, without coming to a rupture,
of showing any such intention, Paris would be involved in a very troublesome
siege, and the Princes rendered odious, as being reputed the principal occasion
of all those disasters; and thus carrying on their intelligence with their
loyal friends in the City, the Parisiens would be brought with greater facility
to take fit resolutions to free them from their miseries, which could not be
done so long as they were deprived of the King.

This was the greatest stroke the Cardinal could give, and it is certain that
this Maxim duly observed promoted the ruin of his opposite Party; for Paris
could not free it self from the hovering ruin, without sending away the Prince
of Conde, whose fall was most certain, because staying there with the Army he
increased their miseries, which stirred up the peoples hatred against him; and
by retiring himself he lost the support of so rich and powerful a City, with so
much the more prejudice, as that he would be forced to retire to his places
upon the Mose, quit the Realm, and throw himself into the arms of the Spaniards.

Upon the news of the Cardinals departure out of the Kingdom the Ministers of
Spain were not a little troubled, because they perceived by his removal the
Malcontents had no more pretext for what they did. Taking their measures
therefore to assist (but not to strengthen too much) the Party of the Princes,
two things were proposed: One was to advance with their whole Army, and forcing
the Kings Army from about Paris, keep those Citizens faithful and united to the
Princes. The other, to amuse that Party and the people of Paris with great
hopes, but little effects, that by their seeming assistance they might hold
firm in their pretensions, and redoubling their disobedience and injuries
against the Court, be finally necessitated to declare against the King; so that
rendering themselves unworthy of favor, and affrighted with the thoughts of
chastisement, they would endeavor to preserve their Usurped Authority. To the
first Proposition were opposed the imminent dangers that the Court seeing
themselves reduced to, should be forced to grant to the Princes those Points,
which with much fervency were insisted on by their friends and partakers.
Neither did the other seem convenient in that present conjuncture; for when the
Princes and the Parliament should perceive themselves deprived of the hopes and
promises made them by the Spaniards, knowing they were not able to subsist by
Paris alone, (which was wavering even in the beginning of the Union) they would
be constrained to regulate themselves as Necessity should counsel them, and
accept those conditions that had been already offered them upon the
Accommodation: so that by either of these ways they apprehended they should not
much help forward their Designs, which they had proposed to themselves upon the
continuance of the civil troubles in France. Embracing therefore a third
counsel, they resolved to cause their Troops to advance, knowing that if the
Parisiens did not continue firm, they should at least encourage the Martial and
haughty thoughts of the Prince of Conde, who making war in France as first
Prince of the Blood, and esteemed one of the Valiantest of the Age, he could
not but much trouble and annoy the contrary Party. Wherefore the Spanish and
Lorein Troops began to move toward the Seen, to the number of 3000 Horse,
under Prince Ulderick of Wirtemberg, 6 other Regiments of Horse conducted by
the Chevalier de Guise, and 6000 Lorrainers with their Duke, who all together
formed an Army of about 11000 combatents. These thought to put themselves into
the Post of Villeneuf S. George, but were prevented by the Marshall Turenne,
who (according to the Instruction of Cardinal Mazarine) had already possessed
it, and entrenched himself there with the Kings Army, and cast two Bridges over
the River.

The Spaniards, the Lorrainers, and the Troops of the Princes, quartered round
about the Country; so that the Soldiers of both Parties scouring the Campania
on all sides, Paris remained besieged by their own friends; wherefore the
Citizens daily pressed the King to return to Paris; who answered, he was ready
so to do, if the Duke of Orleans would cause the Prince of Conde to retire to
his Government of Guienne, the Duke of Beaufort to his Castle of Anet, and the
strangers out of the Kingdom.

The Cardinal de Retz took the advantage of these favorable accidents, and
with the Duchess of Chevreuse and the Marquess of Chasteauneuf, Conde's
Enemies, endeavored to separate the Duke of Orleans from the Prince, and unite
him to the Court, that so remaining together near the King they might hinder
the return of Mazarine; and having ruined the Party of Conde, get the
management of Affairs into their own hands. And this was the only true cause
of all the Caballs of these Lords, for they had no ill will against the Kings
service; only thought to do it handsomer then Mazarine did, who was hated by
many as a stranger, and not beneficial.

Yet notwithstanding the troubles of the Court, the Kings Troops went on with
the Siege of Monterond, and took it, obliging the Defendants to yield it up for
want of Provisions.

Brisac was likewise put into the Kings hands by the Marshall of Guebriants
Lady through the Address of Mazarine, after strange occurrences happened in
that place by the Intrigues of Charlevois, who was taken prisoner, and of the
Count d' Harcourt, who under some vain pretenses that he was not secure at
Court retired into that Fortress, and staid there some time, till he had spent
all the Money he had got in managing the Kings Army in Guienne, in which Affair
Mazarine had the whole direction, and ordered the matter so dexterously, that
the Count d' Harcourt refusing the Offers of the Spaniards and Imperialists,
returned at last to his due obedience.

The Princes in the mean time prosecuted their design, to streighten so the
Camp of Turenne, that forcing them to quit the Post they might fight him, and
destroy him by the superiority of their Forces.

Turenne staid there with much hardship, hoping to weary out the Parisiens, and
reduce them to their duty, obliging them to drive away the strangers from the
Town. But all this while there happened no Action of moment, because both
Parties proceeded with caution and reserve, lest they should receive any
disaster; so that the Country being on all sides, overrun by the Soldiers,
Paris chiefly found the trouble and incommodity, none being secure to traffic
without the gates, without danger of being robbed and killed. Upon these
disorders the Townsmen began to frequent the Assemblies more then ordinary, to
devise how to free themselves from these tedeous miseries.

The 5th. of September it was resolved on in the Townhouse to send some of the
Body of the City to supplicate the King to come to Paris. For the same effect
the Clergy likewise deputed some of theirs, and the Cardinal de Retz was chosen
their Head, as Coadjutor of that Archbishopric. He went in a very splendid
Equipage, and made a most elegant Oration to their Majesty's, exhorting them to
return to Paris. The motive of this his going (as the report went) was to
gratify the Parisiens in their desire for the Courts return, to gain the
credit as Mediator, of so great a work for the universal good, and drawing
advantage by Mazarines absence, render himself necessary at Court, gain the
Kings favor, and by means of the Duke of Orleans make his way.

The Kings answer was in general, and like to the others formerly given to
those that went upon the same account; which was, that he was ready to grant
their request whenever the Enemies of the public peace should be driven
away. And this was the result and drift of the Court (according to the advice
of Mazarine) to stir up the City against the Princes, who though they labored
all they could to make them understand, that the Amnesty given at Pontoise was
full of Prevarication, they could not so prevail but the major part accepted
it, and not only in Paris, but also in Bourdeaux it caused some dispute. It Is
true, that the Princess of Conde, the Prince of Conty, the Duchess of
Longueville, and others, being in this remote City, their Presence and
Authority prevailed. The new Council of the Ormiera determined not to permit by
any means the Parliament to accept it, without the consent of the Prince of
Conde. The Bourdelois were in this point more resolute and constant, because
the Kings Army in Guienne, wanting a General after the departure of the Count
d' Harcourt, they hoped (encouraged thereunto by Count Marcin) to recover the
Towns and places possessed by the said Count d' Harcourt; especially the Kings
Troops being grown lasie and negligent, they let Marsin attempt what he
pleased. Wherefore it being necessary to provide another Chief, by the counsel
of Mazarine the Government of the Army and the Province was conferred on the
Duke of Candale, only Son of the Duke of Espernon, a young Prince sprightly
and generous, and valiant above measure, who undertook diverse Enterprises, and
finally constrained the Bourdolois to return to their obedience.

THE HISTORY Of the Managements, of Cardinal MAZARINE. LIB. III.
AT the same time the Duke de Mercoeur was in Provence, with Commissions for
Governor of that Province, yet without the dismission of the Duke of
Angoulesme, who was the true Governor, but by order of the King was kept
Prisoner in Berry; because having promised His Majesty not to go into Provence
without his Permission, but to stay at Paris, he notwithstanding, afterward
under color of going to his estate, went out of the way with design, (as it
was discovered by Mazarine,) to foment the sedition begun in the City of Tolon;
by this imprisonment, with the diligence of the Duke of Mercoeur, and the
direction of Cardinal Mazarine, Tolon was restored to its former obedience, and
the gates were opened to the Kings Troops, and all the Province thereupon kept
in peace, which was otherwise threatened with sedition and troubles. The Duke of
Angoulesme remained prisoner three months, but afterward the King being
assured by the promises and good intentions of the Duchess his wife, and by
the interposition of the Duke of Joyeuse his son-in-law, he was set free the
beginning of October following, and was permitted to stay in Paris, and at
Court, keeping all this while the Patents of Governor of Provence; but few
months after he passed to another life, and with his death his Family was
extinct.

At the same time that the Cardinal of Retz, with the other Deputies of the
Clergy, were completing their business with their Majesty's at Compeigne, the
Deputation of the Commons of Paris was sent back by the King, with the Answer
which follows.

That his Majesty always preserving a gracious inclination for his good City of
Paris; and having a perfect knowledge of their fidelity, and disposition to his
service, and their due obedience did suffer an unspeakable grief of heart, to
understand the oppression which it underwent, and particularly since the fourth
of July, all seeming to be perverted, which he had endeavored, to make known
his right intentions, in opposition to that malice and violence through which
those Conflagrations, Massacres, and other strange effects had taken place, for
no other end then to turn away his faithful subjects from their obedience, that
the Officers and lawful Magistrates were banished, the Governor, the Prevost
of the Merchants, the Deputy and others compelled to fly away, to secure their
own lives* in whose room the Authors of these attempts, for their recompense,
were placed; new Sheriffs were made contrary to the Kings Prohibition, Taxes
laid upon the goods of the Citizens and people, whilst those of the Villages
and Country were sacked and plundered with all temerity and insolence.

That his Majesty had done all things possible, even to the prejudice of his
own honor, to restore them to their former liberty, and to preserve them from
the miseries of the War, granting the Princes leave honorably to lay down
their Arms, and return to their obedience; but they, instead of resting quiet,
had called together an Assembly of the Body of the City, the chief of which
were without title or legal character; this to delude the people with a
pretense of desiring peace, at the same time that themselves refused it,
declaring that they could not accept of the Conditions offered them; whenas
there were no others then the very same they had demanded, that far from any
thoughts of laying down their Arms, they had caused a part of the Spanish Army
to draw near to Paris, to which they had joined their own troops, with design
to maintain their usurped Authority, and to share betwixt the enemy and
themselves the goods of the poor subject. That they had put a sinister
interpretation upon those deliberations which the King had made, and did still
make to preserve the lives of his Officers and Magistrates, by getting them out
of their hands. That he lived in greatest impatiency, till he saw a possibility
of restoring that Noble City to her ancient splendor, to that plenty enjoyed
in the first years of his Reign, the Trade there, and the Parliament
reestablished, and to honor it with His Royal Presence, not only for his own
content, but also for the satisfaction of all his obedient subjects. That in
the mean time His Majesty would be much satisfied, that a good number of
Officers and Inhabitants did come to him, but considering that the Body of the
City was overpowered, guided, and composed by the Adherents to the Princes,
who came contrary to the ordinary custom into the Assembly, held on the fifth
of that month, to hinder that nothing else should be concluded on but what
contributed fuel to the War, having by such designs turned away all good
resolutions, which might have been taken there, to oblige the Princes to lay
down their Arms, and return to their duty; he neither could nor ought to
authorize that which was determined in their Presence, particularly in the
presence of the Duke of Beaufort and Counselor Brussell, principal Authors of
all these disorders; without offending for ever the public liberty and
security. He did therefore declare the aforesaid Assembly null, invalid, and
unlawful; and consequently could not grant the Passports which were demanded
for them whom they had deputed; but free leave should be given to any
particular men, which were disposed to come and see him, whether they were
Magistrates lawfully established in their Charges; or other public Officers,
Citizens, Companies of Merchants, or Inhabitants of the City, who should be
courteously heard upon all matters which they would represent.

De Pietre, who had been sent by the Assembly, being returned with this Answer
to Paris, where the troubles daily more and more increasing, (not only by the
Commerce being interrupted, but also by the damage done to the country, round
about, which was made a spoil to both Armies; with insupportable
licentiousness, especially of the Lorrainers and Germans, who because they were
strangers, thought they might do any thing though never so extravigant) the
Parisiens understood how nigh their total and irrecoverable ruin did approach,
Especially considering that the time of sowing and the Vintage was very near,
wherefore they began more openly and with greater heat (fomented continually by
the ingenious Artifices of Mazarine; to renew the Negotiation with the Court,
by the means of Cardinal de Retz, of the Marquess de Chasteauneuf, and other
persons, who desired no less the fall of Mazarine, then the destruction of
Conde.

The Duke of Orleans showing himself of the same opinion, and wearied with
these disorders, being a Prince of a very good disposition, and an enemy to
violence, beside the often repeated Promises of his good intention to the
Peace, promoted by the endeavors of the Duke d' Anville and others, he wrote
to the Queen the 20. of September in these terms.

That having understood with great comfort by the Marquess Joyeuse Lambert, the
favorable inclination of her Majesty toward the peace, he thought himself
obliged to assure her by these lines, that he also, together with the Prince of
Conde did passionately desire it; and although the first subject of their
Requests which they made to Heaven, ought to be the good of the State; yet he
did protest with sincerity, that the inclination which he has always had to
honor her Majesty, which was one of the principal Reasons, and that there
could never any thing happen, which should upon any account ever alter that
zeal any respect, with which he declared himself her most obedient Servant.

At the same time the Court of Aids, through the secret management of Mazarine
found an expedient to assemble at Pontoise, in conformity to the Kings order.

The Kings good subjects in the meanwhile, did not cease to contrive how to
draw themselves out of these troublesome disturbances. The Bishop of Amiens, and
others having made palpably evident to their friends, and those that knew the
state of Affairs; the necessity of some ready and fit resolution to restore to
Paris the splendor of the Kings Authority, obscured and damaged by the
pretensions of the Princes, and the artifices of the Enemies to the public
good; the 24th. of September they held an Assembly of between four and five
hundred persons in the Palace Royal, where the Counselor Prevost appeared,
who was in perfect intelligence with Cardinal Mazarine, and consequently with
the Court: he presented them a Letter of the Kings, in which he declared that
His Majesty had a very great desire to come to Paris, but that he ought not to
return so long as there were Seditious Governors; he proposed therefore, that
all those who were faithful Citizens should take Arms, throw away the Straw,
stick Paper in their Hats, go out into the Streets and cry Vivele Roy; and with
one accord seize upon the principal places of the City, drive out the
disturbers, and fall upon as many as should oppose this design: this being
done, the King would then soon return.

The chief Heads and principal Authors of this Company, after the
aforementioned Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut, and the Counselor Prevost,
who had all the secret and ordering of this Affair in their hands, were the
Sieur Barby Controller of the Kings Household, who drew after him many of the
people about the Gates of Monmartre and Richlieu; the Sieur de Luynes,
Counselor of the Parliament of Metz, followed by diverse Inhabitants of the
streets of S. Opportune and S. Innocent; the Sieur Borgon, accompanied by many
from place Maubert; the Sieur de Fay, Keeper General of the Artillery,
strengthened by a multitude of followers from the Suburbs: of S. Anthony and S.
Marcellus, and with a number of Bargemen and Workers of Saltpeter and
Gunpowder; the Sieurs de Bidal and de Villais, both principal Silk-merchants in
the Street de Fer, who drew after them the Young men and the Silk-workers
thereabouts, and being esteemed gallant men and liberal, were seconded by a
great number of those of that Profession; le Sieur Brun, a Merchant of Tapistry
in S. Denis Street, followed by the greater part of the Neighborhood; and from
the places about the Grand Chastelet, a man of a ready Elocution, the same who
was deputed afterward to make a Speech to their Majesty's, and who did it with
so general a satisfaction; the Sieur Farin, the Kings Secretary, a Confident of
the aforementioned Counselor Prevost, and of esteem amongst the Watermen; the
Sieur de Mare, Lieutenant to the Sieur Reghenlt, Perfumer in the Street of S.
Honere, Head of a great Faction of people in those quarters, and who was
afterward Author of those insolences committed in seizing the Prince of
Wirtenbergs Baggage, as we shall relate hereafter; the Sieur le Michel,
Lieutenant Colonel to Signior Thibul, who caused his Company to take Arms, and
raised a great number of people about the Palace Royal.

All these declared that they met together upon no other design then to search
out means most expedient to procure the Kings return to his former residence,
which place was now upon the brink of its total ruin without His Majesty's
Presence. They made therefore jointly a Solemn Protestation to observe
perfectly those Resolutions which were taken, and to spend their Lives and
Fortunes in maintaining them, to defend all in general, and every one in
particular that should be injured by the contrary Party; and concluded this
Engagement in protesting, that their assembling together was to no other end
but the Glory of God, and the Re-establishment of the King in his Lawful
Authority, after the manner of his Predecessors.

In this Assembly although there met no more then between four and five hundred
persons, yet the Adherents were (...) ^^^^rous. The ^ Companies of Merchants
did concur with them, and the greatest part of the Colonels, and almost all The
Deputies of the Townhouse. The true and secret end of this was to let the
People see, that there was a powerful Party in Paris for the King, and to
oblige the Duke of Orleans to grant Pasports to those who were deputed by the
six Companies of Merchants, and by the Colonels to go to the Court and
Negotiate with their Majesty's; which was refused by the said Duke as hurtful
to the Interest of his Party. This Engagement being taken, some proposed for
Head of this new Faction the Cardinal de Retz, a person very fit both in
respect of his own Accomplishments, and of the great esteem which every one had
of him; but they who considered that this might be done to no other end, but to
bring him into favor again at Court, which if it succeeded there would be no
further hope of ever seeing Mazarine return, did oppose it with forcible
Reasons, demonstrating that it would not be convenient to receive any other
Head, but one who was chosen and sent by His Majesty himself, seeing also that
for the most part the Actions of those men are suspicious, who solicit with
much artifice for those Offices which they desire. At this news the Princes and
all their Party were extremely troubled, foreseeing those Events which must
needs prove destructive to their designs; they considered therefore of the most
proper means to redress these disorders, and stop that torrent which was coming
in upon them.

The Marshall d' Estampes went presently with Orders from the Duke of Orleans
to the Palace Royal to endeavor to dissolve the Meeting, but all in vain.
Mademoiselle d' Orleans thought also to go thither, to interrupt by her
Presence and Authority those undertakings, as fortunately as she had formerly
done others upon the like occasion; but when upon second thoughts she
considered, that she might thereby very much hazard her Reputation, she let it
alone, and advisedly, for they had prepared in the Assembly a white Riband for
her instead of the Straw which the wore.

The whole morning of the 24th of September was spent in these and the like
deliberations, and the Assembly adjourning till the next day, every man was
ordered to bring as great a number of his Friends with him as he could. The
same day they sent to the Court, to give an account of the good disposition of
the Loyal Inhabitants for His Majesty's return to Paris.

The good effect which this Assembly produced was this; That the Counselor
Brussel knowing that the Office of Provost of the Merchants conferred upon him
by the violence and fury of the people was insubsistent, resolved to lay it
down voluntarily, to avoid the being constrained to do it by force; but
declared that he did it because his keeping it was looked upon as one of the
causes which hindered His Majesty's return to Paris. The two Sheriffs Gervas
and Orry, who were put in in the places of the other two turned out by the Duke
of Orleans, although they were counseled to follow the example of Brussel,
would not consent to it, maintaining that their Election was lawful, being
unwilling to lose that Honor; but when they had better thought on it, and
considered that they should be in the end constrained to withdraw, they
declared themselves ready to submit, so soon as they should know that the Kings
will and pleasure was such. So that the Townhouse in this manner was at the
Courts devotion, and a great part of the Inhabitants followed them, bewailing
the miseries and losses that so many innocent persons had suffered by the
extravagancies of some few who were guilty of all these disorders.

The day following le Sieur de Vieux Upper Sheriff, and le Sieur de Pierre
abovementioned, were deputed to Court to keep on the Negotiation, supplicating
earnestly in the name of the People for the Kings return. To render what they
did more authentic, and to encourage them to proceed, the Parliament at
Pontoise made an Order in favor of the said Counselor Prevost, and all those
who met or should meet at the Assembly under the Protection of the King and his
Parliament; forbidding every one of what degree or condition soever in any wise
to acknowledge the Duke of Beaufort for Governor of Paris, Brussel for Provost
of the Merchants, or Gervas and Orry for Sheriffs; commanding these in
particular under pain of being declared Rebels not to exercise any longer those
Offices. He commanded further that they should not receive or grant passage for
Victuals or Ammunition to the Troops that served under the Princes against His
Majesty.

This Decree was read and published throughout Paris the 27. of September:
there was also fixed to all the corners of the principal streets a Manifesto of
the Assembly made at the Palace-Royal, the Contents of which were, that His
Majesty's good Servants and Subjects there met together had no other design
then to re-establish Peace in the City, which could not otherwise be effected,
then by the Presence of its lawful Prince, and by driving out the Strangers and
Disturbers of the public quiet.

To this Manifesto was annexed an Edict of the Kings made at Compeigne the
seventeenth of the same month to this effect, that His Majesty being informed
of the Perseverance of the inhabitants of his good City of Paris in their right
intentions for his service, and for the public good; and of their readiness to
employ all their power to reduce things to their former estate, and to deliver
themselves from the oppression they then suffered under, by recovering their
liberties under his obedience, he granted leave to all the forementioned
inhabitants, and to every one of them in particular, and ordered them in case
of necessity to take arms, to join themselves together to seize upon those
places which they judged most fit, to fall upon those who should oppose their
design, to imprison the seditious, and in general to do whatsoever they should
judge necessary and convenient to the re-establishing quietness and perfect
obedience toward the King; and to reduce the City to its Government, according
to ancient custom, by lawful Magistrates under the Authority of His Majesty,
who granted them all ample and full power to this purpose.

In pursuance of these good intentions of the Citizens it was concluded at the
Meeting of the six Companies of the Merchants, to choose ten persons out of
every one of these six Companies, and to send them to Court, to attest not only
their services and fidelity to the King, but also to supplicate His Majesty to
return to Paris, it being so universally desired by all his faithful Subjects.
The Assembly met again the 28. at the Palace-Royal, where the aforesaid
Resolution of the six Companies of Merchants being proposed, they treated
immediately of providing a Guard for the City, that foreign Forces might not be
received in, and other Troops that continually passed to and fro; and to hinder
the sending out of Victuals and Ammunition to the Camp of the Confederates; and
that they should send to the Colonels to put this order punctually in
execution. Their meeting at the Palace-Royal was put off till the return of the
Deputies of the six Companies of Merchants from Court, at which time they hoped
to obtain the so much desired and longed for Peace.

He that was sent to Court before being returned, brought with him a new
peculiar Act of Oblivion granted by the King to the Inhabitants of Paris,
excluding the Parliament and the Princes, as those who by perverse
Interpretations had abused the former.

He brought also the Kings Letters to the Colonels, containing, after a fair
Preamble, express Order to keep strict Guard at the Gates, not to let any of
the Spanish, Lorrain, nor Princes Forces to enter, nor suffer the carrying out
of any sort of Provision for the Enemies Army; to search through all quarters
and houses where any Soldiers of the adverse party might be lodged, and drive
them presently out of the City; so that by this means every one returning to
his due obedience, there might not remain any obstacle to his Majesty's return,
assuring them that he would take particular notice of whatsoever they should
perform in this juncture of Affairs.

The Princes and Parliament being advertised of the Assembly, of the Message
from the six Companies of the Merchants to the Court, and of the Kings Letter
to the Colonels, the same day that they met upon the Duke of Beauforts Affairs,
concerning the duel with the Duke of Nemeurs, they were all of them troubled,
and so much the more, by reason that they had not received any Answer of the
Letter written by the Duke of Orleans to the Queen, although that the Duke d'
Anville had given them notice it was well received, and that they should have
suddenly a favorable Answer.

They debated on the prejudice which might happen to their party, if the
public and private Meetings and Assemblies of the Citizens, tending to open
sedition, continued as they began, and consulted how to remedy them; but
finding so many difficulties not to be surmounted, they resolved to send le
Sieur le Talon, Advocate-General, to the Court to renew the Treaty, and decreed
to prohibit the Assemblies, the wearing of paper or straw in their Hats; and
they nominated le Sieur Meusnier and Lesne Commissaries, to take information
concerning those who had been the first Authors of the Meetings at the
Palace-Royal; and some were of opinion that they should send for le Sieur
Prevost to the grand Chamber, to give an account to the Parliament of his
assisting at that Assembly; but this advice was not followed, most being of
opinion that this business was too nice to be handled without serious
consideration.

In the mean time the Sieur le Vieux and Pierre met the King at Mantes, where
he was then arrived from Compeigne by reason of the inconveniences which the
Court began to suffer in that City, and to be nearer Paris, that by his
Presence he might give more life to the Negotiations. They produced their
Commissions with all respectful and affectionate supplications, testifying to
his Majesty the good will of the people toward his service, and to the
re-establishment of his Authority. They were received graciously, and returned
to Paris the 28. of September with this following Answer.

That his Majesty was very well pleased, that it was the resolution of the
Communalty, to establish the ancient Orders, and to put every one in their due
obedience: and commended the decree made by them in conformity to his Commands,
not to suffer any sort of Provision, Arms or Ammunition, to be sent out to the
Enemies Camp, or to permit any Troops of the contrary party to come into the
City. That he was also well satisfied, that Brussel had voluntarily laid down
the Office of Provost of the Merchants, which he had taken upon him contrary to
the Laws, and in prejudice of the lawful Possessor; and as for the pretended
Sheriffs, who thought they might lawfully exercise their charge under pretense
of leaving it so soon as they should know his Majesty's pleasure, they could
not be ignorant that their Election was very much displeasing to him, seeing
that he had made it null and void by an Order of Parliament passed in his own
Presence, of which they had been sufficiently informed; and therefore he had
reason to take it ill, that these pretended Sheriffs, after such Advertisement
given them of their error, should still continue audaciously to exercise those
Offices, and did therefore again command them to give up their places without
delay, under pain of most severe punishments due to Rebels and Disturbers of
the public Peace.

As to his Return to Paris the substance of his answer was, that as soon as his
Enemies (and those who by abusing his Name and Authority to keep the people in
disobedience, had procured the destruction of the principal Inhabitants in the
Townhouse, and did still make use of the Spanish Forces to keep them in
sub^ection) should have left the Town, that then he would immediately return,
having drawn right to Paris to that intent.

His Majesty added, that as he was much contented and satisfied, that those who
had entered upon offices without a lawful title, and contrary to His Royal Will,
were discharged of their places, and from the Assemblies at the Townhouse; so
he declared that he could not for the future but disapprove and declare void
and unlawful whatsoever should be done at their Meetings in the Presence of the
Rebels and their Adherents, if they continued to appear there, or did any thing
by their order, or any ways favored their evil designs; of which he thought
fit to advertise the Inhabitants, that they might take care for all things, as
they should judge convenient and necessary, assuring himself that upon these
occasions they would give good proofs of their fidelity; of which His Majesty
would take particular notice, and give proof of his Royal gratitude to all
those who should be assisting in so important an occasion, as the Preservation
of the State, and the re-establishment of the Metropolis of his Kingdom to its
ancient splendor.

While Affairs passed in this manner at Court, they failed not at Paris to
attempt all manner of ways the Accomplishment of these designs; and the
Citizens growing daily more and more weary of the Spanish Troops, which lay
about Paris, a part of the Duke of Wirtenberg his baggage was plundered by the
people of St. Honore's street, near to the Croix du Teroir, whilst those who
conducted it were busy at some Taverns in lading of Muscat and Spanish Wines
for the Camp of the Confederates.

After this strict Order was given, that the Gates should be guarded, and none
of the Army to be permitted any more to enter the Town, esteeming it a
dishonor to the French name, that the enemies of their King and Country
should be seen publicly in their red Scarfs in the Capital City of the
Kingdom; whereat the Parliament and Princes were extraordinarily surprised,
perceiving that their Authority became every hour more weak and languishing,
being deprived of the support of the people, and the Citizens in Arms; but what
astonished them more was, to see the device of the Straw obscured by the
splendour of the white Scarfs and Ribands worn by many of the Kings faithful
Servants.

The Assembly at Palace-Royal was afterward advertised, that the Guards of the
Duke of Beaufort were to go out to Convoy the bread made at Gonesse; a Captain
of a Quarter being spoken to, and persuaded to cast away his Straw as a mark of
Sedition, and to take a white Scarf, the Colors of those who were Loyal; and
threatened withal, that if he did otherwise he should be set upon, seeing that
in the Assembly it was resolved to fall upon as many as should be found without
Scarfs or White paper about them; and that they should begin to execute this
design at the gate of St. Martin, where this Captain was to keep Guard, who
thereupon (and all his Company) very joyfully accepted of the white Colors,
and drank the Kings health and the Cardinals; obliging moreover the Captain of
the Duke of Beaufort's Guards to do the like, who going out at that Gate were
stopped, telling them that none must go out there without Passports from his
Majesty on his Generals; and that by the white colors they wore, they might
perceive they were the Kings Servants. The Captain answered, that he had a
Passport from the Duke of Orleans; they replied, that that was not the
question, but that they must drink the Kings Health and return back again,
which he was constrained to do, the Soldiers making use of their Hats in stead
of Glasses; all this was done, and not a man of that quarter offered to stir.
The Duke of Beaufort having notice, immediately took Coach to remedy this
Affair; but having understood the resolution of the Assembly, he stopped at the
Curates house of Saint Nicholas Parish, expecting while that Company should
come off the Guard.

After this beginning, there followed many happy occurrences and great
advantages to the Kings party, many in emulation of one another following this
example. The King being very much satisfied with these demonstrations of their
loyalty, to encourage them the more, commanded upon the 29. of September, that
the Passages should be opened for the conveying of Corn, Wine, Wood, and other
necessary Provisions for so numerous a people. The Answer afterward which he
gave to the six Companies of Merchants contained, That His Majesty was very
sensible of these new Testimonies of Affection and Fidelity from his beloved
City of Paris, and professed himself the more satisfied in that he discovered
in their looks the good intentions of their hearts by the tears which
accompanied their speeches. As to the new instances they made for his return to
Paris, he gave them the same Answer he had signified to the Deputies of the
Townhouse upon the same subject; of which he caused a Copy to be delivered into
their hands, adding only, That there was no need of applying themselves any
further to His Majesty for Peace, since he had already granted it them by the
Declaration of the Amnesty given in the Parliament at Pontoise; the form or
terms of which ought not at all to be censured by Subjects, seeing that the
most guilty and blameable, with perfect security, might therein find the
Pardon and Oblivion of all their Errors; but that they ought withal to oppose
them who were the cause of the continuation of the War, and made their
advantage by it: and these were the only persons to be complained of, seeing
that His Majesty for his part upon these occurrences had out of his
incomparable goodness granted (without any exception) whatsoever was pretended
to or desired, when the others had so often gone back from their word so
solemnly given, making use still of the Royal Authority, to the great prejudice
of His Majesty and the State, continuing armed contrary to their Promise, and
united with the declared Enemies of the Crown, keeping the Capital City of the
Kingdom in awe, by continual seditions and violences, sacking and ruining the
French by Foreiners; and to serve Spain, made desolate and destroyed France:
and therefore it being the interest of all the Inhabitants, to put an end to
these disorders in that City, he hoped that they would apply themselves with
all diligence to restore her to her former state, notwithstanding the
opposition of those who were enemies to the public good; he ended this Answer
with a demand which he made them to try their good intentions, and as a
business most necessary, which was, That the Inhabitants would re-establish in
their Offices, the Governor, the Prevost of the Merchants, and the Sheriffs
who had been turned out. Which being done, his Majesty would presently send
Orders to be observed in the Townhouse; assuring the six Companies of
Merchants of his entire satisfaction, good will, and Protection.

The Princes, the Parliament, and the whole Faction were very much disturbed at
this Message; and as they clearly saw that those of Paris had changed their
minds, and most earnestly sought for Peace, which was not a little destructive
to their designs, they applied themselves with all industry to find out means
to overcome the Kings Army by force of Arms, and make themselves Masters of the
Field; esteeming this the only way to maintain themselves in Paris, while it
remained deprived of that support which on all occasions it might deceive from
the Kings troops.

But to return to Mazarine, who arriving at Sedan, and from thence Bovillon out
of the Kingdom; there wanted not persons who interposed for the adjusting at
least of the Duke of Orleans with the Court.

The Cardinal de Retz, and the Marquess of Chasteauneuf, promising to
themselves, that if once his Royal Highness should return to Court, he might by
degrees regain His Majesty's favor, and taking his place again in the Council
they should not be left behind: To this end, with the consent of the Duke of
Lorrain, the Marquess of Saint Lambert was dispatched to the Court to begin the
Negotiation.

But the Queen and the Kings Officers, who were attent upon the return of
Mazarine and their own security, could in no wise consent that the Duke of
Orleans, a Confident of the Prince of Conde's and a Confederate of the
Spaniards, should meddle in the Government, considering that if the Duke of
Orleans, with his followers and Adherents, should insinuate themselves into the
Affairs of the Kingdom, there would be more danger then ever of diminishing the
Kings Authority, for the secure support whereof it is requisite, that no
Officer of State should depend upon any other then the King himself: for these
by diminishing the credit of others would endeavor to dispose of all things
after their own fancies, threatening whomsoever should oppose them to turn all
things upside down again.

The Prince of Conde, who was engaged with the Duke of Orleans by the Promise
of Marriage between his Royal Highness his Daughter and the Duke of Anguien,
and thought he went hand in hand with him; although he was left out of the
Treaty, might in time also have made his Peace with those advantages himself
desired, and the Duke of Orleans had promised.

Mazarine therefore making prudent reflections upon considerations so nice, who
though far from the Court, yet directed all things, was very sensible how
inconsiderate advice this must be, that exposed the Government to the will and
discretion of others, which under an absolute Monarch will admit of no
Companion.

These Affairs being thus on foot, the Princes and the Parliament stood much
upon the Point, that the Act of Oblivion granted by the King did not contain a
full abolition and pardon of what had been done in the last five years past;
nor was expressed in those terms which were desired, viz. in general, and
without conditions, but served only for the inhabitants of Paris, with design
that if they were once satisfied, not to matter much the Princes and Parliament.

They urged therefore, that the King ought to give full and irrevocable
Authority to the Duke of Orleans to form another without any exceptions, to be
ratified in the Parliament of Paris, where the Counselors gone to Pontoise
ought to appear, and this to be done in the Presence of the King himself; for
this cause the Parliament met often, some Letters were writ by the Duke of
Orleans, the Duke d' Anville and the Marquess of St. Lambert negotiated with
the Kings Council, and many things were done, the particular relation of which
would be too tedeous.

But Cardinal Mazarine knowing how prejudicial this would be to the Kings
Authority, by his Advice the granting of Pass-ports was absolutely denied to
those deputed by the Parliament, already declared invalid, holding firm to
their first resolutions; so that Affairs remained in the same posture as at
first, each party endeavoring to uphold their own opinions.

The third of October the Parliament in Paris being assembled to hear what News
the Marquess of St. Lambert brought from the Court, two Watermen were laid hold
of, who cried aloud, God bless the King and Cardinal Mazarine; and were
seconded by many others, they were led to the prison of Conciergery, and Order
given to draw up their Indictment, as also against diverse others, who cried the
same in several streets of Paris, giving out that such kind of Fellows were set
on by some that gave them money, on purpose to move the people to sedition.

This News being brought to Court, and besides that the Parliament continued to
proceed against some of those who met at the Assembly in the Palace-Royal; the
King with the Advice of His Council passed a Decree upon the fifth of October,
by which he cancelled and annulled all the aforesaid pretended proceedings,
informations, and orders, published, or to be published, imposing severe
penalties upon the Commissioners or Judges that should proceed any further,
commanding all the Inhabitants of Paris to execute His Majesty's Orders and
Commands.

In the mean time the Kings Army was at Villeneufue St. George, much
straightened and pressed hard upon by the Troops of the Princes and their
Confederates, who were superior in number, and in danger either to be forced as
they lay, or set upon in their retreat; seeing that for want of provisions and
forage many both men and horses died. This troubled the Court very much, and
above all Mazarine, who was the cause that the Army put themselves in that
place, and doubted some sinister event, the winning of the day consisting in
keeping the Kings Army near Paris, by which means those Practices were
fomented, which were managed by the Cardinals directions in that City in favor
of the King.

The Princes, who understood the importance of this business, and that if the
Kings Army should preserve themselves all their designs were ruined, omitted
nothing, either to overcome them, or reduce them by famine and sufferings to
the utmost despair; but the nearness and delights of Paris, together with the
sickness which happened to the Prince of Conde, Wirtemberg, and many other of the
Principal Commanders, (which may be truly attributed to an effect of the Divine
Providence) was the break-neck of their party; but besides the sickness of
these Princes, the Dukes of Lorrain and Beaufort, and most of the other Chief
Officers, with a considerable number of the best Soldiers, were also in the
City, as well for the suspicion they had that the Citizens might rise, as to
see what was most expedient to be done in this wavering condition of the
inconstant people, and tired out by the long continuance of these disturbances.
Marshall Turenne, a no less prudent then valiant Captain, stood always
vigilant to observe those moments, which opportunely taken bring great
advantage to those who know how to make use of them in War; and being
advertised of all that past, after a short Conference with his Colleague the
Mareshal de la Ferte Seneterre, he resolved to get out of these streights, and
bring his Army into a securer place, and more proper for their subsistence.

Having caused therefore the Baggage and Artillery to pass over the Seen
October 4. in the night, upon the Bridges of Boats which he had there, at break
of day he discamped with such order and silence, that the Army was got over
before they were discovered by the Enemies Sentinels.

There was no other General-Commander left in the other Camp but the Count de
Tavannes, who perceiving (though late) the March of Turenne, caused presently
to sound to Horse, and put his Army in order to follow him, and fight him. But
the Marshall continuing his march under covert of the River quickly arrived at
Corbeil, a place held by the King, where passing the Seen over the
Stone Bridge, very happily and to his great reputation he withdrew himself from
all danger, and encamped upon the River Marne, between Meaux and Lagny, getting
provisions for his Army from all the neighboring Country, and observing the
motion of the Enemy with so much advantage to His Majesty's Interest, that this
action (becoming a great and experienced Commander) was acknowledged to be the
saving of the Kings Party, and one of the most celebrated acts of this Prince
and true Master of the art of War.

This blow brought extraordinary confusion and astonishment to the Princes,
particularly to the Prince of Conde, who showed himself very much grieved at
the negligence of his Officers, reproching Tavannes as if he had lost his sense
of Hearing, saying, If he had been well, so favorable an occasion should never
have escaped his hands; but there being no help for things past, and Fortune
changing, being weary of staying in the midst of Confusion, and so many
different Humors, upon the 7th. following the whole Army of the Princes drew
up at the end of the Suburbs of S. Anthony, and encamped near to the Castle of
Vincennes, to keep Paris in awe. The King and Court were already come to Mantes
to pass the Seen, (the Bridges of Poissy and Meulan being broken down) and so
to go forwards to S. Germain, with intent to enter into Paris when Affairs
should be brought to that pass to which they seemed to tend every day more and
more. The Parisiens were resolved to free themselves of these miseries before
they were irrecoverable: Wherefore following one another example, and
concurring in the same mind, as Fortune abandoned the Princes, so they inclined
more and more to the Kings side. The Prince of Conde therefore perceiving that
the tempest which threatened him was near at hand, and began to provide for his
own safety and his Armies by withdrawing with all speed from Paris. And because
by his departure and the Kings return they foresaw the quiet of Paris, and the
recalling of Mazarine, many strove to second the rising fortune of that
Minister of State; and even among the Princes own friends, upon this turn of
Fortune, some changed their inclinations, and in particular the Count de
Chavigny.

Ever since the Cardinals return into France he had thoughts of closing with
him, considering that if his Enemies were not able to ruin him at a distance,
they would be less able to do it when he should appear at Court, and be Master
of all affairs.

Besides, at this time the Coadjutor was made Cardinal, his capital Enemy; who
might (he feared) be made chief Minister if Mazarine was kept out. He resolved
therefore to come to an agreement with Mazarine, so as to oblige him; and that
his Authority might be limited. He entered therefore upon a secret Treaty for
adjusting the Prince with the Cardinal, and replacing of Conde, there seeming
an apparent necessity of making use of him; and that he might live quietly at
Court, they would find means that he should not only preserve his Fortune, but
increase it.

But as it is not always easy to walk straight between two Praecipices, so in
the end he found himself deceived in his Maxims, on the one side while he
thought himself secure; on the other, for whether it was that he was resolved
to forsake the Prince, as he was accused, that he was not Loyal to his
Interests, or whether he would have necessitated him to make peace, by
persuading him that the Duke of Orleans would otherwise conclude it without
him; or whether indeed he preferred his own and the Courts Interest before the
Princes, he made the Abbot Fouquet believe, to whom the Cardinal committed the
management of this affair, that if the Prince did not conclude the peace upon
those terms which he thought reasonable, he would so order it that the Duke of
Orleans should quit his Party. The Letter which Fouquet wrote to the Secretary
Tillier, to inform him of this, was taken by one of the Prince's party, and
presently delivered into his hands; who perceiving that his confidence was
misplaced in Chavigny, complained of it to persons who were not much Chavigny's
Friends, and that in terms injurious to his Reputation, yet would not openly
fall out with him.

The noise of this being divulged about Paris, and increased by the malice of
those who were engaged in the same disorders, obliged Chavigny to justify
himself to the Prince at a Conference held between them, from whence he came
out so mortified and concerned, for having dealt with a Prince after this
manner, from whom he had received such high Honors, that returning to his
house he threw himself in despair upon his bed, and after a Fever of six days,
increased by the passions of his mind, he died the 19th. of October.

This was the end of Lion de Bouttilier, Count de Chavigny, in the 44th. year
of his age; a person who for being related to the deceased Cardinal Richlieu
was admitted into His Majesty's Council at 19 years old, at 24 he was made
Secretary of State, and at 34 Minister of State, had the care of the most
important affairs of the Crown, and after the death of Lewis XIII. he was
nominated Plenipotentiary for the Treaty of Munster; a person of a quick Wit, a
haughty Spirit, of a ready Judgment, and covetous of Glory and Greatness, to
procure which he spared no Industry.

In the mean time the Parliament and the Assemblies at the Townhouse met often
upon the occurrent emergencies, where all the well-wishers to the public
thought themselves obliged to deliver the poor Country people from the
insolences of the Soldiery, and especially of the Lorrainers, who destroyed
and wasted every thing. Upon the 9th. of October in the Assembly held at the
Townhouse diverse were chosen and deputed to go to Court, and to entreat His
Majesty again to return to Paris; but because His Majesty did not admit of
public Messages from an Assembly where the Duke of Beaufort (pretended
Governor of Paris) used to be present, contrary to the Kings Prohibition; so
that by consequence the Assembly was accounted unlawful: it was proposed in
Parliament, and concluded on, that the Duke of Beaufort should be desired to
renounce his Charge voluntarily, that he might not hinder the conclusion of the
Peace which was so earnestly sought for by all; wherefore Beaufort remitted it
into the hands of the Duke of Orleans, who had conferred it upon him.

The whole Body of the Militia of Paris was also resolved for Peace; and
knowing that the presence of the King was necessary for the consummating of it,
they made choice at the same time of 250 persons, Colonels, Officers, and other
Inhabitants, to go and render their due respects to His Majesty, and to entreat
him that he would honor his good City of Paris with his return. These Officers
having given notice of this to the Court, and desired the accustomed Pasports;
they were immediately granted, and the King himself wrote to them, with Orders
to come to S. Germans October. 14. where he intended to be that night: and
besides this Letter to all in general, he sent one in particular to every
Colonel, in which he thanked them for the affection and goodwill which they
expressed to his service. He wrote also to the Communalty, and commanded them
to call a general Assembly, and to restore to their Offices the Prevost of the
Merchants and the Sheriffs, which had been turned out.

The Prince of Conde seeing by all these changes that his longer stay at Paris
would be to no purpose, and that every thing was in readiness to receive the
King, he resolved to hasten his departure. The Duke of Lorrain also took leave
of his Brother in Law the Duke of Orleans, upon the 11th. of October, to follow
his Army which were on their march not far off; but at his going out of S.
Martins Gate the Guard stopped him for not having a Pasport from the Communalty,
and were very near giving him some affront, for some of them reproching him for
all those evils which had happened to France, proposed to have him imprisoned
and detained till his Forces were out of the Kingdom, and he had given
satisfaction for the damage they had done to the Country about: but this was
not put in execution for the respect they bore to the Duke of Orleans; but they
gave him a thousand injurious words, and the next morning they permitted him to
depart upon His Royal Highness command. The Prince of Conde went away two days
after, together with the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Duke of Rochefocaut, the
Prince of Tarante, and many other peesons of Quality, who resolved to take
their Fortunes with him. At his going away he said as he passed through the
streets, That the Parisiens hoped for the return of the Court, but that would
not end the War. He went afterward toward Rheims, a great City and Metropolis
of Champagne, with intention to lay hold of what he could in that Province,
that he might the better winter there, under the Protection of Stenay and
Mauson, two places upon the Mose, which held for him.

At his departure from Paris he left a printed Manifesto, in which he set forth
how much he had done for the public, and in particular for the Parisiens,
exhorting them not to trust to the Court, and to believe, that he could by the
force of Arms have constrained them to make Peace.

Conde therefore and all the Officers of the Army, having thus abandoned Paris,
upon the fifteenth following, the aforesaid Colonels and Officers went to St.
Germains, Accompanied with two hundred Citizens more, who joined with them upon
the way.

They had a favorable audience in which they expressed the general desire of
all, to see these mists cleared up by the splendor of his Royal Presence, and
assured His Majesty of their inviolable faith, and entire Obedience, engaging
faithfully their word, that they would be all in arms upon any occasion ready
to spend their lives and fortunes in his Royal service, beseeching him not to
refuse them this favor, but to be touched at their sighs and tears, proceeding
from their sincere and zealous devotion: protesting to him finally, that he
should find nothing from them but due observance, and a perfect propensity to
make good the Character which they bore of His most humble and most faithful
subjects.

The King Answered them with his own mouth, that he should be mindful all his
lifetime, of the service they had done him upon this occasion, and desired
them to be always assured of his affection; and that although the disorders,
stirr^^ up by those who were revolted might oblige him to take some other
journey, yet nevertheless seeing they had so great a desire, he was resolved to
go with the first occasion to Paris, and would signify to the Prevost of the
Merchants and the Sheriffs, what he thought necessary to that effect; the
Deputies gave him thanks, and did their obeisance to their Majesty's severally,
who were pleased to receive them with testimonies of extraordinary satisfaction.

After this they were treated with a Dinner, and had leave to depart to Paris,
with so much joy of the people, that seeing them pass through the streets, and
hearing the News of the Kings sudden return, they loaded them with
benedictions, and deafned them with their continual shoutings of Vive le Roy.

The same day that the Colonels went to St. Germains, his Majesty before he
left Mantes, answered the Letters which the Duke d' Anville had delivered him
from the Duke of Orleans, to desire an Act of Oblivion in better form then the
former; the Contents were, that the King did not desire any further Declaration
from the said Duke, it being sufficient if he made his word good which he had
so often given to lay down his Arms, and send the foreign Troops to the
Frontiers thereby to free Paris, his Majesty having nothing more to do, seeing
he had already published a General Amnesty, and such an one as the most
seditious could not find what more to add to it for their security, and less
to pretend that it should be registered at Paris, seeing that it was done
publicly in the Parliament at Pontorse, so that his Majesty having
anticipated all that the Duke desired of him without any reservation, there
remained nothing but that he on his side should perform his Promises. And that
therefore his Request for Passports was superfluous, and from the purpose,
because it tended to no other end, but to gain time, till the Spanish Troops
commanded by the Duke of Wirtenberg, were drawn near Paris to join with those
at the Prince of Conde, and to amuse the people, whilst that another Body of
the Spanish Army, under the Command of the Prince of Ligne should advance into
the Kingdom; which Forces were designed to keep Paris in that servitude, under
which it now suffered, and to hinder His Majesty's Return.

So soon as the Colonels beforementioned, were departed, it was variously
debated at the Counsel, whether the Court, according as they had resolved,
should return to Paris or no. They who apprehended some danger of receiving
affronts, by reason that there were still diverse ill-affected persons, said,
that there was no trusting to the people, who being always inconstant, are apt
to be led away with every Novelty, and to forget all Promises; and therefore
they ought to walk cautiously to secure themselves from falling into new
inconveniences.

The greater part of the Counsel was of this opinion, adding that they ought
not to trust those who had deceived them so often, or to think to find faith
amongst persons, who with such brutish insolence had shown themselves
unfaithful; that to forsake the King, and now again to forsake their friends,
whom they had so often protested never to leave, was an Argument of an
inconstancy, which was as easy to promise, as not to perform. That this City,
by its outrages committed against His Majesty and his Officers, had rendered it
self unworthy of the Presence of the King and his Court, neither would it be
well thus by the easiness of the Pardon to encourage subjects to commit new
misdemeanors.

But Prince Thomas of Savoy, who had the chief Management of Affairs, and who
being a Stranger, examined matters with no other passion then that of serving
their Majesty's discreetly, weighing the prejudice they might receive by
letting slip out of their hands such favorable opportunities, proposed and
maintained, yet with the Advice of the Cardinal, that they ought to enter into
the City without loss of time, and drive from thence, the principal Leaders of
the sedition, and as the Princes had made use of the favor of the people to
strengthen their party, so the King ought to do the same to overthrow their
Faction.

Marshall Turenne was also of this opinion, who considering that the Country
about Paris was wasted, and the Kings Army not well provided for, represented
to them the necessity of making themselves Masters of Paris, in respect of the
abundance of all things there; and that the King might be said to be without
his Crown, so long as he was deprived of that potent City.

The opinion of these Princes, of so great reputation and experience,
overcoming all Arguments produced by others to the contrary, was at length
unanimously received; and the rather, because both of them assured their
Majesty's upon their words and lives, that they should be received with all
testimonies of affection, and that the Citizens, to wash off that spot they had
contracted by what was past, would with so much the more readiness procure the
satisfaction of the Court, as they had before acted to its displeasure.

In order to this, the Marshall of the Hospital, the Prevost of the Merchants,
and the Sheriffs, being restored to their places, followed the Colonels to
Paris, those of the contrary party endeavored to hinder their entrance into the
City, persuading them that there could be no security for their persons amongst
those people, who had their very names in abomination. The Duke of Orleans in
particular told them, that not being able to promise them any security, they
ought to consider to what danger they exposed themselves; but these threatenings
took no effect, for they being informed of the good intention of the people to
receive the King, doubted not but to be welcome also, and therefore freely
entered.

The Marshall of the Hospital took presently possession of the Bastille, and
the Arsenal, which the Sieur de Louvieres son to Counselor Brussell quitted,
and Orders were given through all the streets and quarters of the City, to keep
the people quiet, and in obedience to the King.

After this His Majesty ordered the Parliament of Pontoise, to be at Paris
upon the 22. following in the Palace of the Lovure, where he designed to lodge
for his greater security, the King of England who lodged there removing to the
Palace-Royal, he wrote also to the Communalty to advertise them, that his
Entrance should be on the same day, and that therefore they ought to take away
the Guards from the Gates, and all the Inhabitants fall to the exercise of
their several Professions and traffic, which was presently done. To-
Mademoiselle d' Orleans, it was signified, that the Kings Brother intending to
lodge in her Apartment in the Lovure, was therefore to be left free, which she
submitted to, with some displeasure, and removed into the Hostel of the
Ambassadors extraordinary, in the suburbs of St. Germain.

On Monday morning the Parliament met, where the President Nesmond declared
that he had received a Letter with the Kings Seal, and that His Majesty had
sent the like to each Counselor in particular, in which they were appointed
to meet on the morrow Morning at the Lovure, there to understand His Majesty's
pleasure concerning the present Affairs. The Duke of Orleans replied, that he
knew nothing of it, and some other Counselors, about twelve in number, said,
that they had received no such Letters, with much resentment and paleness of
face, perceiving that all their designs were totally ruined, and those of the
Kings Party being called to give in their opinions, they gave their voices for
the adjourning of the Parliament to the Gallery of the Lovure, although those
who had received no Letters from His Majesty, as the others had, and that knew
themselves not to be in favor, endeavored to oppose it, representing the
prejudice the Privileges of Parliament might receive from this unaccustomed
Novelty. The President Nesmond made it appear, that the King was Master to hold
it in what part of Paris he pleased, alleging that formerly in the Reign of
Henry the second, and Henry the third, it was held in the Tournelle, and in the
house of Saint Paul, and that the Chamber of Vacations had ordered the Canopy
of the Kings Seat of Justice to be removed into the said Gallery, and they
ought to obey; to this the major part consenting, they determined to meet the
next morning by Sunrise in their Scarlet, at the place appointed.

Upon the 22. of October the King departed from St. Germains, dined at Ruel,
and from thence sent the Count of Nogent to the Duke of Orleans to give him
notice of the Kings journey, and to exhort him, as from himself, to come and
meet the King, and do his respects to him, assuring him of His Majesty's favor
and kind reception. The Duke of Orleans was surprised, not thinking that the
King would in earnest come and trust himself in Paris, where the inquietude of
those spirits who had so highly out-raged him, was not yet appeased, but the
effect confirmed how fallacious those designs are which are founded upon the
inconstancy of the multitude, naturally inclined to follow what flies them, and
fly from that which follows them. He answered Nogent coldly, and desired eight
days time to consider of it, for he could not, nor would not do any thing
without the Prince of Conde, with whom he was bound in a strict League of
Friendship. The King being come to St. Clou, hearing nothing of the Duke of
Orleans his coming to meet him, but rather that there was little appearance of
it, he sent the Duke d' Anville for the same purpose to him, whereat the Duke
was much perplexed with two great Considerations; On the one side, he was
touched with remorse, that he should deny his Affection and due respect to the
King his Nephew; on the other side; his faith and fair dealing with his friend
the Prince of Conde, would be called in question by all the world should he
proceed, in this perplexity therefore at last he resolved not to stir, and it
is thought that he took this resolution by the Counsel of Cardinal de Retz, who
promised to himself, that if the Duke were resolved to stay in Paris, he might
make his party strong enough against the Court by the great number of people,
his dependents and followers; but whether the Duke could not, or would not
enter upon this design, the Proposition was rejected, as shall be related.

A great number of Persons of the better sort, besides all the Officers and
Magistrates went out to meet the King, and returned with him the same night to
Paris: His Majesty came in late by reason of his staying by the way, expecting
the Duke of Orleans his Answer, not thinking it convenient to come into the
City, if the Duke did not go out, or promise to do so the next Morning.

At the Gate of the Louvre the King was received by the Cardinal de Retz, with
a great number of Prelates, and other Persons of Quality.

The Sieur de Sevin was sent the same Evening to the Duke in His Majesty's
Name, to give him notice that he should retire to his dwelling at Lemours, he
made Answer with some resenting words. They consulted again what expedient to
take, some insisted not to obey, but that the Duke should defend himself in his
Palace in St. Germains suburbs, from whence it was no easy matter for the
Kings Guards alone to drive him out, for they judged that the People would
never take Arms against the Kings Uncle, especially seeing that a great number
of the Parisiens were dependent upon him, and on other Lords of his party;
amongst these was the Cardinal de Retz, who was in favor with a great part of
the people, as well in respect that he was their Pastor, as for his liberality
in all things, and chiefly to the poor; He insisted, that if the Inhabitants
that were affectionate to their party, were united, with the help that they
might receive from those of the Suburbs of Saint Germain, they should be able
to contest with the Court, if in case they should set upon them, and upon
occasion they might call the Prince of Conde back again with the Army, by which
means it might so happen, that their Majesty's to avoid living in the midst of
such confusions, upon the confidence of the Inhabitants so much given to
change, would return to St Germains, or else the business being brought to a
Treaty, and this Cardinal entering as Mediator, he should by this means set
himself right again at Court, and perhaps partake in the Management of Affairs
of State, which was thought to be the scope of all his Actions.

The Duke would not embrace this Counsel, but resolved to obey, and give way,
retiring the next Morning to Limours, with the Dukes of Beaufort and Rohan, and
other Lords of his party. Mademoiselle went to Fargeaux a house of hers near
the Loire.

It was very fortunate for Mazarine, that Orleans refused to agree; for if
after the Agreement he had remained at Paris, the people would have thought
that all this was brought about by his contriving, whereby he would have
increased his reputation with the Parisiens, and maintained his former
Authority, so that Mazarine would not have dared to return to Court, whilst
there was a strong party in Paris against him, and especially the Cardinal de
Retz, who for his generosity, was more generally beloved then Mazarine, who in
his Actions showed somewhat of covetousness, and was more sparing both in his
expenses, and in gratifying his friends and servants. The King therefore being
absolutely restored to his full Authority, and the Duke deprived of all
obedience, and a great way from Paris, with all his Adherents, those happy
events which succeeded afterward were more easily brought to pass.

The next Morning being the 23. all the Courts of Parliament met in the Gallery
of the Louvre, except those persons who had not received particular Letters
from the King, as the President le Bailleul, son of the late Chancellor to the
Queen, and Surintendant of the Finances, De Thou and Viole; the Counselors
Brussell, Genou, Portail, Brisac, Croyssi, Foquet, Machault, and Martineau. At
this Meeting they made four Declarations; the first was, for the reuniting of
the two Parliaments; the second, the General Amnesty; the third, was a
Prohibition to the Parliament, not to meddle in any matters but civil and
criminal, according to the Laws; and the fourth, was to nominate those who were
by the Kings ordet to retire, viz. the forementioned, and Counselor Bitaut,
to whom a Letter had been sent by a mistake.

The Duke of Beaufort, of Rohan, of Rochefoucaut, Frontailles, le Bollay,
Penis, the Domestics of the Prince of Conde, of the Duchess of Longueville,
the Wives and Children of all those who were then in the service of the
Princes, and in the places which they held, as well in Guienne as elsewhere,
had order to be gone from Paris, and not to return upon any pretense soever,
without express leave from his Majesty these being the persons accused, who
always perverted the Parliament, and made the people discontent and seditious;
there were also express orders made against all things contained in the third
Declaration.

The same day the Queen of England, and the Duchess of Chevreuse, went to
visit the Duchess of Orleans who remained in Paris, by reason of her being
great with Child, and the Duchess of Chevreuse told her from the Queen, that
she had liberty to stay in her Palace.

The Duchess was very much surprised at the Novelty of it, and answered in
modest expressions, that she could not leave the Duke her husband, and seeing
that she could not take a journey any otherwise in the condition she was in,
she would be carried in men's arms, and prepared for it; but she received
express Orders from the Duke to stay, and not to hazard her life, being so near
her t^^e; which she did, and was brought to bed of a Daughter a few days after.

Prince Thomas went also to visit her, and assured her that it was never his
opinion at the Counsel, that the Duke should withdraw from Court, where if he
had appeared; he would have been received by their Majesty's with extraordinary
testimonies of their cordial affections.

But because it was not thought good, that so great a Prince should be left
under the notion of the Kings enemy, the Wednesday following the Duke d'
Anville was sent to Limours to treat with him, where the King desiring that
Cardinal Mazarine might be comprehended, they could not agree; the Duke
continuing firm in his resolution, never to be friends with him more, nor to
come to Court so long* as he should have the management of Affairs; but in
every thing else he should be ready to give His Majesty all manner of
satisfaction.

The Secretary Tellier, and others of the Kings Ministers went some days after
to try to gain him: but the Duke, that he might not seem mistaken in his
deliberations, would not yield to their reasons; and having at length given
notice of this to the Prince of Conde, by the Sieur de Godovin,
Field-Mareschal, whom he sent expressly to him, and receiving Answer that the
Prince was of the same opinion with the Duke of it was concluded in this
manner, that he was contented to live quietly at Blois, that he would call back
his Forces from the Prince of Conde's Army, and unite them to the Kings, upon
condition that they might not be employed immediately against the said Prince,
to whom, by reason of the entire friendship that he professed to him, he could
not be wanting in what unfortunate estate soever he might be cast.

The Affairs of the Duke of Orleans being concluded in this manner, he executed
punctually all that was agreed upon, and withdrew himself from the care of all
worldly affairs, applying himself to live quietly, and free from all
disturbance. The Duke of Beaufort went to live at Vendosme, and the rest of
those who were exiled, leaving Paris, retired to their Countrey-houses, very
much grieved; but especially when they saw Mazarine triumphant in their
misfortunes.

The President Maison and Counselor Vedeau proposed to assemble the Chambers
of Inquest to treat upon means how they might protect their Companions fallen
into disgrace, and gave out that they would rather renounce their places, then
support a grievance so prejudicial to the public dignity. But the greater part
being of another opinion, the Chambers met not, and Maison being sent for to
the Louvre received a sharp reprehension, with some threathings, which were
afterward put in execution; for he and Vedeau were also banish^d; some of these
were backward to quit Paris, but it helped nothing, being constrained to do it
for fear of greater violence. Only Brussel being old, poor, and without any
Countrey-house, did not stir from his in Paris, where he remained privately,
saying boldly, That he feared nothing, because he was guilty of nothing; that
if the Court desired his life they might take it, for he was now old enough and
for a year or two more or less he cared very little, seeing that the praises of
good men have their birth from the bosom of death. These expressions made deep
impression in the hearts of many of the people, whose spirits were not yet
quieted, and who had not forgot the good will they had had for him, nor their
Prejudices against the Court.

The Court took no notice of this, and made as if they believed he were out of
the Town, being out of Commerce and sight of the people; Brussel therefore
remained private and retired, in the City, although he was banished by name.

Afterward, there was very good order taken for the Government of the City,
the security of Paris consisting in winning the affection of the people, which
succeeded happily by the help of him who governed in a time, when by the
weakness of the Court they might have expected great misfortunes; it was no
small marvel, not to say a miracle, to see in so short a time the fury and
indignation of a multitude appeased of its own accord, which boasted of nothing
more then their firm and immutable resolutions, of maintaining their own
phrenzies; to see the Meeting of the Fronda broken and dispersed, the
Parliament curbed, the most audacious brought low; and lastly, the King
triumphing more by the Power of Justice, of his Innocence and Mildness, then by
the force of his Strength and Authority.

Whilst things pass in this manner at Paris, many new disturbances broke out at
Bourdeaux. Those of the Faction called de l' Olmiere dismantled the Palace du
Ha, and committed many insolences upon those of the Parliament, so that there
was great disorder amongst them. The Parliament sought by all means to keep this
Faction under, but in vain, seeing it was backed by the greater part of the
common people; Mazarine failed not also to use all industry, to appease these
disorders, endeavoring to sow discord amongst them, and to render them
diffident of one another; and in the end obtained his intent, as shall be
related.

The Spaniards in the meanwhile engaged in the siege of Barcellona, failed not
to do their utmost for the gaining of that most important place.

The Cardinal, though absent, took care that the King gave necessary Orders for
the relief of it: and the Marquess de St. Andre Monbrun was commanded to march
from Piemont into Catalonia, with a good number of Horse and Foot; which he did
with all speed, and there ensued diverse exploits. The besieged making a Sally
by night out of the gate of Trussana upon the 16. of July 1652. with design to
drive the enemy further off, assaulted and took the Fort upon the Mountain of
Mongirick; but not having furnished it with Provision and Ammunition, it was
attacqued again, and retaken by the Spaniards giving good quarter.

St. Andrew Montbrun had relieved the Town, if he had had money enough for
Provisions to have put into it, and for the maintaining his Army, for having
happily attaqued the line. He entered in, but was afterward forced to retire
for want of Provisions; and the Horse mutinying by reason of the great
hardships they endured; the Spaniards took all the places which are beyond upon
the Seacoast, from Palamos to Barcelona; and so deprived the besieged of that
little which used to be brought in to them by night in small barks, so that
being reduced to the greatest extremities, upon the eleventh of October the
Marshall de la Motte capitulated with Don John of Austria for the surrender,
and so that City returned again under the obedience of His Catholic Majesty.

Upon the 21 of October the same year, neither the French nor the Savoyards
being able to relieve Casal in Italy, the Governor thereof Monsieur de St.
Angel was constreined to surrender it upon Articles, and to put the Citadel
into the hands of the Duke of Mantua's Captains, who put in a Garrison of his
own soldiers, laughing at them who imagined, and even after the taking of it,
were so confident to maintain, that the Spaniards should have entered the Town,
and not the Mantuans. But the Marquess of Caracena kept his word punctually
with the Duke in all what he had promised, in so much that his Highness
thinking it convenient for the security of that place, to put in a Garrison of
German Soldiers; he proposed to take in some of those which had served in the
Spanish Army, after they should be disbanded by the Spaniards, and had taken an
Oath of Allegiance to him, but the Spaniard would not consent to it, left there
might be some suspicion of deceit in this, neither would he suffer any of his
to enter into the Town, nor would he go himself, but in Company of the Duke of
Mantua, who came thither a few days after.

The Savoyards not being able to relieve Casale, assaulted and took
Crescentino, and would have obtained their desired intents, if those of
Montferrat had corresponded with them, but they being very faithful to their
Prince, were assisting toward the Recovery of the Town.

The Duke of Mantua declared the French Plenipotentiaries, that whenever his
Territory of Montferrat should be restored to its former estate, and put
peaceably into his hands, without trouble or injury to the Treaty of Chirasco,
he would presently renounce the three thousand Crowns a month, which the
Empress was to give him for the payment of the Garrison, and maintain it at his
proper charge, without any ones help, This his Highness did to take away all
jealousy or pretense, which the French might have upon this account, though
this was not his principal motive; for it is certain that he had not the least
imagination of letting this most noble place go out of his hands again, which
rendered him conspicuous to all Italy, and made him esteemed by both Crowns, and
this was always the opinion of the Marquess de la Val.

But these Declarations of the Dukes and his Agents availed little; for things
being diversely suggested at the Court of France, suspicion had such force, that
they judged always sinisterly; nor could the Kings Ministers of State rest
satisfied, after the loss of so important a place, and which rendered their
Authority so considerable to all Italy.

Most of the other Italian Princes grew jealous also that Casale should at
length fall into the hands of the Spaniards, and therefore lamented that the
French had not provided against it in time, which they said, they might have
done very easily, if they had not busied themselves more in persecuting
Cardinal Mazarine, and overthrowing his Counsels, then in taking care for the
concerns of the Crown; their Jealousies and Suspicions were also much more
increased by the report which went about that the Spaniards after they had
driven the French out of Casale, were in a close Treaty with the Court of
Savoy, soothing their chief Ministers, with a belief that his Catholic Majesty
would restore Vercelli, drive the French from Pignerol, and the Citadel of
Turin, make up the differences with Mantua, and perhaps espouse the Infanta to
the Duke of Savoy, by which insinuations they went about to gain that house,
and keeping the French beyond the Mountains, restore Peace to Italy, and their
own Authority to its former splendor.

These Propositions were hearkened to by the Piemontesi, who opened their ears
with no little attention, and the more by reason that they were fearful that
whilst his Christian Majesty was involved in Civil Wars, and not able to
contribute to the defense of Piemont, the Spaniards might make some
considerable Progress, so that if they should defer the remedy to another time,
it might so happen that they should find neither time nor remedy.

These Treaties cast a great cloud upon the Affairs of the Court of France. The
Cardinal particularly considering the Prejudices which the King might receive,
if the Spaniards after they had settled their Affairs in Italy, should employ
all their forces in Flanders and Catalonia; he endeavored with all industry, by
the means of the Ambassador Servient, and the Abbot of Aille, to keep the
Savoyards in hopes, of a speedy and certain care of their Affairs, so that
Mazarine being in great credit, and strict friendship with the house of Savoy,
his word alone prevailed more then all other means to elude the Artifices of
the Ministers of the (...) but because the troubles at home permitted not at
that time the effecting of those things, which the necessity of affairs
required, he sought no further at present, then to keep Piemont united with the
Court, by putting them in hopes of restoring into their hands Verva and
Villeneufve d' Astinelle, and of the Honor of treating their Ambassadors for
the future, equal to those of Kings.

Besides these Honors, the Count de Quince General of the French Forces in
Piemont was sent to them, who arrived at Turin in December, accompanied with a
great number of Officers and Persons of Quality.

Mazarine who amongst these dangerous storms had saved the Kings Authority from
imminent shipwreck, made himself known to all the World, for one of the most
expert and undaunted Pilots, that sails in the Ocean of Policy; so soon as ever
he saw the Whirlwindes of those commotions which had so furiously agitated the
whole Kingdom allayed, by the Presence of the King in Paris. He applied himself
with all sollicitousness to search out means proper not only to calm the
intestine troubles; but to raise up the trampled upon credit and reputation of
the Regal Dignity. Wherefore he judged it would be easier to render it esteemed
and honored by pardoning then by punishing. This being the Cardinals constant
Maxim, to win upon the generous humor of the French Nation, rather by gentle
usage then by violence of Arms.

He began therefore to treat with those who were most contumacious. He was of
opinion, that the sole love of the King ought to be the Quintessence fit to
nourish that Concord amongst subjects, which is interrupted by nothing more
then by the apprehensions of hatred and revenge. He revived new Treaties and
Propositions of Peace with the Prince of Conty, with the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, with the Count d' Harcourt, the Count d' Ognon, and with all the
other Princes and great Lords of high spirit. He sent also an Intimate of his
to negotiate closely with the Prince of Conde, to pacify him, and remove him
from the Spanish service, offering him the Sovereignty of some state out of
France: but whether the Prince found himself too far engaged with the Catholic
King, or whether the Nobleness of his mind would not suffer him to be worse
then his word without cause or apparent reason, or whether he judged the
dignity offered him inconsistent, or moved with other reasons or regards, the
effect of these Propositions vanished.

The Prince declared, that he had no ambition of Sovereignty, but was contented
with the honor which he had of being first Prince of the Blood Royal, that he
knew not how to trust him any more, who under the pretense of friendship had
deceived him; nor could he esteem him faithful, who had not shown himself so to
him, that these offers might be like those Gifts sent exchangeably between
Hector and Ajax. That we ought to give least credit to things which seem most
credible, and to consider that the more any one offers and promises out of
Necessity, the sooner he will fail when his turn is served; that he knew
sufficiently the Cardinal to be a person as ready to promise much, as
industrious afterward not to observe more then what he thought convenient for
his interest, and protested finally that he would not consent to any Agreement,
but wherein the Catholic King should be included, to whom he professed himself
highly obliged.

The Envoy labored to draw him from these sinister opinions, putting him in
mind that he was a Frenchman, and of the Blood Royal of Bourbon, and that he
had too much honor and glory, not to be hereafter made the object of the Envy
and Jealousy of a Nation so emulous of the French. That to lay foundations on
the Promises of those who built upon the hopes of others, was no sure
structure; That friends follow the fortune and not the persons of their
friends; That he abandoning France, the French abandoned him; That to a prudent
man, his Country ought to be as dear to him as the shell to the Tortoise; and
that as he was sincerely his faithful servant, he declared freely, that it was
much more honorable for a Peace, as he was, to bear the Title of Cousin to His
Christian Majesty, then that of Servant to the King of Spain: He used also many
other urgent Reasons, but all in vain, for the hatred and contempt which he had
for the Cardinal did at that time turn away the mind of the Prince, so that
the Cardinal not being able to prevail with him, he endeavored to disengage
his brother the Prince of Conty from his party, and caused to be proposed to
him very advantageous conditions, and such as were worthy his consideration,
thinking that if he could gain Conty, he might by that means reduce Bourdeaux
and Guienne to their former obedience, seeing that this Prince had a powerful
party in that City and Province. The Cardinal thought to draw from hence great
advantages to the Kings service, by ihe Jealousies which the Spaniards might
have of Conde, and by the treatment he might receive from them, which would be
slender enough, when they should see him deprived of those supports which
rendered him so considerable; but although Conty was no great friend to his
brother, and had a mind much more pliable, yet he was fixed, to satisfy his
Sister the Duchess of Longueville, that without her he would resolve of
nothing: and she not being able to disengage her self from that intimacy she
held with Conde, nor from the hopes which were suggested to her by the
generosity of his mind, the attempts on this side were also rendered fruitless;
and by consequence all those Practices weakened which were made by the
well-affected to the Kings Party in Bourdeaux, while it was evident that that
City was resolved to follow the resolutions of the Prince of Conty, and
Duchess of Longueville.

But the Cardinal had recourse to other Expedients, and because the design of
gaining the Princes failed him; he went about by new Stratagems to take away
from the Princes, and those of Bourdeaux, the assistance of those people and
places which fomented their pretensions. He ordered therefore the Duke of
Vaxdosme to carry his Fleet into the Garonne, and sent to the Duke of Candale,
(who was already upon his march,) with all the forces that he could gather out
of the Neighboring Provinces. He treated also with the Count d' Ognon, and
others, to disengage them from the Union, and to render the Kings party more
strong in that Province, as it afterward succeeded.

In the mean time the Prince of Conde was in Champagne with his Army, where his
designs upon Reims, Soissons, and other great Cities (full of Warlike people,
and faithful to the King) proving little successful, he went to Vervins, where
leaving two Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse, he went with the Body of his
Army toward Rhetel, which in a short time was surrendered to him by the
Governor; the Sieur de Rale by reason of the weakness of the place, and for
want of Necessaries to defend it, he took also Chasteau Porcien, not far
distant from it; he attaqued afterward St. Menhand another walled Town; which
was yielded up to him upon the 13 of November by the Sieur de St Mor. and
because this place was being situated between the Mose and the Marne upon the
river Aisne and between Verdun and Chalon was some what considerable, he left
there a strong Garrison, under the Command of the Sieur de Montalt, and ordered
it to be fortified; hoping by maintaining this place and Rhetel to winter his
forces in France.

From hence having dismissed the Troops of the Duke of Orleans, he went
speedily into Bar, where he took Barleduc the Castle of Lagny, and Voet, but
not being able to attempt any thing more by reason the season was too far
advanced, and his Troops wearied, he sent away the Spanish and Lorain forces,
and put his own into Winter Quarters about the Mose.

The Cardinal on the other side, indefatigably exercising his mind in
intricate and dangerous affairs, considered that it was absolutely necessary
before the Army went into Winter Quarters, to dislodge the Princes, forces and
drive them out of the places which they held, he therefore reinforced the Kings
Camp with two thousand Soldiers, which the Duke of Elboeuf had gathered
together in Picardy, and with others drawn out of Normandy, and the
Neighboring Provinces, and in stead of coming to Paris he stayed in the Camp,
to redress by his Presence the Affairs of the Army, much diminished and
weakened; which the Generals would scarce been able to have done without him, he
drew after Him many friends and dependents, and confirmed those, who wearied
out with long travel and pain, thought rather of retiring home, then of
continuing the War at that season of the year; and encouraged every one to
continue in the Kings service, being in great veneration and high esteem
amongst the Soldiery, by whom he was as much loved and respected, as he was
abhorred and hated by some seditious and contemptible people of Paris. He was
not a jot deceived in the hopes he had to draw profit from these opportune
endeavors, for the soldiery, awakened by his gracious aspect, and the
military Affairs enlivened by his Counsel, he gained those advantages that made
him in a short time return gloriously, and as it were, triumphant into Paris,
more then ever in his Majesty's favor, and settled him in the Authority of his
Ministry.

The Marquess of Chasteauneuf in the meanwhile remained in Paris without
employ, deprived of his Offices, and not being able to refrain from bewailing
his ill fortune and the miserable estate of the Kingdom, he was also banished
the City in the month of November; upon the 13. of the same month the King
appeared in Parliament, and caused the Decree made in his Counsel of State
against the Princes of Conde and Condy, the Duchess of Longueville, the Duke
of Rochefoucaut and others, to be ratified and registered.

The Court continued after this to give out convenient Orders for the good
Government of the Kingdom, but always regulating himself by Mazarines
Instructions; but above all, the Kings counsel applied themselves to settle the
mind of the Cardinal de Retz, who as he was a person of an eminent judgment
and deep understanding, so he was considered by Mazarine above all others, as
the greatest impediment to his designs. He hated the greatness of Conde, and
at the same time the exorbitant Authority of Mazarine; he declared himself a
good French man and the Kings servant; and thought it no offense to procure the
ruin of the one, and the suppression of the other; He solicited therefore the
Parliament to meet, to procure the return of their banished Companions, to
bring his designs to pass: Mazarine on the contrary, and the other Ministers of
State endeavored to remove him from Paris, where he was in great esteem and
veneration; but finding no way to do it, by all the Arts they could use; and
Mazarine, not willing to return to Paris, so long as he was there, so powerful
in friends and dependents. It was finally concluded to imprison him.

The difficulty consisted in the manner, for it was not to be done in his own
house, and dangerous in the streets of Paris. Besides, this was far from the
Kings mind, who desired it might be without noise, as well in respect of his
dignity of Cardinal, as that his intentions were to do all quietly and without
confusion. While therefore the Ministers of State were seeking out means to
bring about this Affair, and discovered every day more and more difficulty in
the execution of it; there happened a more favorable Conjuncture then they could
have wished for.

His friends represented to him, how that the King would now be Master of all,
and therefore he ought to render His Majesty the accustomed Visits, or to
abandon Paris, showing him how scandalous it was for him to act in that manner
which he did; these Reasons sufficiently persuaded the Cardinal, and therefore
the Feast of Christmas being near at hand, he resolved to preach himself in
the Church of St. Germain l' Auxerrois, of which the Queen being advertised,
she gave notice to the Parochial, that she did intend to be present there her
self.

The Cardinal took this for a favorable occasion, and thought himself obliged
to go render thanks to her Majesty for so great an Honor; and to this intent,
upon the 20. of December, most improvidently; and without the least suspicion
he went to the Louvre, and entering the Court, he found that the Queen was not
fully dressed; wherefore going up the great stairs to visit the King in the
mean time, he met His Majesty just upon the middle of the stairs as he was
coming down, who received him courteously, and carried him with him into the
Queen-Mothers Chamber, while the Cardinal was complementing and discoursing
with the Queen; the King whispered le Tellier the Secretary of State in the
ear, and ordered the detaining him, which was presently done by the Marquess of
Villequier Captain of the Guard, who arrested him as he was going out of the
Antichamber.

The Cardinal was in great confusion, and said, What me? for what reason?
Villequier with some Soldiers conducted him into the great Gallery, and from
thence to the Duke of Anjou's Apartment, where he stayed about two hours,
whilst the Coach and the Guards were made ready, which carried him through the
Gate de la Conference to the Castle of Vincennes, without the peoples knowing
the least of it; and when they afterward heard the News, they discoursed of it
without any concern, praising the Kings resolution, and saying, It was well
done to imprison the Cardinal de Retz, but to do better, he should likewise
imprison Cardinal Mazarine, and give such an example to Ecclesiastical Persons,
that for the future they should not meddle any more with secular Affairs.

Upon this accident not ordinary, and so fortunately succeeding, there were
presently various and different discourses. Those of the Court said, that the
King began to show himself a King, and That his Majesty had taken this
resoluon on the sudden, without any prompting or counsel of his Ministers; That
the Order was given of his own proper accord, and from his own mouth, being
incensed at the strange proceedings of the Cardinal, and induced hereto by the
necessity of the public good and quiet.

Those of the prisoners party on the contrary gave out, that this blow came
from Cardinal Mazarin, who would not, nor could not return and live at Paris,
with so considerable an Emulatour, supported by so many friends that opposed
his interest, That he on purpose kept himself at some distance from Court, that
he might not be known to be the contriver of this fact, and for fear that the
people rising in the defense of the imprisoned Cardinal, should vent their
inveterat and immortal hatred against him, but however it was, Mazarin declared
that he had no hand in it, to confirm which he wrote a letter to the King,
which was suddenly published, very much in favor of the imprisoned; wherein
he represented to his Majesty, that by the title which he bore of most
Christian King, he was obliged to defend the Ecclesiastical immunities; and
therefore he humbly beseeched his Majesty that he would in these cases have
that regard; which was becoming his Royal Piety, and the title which he bore of
eldest Son of Holy Church, recommending to him with all earnestness the
concerns of the imprisoned.

This Letter was diversely censured, some were of one opinion and some of
another.

Many other considerable persons of the Clergy of France, did very good Offices
in favor of the Prisoner; But the public good being more prevalent then the
satisfying of particular persons. His Majesty openly declared, that he had no
other intention in this, then the quiet and happiness of his subjects; and
least the Court of Rome should take occasion to resent this action of the
French, in doing what was so contary to the Ecclesiastical Laws, a Courier was
dispatched to the Pope, to inform him fully of this Affair. The friends of the
prisoner likewise a few hours after sent another to complain to his Holiness
of this violence, and to engage him to protect the imprisoned.

This News arrived in a few days at Rome, and the Pope was much troubled at it,
not only as being obliged to maintain the reputation of the Scarlet Gown, and
the indemnity of one of his own Creatures; but because it was thought he was
one of not so entire an Affection to the Court of France, nor Mazarine; and if
he had had means to testify his resentments, as he had the will, there might
perhaps have followed considerable disturbances. His Holiness called diverse
Congregations of the most learned Cardinals, and in whom he most confided; and
although there were not some wanting who were more moderate, to represent to
them how circumspectly they ought to proceed in so nice an Affair; yet
Monsignor Marini was ordered to go to Paris, and there to form a pleading of
what was imputed to the Criminal, and to solicit that the Judgment of it might
be left to the Holy See, which was the only Court and Tribunal for the Causes
of Cardinals.

But as they were very certain at Rome, that if they would not receive in
France Monsignor Corsini in quality of Legate to that Court, because there was
not Advice first given of it to the King, or his Ministers of State, much less
would they admit of the Archbishop Marini with the like Commissions; and
consequently they determined a thing which could have no effect; so they at
Paris did verily apprehend, that this proceeded from the Counsel of them, who
desired to arm the Pope with pretenses to blame France, for bearing so little
respect to the Apostolic See, giving him occasion to join with their enemies,
it being certainly believed in Rome, as also in Paris, that the King would
never have venture to thwart the Pope in those unhappy Conjunctures; so that by
this bold Resolution of sending the Archbishop Marini into France, they should
uphold the Pontifical decorum, and make the Ecclesiastical Authority very
glorious. The Cardinal Prince Trivultio, who was at that time in Rome, to take
care of the Spanish Interest, and supplied the place of Ordinary Ambassador for
His Catholic Majesty, wisely foresaw the bad success of this deliberation,
which fell out exactly as he had foretold; for those that were concerned,
judging presently, that these Maxims of the Court of Rome, had no other
foundation then a flattering opinion of their own wishes, they quickly applied
themselves to overthrow them.

Cardinal Mazarine, convinced of the nature of the French, as easy to give way
to Novelties, that bring their delight, as inflexible to those things that
threaten them, he was constrained to mind nothing else but the maintaining of
the Kings Authority, and therefore Marini was not permitted to enter into the
Kingdom; the French were unsatisfied with the Court of Rome, taxing them of
great partiality. For the Affronts and Abuses having been oftentimes
represented to them, that were put upon Cardinal Mazarine a year before by the
Parliament of Paris, against all Law divine and humane, without drawing up his
Indictment, without lawful Authority, and contrary to the Kings mind, who
defended him, and acknowledged himself faithfully served by him; and what was
worse, although the Parliament proceeded so far as to set a Tax of fifty
thousand Crowns on his Head, besides the Confiscation of all his estate, yet
for all this the Pope never concerned himself for defense of the said Cardinal,
who had no other support left him then that of his Holiness, the Kings
Authority being at that time contemned and trampled on, where on the contrary,
for the only detention of Retz (which was done out of mere necessity for the
public good, and for maintaining of the Royal Dignity, against which he was
accused to have a long time plotted) they made so much noise. They added
moreover, that the Pope had the less reason to find himself aggrieved, seeing
the most Christian King had no other intent, then to stop the imprisoned
Cardinal from going on in his Instigations, and not to bring him to trial, much
less to judge him, knowing very well that this did belong to the sole Vicar of
Christ, although the Parliament, passing all respects due to the Holy See, and
to a Prince of the Holy Church, had arrogated to themselves the Authority to do
it against Mazarine.

These, and the like Reasons were deduced by the French, alleging likewise the
example of Lewis the 13. who caused Cardinal Ballua, to be imprisoned and
detained many years, for holding correspondence with the Kings Brother, and the
Duke of Burgundy; and yet the Pope resented it only with fatherly Admonitions,
and good Offices for his freedom; and his errors were not to be paralleled
with those wherewith de Retz was charged. They said moreover, that the King had
caused to be conferred upon him the dignity of the Scarlet Robe to oblige him
to serve him with the greater affection, and not to make use on it to the
prejudice of the Crown. That to Sovereign Princes all things were permitted for
the security of their States. And as the most Christian Kings did justly boast
to have always defended and protected the Holy See, and to have also
reverently and piously obeyed it, assisting them in all occasions with their
forces and power; so His Majesty should glory to follow the footsteps of his
Ancestors. But that he ought likewise to take care for the benefit and quiet
of his loving subjects, of whom the King was the Common Father.

The Imprisonment of this Cardinal, who was one of the principal Supports of
the Faction of la Fronda, completed their total ruin and destruction: for
though there remained in Paris some Relics of this Fire, the Sparks were so
weak, that of themselves they were not able to raise the least Flame; and
therefore the Royal Authority being more and more settled, the Ministers of
State proceeded in those deliberations, which they judged most proper for the
re-establishing the Kingdom in its ancient splendor.

By these troubles the Kings Revenues were much diminished, and the necessity
of having money was very urgent, great debts being contracted, and the credit
of the Court reduced to last extremity, notwithstanding that the King enjoys a
yearly Revenue of above eight millions of Pistols; so that to raise money, His
Majesty made diverse Decrees, which upon the last day of December were ratified
and registered in Parliament, in Presence of His Majesty, with all readiness,
although they amounted to the number of thirteen; but to please them it was
declared, that the money raised should be employed upon the most urgent Affairs
of the Kingdom, and particularly in paying the Soldiery. These Edicts were
also ratified upon the 7. of January following in the Chamber of Accounts and
Court of Aids, in Presence of the Duke of Anjon, who to that purpose was sent
thither by the King with these Redresses of the Political Affairs the Military
also took vigor in the Managements of the War with good success, in regard of
the ruins and losses suffered by the King and the whole Kingdom, not only in
those parts toward Flanders, and in Guienne, but also in Italy and Gatalonia;
Cardinal Mazarine was resolved to keep the War on foot in this last Country,
to divert the Spaniards from employing their forces more powerfully in other
parts, and therefore he opportunely relieved Roses with some barks of
Provisions which he ordered to be sent out of Provence by the Duke of Mercoeur:
The Arrival of this succor occasioned the discovery of a notable Conspiracy in
that Fortress, against the Governor of it the Marquess de la Far, laid by
his own familiar friends.

The Kings forces in Guienne began also to prosper, according as those of
Bourdeaux began to grow weak, by the discord which Mazarine had sown among
them. The Duke of Candale being sent into this Province, (as has been said) to
command the Kings Forces in the place of Count de Harcourt, took the Castle of
Poniols, and secured Marmende and Aiguillon, situated between Bourdeaux and
Again, on this side the Garonne, set upon and routed some Troops of the Prince,
seized upon Bastide and other places; and by the directions of Mazarine, secret
Plots were carried on for reducing of Bourdeaux to the Kings obedience. But
because it was difficult to gain that important and powerful City by force of
Arms, therefore they made use of Art and Industry. Father Faur a Franciscan,
who was afterward made Bishop of Glandeves, an understanding person, and
zealous for the Kings service; and who had been successfully employed in
bringing Paris to its duty, proposed the holding of Intelligence in Bourdeaux
it self, by means of the Fathers of his Order: to this effect Father Bertaut
Guardian of Broad, was sent to consult with Father Itier Superior of the
Franciscans Convent in Bourdeaux, who carried with him diverse Instructions, for
the advancement of this design, according as they should have opportunity.
Bertaut being discovered by the Prince of Conty, escaped out of his hands with
much dexterity, having under a dissembling confidence told him many lies, to
take away from him the true knowledge of their designs, and of the
Conspiratours: But Father Itier was not at all moved at this, for knowing
himself to be greatly esteemed and loved by the Citizens; he hope, that in case
his Practices were discovered, he should be protected by them; and the rather,
because he was assured, that many of them were weary of groaning under the
Tyranny of the Olmiere, which proceeding in precipitous and inconsiderate
Progresses, put their Country and Religion upon the point of being ruined by
treating with the English to bring them into Guienne; it was concluded
therefore, that there was no means more expedient, and more sure, them to gain
some of the Heads of the Olmiere. Mother Angelica Abbess of the Carmelite Nuns,
gave Father Ityer a fit occasion, and discovered to him how that one of the
Mothers of her Convent, Sister to Villars, had communicated to her the good
disposition of her Brother to return to his obedience toward the King, out of
remorse of Conscience, and the fear of a miserable end, which he had deserved
by his great wickedness, and therefore he had desired his Sister, that she,
together with the rest of her Companions, would pray to God to give him grace
to amend his life. Father Ityer made no difficulty of confiding in the Nun, and
procured that she should confirm her Brother in his purpose. Villars engaged to
restore the City to its obedience if the King would grant a General Act of
Oblivion, and give him the Office of Procurator and Syndick of the Communalty,
and the sum of forty thousand Crowns for himself, and those who should be
employed in this affair. The Court consented to his demands, and being besought
by the said Father, they ordered that no injury should be done to the Princes
or Princesses.

This design went forward well, and had easily taken effect, if Villars,
unconstant in his resolutions, had not discovered the Con^piracy, which happened
by the vain ^rating of the Sieur de Lenet, who making as if he knew, (although
^ndeed he knew nothing of it at all) that there was a new Intrigue carrying on
in Bourdeaux, in which were many who professed themselves of the Princes Party:
Villars believing that some of his Companions had revealed the secret to Lenet,
was in fear of being ruined, and therefore sought to save himself, by declaring
the whole matter to the Prince of Conty, saying, that he had not engaged in
this business; but the better to discover it, and then to give a more
particular account of it to his Highness, and that this was the reason that he
did not disclose it to him before. The Prince answered him, that he was well
satisfied touching his fidelity, and charged him to continue his dissimulation,
and to observe the whole whole matter, that he might learn the Names of the
Accomplices, and get sufficient proof against Father Ityer; he bound Blerno and
Giraut Goldsmiths, under a solemn Oath to go and receive the money promised by
the King, of which there were 1500 Pistols consigned, so that upon his
examination and deposition Father Ityer was imprisoned and carried before a
Counsel where Marsin was President, with many of the Olmiere, and Officers of
the Army; and here arose a Contest upon the Point, that Laymen had not power to
judge Churchmen, but they did not long demurre upon it.

The Prince of Conde and Duchess of Longueville commanded absolutely that they
should not put him to death, but that it was sufficient to keep him in prison.
Marsin and Lenet, who sought to inrage people more, caused some of the ^abble
to cry out Toll, Toll, Cru^ifige, etc. At this rumor some of the Judges were
much disorder^d, and with disdainful countenan^es said, We are no Jews, and ^f
you are not Christians you may go and search out some Pilates, for we do not
intend to dip our hands in innocent blood. Marsin was much humbled, and
composed the difference, causing him to be adjudged to an open pennace, which
Spectacle moved the whole City to Compassion, and loaded the Princes party with
blame and hatred; for the Father being led through the streets, with a thousand
reproaches and insolences from the Rascallity, was not at the least disturbed
either at death, which they threatened him, or at the injuries they did him, but
walked along with as great an assurance, as if he had been going to a glorious
triumph. This behavior of his so fearless, and yet full of humility and
patience, did so move the Citizens, that they were forced quickly to send him
back to the prison, from whence they had taken him; and because they had taken
from him the habit of his Order, the Duchess of Longueville, detesting such
wicked doing, gave command that it should be restored to him again, and to
check the insolence of these people. After this, they imprisoned a Cousin of
the said Fathers, a Complice in all his Contrivances, whom they put to a
strange torture; but, as if it had been nothing, he endured it with an
incredible and mavelous constancy, nor could they ever draw from him the
least word concerning this matter. The same morning that Father Ityer was
taken, the President Dasis, Counselor Bort, and Counselor Castelnaut were
also attached and committed to the Castle du Ha, and afterward released upon
their words.

D' Asis withdrew himself from these Intrigues, and went to his Brother the
Bishop of Lombes.

At the same time another Friar called Land, by the means of a Gentlewoman
named Laure, attempted to gain Colonel March, who hearkened to the
solicitations of the Friars brother, and communicated his design to the said
Widow, which was to make use of an hundred light horse which he commanded in
the City, to deliver up a Gate to the Duke of Candale, desiring this Window to
write him the design, and to instruct him the most proper means to execute it;
This Plot was also communicated to the Jurate Robert. But in the end Colonel
March himself discovered it to Marsin; and after a few days Land revealed it
to the Prince of Conty; whereupon the Gentlewoman was imprisoned and examined a
long while in the Presence of Land, and maintained to his face that he was the
Author of all this, accusing him of infidelity and treacherousness, whereupon
he was laid hold on, and banished from the Olmiera, and the Widow sent back to
her Countrey-house.

In the meanwhile the City of Monsegur, wherein the Regiment of the Marquess
of Monpouillon, lay in Garrison, was surrendered to the Royallists, and the
Officers pretending that two thousand Pistols were due to them, put themselves
into His Majesty's service, imprisoned the Commissary, and took from him a good
sum of money which he had levied on the people thereabouts; but they sent him
free afterward, with some Officers belonging to Marsin, who at the same time
with the Princes Troops besieged St. Ferme a small Town near by. This was a
Prelude to the fall of the Princes party, being forsaken by their best Troops,
in a time when they had most need of them, not contented to take pains
continually for so small profit, the hopes of those rewards daily declining,
which the Princes promised them, to soften the labors and sufferances of those
of their party.

Diverse other Accidents happened, which rendered this party still more infirm;
which having no other foundation then the imagination of becoming more happy by
the change of fortune, in stead of meeting with their desired relief, they
encountered the most unexpected misfortunes. A certain Engineer called Larsigne
was imprisoned, and 3500 Pistols taken from him, set him in the Pillory, and
banished under pretense that he wrote to Paris the News of what happened in
Bourdeaux. They arrested a vessel also, and confiscated twenty five thousand
Crowns, which belonged to Dutch Merchants for corn sold in that City, and were
carrying to Rochelle, declaring it to be counterband goods, with these and the
like proceedings; the foreign Merchants, and the better sort of Citizens
themselves were sensibly touched and exasperated, seeing that without shame or
conscience, they exempted none from barbarous and unjust punishments.

The Duke of Vandosme appeared with his Fleet in the Garonne at the beginning
of February, and presently began to build a Fort in the Isle of Cazaux,
situated in the middle of the River, and therefore of great consequence, and
which gave no small trouble to the inhabitants of Bourdeaux; amongst whom there
being many that were affected to the Kings party, it behoved the rest to be
vigilant against surprises and stratagemms, which were easy to be put in
practice in such Conjunctures.

The Curate of St. Peter's, having exhorted his Parishioners in a public Sermon
to shake off the yoke of their servitude, and to withdraw themselves from under
the Authothority unlawfully usurped by that wicked counsel of the Olmiere, he
was taken and put in prison; but the people of that parish, who were very
affectionate to him, beginning to rise, they were forced to let him go and
escape away, for fear some greater mischief might follow: for those who are
admitted to preach the Word of God, have great power over the people when they
denounce to them peace and quietness; for the same cause were banished also the
Curates of St. Simon and St. Remi, with the Prior and Guardian of the
Capucines, and the Dominicans, diverse Counselors of the Parliament, and some
Citizens, who were contented rather to undergo any persecution, then to follow
a Faction directly contrary to the service of the King, so that the Parliament
being at that time by the Advice of Mazarine removed to Again, that at Bourdeaux
was so weakened that there remained no more then nine Counselors, and some of
them so confused and fearful, that they knew not what to resolve on.

The Parliament at Again, beginning to assemble on the third of March, the Sieur
de la Lane, Second President, presided at the opening of the Parliament, in the
Presence of the Duke of Candale, and the Bishop of Again, the Sieur de Pontac,
President of the Treasurers of France, came thither with diverse other
well-affected persons: But in Bourdeaux the suspicions of some new Conspiracy
being revived, all possible diligence was used to interrupt it, and to maintain
the Princes Concerns in their vigor, Proclamation was made, that all strangers
who were found in the City without employ, should presently depart: All
Inne-keepers, Taverners, and those who let lodgings, were prohibited to receive
any one without express order and billet from the Magistrate appointed for that
purpose; Meetings were forbidden, and going about in the night after such an
hour, and every where they kept vigilant Guards, to watch all surprises,
especially because the Neighboring Towns and Provinces were every day more and
more encumbered with Soldiers and people of the Kings party.

And because that by the taking of Sarlaet, Sallagnac, Terrason, and other
walled Towns of Perigord, by the Princes Troops; the Soldiery overran all the
Country, to the great damage of that Province. The Marquess of Pompodor,
Lieutenant of the Province of Limosin, gathering together some of the Kings
Troops, and diverse Gentlemen encountered the enemies near to the Village St.
Robert, in the County of Again, defeated and destroyed them, and so delivered
the Country from the continual molestation of these Soldiers, who were the
more licentious by reason they wanted their pay, and were dissatisfied with the
Princes themselves whom they served. The Town of Montignac, maintaining it self
in its due obedience to the King, did incommodate all they could the Princes
forces, who lost the Castle of Surin and other places, which either rendered
voluntarily, or were gained by the force of Arms, whereby those of their party
being reduced to straight terms, the greater part of them were persuaded by
others example to return to their due obedience.

To these favorable events in Guienne, seconded by other prosperous successes
of the Kings party, was added the engagement upon the 28. of February in the
Narrow Seas, between the English and Hollanders, each party glorying to have
had the advantage; but seeing there was no great difference in the loss of
Vessels, the Victory remained undecided, so that the English being busied in
this new War, they were not in a posture to embrace those resolutions, which
if they had been free, they might have taken, to encourage the seditious in
Bourdeaux, and thereby have notably prejudiced the Crown of France, which
certainly might have been reduced to great streights if on the one side being
assaulted by the powerful forces of the King of Spain, and shaken by intestine
troubles, it had been also on the other side set upon by the English; but the
propitious fate of France, subordinate to the benign Will of God, who
disposes of all things according to the Rule of his divine Providence,
preserved in these disasters that most Christian Kingdom, from the dangerous
Enterprises of that Nation, which differing in Religion and manners, would have
found a fit opportunity of putting France into a very great disorder; but they
governing themselves by violent means, took resolutions very much different
from what was suspected; so that confounding themselves they gave occasion to
the Royal Authority to recover its strength, letting the disobedient want
forces, and those who sought by their Factions and Cabals to disturb and
overturn all, This was the War against the Hollanders, to the promoting of
which Cardinal Mazarine did so much contribute by his secret Managements and
Arts, considering the damages the English might do the French without such a
diversion. Not to interrupt by a digression the thread of our discourse: we
shall only touch upon the principal motives of this War.

After the Parliament of England had made themselves Masters of that Kingdom,
and with their victorious Arms also overcome the Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland, they endeavored to keep themselves armed, and to exercise themselves
with foreign wars, now that the Civil were at an end. Having learnt this good
Maxim of State, to keep open in their own body the necessary Preservative of a
Cautery, whereby to purge out the boiling and malignity of the peccant humors.

It happened then that wanting lawful cause to break with France, and held back
by diverse Reasons of State, no less then by the Arts of Mazarine, who made
appear his mavelous parts in dealing so dexterously with a Nation so ill
affected to the French, they betook themselves to a War with Holland, which
having a glorious reputation at Sea, seemed not a little to obscure the ancient
splendor of the redouted and irresistible power of the English.

Besides, the natural emulation of bordering Nations, the secret and artificial
encouragement of the Neighboring Kingdoms, did promote these thoughts, who
observing with an ill eye two powerful Republics on each hand, they could not
but suspect those sudden Growths of States well furnished with Sea-forces. The
English took their pretext from the Herring-Fishing, which the Hollanders used
with great gain every year in the Orcades in the North of Scotland.

They pretended that the Hollanders had usurped this Fishing-trade by the
negligence of their King, to the great detriment of the public, and therefore
not to be tolerated by a Nation, that for so many Ages held the principal
dominion of the Ocean. On the contrary, the States of the United Provinces
maintained, that by long possession and ancient custom their right was
sufficiently lawful, and established with just reason; especially it being
never known that the English passed into those seas to fish.

This was the motive, for which both parties beginning to arm, the one to
pretend custom, the other an exemption from paying custom, and to preserve
their right, they came at length to an open breach, to the great prejudice of
both their interests, for their chiefest subsistence consisting in Trade and
Navigation, which being interrupted, they found the War reciprocally
destructive and pernicious, but especially to Holland, which being confined to
a narrow Compass of ground, with an infinite of people, their greatest wealth
depends upon the Sea. To these Reasons derived from State-interest, and
particular profit, were added other causes also touching Punctilio's of
Reputation, the English pretending they had been affronted by the Hollanders in
diverse occasions, and principally in the Massacre of their Ambassador Doctor
Dorislaws at the Hague, killed by the English of the Kings party, and by the
Adherents of the Prince of Orange. To this they joined other Grievances,
concerning the death of several of their Nation slain at Amboina, where they
had settled themselves, the Hollanders being jealous of the Commerce of the
Indies, from which they drew great emoluments. The Quarrel began upon the
meeting of some English Vessels with some Hollanders, about the complement of
striking sale. The Hollanders sent over Adrian Paw Extraordinary Ambassador
famous for the Treaty of Munster, managed by him with the Spaniards; but he in
stead of bringing things to a good end rather exasperated the minds of the
English, so that the business going on to be decided by arms, much against the
wishes of those of Amsterdam especially, who desired to withdraw themselves
from the dependence on the House of Orange; The States of Holland were much
perplexed; but nevertheless, by their fresh and multiplied Victories obtained
against the power of Spain, having raised their fame to that height, that they
were generally feared and esteemed; and having made so advantageous a Peace
with the Catholic King, they resolved not to prejudice their reputation by
yielding to the threats and pretensions of England, and therefore made little
account of giving satisfaction to that Parliament; but providing for the War,
they set out a numerous Fleet, so that every one preparing for Hostility, many
Merchants were taken and lost on both sides; and at length the Fleets meeting
of above one hundred Ships a piece, there followed diverse Battles and
Sea Fights, with reciprocal damage, so that each pretending to the Victory, no
certain decision could be made on it, the losses and victories consisting in the
number of Vessels that were destroy^d on either side, which never hindered them
from returning to Sea again, ready for a new Engagement. But the Hollanders
were very sensible of the loss of their Admiral Trump, a Person of great value,
and of great experience in Maritine Affairs, and much troubled that several
Vessels had not performed their duty, by reason they had not the Standard of
the Prince of Orange, to whom a great part of the Fleet showed themselves much
affected, to the particular disgust of those of Amsterdam, jealous and no good
friends to that House. The Court of France taking the opportunity of these
differences, applied themselves to secure Guienne and Bourdeaux, a City above
all others disposed to Rebellion; for the reduction of which, Mazarine made all
necessary preparations; and therefore besides the sending of the French Fleet
into the Garonne, and the advancing of forces from all parts into that
Province: he gave himself to make Overtures of reconciliation with diverse
persons, to see if it were possible to terminate that War, rather by fair means
then by Arms, which being among their own people and subjects, wheresoever the
Victory fell it would turn to loss.

The designs of the Cardinal went on prosperously, as shall be related
hereafter, not only in these parts but in others also; in the mean time he did
not fail to act vigorously in Champagne, to ease the Country of the enemies
Troops where they lay quartered. He went to the Army which was reinforced with
diverse troops, took Barleduc, and having passed the River of Aisne, attached
Chasteau-Porcien, where the Sieur de Brisson commanded, with a strong Garrison
of old soldiers, which rendered the place very considerable, especially it
being then the midst of Winter, a season improper far Armies to lie in the
field.

This difficulty was surmounted by the affectionate and accurat assistance of
the Cardinal, so that all labor and hardship seemed light to the soldiery,
who endured it with as great resolution as they served and followed him with
affection. In seven days he took Chasteau-Porcien, and had also taken Rhetel
and Saint Menhaut if the season had been less sharp; and if the Prince of Conde
had not opportunely reinforced them with a great number of Soldiers, wherefore
the Cardinal gave over the thought of them, and having put the army into winter
quarters made toward Paris being often importuned by their Majesty's.

He was met by the King himself and the Duke of Anjou two leagues out of the
City; His Majesty received him with extraordinary tenderness and affection;
took him into his own Coach, and coming in at St. Denis Gate, conducted him
through a great throng of people to the Louvre.

The Cardinal took up his Lodgings there, to be nearer, as first Minister of
State, to His Majesty, he was presently visited by the Body of the Townhouse,
and by all the other Orders and Magistrates; who declared their acknowledgment
for many singular advantages received through his care, and that all France was
obliged to the conduct of so great a Minister, expressing their joy for his
happy return. Though many thought that how much the more kind they were in
outward appearance, so much the more corrupted they were in reality, there
being no greater malice then that which is hid under the mask of dissimulation.
Yet I who have procured with much accurateness and long experience, to instruct
my self in the knowledge of ^he nature of those persons of whom I write, can
say to the glory of France, not to have found any Nation less addicted to
dissimulation then this, which being free and frank of speech, thinks little of
what is to come; and nothing of what is past. Whosoever shall consider the
contempts and abuses done in Paris to the name of the Cardinal in the month of
September 1652. and shall compare them with the honors and welcome he received
in the month of February 1653. will perceive, that the Fine of fifty thousand
Crowns, which was set upon his head, with all the reproaches and ignominies,
with which his reputation was wounded, were nothing else but the effect of
passion which being prudently dissembled by Mazarine, served him afterward to
fortify his right and good intentions, and rendered him triumphant over his
persecutions, making his Ministry still more glorious.

The same Evening the King caused him to sup with him, in the Apartment of the
Marshall de Villeroy; and that night was signalized with a great number of
Bonefires in the City the next morning, as he came from Mass he cast a quantity
of money amongst the people, as he had done the day before in those places
where he passed; and after he had received the Visits of the chief of the
Court, and of other persons, of all sorts and conditions, he applied himself to
the most important Affairs of the Crown.

On the 3. of February, being the same day which he entered Paris he brought
with him his three Nieces which were met out of the gate of St. Honor by the
Pincesse of Carignan, Louise her daughter by the Mareschall de Guebrian's Lady,
by the Marchioness of Ampous and many other ladies of quality. These Ladies
were lodged also in the Louvre in an apartment by themselves, over the Queens
Lodgings.

The King had not conferred any Office or Charge, either Ecclesiastical or
Secular, since his Return, although there were many vacant, and a great number
of Pretenders, willing to stay for the Cardinal, and give him the honor of
confering them: He was exactly informed of the deservings of each particular
person, so that keeping every one in hopes to receive rewards proportionably to
their worth, he rendered them more ready and zealous to the Kings service.

The King had passed the Edicts of the new Impositions, and dispatched all
other things which might sound less grateful in the ears of the people; lest
that doing them after the Cardinals return, they should seem to be suggested by
the Minister of State, against whom they might renew the pretenses of those
fault, which formerly though wrongfully, they had laid to his change; so that
the Cardinal, by His Majesty's special favor, having the disposal of the
Benefices of the Church and diverse other offices of the Court and Kingdom, he
began presently to distribute them to those he judged most deserving, and most
fit to be employed in His Majesty's service; detaining a considerable part
vacant to keep those that remained at that time, excluded in hopes and
obedience, knowing by experience that the French are as ready to serve when
they hope to be recompensed, as negligent to perform, when they have obtained
their desires.

He conferred the office of Superintendant of the Finances, vacant by the death
of the Marquis of Vieville, upon the a count de Servient Minister of State who
had deserved well of the Crown, being very cordial in the Kings service, and
grown aged in the course of many useful negotiations, to whom he joined the
Sieur de Fouquet Procurator General, who was also made Minister of state, a
person of great worth for his constant fidelity toward the King, whom in all
things, but particularly in the removal of the Parliament to Pontoise he had
served with great zeal, so that at this time there was two Super-intendants of
the Finances in France as also a Chancellor and a Keeper of the Seal, which
though it seemed strange yet had been practiced at other times, and namely,
under the ministry of Cardinal Richelieu.

To these Superintendants were joined four Intendants of the same Finances, who
were the Sieurs de Paget, de Boisleve, de Hausset, and de Brisaciers, besides
this, he gave good orders for the payment of the Kings revenues, to the relief
and satisfaction of the Farmers, and Cardinal Antonio Barberin coming to Paris
at this time, the dignity of great Almoner of France was conferred upon him,
Vacant by the death of Cardinal Richilieu Archbishop of Lions. This was done by
Mazarin to make his gratitude the more conspicuous, and to oblige him he
conferred it on, more straightly to the Crown, esteeming his assistance in Rome
necessary for the Interest of France, since that Cardinal Francesco his brother
had given some jealousy of his intentions having lately done some ill offices
in his tart Letters to His Majesty touching the direction of the Government.

It was discoursed at Court, that Barbarin had changed his first inclinations,
having been gained by the Pope and the Spaniards, upon the hopes of having the
Ecclesiastical Revenues of Naples and Sicily, restored to him, and the money
seized upon in Rome by the Chamberlains when the Pope pretended to ruin the
family of the Barberines, by forcing them to an account.

The Pope was inclined to a reconciliation with the Barberines, because having
not long to live, he thought it not convenient to leave his Kindred at variance
with these great persons, who were still very powerful in Rome; the Spaniards
also concurred herein, thereby to disengage this Family from their dependence
on France, that they might not oppose them in the Election of a New Pope.

Cardinal Francesco cherishing himself (as was supposed) with these hopes,
complained, having no other pretense, that they made little account of him in
France, seeing that Cardinal Mazarine had married his Niece to the Duke of
Mercoeur, without concerning himself to find out a Match for the Princess
Lucretia Barberini, at which he manifested so much displeasure, that he sent
his Nephew the Abbot Don Maffeo to Lions, to bring away, privately, the said
Princess, and the Prince Don Carlo Prefect of Rome into the Country of
Vicenza in Italy, which was done while Cardinal Antonio was at Paris, without
his having the least inckling of it.

This resolution seemed strange in France, and the more, because the same
Cardinal Barbarine had sent his Cousin Colonel Vaini, a Person of great value
and esteem, some years before into France, to ratify the Espousals betwixt
that Prince and his said Niece.

After this uniting of Cardinal Barberin with the Pope, to engage that family
to him by a streighter Tie, a Marriage was concluded between Don Maffeo
Barbarine, at that time Abbot, and a Grand Niece of his Holiness, in
consideration of which, the Prince Governor was promoted to the Cardinalship,
who renounced his Primogeniture to his Brother Bridegroom, as hereafter shall
be said.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Angers in Arms page 155 Archbishop of Rouen deputed to Court. page 157
Assembly of the Citizens of Paris. page 172 Army of the Princes at Estampes.
page 175 Encamped betwixt St. Clou and Furenne. page 218 Assembly at the
Palace-Royal. page 349. Gives great disturbance to the Princes page 347
B.
Brisac put into the Kings hands. page 326 The Battle in the Surburbs of St.
Anthony page 230 Barcelona rendered to the Spaniards. page 415
C.
Cardinal Mazarine his Birth 1 His Voyage into Spain. 2. He betakes himself to
the Wars. 3. Makes a Relation of the Affairs of the Valtoline. 5. Endeavors to
put himself in the Barberins service, ib. Returns to his Studies, 6. Goes to
Milan with Sacchetti, ib. Returns to Rome, 8. is sent back to Cardinal Antonio,
9. treats with the Count de Collalto, ib. He captivates the affection of the
Duke of Savoy 11. Chasteauneuf banished Paris 433 Chavigny endeavors to make
his Peace with Mazarine 380 his death 383 Counselor Brussel lays down his
office of Prevost of Merchants 346. Cardinal de Retz deputed to the King 328
The City begins to treat with the Court 338 Casal delivered to the Duke of
Mantua 416 Cardinal Mazarine his Advice to the King 318 His return to Paris.
477 His Artifices to render the Princes odious to the Parisiens 292 his Plots
to to reduce Bourdeaux 451 Contrives the Imprisonment of Cardinal de Retz 435
He goes to the Camp 432 Endeavors to gain those of the contrary party 423
Cardinal Antonio Barbarin Legate a Latere for the Peace 8 Protector of France
27 Sends Mazarine to Spinola 16 Cardinal Francesco Barberine complains of
Mazarine 21 Grows jealous of him 27 Cardinal Richlieu takes an affection to
Mazarine 12 Conspiracy of the Duke of Beaufort against Mazarine 45 Cardinal de
Sancta Cicilia, Viceroy of Catalonia 48 The Coadjutor of Paris, and the Count
de Chavigny envy Mazarins fortune 60 Commotions at Bourdeaux quieted 87
Cardinal Mazarine sent to the Court of France 11 treats with Cardinal Richlieu
ib. He begins to render good Offices to the French, treats with Spinola ib.
passes into Savoy to the King of France 14 after the death of Spinola he
propounds a Suspension of Arms 18 Concludes the Peace 19 treats secretly with
the Duke of Savoy to deliver Pignerol to the French 20 Enters into the service
of Cardinal Antonio 23 is made his Auditor ib. is sent Nuntio Extraordinary
into France, ib. gains the Affections of the French Ministers of State 24 is
recalled to Rome 25 the King of France recalls him to Paris 28 Nominates him to
the Cardinalship 29 Flempotentiary for France at the Treaty of Munster 30
Extraordinary Ambassador into Savoy ib. is made Cardinal 32 Extraordinary
Honor conferr^d on him, he causes the Command of the Army to be conferred to
the Duke'd Anguien 35 Godfather to the Dolphin 38 He endeavors to confirm the
Alliance with the foreign Princes 40 He draws the Princes of Este to the French
Faction 49 His good Offices to the Barberins 52 Endeavors to preserve the
friendship of England 61 His dissimulation with Conde 72 His Art to draw the
three Princess together ib. He endeavors to quiet Bourdeux 78 He leaves Paris
103 Arrives at Havre de Grace 102 Departs the Kingdom 105 He is complemented by
several Princes 112 endeavors to divide the Princes and the Frondeurs 113
Recalled by the King 126 Returns into France with an Army 142 is kindly
received by the King 151 Endeavors to gain the Duke of Lorain 187 Raises
discord among those at Bourdeaux 414 He encourages the Court of Savoy to
persist in their Union with France 421 Great commotions in Paris 130
Chafteauneuf chief Minister 132 retires from Court 156 The Count de Servient
recalled to Court 158 the Count de Chavigny and others dispatched to Court 177
consternation of the Parisiens upon the retreat of the Duke of Lorain 217 The
Cardinal de Retz hinders the Peace 242 The Court resolves to destroy the Army
of the Princes 228 The Court of Aids assemble at Pontoise 338 The Colonels of
Paris go to the King. page 386
D.
The Duke of Angoulesm imprisoned 311 Duke of Orleans Lieutenant General of the
Crown 286 The death of the Duke of Bouillon 226 Designs of the Cardinal the
Retz 324 The Duke of Nemours slain by the Duke de Beaufort 295 Duke of Beaufort
invites the people to assemble at the Place-Royal 208 Made Governor of Paris
258 renounces his Government 385 The Duke of Savoy complains of Spinola 14 the
Duke of Lorain stopped going out of Paris 387 Duchess of Chevreuse disgusted
with the Prince of Conde 68 Diverse Lords banished Paris 406 Disturbances in
diverse parts of the Kingdom 76 Duke of Wittenbergs baggage plundered 359
Duchess of Chevreuse undertakes to free the Princes 81 Duke de Mercoeur
marries the Cardinals Niece 126 His Marriage questioned in Parliament 127
Decrees of the Parliament against the Cardinal 132 Death of the Count of
Chavigny 135 Designs of the Coadjutor 145 Difference betwixt the Duke of
Beaufort and Nemours 160 The Duke of Lorain marches into France 187 Dunkirk
taken by the Spaniards 299 A dispute betwixt the Citizens and Soldiers 317
E.
Exceptions against the Amnesty page 313 Endeavors to take off the Duke of
Orleans from Conde page 316
F.
The Frondeurs of Bourdeux divided into two Factions 222 French Fleet in the
Garonne page 462
G.
A General Pardon granted by the King 311 the Guards of the Duke of Beaufort
stopped the Gates of Paris page 363
H.
Hoquincourt routed page 164
K
King of Spain takes away Spinola's command 15 The King draws near Paris 170
His Army at St. Denis 226 His Answer to Nesmond 272 Gives the Cardinal leave to
depart 304 His Letters to the Colonels of Paris 354 His Answer to the Deputies
of the City 357 His Answer to the Duke of Orleans his Letter 390 He comes to
Paris 398 His Answer to the Deputies from the City. page 233
L.
Losses of the French in Catalonia. page 90
M.
Metz, Tul and Verdun confirmed to France 44 Marshall de Turenne advances
against the Duke of Lorain 185 Mazarine studies to quiet the people 242 The
Marshall de l' Hospital his words to the Duke of Orleans 248 threatens the
fellow that presented him the straw 250 Mademoiselle quiets the people 256
Manifesto of the Assembly at the Palace-Royal 351 Mazarine foments the War
betwixt England and Holland 470 his Progress in Champagne page 476
N.
New disturbances at Bourdeux page 413
O.
Orbitello besieged by the French page 50
P.
The Princes conducted to Havre de de Grace 89 The Pope disbands his Troops in
the Valtoline 4 Satisfied with Mazarines Relation 8 Progress of the French in
Flander 46 in Italy 48 Plombino and Porto Longone taken by the French 52 Three
of the Parliament of Paris imprisoned 58 Paris besieged by the Kings 60 Prince
of Conde dissatisfied with Mazarine 64 displeased with the Frondeurs 67 The
three Princes imprisoned 74 Prince of Conty promises to marry the Princess of
Chevreuse 84 Princes freed from Prison 102 Paris alarmed upon the Cardinals
March 130 The Princes Army endeavors to hinder the Kings Passage 159 Prince of
Conde comes to the Army 161 Parisiens exclaim, against the Cardinal 166 Prince
of Conde received with joy at Paris 169 The Parliament of Paris send Deputies to
the King 180 The Princes desire Aid of the Spaniards 186 The President Nesmond
deputed to the King 195 the people incensed against the Parliament 213 The four
Proposals of the Duke of Orleans to the Parliament 259 Parliament of Toulouse
declare against that of Paris 291 The Parisiens complain of the Prince 294 The
Parliament removed to Pontoise 300 That at Paris declared unlawful 305 Prince
Thomas of Savoy chief Minister in Mazarines absence 308 Prince of Conde sends
to take the Cardinal Prisoners 310 The Perisiens weary of the War 327 The
Prince of Conde leaves Paris 388 Prince Thomas advises the King to go to Paris
393 President Brussel stays privately in Paris 411 Progress of the Prince of
Conde's Army in Champagne 430 The Parliament at Pontoise return to Paris 396 The
Preachers in Bourdeaux persuade the people to Loyalty 463 Parliament of
Bourdeaux removed to Again 464 Progress of the Royallists in Guienne page 466
Q.
The Queen of France anualls the Kings Will 38 Queen of England visits the
Duchess of Orleans page 407
R.
Roses in Catalonia relieved by the French 490 Royallists assault St. Clou page
183
S.
The Spaniards retire from the Siege of Casal page 10 Spinola made Governor of
Milan. ibid. Surprise of Mantua page 14 The Spaniards complain of the French
for putting forces into Casal 19 open enemies to Mazarine 20 They invited the
Parifiens to a Treaty of Peace 85 Servient, Tellier and Lionne retire from
Court 122 The Spaniards take Graveling and Irino 168 The sedition begun at the
Townhouse 250 Succors out of Flanders to the Prices 262 A Sea Fight betwixt
the French and Spaniards 297 The Spanish Army marches to Paris 323 Several
imprisoned at Bourdeux page 458
T.
Tumults in Guienne 78 Tumults in Provence quieted by the Duke of Mercoeur 223
Turenne discamps from Villeneufve St. George page 377
W.
War betwixt England and Holland. page 467
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 2. line 21. dele so that p. 44. l. 2. dele yet. l. 17. did p. 46. l. 1.
at the treat. ib and saved. p 70. l. 19. dele that. p. 91. l. 5. dele the p
100. l. 25. not to give. p. ^02. l. 1 lo^^ate. p. 116. l. 4. gain. p. 117. l.
1. pretensions. p. 118. l. 6, the Court p. 129. l. 15. skirting. p 113. l. 3.
of some p. 136. l. 17. laughed at. p. 137. l. 15. disposition. l. 18 could not
be. p. 183. l. 25. made. p. 189 l. 10. dele him. p. 192 l. 24 said, p. 193, l
1. ready. p. 208. l. 1 (,) l. 14. place. p. 210. l. 15. Place. p. 223. l 5.
presence. p. 229 l. 18. Passed. ib. l. 18. Parifiens. p. 252. l. 23. defended.
p. 261 l, 14. dele and, p. 263. l. 3. dele his. p. 271. l. 4. of so. p. 310 l.
13. Ministers. p 317. l 22. and. p. 320. l. 21. Mose, quit. p. 338. l. 5. dele
which. p. 343. l. 25. Reghenet p. 358. l. 2 nigh to Paris. p 380. l. 9. dele
and. p. 409. l. 18. dele of. p. 427. l. 2. Prince. p. 430. l. 21. dele was. p.
433. l. 15. Conty. p. 434, l. 7, it self. l. 25. not. p. 338. l. 23. not p.
444. l. 21. them. p 461. l. 23. dele him. p. 44. l, 16. Merchantmen. p 476. l.
22. at.

THE HISTORY OF THE MANAGEMENTS OF Cardinal JVLIO MAZARINE Chief MINISTER of
STATE of the Crown of FRANCE. Written in Italian by Count Galeazzo Gualdi
Priorato. And Translated according to the Original. In the which Are Related
the Principal Successes Happened from the Beginning of his Management of
Affairs till his Death.

Tom. I. Part II.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lloyd for George Calvert and Sam. Sprint at the Ball in
Duck-lane, and Christopher Wilkinson at the black Boy, over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1672.

THE HISTORY of Cardinal JULIO MAZARINE. Part II. Lib. I.
THE YEAR 1652. concluding with worse Fortune and Success to the Crown of
France, then it had begun; Cardinal Mazarine being triumphantly returned to
Paris with the universal Applause (either true or pretended) of the People and
Parliament it self, which had treated him so ignominiously not long before; and
wounded his reputation with so many extravigant injuries, applied himself with
great diligence to the continuation of the Government, as well in its Politic,
as Military Authority, endeavoring both by his Negotiations and his Arms, not
only to reduce the disobedient and seditious Towns that were in rebellion at
home, but to purge the Kingdom of all Foreign Armies, and restore it to its
primitive Potency and Grandeur.

Proceeding therefore in his Preparations for War, the Cardinal in the first
place caused several sums of money to be paid to the Colonels and Captains of
the old Troops for their Recruits, and Commissions to be given out for new
Levies; he thought it necessary likewise to entertain a Squadron of German
Horse, as Persons very proper for his Incampments, and constant to the Party in
which they engage, to that end he dispatched the Count de Nantueil, Monsieur
Milet, Monsieur Gontier, Monsieur Gravelle and others into Germany with ready
money, as likewise the Counts de Grandpre, and Beaujeu, into the Country of
Liege.

And because of the loss of Casal, and the Preparations for War which the
Spaniards made in the State of Milan, (where great Recruits were expected, as
well from Naples as Germany) Piedmont was so dangerously threatened, that the
Duke of Savoy by his rieterated solicitations, pressed hard for considerable
supplies, or else to be permitted to enter into a Neutrality with Spain; the
Court of France dispatched into Piedmont 4500 Foot, and 1500 Horse, which
arrived happily in the Month of May at Anon, as an insorcement to the French
Troops already in those parts under the Command of Count de Quincy, till the
Arrival of a Marshall of France, who was expected every day.

And because the Spaniard continued the Negotiations which were begun long
before with the Duke of Savoy, to gain him to their party, or at least reduce
him to a Neutrality, by their advantageous Exhibitions, to which a Minister of
that Court appeared to be inclined; The King sent Monsieur de Plessis Besanzon
his Lieutenant General, with the Title of one of his Gentlemen, to all the
Princes of Italy, to Negotiate about the present Affairs of those parts.

In execution therefore of his Orders, Besanzon advanced with great diligence
to Turin, from whence, Having assured the Duke that his Majesty would maintain
the Treaty of Chirasco, that he would defend Piedmont, always protect that
State, and cause an Army with considerable Commanders to march immediately
thither; to that purpose he proceeded to Casal, where he found the Duke of
Mantua at that time, and being received with the honors usually exhibited to
the Kings Ambassador, he contracted his business into two Points. One was, that
His Majesty should be satisfied about the interest of Casal, and that that
place should be put into a condition, not to be surprised, exchanged, or fall
any other way into the hands of the Spaniard. The other was, about the
pretenses the Ministers of Spain might make under the name of the said Duke of
Mantua to Montferrat, which was then in possession of Savoy, forasmuch as His
most Christian Majesty wa^ ready to deposit the sum contained in the Treaty of
Chirasco, for the discharge of the House of Savo

To these two Propositions the Duke reply^d, That he esteemed the coming of the
said Monsieur du Plessis as a particular favor, not doubting but he (as a
prudent person) would apprehend the necessity which obliged him to possess
himself of those places, and be persuaded, that by no accident whatever, he
should be alienated from that devotion, which upon so many reasons and
obligations his Highness professed to His most Christian Majesty; so he hoped
also on the Other side, he would show himself so courteous, as to convince His
said Majesty, that he was resolved to hazard his own life and estate, and the
lives and estates of all his subjects, before he would suffer the Spaniards or
any other to make themselves Master of the said places. That it might possibly
be, the money for the payment of the Garrison might come out of the Coffers of
the King of Spain, which yet was more then he knew; but however, he protested
he received it as coming from the Empress his Aunt, and her Sister, under whose
Authority that Treaty was concluded.

That whenever he should be repossess'd of that part of the estate, which the
House of Savoy, with manifest injustice detein'd from him, and might freely
make use of those Rents, as he had formerly done: and as he had often protested
against the Treaties, which were never consented to by the House of Mantua, as
being too much to its prejudice, he would maintain that Garrison himself
without the assistance of any one, and therefore he conceived in that respect
it would have been more proper for him to have been sent to the Court of Savoy,
to have interposed his Majesty's Authority there, and caused them without
further expostulation, to have restored what so unjustly they detein'd, then to
address himself to his Highness, who would be more ready to embrace ways of
Amity and Peace, then of Violence and War, which he knew would disturb the
quiet of all Italy, so much desired and endeavored by the House of Mantua,
which would clearly appear to whoever would impartially look back, and consider
who they were which did really interrupt it; and at length he told him that he
could not in reason accept of the sum he was offered, seeing he had not only
not consented to, but opposed the aforesaid Treaties; and besides, the said
sums would fall much short of what was due, by reason of the advantages had
been made of the rents of it, since the House of Savoy had it in their hands.

Du Plessis had declared before, both to the Duke, and the Marquess de la Val,
his Highnesses prime Minister, that they could not satisfy France any other
way, but by putting the affairs of Casal and Monferrat in the same condition
they were in, before his Highness made use of the Spaniards to cause the French
to march out. But perceiving by their Answers, both by word of mouth and in
writing, that that instance was in vain, and believing it would be sufficient
for His Majesty (considering the importance of the place) if it were well
fortified and provided with a Garrison independent on the Spaniards, and able
to keep them out upon any pretense whatsoever; he proposed, that to satisfy
those ends if it were possible, That half the Garrison should consist of the
subjects of the said Duke, and the other half of Swisses, raised in the
Catholic Cantons, That all of them should remain under the Command and
Authority of his Highness. That one half of them should be paid by His most
Christian Majesty, and the other half by the Princes and Potentates of Italy,
his Allies, and such as were most interested in that Affair: He considered this
Expedient would be a great ease to the Dukes Treasures, till a General Peace
could be concluded betwixt the two Crowns; upon such conditions as should be
proper to draw his Highness out of the necessity (in which he was at that time)
of taking money of the Spaniards, which was a thing much to the dishonor of
those who had so often defended that place against them, and might at length
produce inconveniences absolutely repugnant to the quiet and security of the
said Duke and his subjects.

John Coexens, Secretary to the Emperess Leonora, whom she had sent Post with
all possible diligence, to the end he might in her behalf, and in the name of
the Emperess Regnant, superintend the said Treaty, was arrived, and at that
time present in the Court.

Whereupon the Duke, having communicated the aforesaid Propositions with him,
he replied, That his Highness's Aunt and her Sister, would have no small reason
to complain, if, after his Catholic Majesty had passed his Royal word, that
all things should always be maintained in the free disposition of his Highness,
and they received that Promise as a great Obligation, he should have recourse
to other persons for the subsistence of his Troops, and demonstrate so little
faith and confidence in his Majesty, whose interest it was to conserve his
Famil^ and his Estate: To this Coexens added, That it would be taken ill from
his Highness, if while he received Investiture for Montferrat from his Imperial
Majesty, he should receive into the places depending upon it, either Garrison
or money from any other Prince, without the Privity and Consent of the said
Emperor, and the rather, because the aforesaid Emperesses, his Aunt and her
Sister were his Sureties in that Affair.

At length all the Dukes Answers were reduced to one Point, which was this,
That if the Estates which were taken from him, and possessed by the House of
Savoy were restored, and all the rents which belonged to them, he should be
able without assistance from any person to secure and preserve those places
himself. But Monsieur du Plessis, who foresaw that would be the most ready and
the most proper Answer could be given, was not however satisfied with his
Answer, though, as the Duke told him, he doubted not but upon a prudent and
serious reflection he would approve it, and according to his accustomed
courtesy represent it to the King, adding a thousand Professions of the
Obsequiousness and Devotion he intended always to preserve for his Majesty.

Du Plessis was not at all satisfied with his Answers, and therefore finding
his Propositions desperate, having received many honors, and demonstration of
esteem as to his person, but refused the Presents which the Duke out of his
Generosity designed for him, departing from Casal, he returned to Turin, from
whence he gave the King an account of his Negotiation; From Turin he was
conducted to Genoa, here he transacted with that state to their mutual
satisfaction; from thence he went to Parma, and Modena, and having managed his
Affairs there with the same good success, he arrived at Venice the 24. of July.

The substance of his Negotiation was, to let the Princes of Italy know of what
importance it was to them to have Pignerol conserved in the hands of the
French; That the Treaty of Chirasco should be observed, and that satisfaction
should be given to His most Christian Majesty, by the Duke of Mantua, in
reference to the Affair of Casal, to prevent those disorders which would be
pernicious to the quiet and liberty of Italy, if his most Christian Majesty,
should be constrained to transport his Arms into the very heart of Lombardy, as
without their compliance he would be necessitated to do.

The Marshall Turenne was confirmed in the Command of his Army against the
Spaniards in Flanders; for his Lieutenant-Generals he had deputed the Marquess
de Uxelles, the Count de Beaujeu, the Sieurs de Castelneau, and de Sant Maur,
all brave persons, of great experience and renown. There were designed likewise
7500 Horse and Foot for Rossiglion and Catalonia, under the Command of
Marshall Hoqiuncourt; and at last, after several Negotiations, by the
intercession of the Bishop of Xaintes, he prevailed upon the Count de Ognon, to
resign the Governments of the Country of Aunis, the Isles of Oleron and The,
and the strong Town of Brouages, which he held as the Queens
Lieutenant General, upon the paying him 3000 Francs, and delivering a Patent to
be Duke, Pair and Marshall of France.

The Reasons upon which this person was brought to this resignation was this,
That not being able to stand upon his own legs, he must have been constrained
to have thrown himself under the Protection of Spain, or of England, or return
to his obedience to his Majesty; so that foreseeing discreetly, he should at
last become a prey to those who had undertaken his defense, and considering
that it is the property of a wise man to prevent other people, and not attend
till they be circumvented themselves, and to return with security to his own
Country, and obedience to his natural Sovereign, rather then plunge his Name
and Family in perpetual Infamy, he resolved to surrender all into His Majesty's
hands.

The Lieutenancy of all these Governments was confirmed upon Monsieur d'
Estrades, a Person of tried integrity and experience.

The Lieutenancy of Brouage was given to Monsieur Champfleury; that of Oleron
to Monsieur de St. Leonard; the Fort of Preda in the Isle of The to the Sieur
de Louches, and the Towers of Rochel to Sieur de Aunais, all four the Cardinals
Confidents, with whose contrivances Fortune very courteously corresponding, by
his success, and his wisdom together, he managed things so well, the effects
still rendered his Actions most commendable and glorious.

Mazarine was in the mean time contriving all ways most probable to reduce the
minds of the discontented, by gentle rather then by violent means; he heaped up
great Treasures of money for the payment of the Soldiers, and for the carrying
on of the War. The Recruits of the old Troops, and the Levies of new, were not
small, nor difficult, in respect that the reputation of the Cardinal among the
Soldiers prevailed over any interest whatever, they applying themselves with
effectual diligence to such ways as might render them grateful, and enable them
to merit his favor, which was so exceedingly desired by them all: and this was
the cause, that by their fidelity and assistance he undertook such Enterprises,
and succeeded contrary to the opinions of those who were emulous of his honor.

The principal design of the Cardinal, was to calm all intestine Agitations,
and reunite the distracted minds of the French; and considering, that restoring
France to its former Amity and Obsequiousness to its King, there would be no
further apprehension of any Foreign Power, he addressed himself therefore with
the utmost of his industry and his Arms, to reduce Guienne to its duty, not
omitting what correspondences he could make with the inhabitants of the Town of
Bourdeaux, with several of which he treated to that purpose: In the mean time,
he gave peremptory Orders, that the River called the Garonne, which passes by
that City, should be stopped up, to the end, that perceiving all succor
excluded, all Commerce intercepted, and the Kings Army encompassing the Town,
they might be terrified into a surrender, without the hazard of fighting.

The Duke of Vendosme with his Fleet, possessed himself of the Passes upon the
River, and by building of Forts in places of most importance, and with his
Forces by land, had already beaten off the Princes Troops from several Posts;
upon which it was resolved in His Majesty's Council, to transmit a new Amnesty
to the Citizens of that Town, to let them understand, that notwithstanding the
advantages the King had, which rendered affairs almost secure and infallible,
yet such was his gracious clemency, that he stood always with his Arms open to
receive them again into his favor, who had so ungratefully offended him.

This Amnesty was published and registered in the Parliament, transferred to
Again, upon which diverse Assemblies were held in Bourdeaux, in which the most
moderate declared themselves very sensibly for their Country, making it plain
and palpable, in what damages and dangers those subjects would find themselves
involved, who established the Fabric of their contumacy and disobedience upon
the foundation of foreign assistance; but the incentives o^ ambition, and the
temerity of the multitude were too potent to be capable of Reason, so that they
^mmerged themselves over head and ears in their former presumption, and more
particularly those of the Olmiera, who perverting the Counsels of the good
Citizens, and calling them unfaithful, who with more fidelity and reason
prosecuted the advantage of the Public, they rejected all their Counsels and
Advice, threatening those who spoke any thing to the contrary, insulting the
more, by how much they would have them persuaded that the said Propositions
were rather an effect of the weakness of the Kings Power, then of the sincerity
of his heart.

They believed their best support was that which was promised them by the
Spaniard, who with their money and their insinuations, gained daily upon the
Principals of that Counsel and Faction. They presumed likewise, that the
Eng^ish would not neglect so favorable an occasion of improving their
interests in the divisions of France, and assisting that City, which was upon
the point of establishing it self into a Commonwealth, like another Rochel.
They hoped the Prince of Condy, with his Flanders Army would be able to force
his way to the very gates of Paris, and give them so strong a diversion in
those parts, that the Kings forces would not be strong enough to do any thing
there, where the Princess, the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess of Longueville
with their presence, gave so great luster to the darkness which overspread the
Town.

These Considerations were very plausible; and their fair Show had a great
power to effacinate the eyes, even of Prudence it self, so that the spirits of
the people were become so obstinately perverse, that the reestablishment of the
Kings Authority in those parts, was esteemed a very difficult if not an
impossible thing, so strangely were they possessed of the irresistible assistance
of the Spaniard, who with a vast Profusion of money, omitted no provision that
might quicken that party, which was so likely to contribute to his Grandeur.
But, as private interest for the most part prevails over the public, and hopes
that are only grounded upon appearance, produce the least fruit, so the
Bourdelots in time found it true to their Costs. For though they dispatched
their Deputies to London, to that Parliament and Cromwell, to represent of what
importance it was to England to assist them at that time, and to foment the
divisions in France; and though the English understood their interest well
enough, and were likewise inclined to their assistance, yet those inclinations
were overweighed by other reflections, relating more to their future then to
their present advantage.

The English at that time were at Wars with the Hollander, and their new
Government stood upon too tottering a foundation, to embark in such mighty
designs. The consideration, that the ruin of France would be the
aggrandishment of Spain, (which was always a more implacable enemy to their
Religion) made them recollect that a rupture with France at that time would not
suit with their present affairs, in respect that the French accommodating (as
probably in that case they would do) with the Crown of Spain, they would be
able by a Conjunction afterward with Holland, and by the intelligence they had
with the English, who for the most part submitted to that new Government, for
want of power to dispute it any longer) they might bring King Charles once more
into that Kingdom, and pull that slautry and confusion upon their own backs,
which they designed upon their Neighbors: whereupon their resolution being to
foment the differences betwixt the two Crowns equally, and with such Artifice,
that should harrase and weaken one another, and not engage themselves wholly
with one, which would be the way to drive them to a Peace, the people of
Bourdeaux had but small hopes of expectation of assistance from England.

Besides these, there was another reason more secret and intrinsic then the
rest; and that was a private design which Cromwell had to reform that
Government, which he knew well enough, (not suiting with his designs) to be of
no long duration; so that it was not convenient for him to engage in any
foreign troubles, whilst the discontents and emulations at home gave him such
employment both for his Counsels and Arms. Yet though President Bourdeaux the
French Ambassador at London assured his Master, that the English would conserve
the Peace, and continue their intelligence with that Crown; nevertheless, the
people of Bourdeaux did not absolutely despair, but that at length some
resolution would be taken for their relief, flattering themselves, that when
the peace with the Hollander (at that time in Agitation) should be concluded,
and those differences composed, they would apply themselves to their interests
and support.

In the mean time the Spaniard used all possible Art to propagate their
troubles, and make his advantage thereby. But his Indian Fleet being
insufficient, and his Treasure at home too small to satisfy all
solicitations, and maintain War in so many places; besides, the Kingdoms and
States under the dominion of that Monarchy, being almost depopulate with long
Wars, and by consequence unable to afford them sufficient supplies of men, they
were forced to address themselves to the English for a certain number out of
Ireland, which were immediately raised and transported, to evacuate that
Country of such persons as were Catholics, and ill-affected to the new
Commonwealth. In Germany and other parts they could make no levies at all;
insomuch than being incapable of making any benefit of so benign a
Conjuncture, it made the weakness of the Spaniard more then ordinarily
conspicuous.

To the reinforcement of the Princes party 2000 Irish were sent at several
times into Guienne. The Marquess of Santa Croce had Orders to refit the Navy in
the Bay of Biscay, the Baron Batteville to beat up his drums for men, and to
provide Ammunition and all Accommodation for their speedy return into the
Garonne; besides which, large Promises, and a considerable sum of ready money
was sent to Bourdeaux, and into Flanders to hasten new Levies, and reinforce
those Armies, that by the assistance of the Prince of Condy and his party, they
might be able to make a vigorous Inroad upon the French on that side, whilst
the forces of Bourdeaux gave them strong and considerable diversion on the
other.

The money which was remitted was very welcome to those that had the good
fortune to receive it; who, for the most part, misappli'd it, and converted to
their own, what was intended for the public use; by which means the designs
and deliberations of the Catholic Court, were not only retarded, but oftimes
precipitated; for being so remote from those Provinces in which the War was
carried on, it could not contribute nor proportion its Recruits, according to
the suddenness and variety of the Accidents which happened; an inconvenience of
great importance to that Crown, by which the wisest and most prudent of their
resolutions have been many times enervated and lost.

To these Reasons another may be added, and that is that the Royal Council of
Spain was from time to time deluded by the successive relations they received
from the French in their service, who (magnifying the power and interest of
their party, and villifying that of the Kings) filled the heads even of the
gravest of them, with vain and impertinent hopes, and they taking their
measures accordingly, found themselves at last not only mistaken, but involved
in greater difficulties then before.

On the other side, the French being an united and entire body, able to derive
Orders immediately to its several members; and being animated and directed in
their affairs by Cardinal Mazarin, a Person of miraculous knowledge in the
nature and interest of all Nations; no wonder, if he knew how to make his
advantages, and apply remedies to the maladies of that Country, which without
his Judgment and diligence, would by degrees have grown incurable.

In the mean time then, whilst in the Court of Spain they were contriving
expedients to foment the troubles in France; and in France the Cardinal was as
busy to reinvigorate the declining Grandeur of that Kingdom: the Generals of
the Armies on both sides, omitted no opportunities that might advance the
interest of their several Princes. The Count Marcin, General for the Prince of
Conde in Guienne, desirous to enlarge his Quarters, by the taking in of such
places as were most easy to be attaqu'd, he commanded out Colonel Baltassar
with 800 Irish, to fall upon Grenada on the Garonne in the County of Grave, as
a place which would facilitate his passage into the County's of Armaniack and
d' Auches: The Sieur Baz endeavored to possess himself of a Pass upon the River
called La douxand, hoping to force the Chevalier de Aubeterre to abandon those
places, that he might enter with great profit and advantage to himself and his
Party: Bat Monsieur de Aubeterre, having intelligence of his design, with a
Party of 300 Horse, and some commanded Musketeers, fell so furiously upon his
Forlorn (which consisted of some select Horse and Foot drawn out of their
Gross) that without so much as drawing a sword, they betook themselves to their
heels, part of them being drowned in the River, and part taken Prisoners by the
enemy.

The inhabitants of Sarlat, being much infested by the Garrisons belonging to
the Princes, took heart at this good success, and signified to the Marquess of
Sovebeuf, that if he pleased to advance at a certain time with his Troops, they
would receive him into the Town by a private Watercourse which ran under the
Town-wall: but that design miscarrying, the Townsmen attempted to corrupt some
of the Officers of the Garrison, whom they perceived discontented with their
General; and having concluded an intelligence with them: they gave notice
thereof to the Duke of Candale, who sending them a party of four hundred men
under the Command of the Count Marin: On the 23. of May, an hour before-day,
they were received by the Sieur Boreel, Advocate and Counselor for the City,
where having joined with what forces could be made in the Town, they marched
immediately to the Bishops Palace, where Chavagnac was quartered at that time.
Chavagnac being awaked with the noise, leaped out of his bed, and endeavored to
escape in his shirt; but he was pursued by the Citizens and taken Prisoner. The
main Guard in the Marketplace made some little defense, till the Sieur
Boismale, their Lieutenant Colonel, three Captains, and other inferior
Officers were slain. Chambelloy their Camp-Master, della Roche their
Field-Marshal, and the rest of the Officers who had barricadoed themselves up
in the houses, surrendered, and voluntarily took up Arms for the King.

This fortunate Acquisition was seconded by the taking in of several other
places and walled Towns, in which the Princes forces were quartered: so that
the Kings Army advancing toward Bordeaux on all sides, and the City every day
straightened more then other, the sober and more provident part of them, were in
no little distraction to consider the consequences which were too likely to
follow, they foresaw, that without a sudden and a vigorous supply (the Kings
Army increasing daily as it did) all would in a short time be reduced to the
utmost extremity.

The City of Bordeaux was at this time capable of relief but two ways, either
from England or Spain. To which end the Sieur de Couppes, and Count Marsin's
Secretary were dispatched to Saint Sebastian, and from thence to the Court of
Spain to solicit the performance of their Promises made for the support of
those Parts, which being the most exposed of all the Provinces and Cities in
France, brought Bordeaux into a dilemma of becoming a prey to those that fought
against it, or those which defended it.

In the mean time, the Sieur de Saint Agolin had not been wanting in his
solicitations in Spain, to press the dispatch of their Fleet, and the supplies
of money which had bin promised, and at last practiced in the name of his
Master the Prince of Condy, that unless a considerable sum was sent before the
last of that month (which was February) he should be constrained to depart.
They had already disburs'd 100000 Crowns, which they had sent to Bordeaux; but
upon the Arrival of de Chouppes, who was immediately followed by a Deputy from
the Counsel of Olmiera: the Court of Spain being fully informed of the danger
all Guienne was in, by the vigilance of Cardinal Mazarin, they immediately
dispatched 30000 Pistols to Priscay, with peremptory Orders to put forth six of
their most considerable Ships, and four Fireships, with all possible diligence,
that they might force their way into the Garonne, and oppose themselves against
the French.

The said Persons were likewise immediately returned with 150000 Crowns more for
the Prince of Conde; and because it was conceived, that the Sieur Lenet had not
observed the respect which was due to the Prince of Conty, by reason of his
particular intimacy and correspondence which he held with Conte Marsin, who had
no great veneration for the said Prince; there were Instructions given by the
Spanish Ministers, which way they should conduct themselves for the future, in
the maintenance and support of the Condean Party. But the Count d' Ognon's
Accommodation with the King of France, did not a little startle Don Lewis de
Haro, and the rest of the Grandees of the Council; the foundation they had laid
upon the fidelity of this Cavalier, (who had franckly undertaken the defense of
Guienne) being taken away, and no grounds left for any future resolution, by
reason of the inconstancy of the French, who would promise the highest fidelity
one day, and the next day leave them in the lurch. So that the Kings party
increasing hourly in those parts, and the Princes growing every day weaker,
their apprehensions could not but be very great; nevertheless, in this very
Exigence, the Court of Spain failed not to send their Orders, to suggest their
Counsels, to transmit Men and Money, as far as the utmost of their power and
ability would extend.

Not long after, the Baron Batteville represented to the Court the difficulty
of getting in to the Garonne, unless he were reinforced with a much stronger
Squadron of Ships. Twenty thousand Crowns were immediately dispatched to him
with new Orders to ship himself upon the aforesaid six Men of war and to put
500 Irish into Bordeaux: But affairs changing daily their face, it was
necessary to change Counsels as often, and Batteuille being unable to execute
them without further supplies, their Commands were received oftener then put in
execution.

After this, the Marquess of Lusignan was dispatched in great haste from
Bordeaux to Madrid, where he Arrived in May. The pretense of this Embassy was
to complement his Catholic Majesty, upon the recovery of the Queen, who had
had the small Pox, with great danger of her life, besides the King himself had
been ill five or six days of a Fever: But the intrinsic reason was the
soliciting for fresh forces in respect the French had made themselves Masters
of the Garonne, and fortified it so, that it would be no easy matter to remove
them; and by consequence the Kings Army increasing without interruption, as it
did, it must needs follow that Bourdeaux must be lost.

Lusignan had many fair Promises, 200000 Crowns were delivered to him, and the
Dispatches for the Ships from Port de Passage consigned to him: Not long after,
that design being looked upon as impossible, Battiville had new Instructions,
if it were possible, to get into Bourdeaux by the Lake of Arcazon, with all
imaginable diligence, to keep that people in their fidelity, and support as
much as in him lay, the drooping spirits of the Prince of Conty, and the rest
of the Officers in his Party. He had Orders moreover to propose three things to
them, viz. Whether they would have the Spanish Fleet force its way up the River
Garonne, and fight them; Whether they would have them clap before the Mouth of
the River, and lie there; Or whether they thought it not more convenient for
them to cruse along the Coasts of Britain and Normandy; and by alarming them in
those parts, give them a diversion in Guienne.

Nine hundred more Irish were dispatched into Guienne, and Letters sent Post to
the Archduke, and the Ministers in Flanders, that they should take the Field
with all Expedition, that they should supply the Prince of Condy with 200000
Crowns mere for the reinforcement of his Troops, to put him into a Condition to
march immediately for France.

The Spaniard considering, that Mazarine being in all likelihood thereby
constrained, to draw down what force he could make against that Invasion, would
not be able to pursue his Enterprises against Guienne, but by consequence give
them opportunity to make Provisions for the defense of that Province. But
neither in this could the Spaniard compass his design; for the Ship which
carried the 300000 Crowns into Flanders, to hasten that Affair, falling
unluckily into the hands of the English, they made no scruple to to seize upon
it, (though the King of Spain was at that time in Amity with that Nation) and
to stop the Ship likewise for some time, it being a Dutch bottom.

Nor was this Miscarriage to be imputed to the negligence of the Ministers, but
to the uncertainty of humane accidents, which many times run counter, though
managed and contrived by the best Counsels in the World.

Besides these sums, 30000 Pistols more were sent to the Fleet, with express
Orders to Batteville, to try all ways of introducing himself into the Garonne,
and open a Passage into the Town; to which end, and no other, that sum was
intended.

At the same time, the Count de Fiesco and several other persons went also into
Spain, to represent the necessities of those parts, and to solicit for relief.
But some are of opinion, the chief end of these journeys, was to receive
Presents and Gratuities, which the King of Spain distributed very liberally to
all Frenchmen that came to his Court; so that many pretended to join with him,
more to be nibling at his money, then out of any true service they intended
him; and it is believed, that if the money he in this manner distributed among
the Frenchmen, were fairly computed, it would appear sufficient to have
conquered a whole Kingdom; and yet either by their treachery or inexperience,
all these vast sums were utterly lost, and these great preparations become
entirely ineffectual.

In the mean time the Duke of Vandosme, was employed in hastening the building
of Caesar's Fort upon the Garonne, as likewise another in the Country betwixt
the two Seas, beginning above Vallier, before the house of Alinet, who
considering of what importance it would be, to interrupt the Communication
betwixt the several Posts belonging to the Prince, and the Town of Bordeaux, if
he could possess himself of Lermont, which was situate exactly upon the mouth
of the River, and Garrisoned by 500 Irish, under the Command of Colonel Dillon;
On the 26. of May he caused the Tertia's of Moasieur Milleray and Normandy, to
be drawn out and shipped in such Galleys and Brigantines as he had ready, under
the Command of the Chevalier d' Albret his Camp-Master, who with others being
embarked, they sallied forth by the favor of the Tide, against the Galliots
which lay under that place.

Being arrived, there disbarqu't the Count of Comminges, the Lieutenant
General, the two Brothers, the Count and Baron of Montesson, the Baron of Croix
Camp-Master, and Sir George Carteret, who (as they say) persuaded the Governor
of the place, to take up Arms with his whole Party for the King of France. They
agreed upon the payment of 7500 Franks to deliver up the Town, and it was done
accordingly, for the Irish Soldiers being much discontented, and looking upon
themselves as sold to the Spaniards like so many slaves, did not hold themselves
obliged to them by any faith or duty in the world. The rest indeed had followed
their Example, out of a temple they had taken up, that they could not in
conscience serve the Spaniard, because of the League and Amity at that time
betwixt them and the English, to whom they were professed enemies. But Marsin
foreseeing the danger, had provided very politickly against it, by confirming
the Officers of their Tertia's to put Hostages into his hands.

The loss of Lermont was a cooling Card to the Bordelots, it being of such
importance, that by the taking of it, the Kings Army intercepted the benefit of
the River, in the dominion of which their loss of security consisted.

Notwithstanding all these advantages, the King desisted not from his Overtures
of Peace, with the milder sort of his Rebels, and that in such manner as gave
them more assurance of his Pardon, then suspicion of his revenge; so that in
the Month of May he published another General Amnesty, in such terms as
demonstrated his inclination to be less vindicative then merciful. Upon this
Proclamation the Bonrdelots called a General Assembly in the Town Hall, where
it was consulted, Whether it was better to accept of this Act of Oblivion, and
put an end to their miseries, or persist in their Contumacy. The sober part was
of opinion, it was more expedient for subjects to live in obedience to their
natural Prince, then in the shadow of liberty under a stranger. The fear of the
Olmiera made every body startle, yet in private, things were largely debated by
some of the Olmiesti; but the obstinacy of the Populacy, could not be
overruled by any politic considerations. As if they had been all bewitched by
the Spaniards, they were possessed with an opinion that they should be set at
liberty immediately; they persuaded themselves they should have whatever they
desired: they believed nothing but what agreed with their own imaginations; and
concluding they had that sure in their own hands, which was but the false
reflection of the Artifice of the Princes; they resolved, That no Amnesty should
be proposed or accepted, but such in which the consent and satisfaction of the
Prince of Condy should concur, for whose sake they had taken Arms, and brought
the War home to their own doors; and if any should be so audacious to deliver
his opinion to the contrary, as a Traitor to his Country, he was to be thrown
headlong into the River. They argued, that the Offers made them by the Court,
was but the effect of their weakness, and the product of necessity, rather then
any Compassion to them; and in that mind they supposed themselves able to
justify their disobedience to the King; especially if by their solicitations
in England, they could prevail with Cromwell to undertake their defense, they
doubted not in that case, but under his protection they should be able to
vindicate their liberty, and shake off their Dependence upon their natural
Prince. But these being the dictates of fury and passion, rather then rational
deductions, it was not long before they found themselves deceived by the vanity
of their imaginations.

The Court of France perceiving therefore all the ways they had taken, to
sweeten the obstinacy and fierceness of the people, to be absolutely
ineffectual, they gave themselves over to a resolution of acting with all
severity and vigor against that Rebellious City.

Orders were sent to that end, that by streightning it on all sides, it should
be necessitated to return to its duty, seeing no other way was like to succeed.
Above all, they were to secure the River, against whatever attempt should be
made by the Spaniard, for if they could cut off the benefit of that from them,
the City would be desperate in a short time; especially if they could keep
things in that posture till the Vintage was over, for that being in the power
of the Kings Army, and to be destroyed or intercepted by them as they pleased,
there could be no greater loss nor punishment befall them, the Estates of the
chiefest Citizens in the Town consisting principally in the plenty and
excellence of their Wines, which they selling yearly to the English, Hollander,
and other Northern Nations, afforded them very considerable profit.

But because it was necessary likewise, to provide for the Frontiers toward
Flanders, where the Prince of Condy (joined with the Spaniards) made
Extraordinary preparations, boasting of what he would do that Campaign, by
means of the places he held in the Province of Champania, and the intelligence
he had settled with his friends in Paris, toward which City he gave out he
would march directly. The Cardinal with no less dililigence provided to prevent
him; making all provisions to oppose him; he considered that all consisted in
the unity of the forces of that Kingdom; That his greatest difficulty would be
to preserve himself against his enemies at home; That if he could not reduce
the Prince of Condy to his Allegiance, (whose mind was elated with high hopes
and advantages, he expected from Spain) it would be his best way by all
possible means to lessen his party and reputation in France, so as he might be
left as it were a bare Commander of Spaniards, who being to recompense him for
the losses he received in France, and to maintain him in the Quality of first
Prince of the blood, would be weary of him by degrees, and he become a greater
burden to that Crown, then a Complete and entire Army.

Two things therefore were more especially under the Cardinals consideration;
one, to reduce what places he had in his possession in France; the other, was
to debauch his friends away from him: in pursuance of this design, a General
Pardon was published to all such as should before a prefixed time return to
their obedience. The Count de Tavanes, who had been very zealously engaged with
the said Prince, upon some particular dissatisfaction returned to his house,
upon whose example several others of the Princes Adherents fell off likewise.

In the mean time the Prince of Condy seemed to be unconcerned at what past,
though, to speak truth, he wanted wherewithal to recompense, or repair the
losses his friends received in their own Country, the supplies he had from
Spain being too small for his own private expenses, much less to remunerate
those who had served him. He would have complied notwithstanding, if the King's
Council could have been brought to condescend to his terms, which in that case
it is possible he would have moderated; but, as when he had a numerous train of
discontented persons attending him; it was then of importance to reconcile him;
so now when he was as it were alone, and abandoned by all of them, it was not
thought necessary to continue their applications; forasmuch as in that
condition he would be rather a trouble and expense to the Spaniards, then of
any use and advantage: so that according to the Cardinals Judgment, there was
less danger in remaining abroad then in his return; for being a Prince
ambitious of honor and reputation, he supposed he could hardly comport with
the Spaniards, who were no less ambitious then himself; and that the frankness
and liberty of the French, would not accommodate with their gravity and
reservedness. The Prince was of an humor so haughty and disdainful, it could
not but become odious to the Grandees of Spain, who stood much upon the
Ceremony and Punctilio; besides the natural antipathy betwixt the Nations; and
his ignorance in their Language must of necessity produce some inconveniences,
seeing he could not speak so as to make himself understood or obeyed by the
several Nations in the Spanish Army. And if it should so happen, that by his
extraordinary valor he should atchieve any thing extraordinary, it would but
make them jealous and emulous of his glory, and let his Actions be what they
would, he should be always looked upon in Spain, not only as a Foreigner, but
as a Conspicuous Prince of an Enemies Country, who might every moment find out
some way or other to regain him if they pleased.

But if his fortune should be adverse, his loss would be accompanied with
disdain and regret, for having consumed as much gold for the support of one
person, as would have sufficed to have maintained a whole Army. So that when
ever the Prince came to any difference or rupture with the Spaniard, it must
needs redound to the advantage of France, because in that case it would fall
out, either the Spaniards would destroy him, or he ruin the Spaniard; so that
the leaving the Prince still in their hands would be so great a burden to them,
that in stead of giving them the assistance they expected, he would be an
impediment and obstruction to all their deliberations.

Again, if the Prince should be restored, and the affairs of France succeed to
advantage, the honor would be attributed wholly to his conduct; and adding new
luster to his former reputation, he would be able to eclipse the glory of other
people; so that reassuming his old sentiments of giving, not receiving Laws,
the good Government would become confused and distracted, which under a Monarchy
ought to acknowledge but one Master: besides which, they should want occasion
to evince, that in France there were other Captains as considerable as he,
contrary to what the Royal Council of Spain had given out. The King of France,
out of his inexpressible clemency would have condescended to have received the
Prince again into his favor, if without concerning himself in the affairs of
that Kingdom, he could have resolved to have retired out of France into some
unsuspected State, and quietly enjoy the profits of his Revenue, till the War
were ended. But being in the flower of his Age, and accustomed to command, he
was too passionately addicted to honor (which is acquired by labor and pains)
to make himself a slave to his own quiet and repose.

Upon these Maxims the French interest being managed, and the Cardinal
proceeding with all courtesy and demonstration of kindness, his Ministry
being full of sweetness and Moderation, (pretending to revenge himself no
further of his enemies, then by making himself known to be a good man and a
virtuous, the acrimony and disgust at his Administration (which had been
infused into the fancies of the people, by a few seditious persons,) began to
clear up and dispel. The first effects of this alteration was seen in Paris,
where his Reputation having been more wounded then in any other part of the
Kingdom; the Citizens touched with Remorse for what they had done, thought
themselves obliged to make some public manifestation of their Repentance,
which they performed by inviting him on the 29, of March 1653. to a most
sumptuous Dinner in the Town Hall, an honor seldom shown in France, but to
some great Prince.

The Cardinal went thither, accompanied by several Grandees of the Court, and
the Principals of the Counsel of the Communalty of Paris) where he received a
Dinner so pompously prepared, and served up with so great demonstration of
affection from the people, (with whom the great Piazza called the Greve, was
full) that I my self being there in curiosity among the rest, heard his name
very frequent among their Acclamations, heard them applaud his management, and
curse those who had misrepresented him, with an astonishment equal to the
facility wherewith those animals pass from one extreme of contempt, to the other
of honor and esteem.

The Cardinal appeared to them several times at the window, and caused several
sorts of money to be thrown out among them, who returned their thanks in
extraordinary Applauses: The Citizens drank his health very often, and did him
all the Honors could be expressed to a chief Minister. Whilst he was at Dinner,
the Rooms, and Hall were as full of the Citizens Wives as they could hold, who
were come thither as fine as they could make themselves, to behold a man, who
(as they called him) was the Miracle of Nature, The Cardinal treated them with
all imaginable Civility, distributing Sweetmeats and other Junkets amongst
them in abundance: When he went down the stairs he stopped very often,
discoursing sometimes with one, and sometimes with another; and though he was
then in the sight of the whole Piazza, there was not one of the unruly and
insolent multitude which gave him the least ill word, but all saluted him with
benedictions and well-wishes for his health; with the same noise and
acclamation they followed him to his Coach, only one of them was observd to
cry, Per mia fe voi non sete Mazarino ma un honorato huomo, In my conscience
you are not Mazarine, but an honest Gentleman. Every one strove to see him, and
to be seen by him; Their Augury was good, and the event was suitable, their
happy Annunciations corresponding in their effects, for the Prince of Condy's
Troops under the Command of the Count de Coligny, being drawn out to fall upon
Couvin, a little Town upon the River Noirau, they were caught in an Ambuscade
by the Count de Beaujeu, cut to pieces; and Coligny and others of the principal
Officers taken Prisoners, which the Court looking upon as a good Omen,
concluded the Duke of Espernon Governour-General of Burgundy should commence
the Enterprise against Bellegard.

After the Surrender of the Castle of Dijon, Burgundy was in no small
distraction, by the continual excursions of that Garrison that continually
infested the Country: to restrain their Extravigancies, the aforesaid Duke
clapped a Garrison into the Castle of Pagny, which was not far off, but wanting
strength sufficient to reduce it, he hearkened to certain Propositions made him
by the Creatures of the Prince of Condy, who had some thoughts of putting it
into his hands, as being very hard to be kept in respect of its situation,
which was in the midst of the Kings Provinces. But that treaty being
interrupted by the high remands of the Governor thereof the Marquess de
Batteville, the Duke of Espernon made Preparations to besiege it; and being
advised, that those of the Franche County, (though at that time in Neutrality)
might break with them, and relieve it, he dispatched a Messenger to the
Marquess de Saint Martino, and the Sieur de Cea, the principal Directors of his
Catholic Majesty's Affairs in that Province, and was assured from them, they
had no intention not thought of breaking their Neutrality: Being encouraged
likewise by the Burgundians, who to draw the thorn out of their own foot, had
undertaken to provide them money, and all necessary Provisions for that
Enterprise: the Duke past the Soan at Saint Jo. de Losne: the Marquess of
Uxelles marched from Challons to Verdun with what soldiers he could draw out
of the adjacent Garrisons, which being rendezvouz'd, amounted in all to about
4000 men, under the Command of the said Uxelles and Roncelleres, both of them
Lieutenant-Generals. On the 19. of May, the Duke of Espernon, possessed himself
of the Posts of Chamblanc and Pavy, whilst the other took their stations at
Caselles and Saint George, and beginning their intrenchments, they approached
with their Artillery, battering it in two several places: and a while after, on
the other side of the River, where the Sieur de St. Quintin placed himself with
400 Musketeers. The Besieged defended themselves courageously, and by frequent
Sallies endeavored to interrupt the advancement of the Royallists toward the
Fosse: But Roncelleres having got as far as the Counterscarp, diverted the
water, and filled up the Ditch with Bavins and Timber, he began a Mine under
the Bulwark toward the River: Batteville despairing of relief; and in no
condition to defend himself long, signified to the Duke, that amongst
Christians it was never the Custom to proceed to an assault before Summons was
given; and therefore he desired to know, upon what grounds he was so severely
dealt with. The Duke of Espernon replied, that that indeed was the Practice
against lawful enemies, but not against Rebels; and that he was resolved not to
defer the assault, seeing his Troops were then ready to fall on; but being
persuaded from that asperity by the Officers of his Army, as a thing which many
times precipitate men into despair, he complied; more for the preservation of
his own, then any Compassion for the enemy; so that upon the 8. of June, the
Articles being signed, Batteville marched out of the Town with 700 men, upon
very honorable Conditions, and was conducted to Stenay. The Burgundians were
very much consolated with the reducement of this Town: for by that they
acquired the peace and tranquillity of their whole Province: the Duke of
Espernon according to his Promise, caused it to be dismantled, whereby the
passage of the Sona was left open, and the people excused from the great
Contributions they would have been necessitated to pay the Garrison, to keep
them from plundring, and the ill treatment of the Soldiers.

The Army which took in this Town, was divided afterward, and part of it sent
to the Marceschal Turenne, who was then preparing with all speed, and almost
ready to take the field; the rest were commanded to the Marshall della Ferte
Seneterra, who was at that time upon the Frontiers of Lorain; and had taken
several Castles from the Enemy in the Territories of Verdun.

These good Beginnings were followed by an Exploit (as bold as unexpected)
performed by the Count Broglia, Governor of la Bassee, a Captain of great fame
and experience. He had Intelligence, that the Troops which were quartered at
Esterro, de la Goruge, and the Posts adjacent, (intended to be employed, in the
Army of the Prince of Condy) were most of them drawn away to a General
Rendezvous, and that there remained in their quarters not above 700 Irish Foot
under the Command of Colonel Morphi, and about 70 Horse under the Baron of
Lambech: upon this Intelligence he marched out of la Bassee, with 400
Firelocks, and a hundred Horse, and by a Bridge of Boats passed the River Lis,
betwixt E'sterre and Armentiers, and fell into the quarters of Morphi's
Regiment; he commanded the Sieur de Avogadre Camp-Master to the Regiment of
Piemont, to pass the River with some Firelocks, whilst he kept his Post with
his Horse, and the remainder of his Foot on the other side, to relieve them as
a reserve upon any occasion. On the 13. of June about midnight, the Sieur de la
Treoy Serjeant-Major of the Town of la Bassee, advanced with a hundred
Firelocks, and charge them so briskly, that though their opposition was very
good, he beat them into the Church, where they defended themselves afterward
for above two hours; but at last the Royalists having secured the door, the
Irish which were 300 soldiers, 7 Captains with other inferior Officers) were
glad to surrender and become prisoners of War, Colonel Morphi saved himself by
the benefit of the night. From thence the Count advanced to the Fort, but he
found if forsaken, and having marched up and down the Neighboring Villages, he
returned to la Bassee with considerable booty.

These Rumors awakened the Prince of Condy, and doubtless he would without
delay have taken the Field, had not the taking of the 300000 Royals by the
English (as abovesaid) retarded the provisions of Horse, which were with that
money to have been bought, both for the remounting his Cavalry, (...) for his
Train of Artillery, which were supplied afterward in Holland, but with great
difficulty.

Cardinal Mazarin, taking the advantage of this Conjuncture, he caused the
Marshall Turenne, (after he had commanded his Troops into the Country about
Reims) to depart out of Paris the 14. of June; and there in a certain place,
not far from Chillery in Champagnia, having consulted what course he was to
take with the Marshall de la Ferte Seneterra, who at the same time had drawn
down his forces about Verdun, it was resolved they should fall upon Rhetel, and
endeavor by the taking of that place, to cut off the Princes advance into
Champagnia, which being an open Country, and very plentiful in corn, it was
too probable he would otherwise have done to his great advantage. Turenne
advanced to Chasteau Porcien, and clapped himself in betwixt Rhetel and Chaumont;
This is a Castle in which the Spaniards had a Party of Foot, and some 60 Horse,
who at the very first fight of the Kings forces, rendered themselves up
Prisoners of War, without further Conditions. The Marshall de la Ferte came on
the other side the River Aisne, through the Valle di Bourg, and having drawn up
their men in the fields of Chaumont, they advanced against the Town, on two
sides, and that very night the Regiments of Picardie, Turenne and Palvan,
possessed themselves of all the outworks, and raised two Batteries, one against
the Gate toward Rocroy, (on which side Turenne was quartred) the other at the
Gate by the River, within the quarters of la Ferte.

In the Town there were 600 men Commanded by the Marquess de Persan, who ran
great hazard of being taken prisoner in the night, at the taking of the
outworks. Within two days time they made two breaches so large, that they
prepared to give the assault, but in the mean time the Town capitulated,
surrendered, and were Convoyed with two Pieces of Cannon to Stenay.

Marshall Turenne left the Sieur Boda Governor of the Town, with his Tertia
of French Foot, and marched himself to observe the motions of the Prince of
Condy and the Spaniard, who during this Leagure were joined at Hayes d'
Auvenes, having been retarded in their Campaign, both by their want of Horses,
as abovesaid, and also by a Negotiation they had with a Citizen of Arras for
the surprise of that City. But the same Person held Intelligence likewise with
the Cardinal, as he had done with the Prince, to gain money on both sides.

This Correspondence was began the Year before, and continued till the Prince
found himself deluded and cheated at several times of about 2000 Pistols. The
French having notice, that the Spaniard had not yet their Forces united to
engage the French Army (which was then numerous and flourishing) till they were
reinforced, which they most sollicitously endeavored: by express Order from the
Cardinal, they advanced against the Prince, with full resolution to attaque
him; But he had drawn up his Army betwixt two Woods behind a straight Pass, by
which means he prevented being fallen upon in a disadvantageous place; as it
might have happened, had it bin but one half hour longer, before he had had the
News of the French Army. The Mareschals him in so good a posture returned to
their Posts, and afterward marched toward Vervins, passing thorough certain
Villages not far from the Abbey of Tougny, they drew near to Vervens about
Proussy, and thence coasting by Guise, they encamped at Riblemont, to observe
the motion of the enemy, who, being reinforced with the Lorrain Troops, and
other supplies from Flanders, did principally design to make an Inroad into
France, upon presumption that at their first appearance many would declare for
them: The French Generals, being inferior in number, were obliged for that
reason to be more wary and circumspect, and to have a care how they ran the
risk of a Battle, which if it went cross, would be more dangerous in the
consequences, then in their present loss.

The Cardinals design was to protract time, and to set the Affairs of the
Kingdom to rights, by the reduction of Bourdeaux; to incapacitate the Prince to
raise new troubles by the assistance or intelligence of his friends, and to let
the Spaniards at length see they were mistaken in the opinion they had
conceived of that Juncture to ruin France, and the confidence they had reposed
in the reputation and interest of the Prince in his own Country, that being
the principal mark to which all their Councils were directed, it seeming
unlikely to the Court of Spain, that that Crown of it self, with its States and
Kingdoms, so distant and depopulated, should act any thing with advantage
against France, whilst it was entire and unanimous; for this cause they spared
no money, but were many times lavish and profuse in their distributions to the
discontented French, (who always deceived them with vain hopes and pretenses)
endeavoring still to draw more of them into rebellion, that by that means they
might be able, as it were, to compel the French to a solid Peace, to which his
Catholic Majesty was seriously inclined, but could not hope to obtain any
other way.

But the effects did not answer Expectation, for placing their hopes upon
particular persons more sollicitous of their own then of other peoples
advantage, who proposed only such things as might render themselves necessary
to the Spanish affairs; founding their principles upon this Maxim, That to
draw benefit from Princes, they ought to make them expect more then they
intended to perform, forasmuch as their custom is, when they are once
delivered, to regard them no longer who brought them out of their exigence.
Things being acted in this manner, and hastened by the Spaniard, in order to the
approaching Campaign, the Princes and Generals of the Armies held many Counsels
what way they were to proceed. The chief of of the Spanish Officers, and
particularly the Count de Fuensaldagna (a person of great judgment) proposed to
fall upon some of the most considerable of the King of France's. Towns, by the
benefit of which they might be enabled to pass on, and upon a solid foundation
maintain the War afterward in the Enemies Country. Some propounded to ship 5
or 6000 men, under the Command of the most expert Officers could be chosen, and
to send them into Guienne, to reinforce the Princes Troops in that Province,
and support the courage of the Bourdelots, thereby to sustein the War in those
parts, which was the strongest diversion could be given to the French Arms. To
that end it was proposed, they should sit down before Bayon, and the Princes
repair thither with their Troops, which would be more feasible in respect that
Colonel Baltasser had made himself Master of Tarsas. But the hopes that the
Relief from Spain would be sufficient; and having no Orders for dividing their
Army in Flanders, confuted all those Propositions. The Count of Fuenseldagne
was of opinion, that laying all other things aside, they should sit down before
Arras, whilst their Army was fresh, and the Alarmes so hot in other parts of
the Kingdom, for which reason he looked upon the Enterprise not so difficult as
other people might imagine, and that the Prince of Condy might consent, he
offered to give him Mouson.

But the Prince insisting upon his Intelligence in Paris, pressed hard, and upon
very good reason, that drawing all their forces together, they should pass the
Soma, march up to Paris, and give their party in that City opportunity to rise,
while the Court growing jealous of them, would be easily persuaded to quit the
Town, and that in these confusions, their Army advancing to Mantes, might
possess themselves of all the Country about Pontoise, Saint Lis, and other
adjacent Towns, where recruiting themselves with the discontented party, which
in probability would throng to him daily, they should reap extraordinary
advantage, and foment the Civil War in France.

This Proposition was in appearance plausible, and so well represented by the
Prince, that the Council were of the same mind, and esteemed that his opinion
ought really to be followed, as was seemingly desired by those who applauded
his Actions with their tongue, more then by their deeds.

But there were two considerable difficulties objected. The first was that by
the loss of Bellegard and Rhetel, the minds of many people were much dejected,
so that there were but few of the opinion, but the King of France would be
stronger that Campaign then the Prince of Condy, who had lost two such
considerable places, as it were under his Nose, to the great diminution of his
credit. The other was, that the French Army being come into the Field much
stronger then was imagined, it was dangerous to pass so many Rivers, and put
themselves into the Enemies Country, without any place of Retreat in case of
disaster, whilst also the Spanish Army was attended by another, though less
numerous, yet superior in courage, being all French, bold and experienced,
besides 4000 German Horse, the remainder of the famous Waymers forces, and
supported by several strong Towns and Fortresses, all firmly devoted to their
King. Nevertheless, as there is nothing deludes the imagination more then a
man's esteem of himself; the Prince of Condy was so transported with an opinion
of his Reputation in France, he thought that sufficient to do his business,
without being troubled to fight for it. This opinion therefore was embraced,
contrary to the judgment of Fuensaldagne, who for two secret reasons, was
really averse. The first was, that he believed the Princes designs were not
upon good foundation, and if they were, it did not consist with the interest of
Spain to advance them, forasmuch as it was most certain, if he reduced the
Cardinal to any straight, he would find some way or other to accommodate with
him, and then the Spaniard would run great hazard of having him engaged against
them, and the troubles in France would cease of themselves. The other was, that
it was not convenient for him to expose the whole Forces of Spain, without a
certainty of gaining some considerable place, and with the hazard of some
dangerous disgrace, not daring to be too confident in the Prince, who was a
Frenchman, or in the Duke of Lorrain, who the Count of Fuensaldagne knew, had
his ears always open to any Proposition of advantage, and might easily be
gained by the Artifice of the Cardinal. These two Reasons reflecting so nearly
upon the Prince of Condy, and the Duke of Lorrain, could not be publicly urged
in the Council; and therefore the other opinion prevailing, the Spanish Army
marched toward Cambray, from thence to Crevecoeur, and came to Chastelet
without interruption, and so to Fonsomme, where the River Somma arises, which
was but two Leagues distant from the French Camp,

The Spanish Army comprehending the Prince of Condy's, and the Duke of
Lorrain's forces, consisted of 30000 effective men: it was composed of
Spaniards, Italians, Walloons, Dutch, Burgundians, Flemins, Irish, and other
Nations, who by the diversity of their Languages and customs were the cause of
great confusion in that Camp; Their Train was very great, both for Cannon,
Ammunition and Baggage: Here the Prince of Condy made a halt for several days
in the face of the French Camp, passing the time in frequent, but
inconsiderable skirmishes with their Horse, which with most exact diligence
were kept scouting upon the Roads.

The Princes hopes were impregnated with strong conceit of his Party in Paris,
by whose assistance he thought his success would be in infallible; but he
reckoned without his Host, for the King being there, and the Cardinal very
watchful against the least insurrection, there was not one person durst appear
in the City, nor one Officer of those which were banished, who durst venture to
come into Paris, and head the Malcontents, who wished the Prince well in
their hearts, though they durst not show it, his design vanishing in fumo, He
lost his Reputation among the Spanish Commanders, who discovered him to be
without that interest and dependence which he was supposed to have in France,
and which his friends had promised upon their Parols. Perplexed therefore, and
in confusion about the resolution they were to take, the Armies confronted one
another for several days. The Prince of Condy being stronger in number, desired
by all means to come to a general Engagement, but the French, unwilling to
hazard themselves on so great a disadvantage, endeavored by the benefit of
their Incampments, and the convenience of the Fortresses they had thereabouts,
to give impediment to their Progress, and make them lose time.

This posture of affairs gave occasion to the discovery of the valor and
conduct of two Captains, Competitors at that time in point of Glory and Renown;
the disadvantage under which the Marshall Turenne then lay, in respect of the
disparity of his Numbers, making his Prudence in that Juncture more remarkable
then his courage.

But the Cardinals designs proceeded at another rate, his principal Object was
to reduce Bourdeaux to its obedience; he knew very well, that to secure this
part of the Kingdom, would be the safety of the other; His judgment was
approved by the whole Council, and resolution was taken to amuse the Prince on
the Frontiers of Picardy, or Champagnia, till the Affairs in Guienne were
dispatched, where all things tended to a fortunate Conclusion, though the means
used in the management were not entirely successful.

The Marquess de Theubon, who had defended with great courage and better
fortune the Town of Villeneuf de Agenois against Count Harcourt, disdaining
that Count Marsin should arrogate to himself the glory of preserving that City,
for that (during an inundation of waters, which had forced the Kings Army
further off) he had put into it 200 Horse, as also because by his Order, the
Houses of some of his Relations were plundered, amongst which was that of
Colonges, and of the Marquess Dowager of Villefranca, which said houses he had
taken into protection, he came to Bourdeaux to make his Complaint to the Prince
of Conty, who entreated him to lay aside his animosity at that time, and not to
think of revenging himself upon Marsin, as he had publicly threatened; but
neiher that, nor the giving him 500 Crowns by way of Reparation, prevailing, he
dispatched a Messenger to Blaye, to negotiate his Accommodation with the Duke
of Saint Simon and Vandosme, the last of which was newly arrived at that place,
the Dukes giving the Cardinal Advice thereof, were required by all means to
bring him off, if it were possible, and what other of that Party they could;
This business was of importance, and in a fair way to succeed; but the Advocate
Literie, being banished in the interim, upon some suspicions, though nothing
was perfectly discovered, that design was for the present laid by. Theubon was
advised by his friends, and by those that were true servants to the King, to
remain in Bourdeaux, to make himself Head of that Party in the Town, and never
to reconcile himself to Marsin, but to study a revenge; for if he could be so
happy as to kill him, he would not only satisfy his private resentment, but
put a Conclusion to the War, and perform an Action extremely meritorious to the
public. Nevertheless, being too much taken notice of, he departed the Town,
having first settled there a good correspondence, and communicating his thoughts
to the Duke of Candale, they agreed, that advancing the Fleet to Lermont, he
should endeavor to introduce the Army into the City, by the assistance of the
Sieurs Mousnier and du Sault, (both highly disgusted at the Princes Government)
and by the help of the Counselor de Bordes exceedingly incensed, for having
been imprisoned by the Princes Order, though he was presently released, and
received with great courtesy. These three persons were of the chief of the
Frondeurs, and of great Authority in the Town, and therefore with their
directions it was no hard matter to compass their design, especially
considering several of the Olmiera were joined with them; and particularly one
Cot, a Ringleader of the seditious, and another called Chevalier, a son of one
of the Attourneys of the Palace, carried all the Letters which past betwixt the
Conspirators and the Commanders in chief for the King.

The Fleet appeared at Lermont, ready for the Enterprise, but the Messenger was
taken with his Letters about him, hanged as a Spy before the Town Hall, and
the whole Plot interrupted. At the same time the Sieur de Chambon (who was sent
by the Prince of Condy into Guienne, to hinder the Count d' Ognon from
reconciling himself to the Court, by offering him 300000 Crowns in ready money,
and one of his Manors, with the Title of a Duke) ran the same hazard, for
after he had found all his Negotiations with the Count, absolutely ineffectual,
desiring to pass into Bourdeaux (though they had no good opinion of him, for
having delivered up Xantes to the enemy the year before) He was arrested by the
people drawn to the Gallows, and had doubtless been hanged, if in the time
granted him to make his Confession, the Prince of Conty had not sent to deliver
him, and luckily rescued him from that infamous death.

Yet all this could not discourage Theubon to set on foot new Machinations for
the compassing his designs, and entering into a correspondence with the Count
de Marin Camp-Master under the King, he held frequent Intelligence with all
such as he thought serviceable upon that occasion, in which number having
judged one of the Treasurers of France, called Filiot, a proper person, in
respect of the liberty he had of entering the Town daily, and going out at his
pleasure, he committed the improvement of the correspondence to him which Count
Marin held with the two Brothers of Chastein, and the Counselor du Sault, Son
of the Advocate-General, who being offended to see the Authority of that
Parliament, prostituted to the impertinencies of the Olmiera, engaged himself
in that Plot, and resolved to put himself at the Head of a Party of Citizens,
and open one of the Gates to let in the Kings Army.

This Scene was very well laid, and the success not improbable, because all was
managed by Persons in whom the people had very great confidence. But young
Heads (especially of the French Nation, who are a communicative people, keeping
their secrets as Water in a Sieve.) One of the Chasteins, having imparted the
whole business to the Count de Auteuil, the Duke d' Enguins Governor, by the
means of a Citizens daughter (with whom the said Count was in love) Filiot, and
the Counselor de Sault, were both taken and clapped into prison. The other
Chastein, not knowing the treachery of his Brother, was gone out to persuade
the Duke of Candale to advance with his Troops toward Bourdeaux, as believing
all sure. The Dukes forces marched with that diligence and secrecy: That
though the Plot was discovered, and the assistance expected within, totally
interrupted; yet had not the Prince of Conty been in person at the Gate, to
encourage his men, the Duke of Candale had questionless (without any Accomplices)
entered the Town in that confusion.

This advance of the Duke of Candale was so strong a confirmation of the truth
of the Conspiracy, and filled the Olmeisti so full of disdain, that like mad
men they ran up and down the streets with their swords in their hands, crying
out, That it was better to die a thousand deaths, fighting valiantly for their
liberty, then to suffer themselves to be so basely and villainously betrayed.

They immediately ordered a solemn Procession to be made, to give God thanks
for their delivery, and caused a Franciscan Friar to preach a Sermon to exhort
them to unity and fidelity to their Country: The Friar got up into the Pulpit,
and though in his affections he had been a Frondeur, nevertheless, being at
that time illuminated by the Divine Wisdom, he delivered himself in such a
manner, before the Prince, the Princess, the Frondeurs, the Olmeisti and the
rest, and persuaded them so efficaciously to Peace, that all of them were
touched, and the people extremely edified with his extraordinary eloquence and
doctrine, so that hence we may see that Gods Providence is as active in the
confirmation and establishment, as in the destruction of Kingdoms. Here the
innocence and goodness of the King was protected, and the wickedness and
ingratitude of his subjects chastised by the Justice of Heaven.

After this, a Process was formed against Filiot, and the Evidence being short,
he was most inhumanely put upon the Rack in the Presence of Duratesta (the
chief of the Olmeisti) and the Advocate Pontelier, who took his examination:
Filiot swooned at first, but having implored the divine assistance, he found
himself so strangely encouraged, (as he reported afterward himself) that he
kept firm to his resolution of confessing nothing, nor did he discover one man
of all his Accomplices. For du Sault, they proceeded not so violently against
him, by reason the tears of the father, and the former services of the son,
out-weigh'd the resentment of a Treason (which had it succeeded) would have
left the Princes exposed to the fury of the Soldiers, without any capitulation.

The Negotiations and Conspiracies for reducing Bourdeaux to its obedience to
the King, not having the expected success, and the Forces under the Dukes of
Vandosme and Candale, being too weak to reduce so potent and obstinate a City
by force, the Cardinal dispatched his Orders to the Count d' Estrades,
Lieutenant General in Rochel, to draw what strength he could out of the
Neighboring Towns, and lead them with all speed to the Duke of Vendosme.
Estrades used all imaginable diligence, and being a good soldier, and
well-affected to his Majesty's service, he suddenly appeared with a
considerable body of men before Bourg, the Conquest of which Town being judged
conducive to the reduction of Bourdeaux, it was undertaken by his advice. And
to proceed the more vigorously it was necessary to attaque it in three several
places, but they having foot enough but for two, the Duke of Candale was
desired that he would furnish them with men for the third. The Duke granted
their desire very readily, and going immediately to Caesar's Fort, to discourse
the business with the Duke of Vandosme, and l' Estrades, he caused his own
Tertia, and some other Companies to march, and he himself (having agreed with
the Duke of Vendosme about the Command) would needs be of the Party.

Bourg was beleagured, and on the 29. of June their Trenches were opened in
three places; The first was commanded by the Duke of Vendosme, the second by
the Duke of Candale, and the third by l' Estrades. The last Approach was
managed so vigorously, that the fourth day, the Sieur Delus, Camp-Mareschal,
lodged himself upon the brow of the ditch, cut down a strong Pallisadoe in the
middle of it, notwithstanding several showers of small shot made against him,
and the Grenades and other Fireworks poured upon them from the walls, so that
in spite of all the impediment they gave them, l' Estrades men made this
Progress without any assistance from their Battery, which by the negligence of
the Cannoneers, and quality of the Guns, they were shot off but twice.

The besieged was so amazed at this so extraordinary boldness of the French,
and so dazzled with the luster of their Arms, and the Gallantry of their
clothes, (which were most gloriously trimmed according to the new Mode at that
time) that they could not but admire, and pay a respect to the very splendor
of their Apparel Whereupon Don Joseph Osorio, without further Consultation
(then for his own security) capitulated on the third of June, and on the 5th.
marched out with 800 men, with bag and baggage, and two Pieces of Cannon, but
with the imputation of a base fellow and a Coward; for by express Order of the
King of Spain he was clapped up afterward at Saint Sebastian, though he insisted
very much upon his want of Victuals and Ammunition.

This important Town being in five days time lost in this manner, (for the
keeping of which the Spaniard had parted with great sums of money, and
fortified, and walled it about very strongly; the Spanish Generals and
Commanders were not only dismayed at this misfortune, but the whole Princes
party were sorely afflicted, as knowing the loss of that Town was, as it were,
the Prologue to their future ruin. On the other side, the Kings Army
encouraged by their fortune and success, were excited to greater attempts, and
resolved without any delay to fall upon Libourn, so that while the Duke of
Vendosm continued at Bourg, to give out Orders there, and dispatch the
Artillery; and such provisions as were necessary for so considerable an
Enterprise. Monsieur d' Estrades after two days repose, advanced that way with
2200 Foot and four hundred Horse, by the way he took the Castles of Chavignac
and Laubardemont; and on the 9th. of July passed the River List, his Foot at
Guistres in Boats, and his Horse a League higher fording the River at Goustres,
a Village belonging to the Princess of Conde.

The next day he took a view of Libourne, and having settled his Quarters. On
the 11th. at night the Duke of Vendosm arrived with the Cannon and Ammunition,
having got happily up the River Dordogne, and passed all the Enemies fire,
(which was not above Pistol-shot from them,) by the assistance of the Guns from
the Galleys which Convoyed them, under the Command of the Sieur de la Monnery,
Commissary-General at Sea: upon Arrival of the Cannon, the Trenches were opened
near the said River, where the Duke took up his quarters. The care of that Post
was committed to the Count of Montesson, Marshall de Camp, with the Regiment
of Britain, and a Battery of two Pieces of Cannon: d' Estrades commanded the
Approaches on the other side of the River List, by the assistance of the Sieur
de Saint Romein, with the Regiment of Douglas, and another Battery: The
besieged made a stout Sally on this side; but being repulsed as courageously,
they thought it not convenient to sally any more; The two Approaches were so
vigorously carried on, that on the second day the French possessed themselves of
two Half-Moons, in one of which they took 17 prisoners: not long after a breach
being opened on the Dukes side, and the Mines ready to spring on Monsieur d'
Estrades; the 17. of July in the Morning the Town beat a Parley, and desired the
same Conditions, had been given to Bourg; but the French not thinking fit that
Libourne should be equaled with Bourg refused their Proposals; at length it
was concluded, the French and Irish Soldiers should be Prisoners of War, the
Officers should have liberty to return to their own Houses, and that twelve of
them only should be allowed to march away with their Baggage. The Town being
surrendered, the Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, to the number of about 800, took
up Arms voluntarily, and listed themselves in the Kings service.

The Justice of the Kings Cause was most remarkably visible in the facility,
wherewith these two strong places were reduced by his Majesty's forces. Where
the diligence and Conduct of his Officers; were no less conspicuous, especially
in the taking of Libourne, which (though there were 800 select men in the Town)
was attaqu'd and taken by 2200 Foot and four hundred Horse; The rest of the
Troops being employed, part about the Posts of Castillon, and Montreal, and
part in Parties sent out by the Generals Order, upon advice received, in a
Letter of Marsins, intercepted and disciphered, importing that supplies were
sending from Perigort and Quercy, under the Command of his Lieutenants; for
that Place, which being of great importance for the supporting of Bourdeaux,
was fortified and provided with all things necessary for a long Siege.

This second loss, succeeding as it were, upon the Neck of the former, put the
inhabitants of Bourdeaux into great apprehensions. The Princes party began to
lose much of their former reputation, the people perceiving, that instead of
the promised releif, they were to expect nothing now but misery and destruction.

The Townsmen had several Assemblies; and having examined Affairs, they found
clearly, that without present supplies, there would be no possibility of
holding out long; and forasmuch as these supplies could not be expected any
way, but from Spain or England, they dispatched their solicitations to the
Court of Spain for their promised and seasonable relief; nor did they forget
their Addresses to Cromwell, to implore his assistance to open a Passage into
the River, and preserve that City, which might recompense his Compassion with
so many advantages to the English Nation: But the Spaniards, (who were willing
enough to have gratified their desires) wanted forces to give them any vigorous
assistance in so many several places. The English who were better able were not
so well inclined: for Cromwell being to establish the Authority he had usurped,
thought it not suitable to his interest to engage in any quarrel against
France; and besides, the Cardinal ceased not in the mean time, to puff him up
with other thoughts of more advantage to his Person.

The Cardinal well-knowing, that Expedition is the Mother of success; and
foreseeing, that in time either the Spaniard might be strong enough, or the
English willing enough to attempt its relief, sent Directions to the Generals
to apply themselves with all imaginable industry to the reducing of Bourdeaux;
and therefore having taken Libourne, the Royallists took up their Quarters as
near the Town as they could, to cut off all Communication with the Country,

The Duke of Vendosme kept the Castle of Lermont, commanded all the Country
betwixt the two Seas, and with the Fleet blocked up the River. The Duke of
Candale with his Troops, disposed into the principal Passes, was Master of all
the Avenues, backed by Caesar's Fort, the Town of Blanqufort, and a strong
quarter at Begle, by which means he cut off all supplies on that side, from
whence they had been formerly relieved. The Count Marin was sent to possess
himself of the Forts of Testa and Certes.

But though the Cardinal was not insensible, that force was the most secure way
of reducing that Town to obedience, yet considering very prudently it was like
to be the longest, he began to think of some other way to bring them to a
voluntary submission, to which end he sent particular instructions; The House
of Espernon by a long residence in those parts, having made many creatures, and
gained much upon the affections of the people, contributed exceedingly to the
Duke of Candale renewing his Practices with the well-affected Citizens in the
Town.

By the help therefore of their Friends and Confidents (there being several
others disposed also to peace) they esteemed it convenient to take such
measures as were most likely to succeed. The throng of Countrey-people, which
were retired into the Town, increased their scarcities very much, the corn was
concealed very dexterously in particular houses, the building or repairing of
their Mills neglected, and the other Machines laid (as on purpose) out of the
way, so that their meal failing, and the Bakers unable to furnish Bread for
such a number of people, that coming in great multitudes to receive their
distributions, began to believe that their necessities would be great, and that
it was therefore time to think rather of the public safety, then of their
private interest. Besides this, the care and Government of the Hospitals was
utterly left off, and the poor people sent to their doors, who were supposed to
be the most concerned in the Continuation of the War, and this was done, that
by their miserable clamours and importunitys they might be brought to consider,
that not being longer able to contend with those calamities, their best way
would be to moderate the Obstinacy which caused them.

The sight of these Troops of poor creatures, sighing, and begging at their
gates who where esteemed the authors of the War had a wonderful influence to
dispose them to peace, whilst they began to fear least those very poor people
of whom they had made use for raising those desturbances, should fall upon
them and pillage their houses. It was also proposed to the Religious orders to
expose the Holy Sacrament in all the Churches of the Town, veiled with black,
to signify that God Almighty was displeased with, and detested that Rebellion;
But the Counselors of Parliament and the Princes suffered it to be exposed in
the great Church only, to imply that they desired of God a General peace, which
was the pretense they made use of to fool, and delude the poor people.

In this kind of destraction they continued till Wednesday the 9th of July
1653. Upon which day, after diverse private conferences, several Merchants met
publicly upon the Exchange, and declared it was high time for them to shutt up
their Shops, seeing they were not like to have any more Trading during the Wars.

The Prince of Conty, having private intelligence of these Murmurs, made a
public Cavalcade through the City, but went no further. The next day, a certain
person called de Bas, being by his Order apprehended for crying out Peace,
Peace, before the Palace of Judicature, all the Neighboring quarter took up
arms, and demanded to have him released. This de Bas had private Consultations
with a conventual Minim, called Friar Romein, who holding correspondence with
the Count d' Autenil, showed a certain writing to several Citizens, which he
said was from the Prince of Conty, wherein he gave them liberty to meet, to give
him advice of what passed relating to his party, but this Affair had another
intent; for the Friars design was to discover by this means, which were the
Kings good and bad subjects; and the good Citizens perceiving it, they
proceeded reservedly in communicating things of importance to the Friar.

The reputation therefore this de Bas had in the common opinion, was the cause
the Citizens were so obstreporous for his enlargement, as to threaten a
Commotion, without immediate satisfaction. The Prince of Conty and Marsin, with
the greatest part of the Nobility and Officers in the Town got on Horseback
forthwith; the City-Companies, whose Captains for the most part were of the
Faction of the Olmiere, were commanded to their Arms: but the Butchers, led up
by one Gilbert, and Master Isaac armed with Musquetoons, and other weapons,
cried out for Peace, and that if any one had any particular disgust, he should
revenge himself with his own hands as he could, and not endanger the Lives of
the whole City. A Hollander, that had House and Family in the City, told Marsin
to his face, that they knew how to die, but not unrevenged, and that their
deaths would not trouble them, so they died freemen. At this, being all
amazed, it was concluded that all the Olmeisti should meet in the Townhouse
after dinner, where several things were proposed, and the plurality of Voices
concurred in this, to assault the Citizens inhabiting the Quarter toward
Rochel, and the New-street, and to bring down the great Guns against them. The
Prince of Conty was of a contrary opinion, and thought it better to expect the
judges and Consuls of the City, who were coming to beg of him with great
submission, that he would not suffer the good Citizens of the Town to be abused
and ruined in compliance with the Olmieri, who were about him, and had
threatened to plunder their houses.

The Merchants appeared before him, and entreated for Peace, as the only
probable way to prevent greater disorders. The Prince replied, That he would
not subject any body by compulsion, though it was easy for him to do it; but
if they would remain constant to the service of his Brother the Prince of Condy
and himself, he would protect them and their interest; and by their unanimity
all the difficulties would easily be overcome, which their dissentions
increased, and rendered past Remedy: and that he would advise with his Counsel
what was best to be done in this Affair.

During these tumults at Bourdeaux, the Count de Fiesco had his Dispatch at the
Court of Spain, and imbarking in a Frigate at St. Sebastian, he arrived at the
Port Testa di Bus, where at his landing he found all the Citizens in Arms for
the Kings, and had much ado to escape; but his Ship remained at the discretion
of those Bores; who took it and all that was in it, making use of their
Artillery against the Forts of la Test de Bus, and Sertes, which were
Garrisoned by the Princes Soldiers; to keep open the passage for those that
went and came from Spain. To these Contrymen the Count Marin, joined with
600 Foot, with which recruit in five or six days both those Posts were taken.

The Count de Fiesco arriving at Bordeaux the twelfth of July, went immediately
to the Townhouse with the Prince of Conty, where with great Rhetoric he
magnified the power and greatness of the King of Spain, and assured the Olmiera
of a speedy and effectual supply of Men, Money, Ships and all other provisions:
Affirming he had seen so great, and so forward preparations in the Porto di
Passage, that it could not be long before it would appear. Upon this News there
was a solemn Assembly appointed by the several Companies in the City, where the
said Count made the same relation, and with so much the more Zeal, by how much
it was farther from the truth.

These promises and representations were received by the honest party with
horror, but some Counselors of the Parliament, blinded with their own vanity,
said, that the King of Spain's Courtesy was not to be abused, under whose
Protection all things would be happily concluded, with absolute quiet and
liberty. But notwithstanding all this, the next day the Presidial Court (which
is a Magistracy consisting of about 30 persons, to whom belongs the
administration of ordinary Justice) deputed some persons to the Prince of
Conty, and requested of him in express terms, that they might have Peace;
representing, that they ought not so easily to believe the relation of Fiesco,
who was biased by the passion he had for the service of his King, by which he
drew profit to himself, receiving Gifts and Presents from his Catholic
Majesty, to whom he told as many falsities as he had done there. After which,
all the Religious Orders, one after another, presented their Addresses for
Peace, and their public safety, which consisted in their obedience to their
natural and lawful King, and not in running vainly after foreign Protectors.

The same instance was made by the Chapter of the Cathedral of Saint Andrew;
But their Deputies were threatened by a Goldsmith, called Geraut, who was a
principal man among the seditious: The Ministers of the Huguenots (who in all
their troubles had showed themselves zealous and faithful to the Kings service)
were likewise checked by Duratesta. The Prince returned this Answer to them
all, That he himself was also for Peace, provided it might be permanent and
safe, and when he could be assured of obtaining such an one, he could be more
ready to embrace it then any of them all.

In the mean time he dispatched an Express to the Marquess de Santa Croce,
General of the Spanish Fleet, remonstrating their necessity of of present
supplies, that the least delay would reduce them to extremities, beyond all
possible recovery: and that he was resolved (if any thing happened adverse in
attempting their relief) to send Baltasser before to scour the ways with a
Party of Horse, and to follow himself with his Nephew the Duke de Enguien to
Tartas, and from thence to pass by land to the Frontiers of Spain.

This was a bold and desperate resolution, and as such, was opposed not only by
the Princess, but by Marsin and Lenet.

In the mean time, the Citizens being grown weary of the indiscretion and
tyranny of the Rascallity of the Olmiera, resolved to make themselves Masters
of the Gates of the City, by surprising them upon the relieving the Guards,
which were most of them of the Olmeisti, they listed themselves therefore as
the common people did, to serve in the same manner and form as the ordinary
soldiers; Whereupon some of the very Captains of the Olmiera, offered to join
with them in their Petition for Peace.

Some of the Citizens seeing themselves Masters of the Gates, were of opinion,
their best course would be to bring in the Kings Army, and shake off their yoke
at a blow; But the rest, who desired no less preservation of the Prince of
Conty and his Family, then the liberty of their Country, opposed such violent
resolutions, and endeavored to obtain peace by honorable means, and not by
treachery: undertaking the service of his most Christian Majesty with zeal and
vigor enough: but accompanied with good Order and Decorum, reteining still a a
duty and respect for the Princes according to the dignity of their Royal Birth;
designing to reduce all to the Kings obedience, by gentle means, and upon such
terms as might produce most advantage to their Country, and glory to
themselves.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, Marsin and Fiesco had agreed to bring
some Troops into the Town, to reduce the Citizens to their Will by force of
Arms: and (to vent their whole fury at once, they designed to seize upon the
Prince of Conty himself, and to kill Saracin, and the Abbot of Cognac his two
principal Confidents.

The Prince had Intelligence of this Plot, from the Jesuits, and was desired
for his better security, to take up his lodging a nights at the Townhouse, or
at their College hard by.

Virlade also having Advice to the same purpose, put his Company immediately in
Arms, and possessed himself of the Gate next the Red Chapel, by which the
aforesaid Troops were to enter: They treated also with the Irish, who were to
have effected the design, telling them, that Marsin intended to deliver them up
to the English, their mortal Enemies and Persecutors; and that the business was
negotiating in England, by the means of Francars and de Blaru, two
Commissioners of the Olmiera.

The disgusts betwixt the Prince of Conty and Marsin were grounded upon
Marsin's presumption, and arrogance, assuming all the Authority to himself, and
using the Prince as he had been but an inanimate Statue, so that the Prince not
being able, nor the Princess of Longueville his Sister, to endure such
insolence, they writ to their Brother the Prince of Condy with great
resentment, desiring, that (if he intended to preserve the good correspondence
which had been hitherto betwixt them) that he would contrive some way of giving
them satisfaction, otherwise they should be forced to withdraw.

The Prince of Condy was two months in returning his Answer; and when he did,
it was different from what they expected, being only a general recommendation
of unity among them, declaring withal, that he intended Marsin should have the
principal Management of the Military Affairs, and Lenet of the Finances, and
because de Chouppes had writ likewise against Marsin and Lenet, he sent them
the Original of all the Letters.

This kind of usage was sufficient to have added new fuel to the generous
resentments of the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess of Longueville; and to have
divided them from the Union of their Brother, who treated, them with so little
confidence: But those Princes were too moderate and wise, dissembling all, and
continuing firm to the utmost extremity. Having besides de Chouppes, and the
Marquess of Lusignan, sent Brequigny to the Court of Spain, and Fay, to the
Marquess of Santa-Croce at that time at Saint Sabastian, where the Baron
Batteville, not at all pleased that others should reap the fruit and honor of
his labor, hindered all he could, the deliberations of the Court of Spain, who
with their accustomed delays kept the Princes and their Party in perpetual
hopes without any considerable releif.

By virtue of these differences and Emulations betwixt the Prince of Conty, and
the Ministers of the Prince of Condy, the Assemblies of the Merchants were upon
the Exchange as a place most commodious, more frequent then formerly, in
respect the Townhouse was taken up by the Counsel of the Olmiera, and the
Palace where they keep the Court of Justice, by the Frondeurs: Lenet went twice
to speak with them to sow division amongst them, insinuating that he himself
approved of what they did, so it were without the intervention of the
Advocates, and other persons of the Courts of Justice, who being always for
their own interest, would ascribe all the honor to themselves, and leave only
the trouble for them. To others he inculcated their own interest, the strength
of the Prince of Condy, and his affection to the City, so that partly by
terror, partly by diffidence, and partly with hopes, he endeavored to gain them
all: But all this artifice could not prevent the meeting and concourse of the
honest party in this Assembly, by which he perceiving all things to run counter
to his intention, and that the hearts of the Cititizens were set immoveably
upon peace, instead of confiding in the Prince of Conty (who continued still
constant to his Brother and his family) he suggested certain jealousies of him,
to the Princess, his Sister, and with the most pernicous counsel which could be
given at that time, to make him universally odious, he exhibited several
charges and accusations against the said Prince, to weaken the only support he
had left, sowing discord in his family and among those of his party, and
endeavoring with crafty plots to delude them.

Fiesco took his Lodgings in the New-street among the Merchants, to be more
ready at hand to persuade them; that to establish a secure peace, their best
way would be to follow the Counsel of Marsin, a person of long experience, and
not be led by the Nose by Conty, an unexperienced Youth.

They contrived likewise, that certain of the Frondeurs (in whom they had
greatest confidence) should be present at these Assemblies at the Burse, among
which there were also the Counselors of the Parliament which remained in
Bourdeaux, and these to raise differences and distractions amongst them to gain
time, in which they placed all their hopes. They contrived moreover, that one
Ramont (standing Sentinel at that time in the Townhouse) should deny Admission
to one Orial (though of the Olmira) because he did not second their designs,
as was expected; which was resented by their Companions, and the whole Olmiera,
Who commanded him to depart the City. Having after this discovered, that Marsin
gained upon the people every day; by common consent, they called a General
Assembly on the 19th. of July, 1653. on the Exchange, in which Assembly there
met the Deputies from all the Companies in the City. Whilst they were sitting
here together, the Chevalier Todias a Jurate, appeared unexpectedly amongst
them, whereupon laying hold on the occasion, That the Presence of a Magistrate
of the City rendered the Assembly lawful, they constrained him to accept the
deputation they made to the Prince of Conty, to signify to him the resolutions
of the good Citizens of the Town, and to entreat him to approve of the design
they were upon, to make an Overture of peace, and to consent, That the Faction
of the Olmiera, which was the only obstacle, might be abolished, That the
Captains and Officers of the City might be cashiered; it being not reasonable,
that so many Persons of good quality and birth, as went personally to the Guard
for the safety of the Public, should be commanded by the seditious and
Plebeians; and that therefore they might be changed, and other sober and
deserving persons of condition and worth employed in their dead. It was
concluded in like manner, that such as were present should be deputed as from
the several Fraternities, and meet daily as the principal Counsel of the City.
These to the number of about thirty, with several Heads of the Artizans, went
together toward the house of the Duchess of Longueville, where the Prince
then was, part of their number remaining behind on the Exchange; some thought
it necessary to do something extraordinary, so that whilst their Deputies were
attending the Prince, they caused all they met in the streets, to cry, Viva il
Re, e la Pace, Long live the King, and the Peace, distributing a white Favor to
every one of them. Upon this noise the Deputies took heart, and the Sieur
Todias, encouraged by them, represented with great franckness to the Prince of
Conty, the miseries occasioned both by the Kings forces, and the Princes which
were quartered under the Walls, but especially by the tumultuous and insolent
Olmeisti, who in one year had occasioned more mischief then many ages would be
able to repair: That the good Citizens could no longer endure the
licentiousness of the Soldiers. Wherefore, in the Name of the whole
Corporation, he most humbly besought him to take some speedy course for the
Consolation of all parties, assuring him of the affection and constancy of the
Citizens toward his Highness, the Prince of Condy, the Duke d' Anguien his
Nephew, and his Sister the Duchess of Longueville, the Prince told them, that
they should meet him the next day at the Archbishops Palace, to agree about
the means of procuring a durable Peace. The Deputies coming out of the Duchess
of Longueville's house, and meeting the people that were crying Peace, they
took each of them a white Signal, and joining with them in a moment, the Cry
went through the whole Town, Viva il Re, e la pace, e muoia l' Olmiera, Long
live the King, and the Peace, and let the Olmiera perish. The women, the
children, every body put on white colors, and they which had no other, made
use of their Handkerchiefs or white paper: On the other side, the Olmeisti and
others of the Princes party distinguished themselves by Isabella and blew.

The next Lords day, by order of the Prince of Conty, there were present at the
Council the Counts of Marsin, de Mora, Fiesco, de Mata, de Antel, the Marquess
of Lusignan, Coll. Baltasser, the Counselors Ramont, Du Duc and Spagnet, who
had been at the Exchange to desire Peace; the President Fresne was also called
to the Council, who had concealed himself for two years together, under
pretense of a fit of sickness real or feigned. They argued and discussed this
Affair with variety of opinions; some of the Frondeurs, to hinder them from
coming to a Conclusion, endeavored to divert the Resolutions of the Assembly,
and delay time; But this being discovered by some who were well enough
acquainted with the intention of the Frondeurs, and understood how much it
imported them not to lose time, they remained behind in the Exchange with some
other of their friends; and besides those they had with them the day before,
getting some other active Persons, they heartened their Deputies, who at that
instant were at the Archbishops Palace, and startled Marsin, their number
being increased to above 2000 persons, they assaulted the house of Bleru, who
was at that time an Agent in England, that by this means the tumult, (which
they noised abroad to be much increased) might dispose the Prince and the
Assembly to satisfy the Petition of the City; but the unstable Rout soon gave
a proof of their inconstancy, deserting their Leaders in the very height of the
Action: who did what they could to keep them together, but to no purpose; and
in the mean time, night coming on, and nothing done, Virlada resolved to give
some money to his Kinsman Cabanieux, if with other of his Companions he would
go and take down a red Standard, which had been set up by the Olmeisti upon
Saint Michaels Steeple, and in stead of that funest and bloody colors, put up
a white one (the Kings colors) in its place; which being done, and another of
the fame, in like manner advanced on the Steeples of St. Remy and St. Peter's,
by the well-affected of those parishes; as also on the Gate next the Exchange,
the appearance of these colors had so great an influence, that Marsin himself
who did all he could to divert the Propositions for Peace, condescended to all,
the Deputies of the Merchants desired, upon a suspicion of some unavoidable
surprise; Twelve Deputies therefore were chosen, to consult with the Princes
Counsel upon such terms and expedients as should be most proper for the
Conclusion of the Peace; but Marsin perceiving that their fear was without any
foundation: the same night coming to the Townhouse (where the Prince of Conty
lodged,) with all the Officers of the Army, and the chief of the Olmiera, they
consulted how to disturb and prevent the designs of the well-affected to the
King.

The Olmeisti proposed to fall upon those that were assembled in the Burse.
Marsin and Fiesco were for standing upon their defense, and (bringing in their
Troops) to place them in the street before the Townhouse, as far as the
quarter of Santa Eulalia toward the Archbishops Palace; and the Castle of Ha,
where the inhabitants had not declared against them: it was resolved also to
make use of an Arrest of Parliament offered by the Frondeurs, which under
pretense of Remonstrating for Peace; forbade all Assemblies, as unlawful and
seditious, to the end that the Olimiera might unite with the remainder of the
Parliament against the other Citizens: The Prince of Canty did not approve of
bringing in the Troops, as a thing which would make the Citizens disperate and
and force them to open a Gate to the Dukes of Vandosm and Candal, which would
prove the utter desolation and ruin of the whole City: so that the result was,
that they should only make use of the Ordinances of Parliament. The next day
the Counselors of Parliament going to meet, were hindered by a party of
Citizens, telling them the Parliament was at Again, and not at Bourdeaux:
Virlade clapped a Court of Guard before the Palace of Judicature, to hinder the
Entrance of the Counselors; and upon the Exchange ordered the Sieur de
Lovergnac, one of the Advocates, to read a Letter publicly from the Duke of
Candale, in which he offered the Citizens his Mediation, and a General Amnesty:
The people, though they did not accept thereof, yet they desired Virlade and
Baccalan, that they would be present as their Tribunes, at the Counsels held
for public business in the Archbishops Palace. This being the posture of
Affairs in Bourdeaux, and the greater part of the Citizens disposed for Peace,
the Kings Generals thought it not amiss to encourage these Proceedings, and to
hinder the seditious spirits of the Olmiera from interrupting them,) to cause
their Troops to advance from their Quarters about Begle, toward the Gate of
Saint Julian, and at the same time to bring the Fleet above Lormont.

This Council was immediately put in execution, the Duke of Candale's Troops
marching forward by Land, to the number of about 4000 Foot and 200 Horse. The
Clouds of dust, which the trampling of the Horses raised in the Air, and the
noise of the Artillery from the Ships against the Post of Bacalan, was seen and
heard with so much confusion and terror, that the Frondeurs, and some
Counselors of the Parliament, who were met in the Burse, or Exchange,
dissolved the Assembly suddenly in great fear, upbraiding the others that under
the color of Peace they had plotted the surprise and desolation of the Town.
Virlada did his utmost endeavor to change the Officers that had the Command of
the Gates (which were all of them Olmiesti) but being yet all alone with the
Advocate Dalon, advising what was to be done, their design being discovered,
and seeing the people incensed against them, he resolved to repair to the
Townhouse, and there with the help of some of his friends, attempt the
nomination of new Captains. Here he found the Prince of Conty, and represented
to him, that in respect of the confusions within the City, and the approach of
the enemy without, the Citizens also being refractory, and unwilling to follow
their old Officers, not so much as their Serjeant-Major Periera; it was better
(as he did most humbly entreat) for his own proper security, to accept of those
few Captains, which in the name of the Citizens he tendered to him, insinuating
withal a jealousy, of the pretension of the Jurates of the City against his
Authority, if it should happen into their power to choose them, as they
desired. The Prince to rid himself of him quickly, fearing to be surprised,
having taken their Oaths, they took possession of their places in the Council
held in the Archbishops Palace, and fell into debate immediately about the
most probable Expedients to obtain a Peace; to which end Virlade offered himself
to go forthwith and negotiate with the Duke of Candale, without expecting a
Passport, not to lose time.

Marsin thought to elude him, appointing him for his Companion Baz, a Marshall
de Camp, and his very great Confident. But Virlade departed at Midnight with
the single Permission of the Prince, without the said Baz: Bacalan was
nominated also to go to Vandosme with Calapian, (another Marshall de Camp,
Brother to the Marquess de Lasignan, and strictly engaged in Marsin's
interest;) Virlade represented to the Duke of Candale the intention the City
had to submit themselves to the obedience of the King, and showed him the full
power they had given him to treat, as also a Letter of credit from the Prince
of Conty, who to prevent the fatal effects of a Conspiracy contrived against
his life, by certain persons which had been banished, and were returned again
into the Town, condescended to treat with the said Duke, his particular friend,
in the behalf, and for the security of his Nephew the Duke de Enguien, the
Princesses, and the rest of his Party, and he entreated him most earnestly to
interpose his Authority, that the good Citizens might receive the effects of
the Kings Clemency, rather then of his justice.

The Duke received these Overtures with great civility, and declaring himself a
friend to the Prince of Conty, he expressed all the demonstrations of esteem
that could be expected from an entire Correspondence, it being necessary for
the better carrying on of the Treaty, first to make a Truce, which Viralda
earnestly pressed, the Duke replied, he would conclude nothing of himself, till
he had advised with the Duke of Vendosm, with whom he went hand in hand in
carrying on the Kings Interest; yet they proceeded so far, that the Duke
prohibited his soldiers under severe penalty to go out of their Quarters, or
to commit any Acts of Hostility, either against the Goods or Lives of the
Bourdelots. The Duke in the mean time sent the Chevalier de Muns, Captain of
his Guards, to complement the Prince, and to assure the inhabitants of his good
affection, and sincere mediation to his Majesty in their behalf; from thence
the said Captain repaired to the Duke of Vendosme, to give him an Account of
what had passed. Bacalan made the same submissions to the Duke of Vendosm, who
received him with extraordinary Courtesy, answerable to the sweetness and
affability of his humor.

That very same day Gourville arrived from the Court, at the Duke of Vendosmes
quarters, and desiring to pass likewise into the Duke of Candales, the next way
being through the Town; he sent thither for a Passport, which (every one being
curious to understand how Affairs went since their separation from the Prince
of Condy,) they presently granted. He arrived late in Town, and Lenets house
being near the Post House, where he alighted; he made his first Visit to him,
and stayed with him all night, which gave some jealousy to the Prince of
Conty, and the Duchess of Longueville, who imagined, that coming from the
Court he had had private Instructions to treat with Marsin and Lenet, who were
then in no good correspondence with the Prince and the Duchess.

The next day he went to pay his Visits to them, who were very importunate with
him, to know what Orders he had brought along with him from the Court, and
because he assured them, that he would not meddle with any thing, without
communicating with them, and desired them that they would look upon him as a
Person wholly devoted to the service of the King, they looked upon him with
more suspicion then before.

The Curiosity of the Princes entertained him in long Discourse of several
things, so that the same effect his Conference with Lenet had wrought in the
Prince, the same did his discourse with the Prince produce in Marsin and Lenet,
and the rather because not having negotiated any thing with them, they
concluded his Orders were to treat only with the Prince, so that they were all
of them equally in the dark. Gourville pursued his Voyage in the Company of
Baz, (who was sent by Marsin to the Camp at Begle, to have an eye upon
Virlade's Proceedings) and coming to the Duke of Candale, who received him with
great kindness, he communicated to the Duke all that was to be done for his
Majesty's service in Bourdeaux, according to the Instructions he had received
from Cardinal Mazarine. Joining with Viralde, they together obtained a
suspension of Arms for three days, in which time the Duke of Candale promised
to speak with the Duke of Vendosme, to adjust the Articles of the Truce, not
only for the City, but for the whole Province of Guienne.

In the mean time the Prince of Conty went to the Exchange, and put on a white
Scarf, to the great joy of the people. But the inconveniences which might arise
from the frequent resort of the Kings Officers and Soldiers to the town, being
represented to him, he prohibited the admitting any of them for the future,
without a Passport.

Whilst things were thus in Agitation, Virlada returned to Bourdeaux, and
informed both the Prince and the Citizens of his Negotiations with the Duke of
Candale.

Marsin, being enraged to see the Conclusion of the Treaty so near, which he
sought with all Art and Industry to protract and interrupt, he would not
consent that any Answer should be returned from the Archbishops Palace.
Whereupon Viralda, (to animate the people the more, and to excite them to
Peace) produced another Letter from the Duke of Candale, by which he permitted
the Citizens to go to their Countrey-houses if they pleased, to get in their
Harvest, and distributed Passport to those that desired them, who came in great
throngs.

The Duke of Vandosm likewise sent Butin his Secretary into Bourdeaux, to
assure the Citizens of his inclinations to favor them, but that he would not
admit of any Treaty without the consent and participation of the Duke of
Candale, and that the Propositions might be the better discussed and examined,
they would meet together, and not separate, till the Treaty was concluded or
broke off.

Butin was received with extraordinary Acclamation; but the Chevalier Todias
represented, that it was contrary to the Rules of War, and against their proper
interest to show such partiality. The Secretary was sent back, and Vandosmes
Letter delivered to the Prince of Conty: Marsin came into the Council assembled
in the Archbishops Palace, and sharply reproved Virlade, for that in his
Presence he had suffered Feran (a Huguenot Minister) to inveigh against the
Princes party before the Duke of Candale, adding, that this was a clear
demonstration, that the Huguenots hated the Spaniards, which was repugnant to
the common interest, by reason they could hope for relief from no other
Country but Spain, and that he and Feran both, would have but little thanks
from the Citizens.

Marsin hearing the relation of these transactions was not a little disturbed,
who foreseeing that all would be lost, the greatest part of the inhabitants
being disposed to return to the obedience of their King.

A Passport was here demanded for the Duke of Vandosm's Galleys to go and
receive the Duke of Candale at Begle. Marsin opposed it, saying, it might be a
Treachery, and proposed that the Duke might be conveyed in the Vessels
belonging to the Town, whereupon a Contest arose betwixt him and others, who
maintained, that it was not decent for the Kings General to appear in any
Ships, but what belonged to His Majesty; Marsin insisted that the Deputies
might be changed; but these being in good esteem with the people that were
well-affected, they were confirmed, and the Articles of the Truce enlarged. The
Contents of them were, that all Hostilities should cease till the Consummation
or Rupture of the Treaty; That there should be no communication betwixt the
soldiers and inhabitants, without passports from the Kings Generals. That when
the Kings Troops should be removed further off, quarters should be granted to
the Princes Forces, four leagues from Bourdeaux. That during the Treaty, there
should be free entrance for all kind of Provisions into the Town; That Passes
should be given to certain persons, to be sent into Flanders, to give advice of
what passed to the Prince of Condy, and into Spain, to his Catholic Majesty,
That Baltasser with his Troops might retire to Tartas. The Article concerning
the Passport into Spain was disputed, and at length altered by the Prince of
Conty, it being agreed on, that only notice should be given to the Generals of
the Spanish Fleet; But with order not to come near Bourdeaux, for if they did
they should neither be received nor assisted. All these Transactions being
highly displeasing to Marsin, and all such as were enemies to the peace, they
raised new murmures and divisions in the City, and plotted all ways to break or
disturb the Treaty; They assured the people that there was Corn enough in the
Magazines for three Months; That the want of provisions, and sickness
increasing daily in the Kings Army, they could not long subsist, nor be able to
make the least opposition against the Spanish Fleet, which was expected every
moment, with ample supplies, both of Victuals, Money and men, so that holding
out but a few days longer they should obtain a Peace much more advantageous.
That the Prince of Condy was in Flanders with a powerful Army, able to march to
Paris without any obstruction, by reason of the weakness of the Kings Forces,
and the peoples disaffection to the Cardinal. Marsin continued to declaim
aganst the Propositions of the peace, as dishonorable to the name of their
Union, and to their Promises, and oaths so often reiterated, not to abandon the
Prince of Condy, That it was nothing but the effect of a Conspiracy of a few
persons corrupted by the flatteries of Mazarine, and inveigled with the
thoughts of bettering their own fortune by the ruin of the public interest.
That their Offers were to be shunned as the singing of a Sirene, That having
offended a Prince to the quick, the best Counsel was to see him no more except
in a Picture: But on the contrary, those who understood the Artifices and
machinations of seditious persons, were of another judgment, and declared,

That things were reduced now to such an extremity, they must fall inevitably
into the hands of the Spaniard, and live under their yoke and dominion, or
become miserable sacrifices to the arms and vengeance of their own King. That
the State could never fall under greater Tyranny, then what they then suffered
under the Officers of the Princes, who had no other aim then to satisfy their
insatiable desire of robbing them both of their honor and estates, leaving
them in a miserable and languishing condition. That the City, not being to be
brought to a worse plight, ought to embrace so happy an opportunity of
redeeming it self from such imminent dangers, whilst the Generals, with
unexpected Courtesy, distributed every where his Majesty's grace and favors,
full of clemency and pity, and thought it greater honor to be the instruments
of his mercy then revenge. That now was the time to wipe off all the unworthy
stains of rebellion, by making it appear, they were rather the effects of a few
peoples violence, then any universal disgust. That Marsin (as a stranger) was
manifestly more solicitous for his own private interest for the Princes, and
therefore he ran things to Extremity, with false and pretended promises of
releif, which if soberly considered, was rather to be abhorred then received,
seeing by prolonging the War, all the people must of necessity be precipitated
into an eternal, and inextricable confusion, and their revenues brought to
nothing, consisting principally in trade with strangers, and in the fruits of
the field, the one absolutely precluded and interrupted, and the other like to
be destroyed, by the spoiling of their Vintage.

They further added, that the Princes professing the ease of the people, to
whom they had so many Obligations, it was to be supposed, they would not
consent, that for the advantage of a few of their party, so many innocents
should be ruined; and that themselves, being of so high a birth, by returning
to their obedience, they might restore themselves to their pristine Authority
and Grandeur in the Kingdom of France, where no true Frenchman, by reason of
their natural antipathy could willingly brook the Spaniards, who sought to
advantage themselves by these troubles, alluring the uncautious by the luster
of their Gold, and deluding the people more with false hopes then really
assisting them with any formidable and effectual force. Finally, they
concluded, that having for their own Sovereign, a King given them by God, they
ought not to doubt of his being endowed with so Noble and Generous a mind as to
forget injuries, and pardon Offenses.

These Reasons, with the Engagement, into which most of the Citizens had
publicly entered, and the fear of falling again under the outrages of the
Olmeira, in case they should recover their former Authority by the means of
foreign force, was the cause that the Assembly of the Olmeisti, was expressly
forbidden, and the Captains of the quarters renewed with all diligence, and
strict Guards placed at the Gates to hinder the entrance of foreign Soldiers.
They treated also privately with Colonel Baltasser, to gain him to their side,
as a valiant and generous person, and one that was capable of doing much
mischief, were he united with Marsin, with whom (by reason of several disgusts
past betwixt them) he held no very good correspondence.

Virlade, being in the mean time returned to Begle, to accompany the Duke of
Candale to Lormont, and assist at the General Truce, received an express from
the Duke of Vandosme at Midnight, that 33 Sail of Spanish Ships were arrived
within sight of Blay; Whereupon the three days Truce being expired, the Duke of
Candale thought it expedient to give them another indefinite, till the
conclusion of the peace, and the publication of the Amnesty, which he did to
engage the Citizens in a Treaty, before the news of the approach of the Spanish
Armada, lest they should change their resolutions, and concur with the
contrary party.

It being concluded therefore, and established as firm as was possible, Virlade
was dispatched back to Bourdeux, to draw the Prince of Conty to a peremptory
resolution to declare puplickly for the service of the King; where being
arrived, he found the City much altered by the Artifices of Marsin, who (having
been at the Burse, to clear himself and Lenet of the machinations wherewith
they were charged) he had in some measure mollifi'd the hearts of those who had
been exasperated against him, and by the distribution of Money amongst the
Plebeians, captivated a good part of them, particularly those of the Fraternity
of Saint John, (which are so numerous they seldom appear less then 1500 in
their procession upon that Saints day) so that he caused them to fasten pieces
of Red Ribbon to their Procession-staffs, and to cry up and down the streets,
and in their very Procession, Viva i Principi, Long live the Princes.

Virlada, astonished at this change, rid amongst them with a Trumpet of the
Duke of Candales before him, snatching from some of them their Red Ribbons,
giving them white, and casting some Moneys amongst them, he caused them quickly
to change their note, and cry out as fast, Viva il Re, e la Pace, Long live the
King and the Peace, and from thence passing to the Townhouse, where the Prince
of Conty then was, he pressed him to declare himself either for Peace or War,
telling him, that as his servant, he could not but advise him of the evident
danger he was in, seeing the design was to make themselves Masters of the Town,
though with the destruction and ruin of his Highness. That therefore he did
earnesly desire him to continue the suspension of Arms, which during till the
conclusion of the peace, would secure him, and take away all occasion from the
Kings Generals to attempt any thing against the City, which in the confusions
they were then in, would be no hard matter for them to do, to the endangering
of his person, and his friends, or at least to his dishonor.

These Propositions sunk very deep into the heart of the Prince, full of
generosity, and therefore the more disposed to receive such counsels as were
grounded on reason and honor; Besides, Gourville, being in private Treaty with
him at that time, who took great pains to remove him from all contrary
sentiments; he finally resolved to subscribe the suspension of Arms; which was
solemnly published, and went to the Exchange to declare openly, that he
renounced all leagues and confederacies with Spain.

Here were likewise read the Articles of peace, which were to be proposed, as
also a renunciation of the Citizens, of all Treaties with the English, and the
Ministers of Spain, and this was also done in public by the Prince, with much
frankness, which drew after him all the acclamations of the people.

The Arrival of the Spanish Fleet was not yet known in Bourdeaux, and those
that understood the inconstancy of the people always desirous of novelties,
endeavored to conceal it as much as was possible.

The Duke of Candale went to Lormond to the Duke Vandosme, and the articles of
the Truce were agreed on in the same form they were presented, except the
granting of quarters to the Princes Troops, a passport to Baltasser, or liberty
for bringing in victuals or Ammunition into the Town. They agreed afterward,
on the hour to meet the Deputies, to treat about the peace. The designs of
the seditious and the Spaniards being in this manner defeated; The Kings
Generals were much rejoiced, and the rather because they had reason to fear,
that if the Spanish Navy had appeared before the Treaty had been concluded,
they would easily have made themselves Masters of Bourdeaux, and all the Kings
Affairs in Guienne, been utterly ruined, besides the prejudice they would have
received in the other parts of the Kingdom by so potent, and so considerable a
diversion.

The Spanish Fleet came to an Anchor at the mouth of the Garonne, and the
Generals (having notice of the resolution of the Bourdelois whilst they lay
there, attending the opportunity of the Tide, to attempt the relieving of the
Town) were in great confusion, and at a stand what to do, fearing to engage
themselves in vain, further in the River, with so much hazard, not being
assured to be received by the City, but rather treated as Enemies; They
concluded at length to continue where they were upon their Guard, and to
dispatch away a Messenger with all speed to the Spanish Court, to give notice
of the alteration of Affairs, that they might deliberate what was best to be
done in this exigence. They sent likewise advice into Flanders, to the Spanish
Ministers and the Prince of Condy, who at the receipt of this News saw his
expectations quite vanished, while with a secure confidence he had cherished
himself, that the Spanish Fleet would have got easily to Bourdeaux, and have
had the better of the day, if they came to an engagement; which the Spaniards
themselves, gave evident tokens they were not willing to undertake upon a
slight account.

On the 27. of July, the Deputies, being twelve in number (whereof Chevalier
Todias was the chief) to whom was joined the aforesaid Virtade, they propounded
the Articles of the Peace. By the permission of the Prince of Conty, Bartau a
Citizen of Bourdeux, was sent to the Spanish Navy, to let them know, that the
City renounced all leagues and confedederacies concluded with his Catholic
Majesty, and disowned all succors that came from him.

The Generals having perused the Propositions of Peace, they found some things
too prejudicial to his Majesty's honor, so that they had like to have sent
back the Deputies; But apprehending, by rendering the Bourdelots disperate, they
might throw themselves into the Arms of the Spaniards already advanced too far,
they found out a medium very proper to compose all, which was to shorten the
Trea-and come to a Conference, in which those Articles that could not be
granted, should be remitted to the King, rather then to send away the Deputies.
It being more then probable, that Marsin would take new courage by the
discontents of the people, and the well-affected themselves, seeing their hopes
frustrated, would easily be persuaded to admit the Spanish supplies.

For these Reasons the Deputies were recalled, and after having offered them
the favor of the General Amnesty for the inhabitants of the Town, in the same
form as it was granted to the Parisiens, and as it was Registered in the
Parliament, transferred to Again, To the Princes and Princesses, and all others
of their party, as ample passports as they could desire; to the Generals and
French Officers, leave to retire to their own houses, and to the Foreign Troops
to depart out of the Kingdom. They promised to examine the Articles in a
Conference the day following; All which being tendered to the Prince of Conty
and the assembly of the Citizens in the Burse, in two Sessions, they resolved
them in this manner following.

Upon the 1. and 2. (after the Kings Declaration of 1650. was read,) it was
agreed, That a general Amnesty should be granted to the Citizens of Bourdeaux,
with confirmation of their prviledges.

The 3. (which respected the Person of the Prince of Condy, and his indemnity)
was referred to the King: but it was proposed, that they might have a months
time to give him notice of their Treaty, by a Messenger express, to whom the
Kings Generals were to give a Passport to the Court, and from thence he was to
have the Kings safe conduct into Flanders. That the Prince of Conty, and the
Duchess of Longueville were to be comprehended, if they pleased in the Amnesty
of Bourdeaux, or if they desired one separately, it should be granted them, in
the best form, and verified for them and their dependents in the Parliament of
Paris, as that for the Bourdelots was to be in the Parliament of Guienne. That
the Duke d' Enguien, and the Princess his Mother should have Passports given
them for their security and residence, in case they were inclined to abide in
any part of the Kingdom; That Marsin should have liberty to go to Liege by Sea
or by Land, as he pleased, it being his native Country; and the same to the
Count de Mora, the Marquess of Lusignan, Lenet, and the rest, if they refused
the benefit of the Amnesty.

Some difficulties arose about the Gens d'armes, the Princes Guards, and the
Regiment of Enguien, the Generals pretending that those Troops belonging to the
King, they ought either to be disbanded, or entered again into his Majesty's
service, but the Example of the Capitulation at Bellegard prevailing; They
consented that they should have ticketts given them for quarters, till they
came to the Frontiers of the Kingdom. The Regiments of Marque, and Marquese,
with the rest of the Princes party, were all of them disbanded. The Irish had
leave to retire into Spain, having secretly treated with the French Generals.

The Castles were surrendered, the Prisoners released, but the dismantling of
Fort- Caesar, Bourg, and Libourne, and other places upon the River, was
referred to the pleasure of the King.

There was a long debate likewise upon the restitution of the Parliament in
Bourdeaux, as also upon the Article about the taking off the Imposts
established at Blay, of two Crowns upon every Tun of Wine, the reimbursement of
the debts contracted during the War, upon the Merchandises and Rents, as also
the revocation of the subsistence of the discharge of Taxes, and Tenths for ten
years, and the suppression of the Court of Aids, all which Articles being of
more then ordinary importance, were left to the decision of his Majesty.

Moreover, the Generals refused to comprehend Villeneuf d' Agenois, and the
other Towns of the Princes side in this Treaty, alleging they were free to
accep of the Amnesty, and return to their obedience without it if they pleased.

After this Conference the Duke of Vandosme demanded of the Deputies what the
sentiment of the City of Bourdeaux would be. these Articles being granted, the
Kings General Pardon passed in the form and manner requested, and the
Soldiers drawn off: This was a long time under debate the 29. of July in the
Burse, where in the presence of the Prince of Conty, the Duke d' Enguien, and
Lenet, the Propositions of the Generals were read.

Which contained this, That the Articles being signed, they were to rely upon
the word of the Generals as Persons of honor, seeing it would require time to
procure the Kings confirmation, That the said Generals would enter into the
City, allow Provisions to be brought in, and give security to the Princes and
their Troops to retire; if otherwise they chose rather to expect the Kings
Declaration before they suffered them to enter, in that case no Provisions were
to be brought in, nor liberty for any to come out but the Deputies themselves.

The Counselors of the Parliament, who were then in Bourdeaux, and who were
all of them Frondeurs, especially Spagnet and Saux, declared their opinions,
That in that case War was to be preferred before a doubtful and uncertain
Peace; That they ought not to consent that the Kings Declaration should be
registered any where, but in the Parliament sitting in Bourdeaux: Nor the
Generals permitted to enter into the City: But the Prince of Conty and Lenet
were of another mind, and declared that they ought to treat with their
Sovereign in terms of obedience and respect.

In this Intrigue they took this expedient, To cause the peace to be published,
To attend the Kings ratification, with mutual Hostages on both sides without
admitting the Generals into the Town. To this was to added, That (the people
beginning to tumult and cry out for an end of the Treaty, and their miseries)
the Troops should be sent away, and only some few days granted to the Princes,
to adjust their Affairs; But the Generals would not condescend to these
demands, replying, that if the peace was not absolutely concluded, they could
not draw off the Kings Troops from the Town, and that whilst the Prince,
Princesses, Marsin, Lenet, and others remained in the City, they must only
expect the benefit of the bare suspension of Arms agreed on by the Truce of
the 30th. of July.

The Prince of Conty (who for himself and his whole family, had subcrib'd a
Treaty with Courville, declared in the Assembly at the Burse; that for his part
he relied upon the Generals Parole, nor should his interest or his families
hinder the Citizens from obtaining a speedy remedy for their miseries, by the
withdrawing off the Troops, That as for his part he was resolved to leave the
Town forthwith, and retire to Cadillac.

It was declared likewise by the Chevalier Todias, That the Princess of Condy
would retire to L' Esparre, and the Duchess of Longveville to Plassac, there
to expect either their passports, or the Amnesty. The Duchess of Longueville
as soon as hers was arrived, by the consent of the Duke her husband, retired
out of the noise and clamours of the world, into a Monastery of Nuns in the
Suburbs of Moulins in Bourbonnois.

The Deputies being returned the same day, it was concluded that the Dukes
might enter the Town, when they pleased, according to their condition and
quality, and the honor due to His Majesty's Arms, and that the Princes troops
should withdraw as was desired.

The Passports were brought to the Princess of Condy, the Duke d' Enguien,
Marsin, Lenet, and the same day were dispatched to Court, the Count of
Montesson from the Duke of Vandosm, and the Conte de Marinville from the Duke
of Candale, for the ratification of the Treaty; The 3d. of August the Dukes
were received into the Town, with great Ceremony, and the universal applause of
the people who but few days before were of a clear contrary mind. The Dukes, to
demonstrate the entire confidence they had in them, dismiss^d their own Guards,
and caused their houses and persons to be guarded by the inhabitants. They
elected new Jurats, and the Assemblies which were held in the Burse, were
removed to the Townhouse. The Princess with the Duke d' Enguien her Son, went
to Chastillon de Medoc, Marsin into Spain by Sea; The Count de Fiesco took Post
thither by land, the Prince of Conty retired to Cadillac, where he found
Langlade, Cardinal Mazarine's Secretary sent thither to assist at the Treaties
of Bourdeaux, but falling sick he could not be present at the Conclusion.

Colonel Baltasser entered himself into the Kings service with 600 Foot, and 400
Horse. Monsieur de la Rocque, who was at that time with some Horse and Foot, at
the City of Perigueux, followed the example of Baltasser, and took up Arms for
the King, the said la Rocque conceiving a jealousy, that the Marquess de
Chanlo, Governor of that Town, had a design to take him Prisoner, went out
himself with some of his friends, and repairing to the Commanders of the Kings
forces, was an occasion of a Treaty with the Inhabitants of that place, in
order to their return to their Obedience. Father Ythier a Jesuit, by
directions from Cardinal Mazarine, led the Dance, and not only disposed the
minds of the Inhabitants, but observing what passed, gave intelligence to
Father Bertaut, who followed the business whilst Ythier was sick.

Besides this, another private Treaty was set on Foot with the Irish of that
Garrison; But the Governor, (not fully confiding in that Nation, disgusted
with those that had ordered them thither, and not satisfied with those that had
received them) kept so vigilant an eye over them, that having a suspicion of
some design, he caused their Officers to be secured, and dispersed the Soldiers
amongst his own companies he most trusted.

The Duke of Candale (who was too Generous to approve of a victory obtained by
Circumvention or treachery) could not endure any such dishonorable ways, but
resolved to besiedge that City, and reduce it with his Sword in his hand
according to the more Glorious methods of War.

He had already caused the Artillery to be embarked, and dispatched the
Marquess de Sovebeuf, with part of his Troops, (commanded by the Marquess de
Cavillac, and the Count de St. Germain) to invest it; But the Citizens, knowing
how prejudicial it would be to expect a formal Siedge, resolved after the
example of the Bourdelots, to betake themselves to their Arms, and force the
Guard of the Gates out of the hands of the Garrison. The Governor having
notice of their design, and being at that time in Treaty about leaving the
Country, upon condition he might be permitted to march with his Troops to the
Prince of Condy, his Master; he drew up all his men immediately in the great
Marketplace, and his head being a little hot with wine, (having been at a
Wedding-dinner) he went haftily (accompanied only with his Page, and one of the
Consuls of the City) to the house of Budan the Kings Attorney, to demand the
reason, how they cursed hold such private Assemblies without his cognizance and
permission; when he came there, they repulsed him very rudely, and told him
there was no such Assembly; but he pressing on to enter by force, some of the
Attourneys friends discharged their Firelocks upon him, so that he fell down
dead in the place, upon which the Inhabitants taking heart, they issued into
the streets armed, crying out, Viva il Re e la Pace, Long live the King and the
Peace, and dragging his body about in a most barbarous manner. The Soldiers
were in no small confusion upon this accident, the Officers could not keep them
together, nor oppose them against the fury of the people: they running from
their colors, some one way, some another, insomuch that the City remained
entirely in the Citizens hands, without further obstacle, who immediately
dispatched a Messenger to the Marquess de la Douze, to desire a Passport for
their Deputies to wait upon the Duke of Candale, from whom they desired the
benefit of the Amnesty, and to return to their obedience to his Majesty, as
they accordingly did, one of the most seditious amongst them being hanged up,
several others banished, and the Officers and Captains of the Quarters changed.

Villeneuf d' Agenois, proud that they had resisted the Count de Harcourt, and
defeated his attempts; emulating the fury of the Olmiera of Bourdeaux; and in
imitation of those inhabitants they listed several Companies, boasting to
defend their liberty, To suppress their insolence, the Kings forces under the
Command of the Marquess d' Aubeterre approached the Town, at the time when
their grain being ripe, (with which that place does exceedingly abound) the
Inhabitants were preparing for Harvest; so that the Citizens foreseeing the
loss of their Revenues, and that they could not live happily, being deprived of
their estates, they preferred the fear of misery before the ambition of
liberty, and sent Deputies to the Prince of Conty, supplicating him to send
them succor, or make their Peace. But Bourdeaux, having already capitulated,
and the Prince of Conty laid down his Arms, and retired to Cadillac, they began
to treat with the Conte de Vaillac, and afterward with the Duke of Candale,
who sent thither la Ribere a Counselor of State, and Commissary of his Army,
with whom their Amnesty was concluded, upon condition that their walls should
be pulled down, their fortifications demolished, and the Citizens who had bin
too busy and pragmatical, to pay 4000 Pistols; besides, to deliver 20 persons
prisoners, to be disposed of as the Duke pleased, two of which were hanged
presently, Dureteste also arrested by Order from the Count d' Estrade, was
executed at the same time.

Whilst the Duke of Vandosme and Candale, were proceeding with great sweetness
and Moderation, toward the settlement of Affairs in Bourdeaux, they omitted
not to watch over the Actions of some perfidious persons, who became more
savage and brutal, by how much the Generals (repleat with all virtue) used them
with more then ordinary kindness and courtesy.

Sir George Cartret an Englishman had intelligence, that one Edwards, sent by
the Parliament of England, lay privately in a certain place in the Town,
blowing up the coals of Rebellion, which were not quite extinct, but lay still
glowing in the hearts of some seditious people. About the same time a small
Felucca was taken casually, with Letters from Lenet to the said Edwards,
inviting him to a Counsel which was to be held aboard the Spanish Admiral. Two
Citizens of Bourdeaux were apprehended likewise with Letters from the said
Lenet, to several persons in the Town, and particularly to certain Ladies.

By all these Discoveries, it being sufficiently clear their design was to
reunite with the Spaniards, and to revive the hopes of the Frondeurs, which
were not yet quite extinguished, the Dukes were more vigilant then before, and
applied themselves with all imagineable diligence, to find out fit remedies for
these wounds, which were not yet well closed.

After the Procession of the 15. of August, Espagnet was imprisoned, and sent
with a good Guard to the Castle of Angoulesme. Passports were given to several
persons suspected to contrive new troubles, to remove elsewhere, among which
were the Counselors du Duke, de Manvesin, and la Chese: Some Troops were
commanded toward Merau, to be embarked, if need were, in the Kings Ships, in
order to the engaging of the Spanish Fleet, which was then at Anchor within
sight of Royan, a small Town, but of great strength, and importance, having
Xaintonge, on its right hand, and the Country of Medoc on its left. Other
Soldiers were sent into Xaintonge, where the whole Country was in Arms
apprehending the landing of the Spaniards in those parts. And all
Inconveniences were with such diligence prevented, by the order of Mazarine,
that the Rebellion could by no ways take Footing again, nor disturb the peace
and tranquillity of the Bourdelots. Who being grown wise at their own cost had
found that the worth and excellency of good Orders is not to be discerned,
without a sense and experience of disorders.

The HISTORY of the Managements of CARDINAL MAZARINE. Part II. Lib. II.
AFfairs going on in this manner in Guienne, with such advantage to the King,
and glory of the Cardinal, whose fortune appeared more and more favorable to
him in all his Enterprises. In the other parts, on the Frontiers of Flanders,
the Armies encamped themselves with different designs. The Spaniards with the
Prince of Condy, trusting in the greatness of their force, which consisted of
30000 fighting men, extended their quarters and lay at large, seeking to allure
the French Army to a Battle, because if they obtein'd the victory, they hoped
to advance to the very Gates of Paris, to encourage those as were disposed to
sedition, to create new troubles before the Affairs in Guienne were composed to
the advantage of the King, and by forcing their way into the heart of the
Country, to fill the whole Kingdom with horror and confusion. The number of
their Counselors being great, the opinions were various what course they were
to steer to bring their designs to a happy issue: For though the Prince of
Condy stood firm in his opinion of marching -- to the Seine, without engaging
in any tedious Leagure; yet the Spanish Captains were backward in concurring
with the undaunted thoughts of this warlike Prince, as being fearful to engage
their Army in some desperate Affair, or puff up the Prince with too much glory,
of whose instability, as a Frenchman, (though their experience since has
convinced them of his constancy) it appeared, they were not a little jealous:
after various consultations upon the best and most seasonable expedient, it was
resolved all ways should be tried to force the Enemy to a battle, and
according to the event of that, they might proceed afterward to other
resolutions. With these designs the Army advanced, facing the French for
several days, and parted only by the River Oyse.

The Mareshal de Turenne, though in number inferior to the Spanish Army, out
of the greatness of his courage, would with all his heart have accepted of the
Combat, but his generous Spirit was restrained by the mature experience he had
gained, to his great glory, in 22 Campaigne's, in which, though young, he had
always the Principal Command; besides, he was withheld by express orders from
the Cardinal, who considering very wisely, that the fortune of the whole
Kingdom, depending upon that Army, they ought not to expose their past labors,
their present condition, and their future hopes, to the hazard and uncertainty
of a Battle, with so much disadvantage; wherefore in this case, following the
example of that politic Roman, who by his cunctation and delays destroyed the
Army of the Carthaginians; He contented himself to Alarm the Enemies Camp, now
in the slanck, now in the Front, now in the Rear, and by forcing them, sometimes
to keep close, sometimes to hasten, sometimes to retard their March, reduce them
to a scarcity of provisions, and finally to frustrate all the designs they had
contrived against France. But their being in the Marshall Turenne no less,
then in the Prince of Condy an ardent and immense desire of glory, he could not
satisfy the fervor of his mind, if in so conspicuous an occasion he gave not
some proof or testimony of his valor. He past the River therefore one day with
7 or 800 Horse, and joining with his main Guard, which was kept on the other
side, he fell upon the Enemies Guards at the head of the Fens of Fonsomme, and
charged them so briskly, that he beat them into their main Body, took several
Prisoners, and returned with great honor to his quarters.

In the mean time the King, the Cardinal, and the whole Court arrived at the
Army the 24. of July, where he was received with extraordinary applause, there
being drawn up in excellent Order an hundred Squadrons of Horse, and 18
Battalions of Foot, in all about 16000 old Soldiers, well inured to the
Wars, with a great Number of experienced Officers, and Reformadoes. The
Marshall de Turenne being willing to entertain the King with the sight of a
Skirmish, very much desired by his Majesty, who is naturally Martial: He forded
the Oyse with his light Horse, Gens d' arms, and about a Thousand other select
Horse, and fell again upon the same Guards of the enemy and beat them back:
The Prince of Condy, being confident, that upon the arrival of the King, the
French Generals would dispose themseves for a Battle, he put his Troops in
Order, and stood firm, observing their motion, till the King was retreated, and
understanding afterward it was but a party of Horse, he was much troubled he
had not advanced, and tried his fortune in a charge.

The King remained all that day in the Camp, animating every body with the
Majesty of his presence, and filling them with an impatient desire of
signalizing themselves in his service.

He dined at the Marshall Turenne's, with a great number of his principal
Officers, who had the honor to be called by his Majesty to his own Table. He
supped with the Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre in the same order, and returned
to lodge in the Marshall de Turenne's Quarters, in the midst of the Army. The
Cardinal having given the Generals Orders and Instructions how they should
regulate themselves that Campaign, returned with the King to Paris.

Two or three days after the Kings departure, the Spanish Army quitted their
Posts, and took their March directly toward San Simon and at Serocourt passed
over the Sum. The French Army followed them by the way of la Fere, and
quartered at Chery, and Maiau, and passed the Oyse, at the place where it
forms it self into a little Island, and a little above Verduel, and Trauessy,
they drew into Battalia, from whence they march-to Fargny, where they encamped;
observing always the enemy, that they might not have time to sit down before
any place, and entrench themselves, which was their design, after they found
how difficult it was to draw the French to an engagement.

The Prince of Condy, suspecting that Turenne would fall upon his Rear as he
was passing St. Simon, he marched through with all speed, and lodged within a
league of Ham, doubting he would attaque that most important place, situate
upon the Sum, betwixt St. Quintin and Peron.

This sudden motion obliged the French Generals to advance to Chauny, a Town
upon the Oyse, and from thence to Noyon, the chief City of a County upon the
same River, with a strong wall about it, and well-peopled, where they made a
halt for some days, while the Spaniards facing them, the Prince of Condy passed
with six thousand men at Magny, and marched from thence to Roye, and
approaching it in three several places, he forced it to surrender: Turenne
hearing what had passed, and suspecting he might surprise some of the Towns
upon the Sum, he advanced to Magny. Condy designing against Corbie, pretended
to march with part of his Army toward Beauvais, to draw the French Army from
their Post, and at the same time to invest Corbie.

Turenne, who by long experience understood the Arts of the Prince, and knew
very well he would not engage himself far in France, with so many strong Towns
at his back, and an Army in his flanck, in stead of following him, as seemed
requisite by the Rules of War; On the 9. of August he marched to Magny, where
they made Bonefires and rejoycings in the Camp, for the happy news of the
reduction of Bourdeaux, which much encouraged the Army, so that speedily
passing the River, he dispatched the Comte de Schomberg, with 400 Horse and 200
Foot, to reinforce the Garrison of Corbie, and prevent the Princes design.

At the same time the whole French Army marched toward Ham, passed the River
in the night, and lodged on the other side, where Turenne, having intelligence
that the Count de Maille, with a large Convoy of Ammunition, and 4000 Pioneers
was departed from Cambray, to reinforce the Spanish Army, in case they should
invest any place; Incontinently with the greatest part of his Horse, and a
commanded party of Foot, the the next morning at break of day he clapped himself
in the way that the Convoy was to pass, with resolution to set upon them: But
the Prince having smelt his design, (as being no less acquainted with the
Practices of Turenne, and the greatest part of his Commanders, most of them
having served under him) and that there was nothing to be done at that time,
turning head with his light Horse, and marching with all diligence toward the
Sum, sent advice by Polenet (Groom of his Chamber,) to the Count de Maille,
to return again with his Convoy to Cambray.

Polinet, returning back the same day was taken Prisoner by a Party of the
Royallists, who understanding by him, and afterward by the Scouts (which had
been at the very Gates of Cambray) that Maille was retreated, and that the
Prince having cast two Bridges of Boats over the Sum, had passed it, and
lodged himself upon the banck of it, betwixt Corbie and Bre, Turenne returned
with great dexterity toward his Camp, which was already advancing toward him;
and having joined with the Marshall la Ferte, they secured their Baggage under
the walls of Peronne, and encamped at a Village not far from that Town, and at
no great distance from the Spanish Army, taking possession of a convenient
place to sustain a battle, if occasion offered it.

The Prince in the mean time believed he should catch Turenne unprovided, and
constrain him to fight; and in this confidence he marched all night long, and
with so much expedition, that the next morning, in sight of Peronne, he found
the enemies baggage with its Guards, who having no Alarm, thought his coming
impossible: But his men being very weary with the tediousness of their March,
he forbore falling upon them, Turenne in the mean time having drawn his Army to
Mont St. Quintin, which is an Abbey upon a Hill. The Prince found him in so good
Order, he had no mind to provoke him at such a disadvantage. However Condy
made as if he was come on purpose to attaque him, thereby to hold him in
suspense, till he could receive the Convoy from Cambray, without which there
was no probability of being able to lay Siedge to any place. But in the
mean-time, while he endeavored by small skirmishes to amuse them with the
expectation of a Battle: he caused his Vauntguard to march directly toward
Saint Quintin, leaving the Kings Camp on the right hand, and a great Wood
betwixt both Armies: Turenne, having his eyes open upon all occasions, and not
willing the enemy should march directly before him, as the Prince of Condy did
design, he advanced with equal diligence, and prevented him at a Post which the
Prince thought to have possessed: Condy was hereupon obliged to make a halt, by
which means the Armies were once again brought to face one another, there being
nothing betwixt them but a little valley, and that very easy and accessible,
above which the French placed a strong Guard over against a Wood which ran up
almost to the Enemies Camp, not above a Musket Shot distant, Here both Armies
stood their ground, facing one another three or four days; with great wariness,
the Prince and the Spanish Generals, being unwilling to come to an Engagement,
in a place the Mareschals had chosen so much to their advantage.

On the 14. of August, there happened a smart skirmish, in which the two
Counts, brothers of Russy engaged themselves too far, and Turenne's
Lieutenant-Collonel was slain: The same day the Prince of Taranto, the Marquess
de Bouteville and the Count de Duraz, being upon the Prince of Condy's
out-Guards, and curious of seeing and saluting the Marshall Turenne, who at
the same time was by accedent at his, they sent a Trumpet to desire they might
have the honor to kiss his hands, which being granted, they were received by
Turenne with his usual kindness and affability, and discoursed together with
reciprocal Complements. Some Gentlemen also ftom the Kings Camp, went to pay
their respects to the Prince of Condy, who drew near within 200 Paces of
Turenne, and possibly with a desire to speak with him; but Turenne being aware
of it, pretending some business, he departed from that place without staying
for the Invitation, which as was supposed, the Prince was about to send him by
one of his Gentlemen.

Two hours before day, upon the 25. of August, the Prince raised his Camp, and
marched toward St. Quintin, of which Turenne having advertisement, and
suspecting the attaque of some of those places, he caused the Count de Beaujen
to repass the Sum with 1200 Horse, and 600 Foot, with Orders to keep nigh Ham
and Saint Quintin, to be ready to succor which of those places he should fall
upon: The French Generals repassed the River at Peronne, marching all Night,
and the next day directing their way toward Ham. Beaujeu, being arrived at
Saint Quintin, he had news that the Count de Duraz was with 2000. Horse
commanded out of the Enemies Army, and advanced to invest Guise; whereupon with
all diligence crossing the Fere, he put a good supply of men very seasonably
into that place, of which the Prince of Condy having notice, he commanded the
said Count back to the Army, after he had faced the Town 12 hours together.

The Prince perceiving his designs hitherto ineffectual, and much troubled to
find so much Conduct and Courage in the Kings Captains, he resolved to try
another way, advancing his Army within a League of Ham, distending it along a
little River (which there discharges it self into the Sum,) with a
resolution to attaque that place, or if the Kings Army appeared to relieve it,
to fall desperately upon them, and with his sword in his hand, in that field,
to determine all differences and emulations. He was no sooner arrived at his
appointed Post, but he saw the French Army on the other side ready to flanck
him, and at his back the Count de Beaujeu, who having repassed the Oyse, had
placed himself at Fargny, to take such resolutions as the accidents of Affairs
should direct.

Three weeks together the Armies lay facing one another in this posture,
without any Action: at length the Prince of Condy and Spanish Generals,
despairing of their designed Inroad into France, or of giving them battle, or
surprising any Town upon the Sum, by reason of the great vigilance and
precaution of the French Generals, they grew very confused and variable in
their Counsels. Condy had insinuated into the Spanish Ministers and Captains,
that upon his entrance into France, he should meet with so much welcome and
assistance, that they should make their way more by the good will of the
people, then by the sword: But not managing his Interest dexterously, and
wanting the means the Cardinal had, to inveigle and cajole by recompenses,
those who were of a contrary judgment, he found himself deluded, and those
persons who had promised him their fidelity, in lieu of proving constant to his
party, let themselves be corrupted by the said Cardinal, and served more to
endamage and prejudice him, then to assist and profit him.

The generous mind of the Prince being netled in point of reputation, (which
being lessned already by his daily misfortunes, would be absolutely lost, if
with so much preparation, and so great forces, he should consume unprofitably a
whole Campaign, which at first did seem to promise so much advantage and glory
to Spain, and threaten so much ruin and destruction to the Kingdom of France)
in a full Counsel of War he proposed the Enterprise of Rocroy, making good his
opinion both with martial and politic Arguments.

He acquainted them, that he was informed the Garrison was very weak, by reason
the Chevalier Montague, Governor of the place, upon confidence that he could
not be attaqued, had sent away the Regiment of the Crown to Rhetel: That
therefore in 12 days time it might be taken, That there would be no great
difficulty to invest it, in respect there were no great Rivers to pass, and the
Siedge would be very easy, since the Town lying betwixt thick woods, whosoever
were first to gain the Passes, might be able to maintain them and defend their
lines with a very few men. That Rocroy would be of very great importance being
a Key of the Frontiers of Picardy; and though indeed the loss of it would be no
great detriment to France, yet it was very considerable to the Spaniards; for
by this place the French made all the adjacent Country pay Contribution, and a
great part of the Province of Luxenbourg.

These Considerations of the Prince of Condy were excellently good, and his
opinion credited and received as an Oracle by all the Commanders: But the
Spaniards who seldom put their foot into the water, till they have first
sounded the bottom, and who hold Prudence as an inseparable Companion of all
their Actions, though in appearance, they inclined to the Propositions of the
Prince, by way of Complaisance, yet in reality they did not assent in their
hearts, for it being formerly by agreement betwixt them and the said Prince,
declared, that all such Towns as should be taken within the distance of three
Leagues from the Frontiers of Flanders, should belong absolutely to the Prince,
they considered, that they should expose and consume their Army in the
acquisition of a place that would add nothing to the advantage of their Crown,
and would be rather instrumental toward the reconciliation of the said Prince
with the Court of France, then any furtherance toward the General peace, of
Spain: To this they added, that if the Siege should happen to prove longer then
was proposed, they ran a great hazard of consuming their Men, their Money, and
their patence; So that at length their Soldiers failing, they should no longer
be Masters of the Field, in which consisted the hopes of those, who relying
upon their assistance, were contriving new Cabals in France. The Count de
Fuensaldagne's judgment was to lay siege to Arras, seeing they had an Army big
enough to undertake it, and maintain a line of Circumvallation about it.

Others were of opinion, that encamping still with their Army in the Enemies
Country, they should not only put them to a great burden of the War, but might
with money and promises encourage and propagate their Intelligence, whereby to
obtain an advantageous victory, which could never be complete unless they
advanced into the very bowels of France, and divided that powerful and opulent
City of Paris from their Union with the King; But as this had been endeavored,
even from the beginning without any effect, so was there less hopes now,
especially since by the pacification of Guienne, the interest of the Princes
was in a declining condition, and the credit of the Cardinal much increased. At
last the Enterprise of Rocroy was resolved on, To which effect the Count de
Ligneville advanced with 3000 Horse with all speed, to block up the Town the
5th. of September by break of day, and was followed by the whole Army, which
was so unexpected, and not foreseen by the Governor, that 100 of his best
Soldiers were shut out of the Garrison, being gone a scouting according to
custom. The French Generals did their utmost to put in supplies, but the ways
being narrow and difficult, they could by no means effect it.

The Spaniards having possessed themselves of all the Passes, the Prince of Condy
took up his quarters at a place called l' Vnghero. The Count de Fuensadagne in
the Champion Country, extending his quarters from the Main body, to the watch
above: The space from thence to the Prince of Condy's Post was possessed by the
Lorainers, Their Army being Lodged in this posture, they began immediately their
line of Circumvallation, which in 4 days was completed, and on the 11th of
September they opened their Trenches, directing their approaches to the
Bulwarks of Chene, and del Perdu, and to the Half Moon or Ravelin betwixt them.

The Commanders in chief of the Spaniards in this Leagure, were the Count de
Fuensaldagne General, the Count de Garzias Lieutenant General, and the Prince
of Ligny in the third place. Prince Uldric of Wittembourg was Captain General
of the German Horse.

The Lorraine Troops were Commanded by the Count de Ligneville. The Prince of
Condy's, by the Marquess de Bouteville, the Count de Briole, the Count de
Duraz, and the Prince de Tarante, who a while after left the Camp, disgusted
with the Spaniards, because they would not admit him to the Command conferred
upon him by the Prince.

Rocroy was well-provided with Victuals, Ammunition, Cannon, Forts, and a good
wall. Their chief want was of men, there being in the whole Garrison not above
450 Foot, 50 Horse, 30 Inhabitants in Arms, and about 90 Peasants that had
fled thither; The fosse was full of water, and the Plain without the Works
spungie and morish, but 4 or 5 Foot deep, chalkie and firm.

The French Generals, at the first motion of the Enemies Army, perceived
immediately they could nave no other design but upon Rocroy; and because they
judged it impossible, either to disturb them in their Siege, or put relief into
the Town, they marched without delay to la Fere, passed the River, and by the
way of Heppe, Auchenne and Pollieux, they came to Armilly, from whence they
dispatched away a strong party to join with the Count de Grand Pre, who was
already advanced from la Fere to invest Mouson. The Prince of Condy foresaw,
that Turenne, to recompense the loss of Rocroy, would endeavor to get Mouson,
and there fore had very opportunely commanded the Count de Briole to convey
himself to Stenay, with 400 Horse and 1200 Foot, to join with the Marquess of
Persan's Troops, who upon the surrender of Rhetel were retired into that Town,
and with them to have a special eye upon the conservation of the adjacent
places, which were under his command; accordingly the Count de Briole,
understanding the motion of the French Army, marched immediately to Beaumont, a
Village within a league of Mouson, from whence he put into the town some
Companies of Foot, returning with the rest to Stenay, to be ready upon occasion
to succor the Garrisons of Clermont and St. Menhaud, if the French finding the
Garrison of Mouson too strong, should turnback upon some of these places. But
notwithstanding these supplies, the French late down before Mouson, dividing
their Army into four quarters, one at Ablemont, where Turenne lay; the second
at Vaux where la Ferte lodged, the third, by the River, commanded by the
Marquess de Uxelles, Lieutenant General; and the fourth in the Suburbs on the
other side the Mose, where the Count de Plessis, son of the Marshall of that
name, entered with his Regiment of Foot and some Dragoons. And because it was
necessary to secure their quarters in the said Fauxbourg, from any prejudice
they might receive from the besieged, by reason of a Fort or Tenaglia they had
at the very point of the Bridge; Turenne past the River himself, and caused it
to be assaulted in his Presence, which was performed with so much courage and
good Order, that they presently presently made themselves Master of it; the
Defenders retreating into the Town; The taking of this Fort rendered the Bridge
unserviceable to the enemy, and secured their quarters in the suburbs. The
Count de Beaujeu, who lay with a Body of Horse at Lobe, 4. Leagues from Rocroy,
to observe the motion of the Spaniards, came likewise to Mouson, and quartred
with his Horse in the Fauxbourg.

Mouson lies upon the river Mose, one branch of which runs through the Town, the
other washes it on the right side; it has a fair Bridge, and at the end of it
was the said Fort or Tenaglia, which commanded the suburbs, which lie at a
little distance: The Town is encompassed with a strong wall, and Towers of an
ancient Fabric, filled in many places with earth, and flancked with half-Moons
and Ravelins. On one side, the ditches are watered with the River, which runs
very pleasantly through them: besides which, it has very strong outworks which
encompass it from one side of the River to the other with Bulwarks and
Half-Moons. There were in the Town about 1500 Foot, and 200 Horse, under the
Command of Colonel Wolf a German, with sufficient provision of all sorts, and
18 Pieces of Cannon.

The Tenaglia at the Foot of the bridge being taken, and the Fauxbourg secured,
the French opened their Trenches, and in 4 or 5 days possessed themselves of the
outworks, lodging themselves upon the brow of the Ditch in two places, where
they planted three batteries. The Marquess de Castelneau, Lieutenant General
lodged himself upon the bank on that side next the River, and possessing
himself of a Half Moon, which the besieged had deserted, and attempted to place
himself at the Foot of the wall, to spring a Mine, but he was beaten off by the
Defendants, with Grenades and other Fireworks: upon which the besiegers were
obliged to break the Counterscarp, which was lined with stone, and throw
themselves into the Ditch to advance under Covert with their Galleries, even to
their very Pallisadoes and in this attempt the Vidame of Laon (son to the Count
de Boussy, Nephew of the Marshall Turenne, a brave youth of 18 years of age)
was slain.

The French made their approaches over against a great Tower, and passing the
Ditch without the help of a Gallery, they began their Mines at the Foot of it,
and springing one of them, which taking effect, they lodged themselves in the
said Tower, continuing their work in the Mine, that they might utterly demolish
it, as they did on the other side, which more then ordinary diligence, pressing
hard upon the Town to take it, before the Spaniards should make themselves
Masters of Rocroy, so that their Mines being ready to spring, the besieged
fearing they should not be able to resist an assault, resolved to capitulate,
which they did upon the 26. of September, 18 days after they were attaqued* the
Governor marching out with 1400 choice men.

While the French were intent upon the taking of this Town, the Spaniard was no
less busy about the reduction of Rocroy, hoping to compel that Garrison to
surrender, before they lost Mouson, and so come in time enough to its relief,
which if it succeeded, they should easily obtain their intent: having finished
their trenches, their approaches and their batteries, (in five of which they
had disposed 23 whole Cannons, two upon the brow of the Ditch, and 3 in the
field) The 16. of September the Prince of Condy caused 400 of his men to
attaque their covert way, and Lodge themselves upon the Counterscarp, falling
furiously upon the Half Moon, betwixt the two Bulwarks, which was with great
courage defended by the besieged. The Governor wanting neither experience nor
valor, by frequent and well-managed Sallies, rendered the Enterprise much more
difficult then was imagined; and because the Count de Fuensaldagne had always
opposed this Siege, from whence nothing could be expected but the consuming of
their soldiers, the loss of one of the Kings Towns, and a Conquest without
profit, it falling to the Prince of Condy's share; upon which score, some sharp
expressions falling out betwixt him and the said Prince, the Archduke thought
fit to come himself to the Camp, to compose by his prudence and dexterity, all
differences betwixt them. But if his coming did one way appease the mind of the
Prince, another way it discontented him as much, he being very sensible, that
the Archdukes presence would diminish the Glory which in the taking of that
Town he conceived did belong solely to himself, of this disgust he gave a clear
proof, refusing to receive the word from the Archduke, which he highly
resenting, Commanded the Prince of wirtenbourg (who was lodged in the same
quarter with the Prince of Condy) not to obey his orders any more. But this
Affair likewise was accomodated by the Duke of Lorrain, who arrived at that
time at the Spanish Camp, the Medium he found out was this; That the word
should be given neither by the Archduke nor by the Prince, but by a third
person Chosen to that purpose by them both.

The Duke of Lorrain pretending that by the ill Air of that place, his Troops
were grown sickly, and died daily: on a sudden without the least intimation to
the Archduke, he Marched off with his Forces, to the great wonder and
astonishment of the other Generals, for without his forces which made up the
third part of the Army, if the French should attempt the relief of the Town,
they might easily effect it, and force them to raise the Siege, not without
great danger of a further disaster: wherefore the Count de Fuensaldagne
followed the said Duke, who was already some leagues off: and overtaking him at
Mariambourg, with much ado persuaded him back to the Leagure.

The first Salley the besieged made, was upon those that were lodged on the
Countrescarp, toward the point of the Half Moon, by 60 choice men, armed all
of them with a kind of Syths upon strong staves, with which having entered the
work, they cut all in pieces that were advanced the most forward: after this
Salley, another Captain issued out with 45 men, and two Granadeers; and entering
into another work, advanced by the enemy against the Bulwark of Chene, under
the Pallisadoe, to facilitate their passage into the ditch; they put all they
found within it to the sword.

Yet notwithstanding, such brave opposition, the Besiegers ceased not to double
their strength advancing to the Wall of the Bulwarks to open a breach with
their Mines, and come to an assault: In the mean time the besieged made another
Sally upon the Spanish quarter, doing them great mischief, and taking Prisoners
a Lieutenant Colonel with a Spanish Captain. The besiegers some few days after,
opening a way into the Fosse, they passed it by the help of two Bridges of
Bavins, and gave fire to their Mines under the aforesaid Bulwarks, one of which
proved ineffectual, by the diligence of those that were within: the other took
effect at the Bulwark of Chene, where the Governor received a wound in the
Head by a Musket Shot, who notwithstanding caused himself to be carried up and
down in a Chair, where his Presence was most requisite. Two breaches in the
mean time were made in the front of these bulwarks, and furiously assaulted by
the Spaniards, and as stoutly defended by the Garrison. The same night the
besiegers were repulsed in another assault upon the Half Moon, yet not so, but
that they lodged themselves at the point of it, and carried it afterward, for
they within not being able to defend it any longer, thought best to abandon it,
especially there being no Port of Communication, which made them doubt, that if
it happened to be forced, all those men would be lost: of which they stood in
need. The Governor having taken a review of the remainder of his men fit for
service, and finding they amounted not to 300, and seeing the breaches open in
the bulwarks, and another Battery began upon the Courtin, which had no defense
without, nor water in the Ditch, That same night the enemy was ready for the
assault, he resolved to capitulate, which was concluded on the 30th. of
September, and on the first of October, he marched out with 220 Soldiers, with
honorable conditions, and was convoyed to Charleville

This Town was delivered into the hands of the Prince of Condy, garrisoned by
his soldiers, and the Government of it given to the Duke d' Anguien his son,
which gave some resentment to such as were truly for the interest of his
Majesty of Spain, who discoursing politickly among themselves, said, that they
had lost Mouson, and not gained Rocroy, for it remaining in the Princes hands,
would serve rather to foment his pretensions, and facilitate his reconcilement
with the Court of France, then to augment his affection to the service of Spain.

Rocroy being taken, the Spanish Army remained there for some days, to demolish
their lines of Circumvallation, and make up the breaches, and finding
themselves much weakened and harrass'd with that siege, they retired into the
country, about Avennes, to refresh themselves, the Prince remaining at Rocroy,
being fallen ill of a quartane Ague.

The Marshall de Turenne having taken Mouson, as has been related, left in it
a Garrison of 600 Foot, with the Regiment of the Count de Grand Pre, giving him
the Command of it: and passing the Mose, marched directly toward Meziers, and
whilst he lay there, he had News of the Surrender of Rocroy. At the same time
the Count de Novalles advanced to Vervins, with 1500 men, and having taken it,
Marshall Turenne, Marched to Aubigny, to observe more narrowly the motion of
the Enemy, and obstruct their attempting of any other place, and here he rested
for some days: Whilst he was at Meziers, he sent the Marquess d' Uxelles, with
1200 men toward the Castle of Bousancy, which not being capable of relief from
the Garrisons of Stenay, and the adjacent Towns, (by reason they were watched
with a Party of Horse under the Count de St. Maur) it surrendered before the
Cannon came up.

The King was come from Paris the first day of September, and after a short
stay at Amiens, removed to Soissons the 30. of the said month) and thence to
Laon, in order to the relieving of Rocroy, which he had a design to have
attempted, and to that purpose the Duke of Elbeuf was called out of Picardy,
who with 3000 men lay quartered in those parts, to which the King joined the
greatest part of his Guards: but the Surrender happening before all the
Preparations were ready, those thoughts were laid aside, and changed into
another resolution taken up by the Cardinal with great undauntedness and
courage.

He judged it very convenient for the King to go to Amiens, whilst Affairs were
in that posture, to cajole the Duke of Chaunes out of that City and Citadel,
who had insinuated himself into the possession of that place, after the death
of his Brother, and as was doubted would keep it, contrary to the desire of the
Kings Counsel, and thought the said Duke having a considerable estate in
France, and his mind well composed to the service of the King, was supposed to
have no other intent, but to create a jealousy in the Court, thereby to
addvance his fortune (which Arts are no where practiced so much as in France)
nevertheless, it was judged no ill piece of policy, to secure themselves
against the least suspicion of a person, who by the Variation of his mind,
might contribute so largely to the prejudice of his Sovereign; And though the
said Duke had sent to the Court the Letters which were writ him by the Prince
of Condy, full of invitations and promises if he would engage on his side, yet
the Cardinal looked upon it as a Seasonable piece of service, to make sure of
that important place, considering how unstable the minds of men are, and
particularly of that Nation, in whose brains there always boyls a certain
vivacity, more turbulent, with the desire of Novelty, then the Waters with the
Wind. All this was managed and effected without noise, the said Duke being
contented to deliver it up to the Sieur Bar, and he in Exhange, to enter upon
the Government of Dorlans, held by the said Bar; To which was added the Title
of his Majesty's Lieutenant General in the parts about Dorlans, and a certain
sum of Money paid him for such Arms and Ammunition as he had provided at his
own Charge, in the Citadel of Amiens.

But the end of this Voyage was not barely the securing of Amiens, but to be
more ready at hand to assist the Army with his Counsels, and (besides the usual
Guards of Horse and Foot,) there being great numbers of the Nobles attending
the King, with the one and the other, to succor the Army in time of need.

Nevertheless, it had not been amiss, had their Majesty's stayed in Paris, to
prevent such accidents as might arise in that City, where the sinister
intentions of some persons toward the Government, were not absolutely
dispelled, especially the Archbishop being decrepit, and the Cardinal de Retz
to succeed him, new troubles might arise among the people, who would have
pretended not to be satisfied without their Pastor, he being a person of much
esteem amongst them for his Generosity. But there being a necessity of the
Kings going into the Field, the Cardinal thought (to evade all accidents that
might happen, and to remove the said Retz out of Paris, as a person of too high
and extravigant a spirit to be left behind) to offer him his liberty, and the
Kings favor, upon condition he would renounce the hopes of his future
succession, and retire to Rome with promise to stay there, and not return into
France, in recompense of which he promised him an Equivalence to the
Archbishopric, though his Uncle was living, and other assistance besides, to
augment his dignity and splendour.

Cardinal de Retz, though under the durance and inconveniences of a Prison,
preferred the glory of his Constancy, before all other private considerations,
and being puffed up with hopes of seeing in a short time the face of things
altered, either by the death of the Archbishop, or by the means of his friends
at Rome, emulous of Mazarine, he stood firm in the Negative, not to quit his
dignity, declaring, That for the King he would do this, or any thing else, to
the very effusion of his blood, and loss of his whole estate, but knowing it to
be no other but the Artifice and interest of Mazarine; he could not swallow so
bitter a potion presented to him by his most irreconcilable enemy. The Pope,
though not much inclined to the interest of France, declared that the
Proposition in his judgment was honorable and practicable; of this also the
Prisoner had notice, but it would not sweeten the bitterness of his mind, who
bearing his adversity with great constancy, he gained the reputation of an
intrepid person; and having found a way to write to the Sacred College of
Cardinals in Rome Letters full of Lamentation, with earnest requests to be
assisted with their Protection, by whom he did humbly conceive he ought not to
be abandoned, for fear of manifest prejudice to the dignity of the Purple. One
of the Cardinals of principal credit amongst them, seeing they were inclined to
answer him, declared, in delivering his opinion, that he could not see why they
should engage in an Affair, more likely to prove a detriment to the Church,
then any benefit to the prisoner, seeing they could give him no other
assistance then by words, which would persuade more by gentleness then by
rigor. He urged moreover that Cardinal Mazarine was in the same or greater
perplexities with the Parliament of Paris, and that nothing have been done in
his behalf, though concurrent with the service of the King his Master. much
less were they obliged to do any thing for Cardinal de Retz who was at that
time in his Majesty's displeasure.

The Counsel of this Cardinal being heared and approved as the best, gave
occasion to the resolution they took of interceding to his Holiness, that out
of his paternal care he would exhort his most Christian Majesty to grant
Cardinal de Retz his liberty. The King showed himself very ready, and after
diverse Negotiations, the Duchess of Chevreuse undertook it, shuffling in
Conditions for the Duke of Lorrain, who though he was secured by the Spaniards,
as we shall hereafter relate, Nevertheless, the Treaty about the Cardinal was
not laid aside, but at last was concluded, upon Condition he should renounce
his Coadjutorship of Paris, giving him as many Benefices as were Equivalent to
that Archbishopric, the revenue of which amounted to a vast sum.

This affair was almost brought to a Period, all difficulties being reduced to
two points, the one about the value of the Benefices, the other about the
security for the performance, when the death of the Archbishop changed the face
of Affairs, but though the Curates of Paris, all the factious party, and the
friends of the Coajutor, had raised new tumults in his behalf, nevertheless the
Cardinal resolved to accept of the Conditions offered him,

Being brought therefore from the Castle of Vincennes, he was delivered into
the hands of the Marshall de la Melleray, who conveyed him to Nantes, where he
was to remain till the Articles agreed on were accomplished, after which he was
to be sent to Rome, and money given him for his Voyage, and subsistence there,
but he making his escape from Nantes, all things were disordered again, as we
shall relate in its proper place.

In the mean time the enemies of Mazarine, seeing their Artifices and Cabals to
ruin him ineffectual, they began to plot and contrive how to take away his
life. It was divulged, that the Prince of Condy had a hand in this business,
upon a suspicion that the Cardinal had attempted his life.

It is most certain (as was afterward made manifest) that neither the one nor
the other were true, but that all was plotted and designed by the malice of the
common enemies.

One Recous and Bertau were gained and persuaded to do the deed, who being
resolved upon the Enterprise, they began to frequent the Louvre, and to watch
for a place and time to put their design in execution; it happened that Letters
were accidentally intercepted, which gave such discoveries as were sufficient
to cause them to be apprehended: upon which they freely declared their
resolution, to have stabbed the Cardinal with a knife, as he was coming down
(as he was accustomed every night) from the Kings Apartment, by certain private
and strait stairs. They were according to their deserts condemned to be broken
upon the wheel, the 11th. of October in Paris, near the Bastile, in the great
street of St. Anthony.

The Cardinal according to the gentleness of his nature, and as a true Prince
of the Church, abhoring such bloody spectacles, interceded very earnestly for
their Pardon, and had certainly obtained it if in so enormous a case it could
have bin done without violence to justice, which in such accidents ought not to
be overpowered by pity and compassion.

There followed several other Executions in Paris, upon persons imprisoned for
heinous Offenses, but without doubt the King's Clemency was greater then his
Justice, they that received grace and pardon, being superior in Number to
those that were punished.

We cannot omit in this place the action of a dilinquent, who being to loose
his Head, declared, his ambition should triumph over his fate, and therefore
before he was to appear upon the Scaffold, as he had been to go to a Feast, he
put himself in a gay dress, caused his face to be Shaved; his hair, curld and
powdered, and his Mustaccio's turned up, boasting with an undaunted boldness,
That Persons of Honor, even in the most ignominious death, ought to die like
themselves.

And though clemency and too much indulgence gives but fresh boldness and
encouragement to fall into the same crimes again, and, is therefore looked upon
in many peoples opinions, as a very ill Maxim, yet that was no impediment to
the present Councils, for to all generous minds, the opportunity of meriting
the benedictions of such as received grace, being much rather to be chosen,
then the imprecations of those which were punished, the Kings Ministers took
this course, whereby their Charity working upon Heaven, has since produced
those Miracles that have rendered his Government the happiest, who bearing the
hereditary Title of most Christian, has to his everlasting honor added to it
the Epithet of most merciful.

And certainly, they may justly be called Miracles, which were seen in France,
in this Year 1653. for whilst it was expected, and too probably, that that
Kingdom could not avoid destruction by so many storms and tempests both at
home, and from abroad. The Heavens cleared up on a sudden, and that Clime
became quiet and sedate, which was before so dismally dreadful, for by the
reduction of Guienne and Bourdeaux, being rid of that fastidious diversion,
they were able to use those Arms in other places, which have since secured the
Frontiers from daily Alarms; and penetrating into Catalonia and Lombardy,
interrupted those designs, which by the favor of their antecedent Victories
would have brought extraordinary advantage to thinterest of Spain.

Whilst the military Affairs in Catalonia, Guienne, and Champagne were managed
in this manner; in Piemont also they began to have a better face, and those
doubts to clear up, which by reason of their want of assistance, the people of
that Province might have reasonably pretended, if to evade the calamities of a
War, they had come to an Agreement with the Spaniards. For the Count de Quince
having past into Piemont, and by order from Mazarine, being enforced with fresh
Troops from France, he advanced with 5 or 6000 men into the Enemies Country,
and encamping at Annone, upon the Banks of the Tanaro, in a months time that he
was there, he infested the Country about Alexandria, with continual
incursions, after which he returned into the Territory of Montferrat, and
passing the Po at Verrica, he went to encamp above Crescentino, to observe the
motion of the Marquess of Caracene, who having taken the field with 8000 men,
was come to Fo^tane and Palazzuolo three miles distant. Here the Armies
remained several days, observing one another motion, in which time the French
made several excursions, and one in particular with 1500 men as far as
Vercelli; afterward, before they drew off, Quince drew out his Horse into the
Fields of Bertola, within Cannon-shot of the enemies Camp, and challenged the
Spaniards to a battle; but they holding it as a Maxim, to tire out the French
fury with the Spanish Phlegm, laughed at his defiance.

This Gallantry of the French vanishing in this manner without effect, Quince
repassed the Po in the Month of July, and entered a fresh into Montferrat,
passing the Tanaro upon a Bridge of Boats near Asti, and from thence having
stayed two days at Rochetta, he encamped at Monbersel. At the News of this
March, the Marquess of Caracene crossed the Po likewise with his Troops near
Pontestura, and traversing Montferrat, came to Felezzano, to pass the Tanaro at
Rochetta; but discovering the enemy ready to oppose him, he went to pass it
lower toward Alexandria, advancing as far as Nizza de la Paglia: Quince
stayed, observing his motion about 15 days at Castle nuovo Bruzato, where
happened daily skirmishes betwixt their Horse. But Caracene resolving finally to
fall into Piemont, and by this diversion oblige the French to quit Monferrat,
he passed the Po at Pontestura, and began to scour the Country round about
which yet was not sufficient to make Quince remove, who judging it a thing very
prejudicial, to transfer the War into the Country of his Friends and Allies,
he took another resolution; He sent his baggage to Asti, and forded the Tanaro
at Rochetta, and so passing to Bormida, by the way of Novi, he came to
Serravalla a great Village, above Alexandria, upon the Confines of the
Territories of Genoa, betwixt the Rivers Scrivia, and Orba, and having sacked
it, he Marched toward Tortona, and Castle nuovo di Scrivia, making great
Booties in those places, where he was not expected. Upon this Caracene was
constrained to change his designs upon Piedmont, and pass with all diligence
to Alexandria, draining his Garrisons, and drawing all the forces together he
was able, to cut off the retreat of the French to Nizza: But Quince having
notice both of his motion and design, he marched by Cassino di Stradda, by
Aicqui, and by the vale of Bistagno and Nizza, where the Spanish Army was
arrived before him: The same Night the French retreated to Santo Stephano, and
hasted away to gain the Pass of la Madonna de Tennello, preventing the enemy,
who arrived there at the very instant that the French had made themselves
Masters of it with their Vauntguard. Here they fell a skirmishing, but with
reservation on the Spanish side, who would not engage themselves in a Battle
with the French, who though they were inferior in number, yet were too strong
for them, in respect of the goodness of their Horse, Quince past directly
toward Alba without any stop, and from thence to Govenne, betwixt Alba and
Asti, extending his Troops along the Banks of the River Tanaro, where the
French made a stay till the Arrival of the Marshall de Grance, who having
passed the Mountains with a Recruit of 1200 men, on the 18. of September
arrived at the Camp, where informing himself of the state of the Spanish Army,
which was likewise encamped upon the same Confines, endeavoring to penetrate
further into Piedmont: he had News that Caracene was removed from Montenego,
and marched with all diligence to gain the Pass of the Tanaro at a place called
Rochetta, with design to go to Felezzano.

Hereupon they held a short Council of War, and it was resolved not only to
hinder his Advance, but engage him to a battle, on which depended their hopes.
Grance sent out the Marquess of Monpesat, his Lieutenant General (who had the
Command of the Rear) to possess himself of the most advantageous ground, and
having drawn up the rest of his Army himself in a large field, reaching to the
Neighboring Hills: He advanced with 4 Squadrons to descry the enemy, and
having discovered that Caracene began to pass his men over upon a Bridge of
Boats, followed by the Infantry, under the Conduct of Don Vincenzo Monsuri, and
that the Horse foorded the River a little beneath, led by the Duke de Sesto,
General of the Gens d' Arms, and Count Geleazzo Trotti General of the
Neapolitan Cavalry: He thought it best not to give the Spaniards time to finish
their Passage, but by possessing himself first of the Field, to necessitate
them either to retire or to engage upon disadvantageous terms, he caused
therefore his main body to advance with all possible speed; Caracene not being
able to prevent the French, by reason of the slowness of his men, in passing
the River, and the loss of two hours time, in staying for the Bridge, resolved
to expect them under the Advantage of the Posts where he was, and because he
had not time to draw into the Plain, and the ground being somewhat strait on
that side the Tanaro, accommodating himself as well as he could, both as to his
time and his ground, he drew his Horse into Squadrons behind his Infantry.

Thence he possessed himself immediately of two Cottages, placing there the
Tertia's of Don Luigi Benaudes, and Don Inigo de Velandia, and in the space
betwixt the two Houses, the Regiments of Don Giuseppe Velasco, Don Diego d'
Arragon, and of Beltin, with design to have united them by a branch of a
Trench, which for want of time could not be perfected.

The Marshall observing the posture of the enemy, and perceiving that by the
advancing of his Van he might put the Spanish Camp into some disorder, by the
advantage of the hill (though without Musket Shot, and provided only with two
little Fieldpieces) he drew his Army into two lines with all possible
expedition.

The Marquess of Monpesat had the Command of the right Wing, consisting of the
Regiments of Navarre, Perault, Aiguebonne, the Kings Swiss-Guards, the Squadron
of the Mareschals Guards, the Regiments of Orleans, Feron; of Prince Maurice of
Savoy, Marcousse, Ferues and Epinchat. The left Wing was commanded by the
Marquess de Vardes, with the Regiment of Foot of Orleans, Lionnois, and Quince,
and of Horse there were the Regiments of St. Andre, Brigy and Villefranche, on
the left hand of which stood all the Companies of Volunteers, the Cavalry of
Savoy, under the Command of their General the Marquess de Monte of Verona, to
whom were joined the Infantry of the Regiment of Monpesat, and Villa,
Lieutenant General of the Savoy Horse.

In the second line stood the Regiment of Saux, as a Reserve to the Regiment of
Navarr, with the Regiment of Carignan de Sault: and on the left the Regiment of
Grance, sustein'd the Regiments of Orleans and Lyennois, having with them in
the same line the Guards of Savoy, the French Gens d' Arms, with the Regiments
of Ris, Deoncly, and Saint Agnan.

In this Order the French advanced and with great fury, charged three Companies
of light Horse, and some parties of Foot, which appearing upon the top of the
Hills, were repulsed as far as the Battalions of Benavides, Velandia and
Beltin, by whom the French were received so courageously, both with Pike and
Musket, which flanked them through several holes of the Cottages, that Monpesat
finding it impossible to advance further, made a stand.

The French resolved to possess themselves of a little Church or Chapel
toward the River, about some 20 paces distant from the little Houses, where
Caracene had placed two Files of Spanish and Italian Musketeers, with Orders,
if they were attaqu'd, to retire to a body of his, drawn up hard by, composed
of the Tertia's of Don Carlo d' Este, Don Giusippe Brancaccio, Danel Assy,
Count di Santi lana, and some foreign soldiers of the State of Milan; Grance
caused the said Chapel to be Assaulted by 200 Foot, seconded by some Horse,
which was immediately taken, the Musketeers retiring according to their
Orders, to their main Body, which stood firm in their Post. He sent out after
them his Company of Gens d' Arms, who advanced within 30 Paces of the
Trenches, on the Spanish left wing, and as the same time he made a brisk charge
with his Foot, hoping that if he could disorder the Enemies Battalion, the
French Horse might fall in, and put them to an absolute rout, but meeting with
a certain torrent of Waters which in that place falls into the Tanaro, the
Horse were forced to stop their carreer. In the mean time the Troops of Savoy,
made their charge betwixt the River, and the right Wing of the Spaniards, which
was the most open place, where at the first volley of the Enemies Masketiers,
the Marquess Monte, (a person of great Conduct and experience, and of great
same, for several valiant Exploits) was shot in the Head, and died immediately.
The Marquess Villa had a slight wound in the Arm, and was afterward made
General in the place of the said Monte, the Count de Medavid, son of the
Marshall and the Sieur de Boussy, Marshall di Battaglia, and several other
Officers were hurt. Whereupon Grance (observing the resoluteness of the
Spaniards, animated by the presence of their General Caracene, who according to
the example of an excellent Captain, kept still in the front among his first
Files, thrusting himself forward where the danger was greatest) commanded up
his second line, with two small pieces, one of which was disabled at the first
shot, by the breaking of the Carriage, the French continued shooting with the
other, but to so little purpose, That being repulsed in all places, at length
about Sunset their fury beginning to abate for want of Artillery and Ammunition,
(it being observed, that the Swissers for want of leaden Bullets had shot away
most of their Pewter-buttons off their doublets,) they retreated to the Hill
where and the next Morning took their March toward Montemagno and Granai.
There were slain of the French in this Engagement, besides the Marquess de
Monte, 4 Captains, and several other Officers, with a considerable number of
common soldiers, which was not precisely known, and above 100 wounded, amongst
which several Officers. The Spaniards lost but few Soldiers, and few or no
Officers, but several were wounded, and among the rest the Marquess de Caracene
was slightly hurt with a Musket Shot.

After this Fight, the French Army remained 17 days at Mountemagno, and neither
the one nor the other being in a condition to undertake any considerable
Enterprise, all the rest of that Campaign was spent in Marches, and
Counter-Marches from one place to another; The French to keep themselves in the
Territories of Milan, and to subsist in the Enemies Country: and the
Span^ards, as much as they could, to prevent them, upon which several
skirmishes happened with reciprocal success: Afterward the French Army
dislodged from Mountemagno and came to Tuline, attended still by the Spaniards,
which at the same time discamp'd from Felezzano, and was got in the Enemies
front. Here Caracena and Grance had a Conference, each of them accompanied with
the principal Persons in their Armies, discoursing together for two hours with
great Complement and Civility, the French remaining well satisfied with the
humanity and valor of Caracena, holding him in the esteem of a most prudent
and most generous Captain.

This Conference being over, the French Army kept the Field for some time, now
in this place, and now in that, but still (according to the Instructions they
had received from Mazarine) in the Enemies Country, where by the vigilance of
the Spanish Commanders, not being able to gain any Post to subsist in, and at
length the Weather growing sharp, they were forced to retire into Piemont,
where they wintered their Foot, and sent their Horse over the Mountains, into
Dauphine, Bress and Dombes, and in this manner ended the Campaign in Italy in
the Year 1653.

Whilst things went thus in Flanders and Italy, Letters were brought to Court
with the Capitulations of Bourdeaux, which being read in the Royal Council, and
the relation of de Las heard, (who was sent from the Generals, and the Sieur d'
Estrades,) the Amnesty was immediately dispatched away, containing an entire
abolition of all crimes, without exception of any, but Francar the Counselor,
Blaru, and Desert, Merchants, deputed from the Olmiera into England, as also
Durateste and Villars, Heads of that Faction, with Clerat their Agent in Spain.
It was decreed moreover in the said Amnesty, That the Citizens should renew
their Oath of Allegiance, That they should repair the Castles of Trompet and du
Ha, as necessary to restrain the unruly turbulencies of the people, and support
the honest and more honorable fort, it being observeable able in all Cities,
that the Populacie is always an enemy to those who have any thing to lose.

This Declaration of the Kings being proposed to La vie, the Advocate-General
(who was at that time at Bourdeaux, to draw up a Process against the two Spies
which Marsin and Lenet had sent back into the City) he promised the Duke of
Vendosme, it should be speedily verified; who expected from every one of the
Parliament such testimonies of their submission, as might be able to cancel and
obliterate the memory of their late disobedience: But the said La Vie, making
use of this opportunity to render himself necessary; created so many
difficulties and ambiguities, perplexing it with such intricate
Interpretations, that gave encouragement to the Counselors of the Parliament,
to restrain the Kings pleasure with their Comments, Glosses, and Modifications,
that they seemed not only to be the Intepreters, but the Moderators and
Disposers of his Majesty's Favors, as if they had come by their means. They
stirred up the people particularly not to suffer the yoke (as they called it)
of the Castles, ordering to renew their instances at Court for the demolishing
of all the Fortresses in the City, and that if it should be the Kings
peremptory resolution to force that servitude upon them, they should not
however consign the said places to the Governour-General of the Province.

This reflection was not at all pleasing to the Cardinal and the other
Ministers, much less the Contion, that the Publication of the Amnesty should be
deferred, till the Parliament should be established and resident in Bourdeaux,
as if that had been deemed necessary for the security of the people, and to
make valid his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, which made the Court the more
suspicious of them, by how much they pressed to have their desires in this
Point granted. These kind of Proceedings and Extravagancies of the Parliament,
were extremely resented by the Dukes of Vandosme and Candale, as looking like
manifest demonstrations of their express disobedience; wherefore they ordered
the Counselors which were come from Reole to Bourdeaux, to return again to
their residence. The said La vie, who was supposed to be the Author of this
boldness for his own ends, was expressly forbidden to abide in Bourdeaux. After
which, having with a wile procured the Original of the Declaration, out of the
hands of the Clerk, of the Parliament, it was published by Order of the
Generals, by the Magistrates of the City. The Court was as much surprised at
these disorders as disgusted with the Parliament of Guienne, the most Loyal of
whose Members, seemed by this, to be as much Rebels as the rest, whereupon by a
severe decree of the 26. of September, they were prohibited (to their great
mortification) to meddle in any matters pertaining to the State.

The King Generals observing the inconvenience of their Troops lying so near
the Town, resolved to remove them: and by the surrender of Peregueux, the war
in that Province being at an end, the Count de Bougy, Lieutenant General was by
Order from the Court sent away with 6000 Horse and Foot toward the Frontiers
of Flanders; Three Thousand other Horse, and 2000 Foot were Commanded into
Catalonia, there remaining only part of the Duke of Vandosme's Army in the
Country, called, Betwixt the two Seas, to be ready to be Shipped upon the first
Order, in case the Spaniards should continue to block up the Mouth of the
Garonne, who landed some men within 12 Leagues of Blaye, and set on fire
certain stacks of Hay, belonging to the Duke of St. Simon, and on the other
side they fell into the Country of Medoc, and burnt all the Neighboring
Villages.

The Duke of Vendosme in the mean time, having viewed all his Ships under the
Fort Caesar, and with those which had been equipped by the Bourdelots, during
the Siedge, he proposed to engage the Spanish Fleet, as was earnestly desired
by the Duke of Candale, and the Count d' Estrades, who to that end had brought
along with him 700 Seamen from the Isles under his Government of Rochel, But
the Sea Commanders represented that their force was unequal in respect of their
great Ships; for though they out-numbred them in the whole; yet the French
Ships were much less in bulk; so that the Spaniards had great advantage by
their Galeons full of fresh men, with which they would be too hard for the
French Fleet, which was neither well manned, nor provided with other things
necessary.

And if the Spaniards should put out to Sea; or keep themselves at the Mouth of
the River, where they then were, it was not possible for the Galleys (though
never so well armed) nor the small Ships in the French Fleet, to do them any
mischief. But if they should advance higher in the River, where the Channel is
narrower and full of Sand, then they might be able to Attaque them with more
advantage.

To rectify the differences and difficulties the Sea-Commanders objected, the
Count d' Estrades Engaged to muster up all the Seamen that were able to bear
Arms, and put them on the Ships. But as they were Executing the Duke of
Vandosm's Orders, to conduct them, on on a sudden the Spanish Fleet was
discovered under Sail, standing toward Blay, and advanced as far as Paulliac;
not as formerly, five or six in Company to fetch fresh water; but the whole
Body of their Navy, in appearance, to fall upon the French, at a time when the
Duke of Vandosme had withdrawn his Troops into Xaintoigne, to ease the Country
about Bourdeaux: But being called back again in great haste, and advancing some
Regiments to put aboard the Ships, the Spaniard retired to the Fosse of Verdun.

The Duke of Vandosme had taken a view of the Spanish Fleet the 26. of
September, and sent Sir George Carteret to inform himself more particularly of
their condition; who found they were 28 vast and stout Galeons; but by some
which had been taken prisoners in the Island of Patiras, he understood they
were much infested with the Scurvey, which is a disease that eats up the Gumms.
Nevertheless, they landed some men at St. Surin de Cadurna in Medoc, and burnt
some few houses, before the Kings troops were in a condition to repulse them,
or accost them with their Cannon: As Vandosme was preparing to engage them, and
had sent several Galeots to Saint Surin de Mortagne, and to Mortagne it self,
to take in some corn; the Count Marsin arriving at the Spanish Fleet, had a
design on that place, and accordingly landed about 3000 men, surprised the ten
Galeots, sent thither to furnish themselves with corn for the necessities of
the Army and Fleet, forced the Castle, and pillaged some houses; but
apprehending, lest the Marquess of Breval Marshall de Camp, should fall upon
him with the Regiment of Normandy, which was quartered hard by, he aabandon'd
the Post he had taken, and if Breval had had but the least number of Horse, to
have cut off the passage from the Spaniards, who had no Horse at all, and were
laden with booty, he had undoubtedly defeated them.

Marsin made some barricadoes in a Meadow, which extends it self to the River,
having on one side the Canale de Mortagne to shelter that flanck, and on the
other, his own men, which he drew into Battalia; He sustein'd the skirmish
vigorously, and embark't all the plunder of that miserable Country, losing
nevertheless some few men in his retreat, which the Regiment of Normandy fell
upon as they found their Number lessen upon the Shore.

In the mean time the Count de Estrades, had got together about Rochel and
Browages, and other places belonging to his Government, some 1200. Mariners,
which he put aboard French vessels, and sent them away without delay to join
with the Duke of Vandosme.

The Duke being gone on board the Admiral, and all his men embarkt, the set
Sail, resolving to give them Battle, but the Spaniards surprised with this
unexpected resolution, set fire on certain small Vessels, and with the favor
of the wind retired. The Duke followed them out of the mouth of the River,
where he saw them divide their Fleet into two Squadrons, one of them making
toward Biscay, and the other toward Dunkirk.

The Duke went on shore at Royan, and whilst he stayed there to receive more
certain news of the enemies Fleet, the San-Salvatore, Vice Admiral of Spain,
which came from Saint Sebastian, together with another small Ship, both of them
laden with Victuals and other Provisions for the Fleet, entered into the River,
not knowing they was departed, and were so far engaged amongst the French Ships
before they were aware, that after some small opposition against the Ship
called the Berger, they were forced to strike Sail, and surrender: In the
Vice Admiral there were 40 Pieces of Cannon, in the other Vessel 700 Mariners,
and a Months Provision for the whole Armada: After this Prize the French Navy
retired into the River Sudra, and the Duke of Vandosme went away to Court: The
Count d' Estrades for his great merits was declared Major of Bourdeaux, an
Office of great honor and importance, and the Principal in all that Town,
signifying as much as the Head or chief Governor of the City: which Office is
so considerable, that it was formerly enjoyed by the Sieurs de Mattignon, d'
Ornano, and de Roquelaure Mareschals of France.

In this manner the disturbances at Bourdeaux were composed: But whilst these
inhabitants were enjoying the fruits of the peace, which had bin granted them
by his Majesty's clemency, the Plague breaking out in that City, interrupted
their liberty and their Trade, the Country, round about was so sorely visited,
that it remained almost depopulate.

The Deputies of Bourdeaux being arrived at Court, which was at that time it
Chalons in Champagne, were received by their Majesty's with such demonstrations
of clemency and affection, that the guilt of their past errors was quite forgot
and gave them confidence to expect even the favor of the Kings bounty, The
Parliament of Guienne, who had removed themselves to Reole, receiving the
Provisions of the Government of Limousin, granted by his Majesty to the
Marshall Turenne) who with his Valor and Counsels maintained the Frontiers
against the strongest efforts of the enemy, encamping always so, as to be
ready upon the least motion of the Prince of Condy, who though he was retired
to give his Army refreshment, yet not without thoughts of returning into the
Field again, and take up at least his Winter Quarters in France.

The Cardinal, finding by the reduction of Guienne, the Kings Army's free from
a most powerful diversion in those parts, and being able thereby to apply
himself with the whole Army, to check the bold designs of the Prince of Condy,
and ruin his reputation in France; He called the Generals of the Armies
together in his Abbey at Laon, to a Council of War, and proposed to them, that
before they went to their Winter Quarters, to attempt some new Enterprise, and
if possible to take from the Prince of Condy the Town of Saint Menehaud, which
having a strong Garrison in it, infested all the Neighboring Country, and
forced, not only the Villages and open places, but the walled and strong Towns
to pay them very large contribution.

The Judgment of the Major part of the Officers was not to engage in any new
Enterprise that year, for that the Spaniards, though much weakened by the siege
of Rocroy, might recruit themselves, and returning with considerable forces,
either raise their siege, to the great di^reputation of the French Arms, or by
some other diversion, recompense the loss they should sustein, and perhaps to
double the value.

The Cardinal opposed this opinion, and made it appear, that with the Army of
the two Mareschals Turenne, and la Ferte Seneterre, they might oppose the
Spaniards and the Prince of Conde; and in the mean time with the Kings Guards
and some other few Troops, block up St. Menehaud, till the forces from Guienne,
and certain new Levies from Germany, (which had at that time Orders to march)
arriving, they might be able to form a Leagure, and by taking that Town, free
the whole Country of Champagne from their Incursions.

These Reasons prevailing, the Court removed from Laon to Chalons. The Marquess
de Castelneau with 1500 men, Monsieur de Saint Maur with 500 Horse, and some
Foot provided by the Cardinal, on the 21. of October blocked up the Town,
disposing themselves into four Quarters, without any line of Circumvallation,
because their Camp being secured by the Armies of the aforesaid Mareschals,
they concluded they should be able to reduce it without any formal siege.

And though it seemed ridiculous at first, that 3500 men should undertake the
reducing of a City and and strong Castle, Garrisoned with above 1500 Soldiers,
under good Commanders, which were the Marquess de Forz Governor of the Town,
and Monsieur de Montal Commander of the Castle, and indeed the chief Director,
as being a particular Confident of the Prince of Conde's; yet the siege was
undertaken with such briskness and dexterity, that the unexpected success did
much confirm the great Judgment and Parts of the Cardinal in all men's opinion.
And certain it is, his good fortune in that Enterprise added very much to his
honor, forasmuch as against the sense of the whole Council of War, he alone
defended the possibility of it.

The Marquesses of Castelneau, and Uxelles, the Count de Novailles, and
Mounsieur de St. Maur, commanded in the Camp before St. Menehaud, in quality of
Lieutenant Generals: The Provisions for the Camp were supplied from Chalons;
and because the Country, being ruined by the War, could not furnish them with
Horses and Carts, for the conveying of such things as were necessary for the
siege, they remedied that defect with those belonging to the baggage of the
Court; which was never thought on by the enemy; who looked upon that
Enterprise as vain, being undertaken without conveniences for carrying on the
siege; and the rather, because Clermont flanck'd them on the left side, whose
Garrison scoured the Country continually, and much molested the Neighboring
villages: One day they happened upon the Court-Waggons, carrying Ammunition and
Provisions to the Camp, and took away their Horses.

Whilst the Cardinal was employed in promoting this siege, the Marshall de
Turenne marched from Aubigny with five or six thousand men, to observe the
Enemies motion, who made a show as if they intended toward Rocroy.

The Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre put himself with his men, betwixt Clermont
and the Mose, to give encouragement to the Leagure. The Count de Beaujeu with
1500 Commanded men marched further into Picardy, to have an eye to the Frontier
Towns. The Duke de Elbeuf, and the Count de Illebonne his son, with their
Troops, kept sometimes at Rosan, sometimes at Mon Carnet, and sometimes in other
stations as Necessity required.

On the 26. of October, the King accompanied by the Cardinal, and a great
number of the Principal Cavaliers of the Court went to the Camp to see what
Posture it was in, and to encourage them with his Presence. He lodged that
night in the Abbey of Cicussy, belonging to Cardinal Bicchi; the next morning
he visited the Quarters of Nouailles: from thence he went to the top of a Hill,
under which was the quarter of Castelnau, form hence certain Cavaliers, to show
their courage, pickeer'd within Musket Shot of the walls; the King was very
well pleased with their Gallantry, which is not unusual among the French
Gentlemen, the Nobleness of whose blood is for the most part accompanied with
undauntedness of mind. The King had a Council of War called in his Presence,
and resolved to send Monsieur Villequier to the Town with a summons, addressed
more particularly to the Marquess de Forz. This Marquess, by the means of his
Father-in-law Monsieur de Vaubecourt, Governor of Chalons, had treated with
the Court, and in a manner made his Peace, but in the very instant, whilst he
was in expectation of the Prince of Condy's consent, the Town being invested he
thought it not consistent with his honor to abandon it, and therefore to
perform the Punctilio of a generous Cavalier, he resolved to defend it; and
that Montal might have no occasion to suspect him, he declared he would serve
in the siege, only in the quality of a private Reformade, and leave the care
and Government of the whole to him, as the accordingly did.

The 28. of October the King returned to Chalons: The 1. of November the
Trenches were opened in two places; and the French began to batter the Town,
but with little progress, by reason of the brave defense made by the Garrison,
who by their Salleys, and their Counter-batteries, gave them more difficulty
then was imagined.

Upon the News of this Siege, the Prince of Condy, who (as has bin said) was
sick of a Quartan Ague, commanded the Counts of Briole and Duraz, to draw out
what Troops they could out of the nearest quarters, and endeavor to relieve
the place, whilst himself with the Spanish Generals, should join their Forces,
not so much to raise the Siege, as to quarter in the French Territories.

The said Counts with the Assistance of the Lorrainers, got together 3000 Foot
and 2000 Horse; and passing the Mose, advanced to effect their design, which
doubtless had succeeded had it not been prevented by the diligence of the
Cardinal; Who having intelligence of their Motion the 4th of November 1653. at
Midnight, from Grand-Pre Governor of Mouson, he leaped out of his bed, and
gave Order immediately. He first dispatched Mounsieur d' One, the Lieutenant of
his Guards, to Vitry, to cause the Count de Bougy with the Troops of Guienne,
to march with all speed to the Camp. He commanded the Gens d' Arms, the light
Horse of the Kings Guards, and his own; and all the Gentlemen of his Train to
march forthwith; He dispatched Courriers to all the adjacent parts, requiring
all soldiers to repair immediately to the Army, which he designed should be
commanded by the Marshall du Plessis Praslin, in whose valor and fidelity he
had great (...) very great confidence; by break of day all the Soldiers and
Gentlemen attending the Court appeared mounted and armed, with an alacrity
suitable to the greatness of their courage.

The Marshall the same day after dinner departed from Chalons, and being
accompanied by the abovementioned Guards, and a good number of Volunteers, he
took his way directly toward the Camp: with design to arrive there in the
night, as privately as he could possibly; intending, if the enemy appeared, as
he expected they would the next morning, to fight them; but they were too well
advised to come on; perhaps out of fear of being enclosed by the Marshall de
la Ferte, (who by Orders from the Cardinal, was marching to put himself between
Clermont and St. Menehaud, a proper place to have fallen upon their Rear, in
case they should adventure to raise the siege. Or else, as the Spaniards
pretended afterward, by reason the Duke of Lorrain would not give his consent.

The next day, the Guienne Troops, (consisting of 12 Regiments of Horse, and 10
of Foot; all old and well-disciplin'd soldiers) arrived at the Camp; so that
the Army being recruited with these and other forces from Germany, the Prince
of Condy was out of hopes of making any further attempt to relieve it, without
an entire Army, and that with evident danger of being forced to a battle, which
was at that time much desired by the French, but not by the Spanish Commanders,
who would have hazarded too much. Wherefore they proceeded very deliberately in
seconding the bold Counsels of the Prince of Condy, especially the dispute
being for a Town belonging to the said Prince, so that the more forward he was
to engage, the more averse they were from venturing their soldiers for another
man's advantage; besides, the Lorrainers pretended they had done enough that
Summer, and would retire to their VVinter-quarters.

Upon the Arrival of du Plessis Praslin, the siege was carried on with more
vigor then before, and the Town as bravely defended by Mental, with frequent
Salleys, and reciprocal damages; and he would have done much better, had not
one of his Magazines of Ammunition been fired by a Cannon-shot, or some other
accident, (for it was diversely reported). The night before the 6th. of
November, the French stormed the Half Moon before the Port du Bois, and opened
a way into the ditch: but the besieged sallying out upon them, they not only
interrupted their works, but took d' Ortis (a Lieutenant of a Company in the
Kings Guards;) prisoner, and sharply handling several other Officers and
Soldiers, amongst which Pontet a Captain in the same Guards was wounded.

The 16th. at night they sallied again upon the Guard of Nancre, (who had then
the Command in the Approaches) but were repulsed, as they were afterward in
another Sally upon the Trenches, guarded by the Regiment of Guards; and again,
two days after they were worsted by Carmon a Captain in the said Regiment, but
with the loss of la Guard, a Lieutenant Colonel in the Regiment of Burgundy.

The next day, Damon the Sergeant Major of the Town was slain in the ditch, as
he was viewing which was to convey his men with most security to attaque the
enemies works.

Castelneau in the mean time caused a work to be assaulted, called, the Ferra
cavalli, and having taken it, he descended into the ditch, where he prepared a
Gallery to shelter their Mines, which he happily accomplished, after he had
beat back the besieged, and slain several of their men in two considerable
Sallies.

On the other side, the Regiments of Uxelles, and Dampierre took the Half Moon
on the right hand of the Breach; so that the French standing ready to storm on
the one side, and the Mine ready on the other to blow up the Bastion; they
within the Garrison wanting Powder, the Governor beat a Parley, offering to
surrender upon good Conditions, if they were not relieved in 8 days, but this
was refused by the Marshall, who went on with his Works so fast, that on the
24. of November 1653. Montal was constrained to deliver up the Town, marching
away to Rocroy on the 27. only with their Arms and Baggage, followed by a few
French; the most part of those that served under him accepting of the Amnesty,
entered either into the Kings Pay, or retired to their Houses, amongst which the
Marquess de Forz, and others, (invited by his Majesty's clemency, and finding
by experience, that the subjects truest felicity consists in their entire duty
to their lawful Sovereign) laying aside all bitterness and animosity, returned
to their obedience.

The taking of St. Menehaud concluded the Campaign for that year, which in the
beginning was likely to have proved very troublesome and dangerous the Kings
interest, as well for the inequality of their Forces in those parts; as for the
diversion in Guienne, where at that time the Power of the Princes was much
greater then the Kings, so that by how much the difficulty was the greater, to
obstruct the progress of the enemy, by so much the more did it redound to the
Honor of the Cardinal, and valor of the Captains, who knew how to Manage
their Affairs to the best advantage, for having put so happy an end to so many
disasters and Misfortunes, it was but reasonable to expect the Continuation of
their success: Seeing the malignity of times can never be so great, but at
length by the Constant force of policy and prudence, it may be overcome.

The Conquest of this place freed the Neighboring Country, from the
Contributions which they most vigorously exacted toward their maintenance.
During this siege, the Cardinal with great vigilance had an eye over all, and
gave out such Orders as were most convenient for the good Government of the
Kingdom. He dispatched Messengers into Provence, with directions for the
Galleys to put in all necessary Provision of Victuals into Roses, apprehending
that after the happy relief of Girona, the Spaniards would attempt that place.
He sent the Captain of his Guards to Brisac, to complete the Negotiations with
the Count de Harcourt, and put that strong Town once more into the Hands of his
Majesty. To the turbulent and unquiet spirits of Bourdeaux, he applied such
suitable remedies, as made them not only relish the sweetness of Peace, but
abhor and nauseate their former confusions.

At length having issued out Orders for disposing the Soldiers into their
Winter Quarters upon the Frontiers, with the least grievance to the subject as
was possible, he returned with the King to Paris, where his Majesty made his
entry in great triumph, and was received with incredible applause, and with
such admiration of the Cardinals Management, that his name became venerable,
and was immortalized by the very Tongues of those who had formerly traduced
him. By order likewise of the Cardinal, Count Harcourt was treated withal, for
the accommodating his Affairs, and to draw him out of Brisac, upon a jealousy
that he might treat with some foreign Prince, and endanger that important
place: but the business was interrupted upon the very point of Conclusion; for
whilst he seemed content with the Government of Anjou, and the Town of la Fere,
in lieu of his Government of Alsatia, being mischievously informed of a design
of seizing the Prince of Armagnac his eldest son, who was following his studies
in Paris, he caused him to steal away secretly, and come to him to Brisac,
whereupon the whole Negotiation ceased, and their jealousies and diffidences
revived.

It was the general opinion, that Count Harcourt, being a Person of valor, and
having such Fortresses in his hand, would push on his Affairs to the highest
pitch, the better to capitulate, and make his advantage for his reestablishment
at Court; but they were mistaken in their Account; he had too noble a mind to
engage in any Action that might reflect upon his fidelity, contenting, himself,
to pay the Garrison, and establish his security in that place, without making
any new Propositions, since the first were interrupted; On the other side, the
Kings Counsel did not much press him for several Reasons.

The first was, because they hoped, when once they began to want money, the
Garrison would revolt for want of their pay. The second, because they would not
engage in a Treaty with him, till they were sure he was Master of the Town; for
Charleroy being also there, his Presence was sufficient to create a doubt, That
the Count's Authority was not absolute. The third was, that he being a great
friend to his own reputation, would never be drawn into an Action that might
eclipse the glory of his name; wherefore they thought it not Prudence to enter
into a Treaty with him, lest they should be forced to another afterward with
Charleroy. So that when Harcourt began to treat with the Court, by the
mediation of the Baron de Milet, and the Abbot of Charente, (who imparted all
to the Duke d' Elbeuf, and the rest of his relations and friends) the Cardinal
did what he could to protract the Affair; Monsieur de Besimaux Captain of
Mazarins Guards, went to Brisac under pretext of finishing the Treaty, but in
stead of concluding it as he made show he intended; he privately corrupted the
Officers of the Garrison of Philipsbourg, and prevailed with them to receive in
the Kings Troops, publishing a Declaration too injurious to the loyalty of
Harcourt, as if he had treated to sell that place to the Duke of Lorrain.

Whereupon Command was given to the Officers of the Kings Stables to receive no
future Orders from him, as Grand Escuyer of France, and Directions dispatched
to the Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre to advance with his Troops into Alsatia,
and make War upon such Towns as held for him, that he might be compelled to
accept of such terms as his Majesty should please to grant. The Marshall
besieged, and in a few days took the Castle of Betford, valiantly defended by
the Count della Sufa, and sent to Harcourt to deliver up Brisac without further
Expostulation, and to retire to his Government of Alsatia, or to Philipshourg,
which should be restored him. The Count showed himself very ready to comply
with his Majesty's Commands, entered into a Treaty with the Marshall, and
accepted the Articles, which both subscribed to, by which it was agreed, That
40000 Pistols should be deliver^d him to pay Charleroy and the Garrison of
Brisac, and 10000 for himself toward what he had disburs'd, in maintaining the
Garrisons of Brisac and Philipsbourg.

The Marshall dispatched away the Sieur de Brinone, his Nephew, with the
Articles, to have them ratified at Court. But the Cardinal being assured that
Harcourt could not treat with the Spaniards, as not having the Town absolutely
at his command; much less with the Emperor, who would not hearken to any such
Proposition, as well for the 3 millions, which the French were to pay to the
Archduke, Charles Ferdinand of Inspurg, according to the treaty of Munster, as
also not to give the French occasion to cause the Swedes to return into
Germany. The Mareschals Agreement was disapproved, and the Sieurs de Brinon,
and D' Hautichamp who was sent also to the Court by the Count for the said
Ratification, were sent back with Orders to revoke what had past; whereupon the
Sieur de Seneterre writ by Brinon to his son, that he should not be disgusted
because the Articles were not approved, but to obey without further dispute.

The Marshall observed the Orders punctually, and sent Brinon to the Count
with his Letters of excuse, telling him, that the King had not approved of his
Treaty, and that therefore there remained nothing for him to do, but to restore
all things into their pristine condition, putting Brisac immediately into his
hands; and that he was marching forthwith into Alsatia with his Army, to reduce
such places as should refuse to submit. Harcourt was much troubled at this
unexpected News, complaining he was deluded, and urged that the Marshall was
obliged to make good his Parole; for which reason he kept Brinon Prisoner, but
to no purpose; for the Marshall caused Monsieur D'Hautichamp to be secured,
and sent away the Sieur de Castelnau Lieutenant General, to reduce Tannes. D'
Hautichamp perceiving all his instances for his liberty ineffectual, he desired
the Marshall to consider him as a Prisoner of War, and permit him to go out
upon his Parole, which being granted, he proceeded in his journey toward
Brisac, and arriving at Tannes, at the very instant that Castelnau was about
storming the suburbs which were entrenched, he writ suddenly to the Marshall,
entreating him to cause them to forbear the assault; and assuring him the Count
de Harcourt should command the Sieur de Grum Covernour of that place to open
the Gates. But the Marshall looking upon this as a delay, only to gain time,
would not condescend to any Protraction: Whereupon the suburbs being taken, and
a Cessation granted by Castelnau, till D' Hautichamp returned; he departed with
all speed, and visiting the Marshall by the way, who gave him hopes that the
Truce should be continued till the 9th. of March in the morning, that he might
have time to return with an Answer from Brisac; but notwithstanding the Truce,
the Town was sharply assaulted, upon intelligence of which, Count Harcourt
dispatched Orders with all speed to Monsieur Grum to receive the Kings Troops
into the Town, without further Contest: D' Hautichamp sent away the Orders over
night by a Soldier of the Kings Guards, and was there himself in the Morning
early: But the Marshall, not willing to receive from Harcourt the thing he
knew he could compass himself, would not be spoke with, and in the meanwhile
the Town was stormed, where Castelnau received a hurt with a Musket Shot, and
several other Officers on both sides were wounded.

The Governor, in confidence of the Treaty with the Marshall, coming out of
the Town to discourse the business with him, was taken Prisoner; the Kings
forces entered the Town, plundered the Governors house, and he himself was
condemned to pay 3000 Pistols, to his great regret, complaining he had been
betrayed under the Public faith.

At length Hautichamp obtained liberty to speak with the Marshall, who because
the Regiment of Lorrain had been introduced into Tannes, (whereas at first he
demanded only the Town, and had promised, as Count Harcourt affirmed, not to
meddle with the Castle,) insisted to have that likewise surrendered, allowing
the Governor only four days time to expect Orders from the Count.

Harcourt again by this last Action resolved to take away all Objections that
could be made against his sincerity, and at the same time he released Brinon,
and sent back D'Hautichamp to the Marshall, and thence to the Court, to assure
his Majesty of his submission without further reserve, and that he would retire
forthwith to Philipsbourg, and there attend his Royal pleasure, In this manner
this Prince left Brisac, at the same time Charleroy, having received his
Arrears, the Garrison was changed, and Monsieur de Besemaux Captain of the
Cardinals Guards was made Governor, with whom were left several other
Officers, entirely depending on the King.

This Affair having succeeded, as the Cardinal (contrary to the opinion of many
of the Council) had presaged, contributed much to his reputation, and rendered
his merits more considerable to the Crown. The Cardinal after all this assured
the Duke d' Elbeuf, that being thoroughly informed of the sincerity of Count
Harcourt, he had the same kindness for him as formerly; and that seeing he had
submitted himself so ingenuously, he would take an opportunity that he should
have absolute satisfaction. The Court remained very well pleased with the
Respect and Generosity of the Count in that Action; but those who were emulous
of his glory, and with several suggestions had wounded his reputation, were
much astonished and confused.

The Duke d' Anville, who not many days before had been banished the Court,
was recalled, and received into favor again, both by the King and the
Cardinal. The displeasure was grounded upon this, that having promised to
resign his Government of Limousin, which was designed for the Marshall de
Turenne, in recompense of his services performed for the Crown, by the
instigation of the Archbishop of Burges, d' Anville seemed unwilling to give
his Consent; whereupon to Court having engaged their word to Turenne, thought
themselves obliged to make it good, as well to satisfy him, (who otherwise
might have thought himself eluded) as to signify his Majesty's resentment to
the Duke, but he, acknowledging his fault, and having performed what he
promised, was restored again to Court.

Whilst the Marshall de Hoquincourt was preparing for his journey into
Catalonia, the States of Languedoc that Winter were held at Pezenas, a Town and
Castle seated upon the Confluence of the two Rivers, the Pain and the Eraut;
the Marquess de Plessis Belliere residing there, and finding the humor of
those people, by the infelicity of the times more disposed to Factions and
Cabals, then to pay their Contributions to the King, he used all possible means
to reduce them to their obedience; and at last perceiving the said States
resolved to contribute nothing, unless the Troops were drawn out of that
Province: and knowing that the Provisions of Oats for the Horse, and other
Necessaries for the Camp, were to be made out of the Benevolences of that
Country, which would amount to a very little, if nothing was given by the
States, and by consequence the Army would be incapable of doing any thing
considerable: He offered to take the Field, if any reasonable Contribution
would be made toward the subsistence of the Army, to which the States were
well enough inclined. He considered moreover, that the time of the year was far
spent, That supplies of men were coming to the Spaniards out of Italy, That the
Enemy were drawing together, and made Provision of Cannon, Powder, Ladders, and
other Necessaries of War at Castillon, in order to the besieging of Roses;
wherefore concluding it would be too late to relieve it, if their Line of
Circumvallation should be finished before his Arrival, it was necessary to
provide against it in time.

He departed from Pezenas the 25. of May, and advanced to Rigean, and
Rivesalta, where he made some stay to get his Troops together, and to see what
the final resolution of the States would be. Above all, he considered the
importance of conserving Rossilion, about which the Cardinal had writ to him,
and recommended that Province particularly to his care. He rendezvouz'd his
Army at Baulori, from whence he marched the 16. of July, to pass the Mountain
of Pertus; his whole Number consisted of 2500 Horse, and 4000 Foot, all expert
and veterane soldiers. The Spaniards Army was a Regiment of Foot more in
number then the French, and was commanded by the Baron Saback, the Constable of
Castile, and the Marquess Serra; so that it was probably judged they would have
opposed the French at that Pass: but they only put a Guard into the Tower of
Longuiera, purposing that whilst these had stopped them, to come in opportunely
and defend the entrance, but contrary to all expectation, the Tower yielded at
the sight of two small field-peeces, which the French had brought with them
from Rossillion: here they stayed a day, attending the coming up of their
Baggage and Rear-Guard: thence they advanced into the Plain beyond Oustelnau:
Plessis Belliere divided his Army into two Battalia's, upon intelligence that
the enemy would expect him about Castillon, who the more to engage their men to
keep the Field, had set fire on their Forts before Roses, and drawn out the
Garrison from Teguiers. The French Marched in good Order directly toward the
Spaniards, leaving Teguiers on their right hand. Their Vanguard discovered the
Spaniards drawn up in Battalia behind Castillon, under the shelter of the Town,
a great Moor, and several Canals and Ditches, but as soon as they saw Night
approaching, and that the French Rearguard was at hand: Their Horse, which had
faced the enemy till their Foot and baggage Marched off, began to face about,
and retire under the benefit of the Night, leaving only 1200 Men in Castillon,
to hinder the advance of the French.

The Marquess de Plessis Belliere called a Council of War, to consider whether
they should follow the Enemy or not, and i^ was concluded in the Negative,
because in a Country full of difficult and strait passes as that was, it was
impossible to force the Enemy to fight, unless he had a mind to it himself;
Besides, their provision of Victuals was not yet come up to the Army, and they
should be necessitated in a short time, to return for want of it, to the great
prejudice of their reputation amongst those people, accustomed to judge of
things according to their outward appearance, and it concerned the French, to
preserve their friendship. It was resolved on therefore to take Castillon,
before they procdeded any further, and to advance fair and softly, and not
engage in long Marches that they should not afterward be able to prosecute.

To this purpose two Pieces of Cannon were sent for from Roses, and having
taken a view of the Town, they began presently to open the Trenches which were
in a short time advanced to the very brim of the Ditch, notwithstanding the
perpetual firing from the walls.

Castillion has a Rampart about it lined with stone, made curtain-wise, with a
small dry ditch: the Garrison were Irish and Neapolitans, commanded by Colonel
Milon, who being made Head of the people of Naples to their late Revolutions,
deserted their Party, and entered himself into the Spanish service, in which he
behaved himself with much reputation. The Besieged made no Salleys as having no
works to shelter them without, but they threw such quantities of stones, that
the Assailants were obliged to raise a Gallery, in the Ditch, to get to the
wall with more security, which being finished, and a Mine ready to spring under
a Corner of one of the Towers, the Garrison knowing themselves not able to hold
out, capitulated and surrendered upon honorable terms, with obligation to
return into Spain, by the way of Fonterabbia, which was a long way about. The
French found in the Town six Pieces of Cannon, and 5000 pound of Powder, which
came very seasonably to them, having ventured upon that Enterprise, very ill
provided Ammunition: During this siege Plessis Belliere sent the Marquess de
Bellefonds with part of his troops to attaque Empouries, the Tower Medes, and
some other small places, all of them yielding upon the same Conditions as those
to Castillon.

The French, before they entered into Catalonia, knowing the Irish not to be
over-well satisfied with the Spaniards, they invited them to their party, made
them very advantageous Offers, which were accepted, with a promise to come over
to them with seven Regiments, upon the first opportunity presented.

While the French were before Chastillon, it was signified to the Irish that
were within, to perform their Promise; but they replied, that they could not
abandon the Spaniards like Cowards; While they were in that Town, they would
defend it like persons of honor; but when the siege was over, they would
perform their word, as they did presently after, so soon as they came into
Rossilion, where taking their leave of their Neapolitan Camerades, they marched
into Danphine, where they took up their quarters, and by degrees were followed
by many more of that Nation.

So soon as the Spaniards were marched out of Chattillon, Plessis Belliere
renewed his Orders already given to all the Neighboring-Villages after the
taking of Barcelona, compelling them to bring in Provisions to Roses: he
commanded them likewise to throw down the works the Spaniards had made about
Roses and Chattillon, committing the care of it to the Governor, who remained
in the place with a Regiment of Foot, and another of Horse; but he neglecting
to put these Orders in execution was punished severely.

Having intelligence afterward, that the Enemy was retired to Girona, and
entrenched there, he suddenly took his March that way with resolution to engage
them, but finding it not feasible, he marched along by the River Fer, putting
himself at the Head of his Scouts, the better to observe the posture of the
enemy.

Here he discovered, that their Horse-Guard, which they kept at the Great
Bridge, was retiring toward Girona, whereupon the foremost Squadrons of the
French left the said Bridge of their left hand, and descending along the River
side, till they came past the town, they found the Spanish Horse at forage on
the other side of the River, who immediately drew themselves up into Squadrons,
and the rest of the troops marching out of Girona with their Cannon, they drew
up into Battalia without the trenches, and here (whilst the Scouts were
skirmishing together, from one side of the River to the other) those who went
closing up placed themselves directly before the Spanish Army, whose Commanders
perceiving the design of the enemy, they retired immediately within their
lines, which were very large, strong and deep, with a well contrived bank, and
flanked with four or five Stone-houses, well-lined with Musketeers.

These fortifications made exactly according to the Rules of Art, began at the
walls of an Hospital in the Suburbs, and ended at a little Brook that was not
fordeable. In the mean time the Night approached, most part of the Soldiers
wanted powder, and the Wagons which carried that little they had, were not
come up; this notwithstanding, the Soldiers expressed great desire to fight;
wherefore not to deny them this satisfaction any longer, Plessis Belliere took
all his Horse along with him with 700 Foot, and causing every one of them to
take a faggot on his back, he past the River on the left hand not far from the
Town, and Bellefonds did the same about 50 Paces below him.

There were other troublesome Passes betwixt the River and the Spanish Camp, so
that it was Midnight before their Forelorn could arrive there, where they found
the Trenches stuck with lighted Matches, and approaching, perceived the enemy
was gone.

Plessis Belliere sent out several small parties, for intelligence which way
they were gone, who having sought them all night to no purpose, in the Morning
they descried them upon the Mountain behind the City.

The French had left their Baggage on the other side of the River, with some
few Foot to secure it, and attend the coming of their Cannon; the Spaniards
perceiving it, caused their Horse to march down from the Mountain passing
through the Town, with design to have plundered it, but they reckoned without
their Host, for no sooner were they observed to march that way, but the French
immediately sent seven or eight Squadrons over the River, who constrained them
to quit their design, and betake themselves again to the Mountain; after which
the Baggage and Cannon past over the River with the rest of the Foot. So soon
as their Ammunition arrived, which was expected from Narbon, the French
encamped in the open Field, within half Cannon-shot of the Mountain and the
town, so that if the enemy drew down their Foot to defend Girona; in that case
they resolved to attaque the Mountain, and if they stirred not, they should be
able to attaque and take the Town, at a cheaper rate.

Girona is a great City, situate upon the side of a Mountain, encompassed with
a wall, and flanked with some little Towers. The Houses of the Town serve as a
Parapet on that side next the River Fer, which washes it on the right side, so
that it would have been no hard matter to have taken it, had there not been an
Army to defend it. The French were Masters of the Field, their Convoys came to
them without any danger, and in every skirmish (which were very frequent) the
Spaniards were still worsted: Belliere endeavored by all ways to debauch the
Spanish Soldiers; who both Horse and Foot, came over to them in such numbers,
that the Officers themselves were forced to be a Guard to their own Soldiers,
the Irish had promised to come in entire Companies to the French service; The
Town began to be straightened for want of Provisions; Their Horse already for some
days had nothing to sustain them, but what Grass they could gather upon the
Parapetts of the Wall.

The Spanish Generals perceiving their troops daily decreasing, to preserve
themselves on the Mountain, they had built three Forts; And designed (as was
collected by some intercepted Letters) to send away part of their Horse to
Barcellona, as well to give them some refreshment from their sufferings in the
Siege, as that they might join with the Constable of Castile, who was preparing
an Army to relieve Girona; The French hereupon were constrained to very hard
duty, in so much that they kept their Horses Sadled Night and Day. Whilst the
Siedge went on in this manner, Plessis Belliere had gained an intelligence with
the Inhabitants of San Tibeau, a small Town, with a very strong Castle lying
upon the Sea, betwixt Pallamos and Blanes, whose Garrison suspecting nothing,
and not keeping strict Guards were easily surprised.

Affairs standing thus, the Marshall d' Hoquincourt taking his leave at Court,
hastened with all speed into Languedoc, where having got together the Soldiers
that were designed to serve under his Command, he marched away to the Army
before Girona: Plessis Belliere having notice of his approach, sent his
Brother-in-law Monsieur de la Rabiliere to complement him, and give him an
account of what had passed in the Leagure. He acquainted him likewise with
their want of powder, and how necessary it would be to cause that to be sent to
the Camp, which was expected at Narbon, and in the mean time to endeavor to
borrow a quantity of the Governors of Perpignan and Roses; he advertised him
likewise, that if he intended to storm Girona, or continue the Siege, it would
be convenient to hasten the levies of the Catalonians, which were raising in
Rossillon, to cause the Regiment of Swisses, which remained at Locoman to
advance, as also the Queens Regiment, the Regiments d' Anjou and Languedoc,
which refused to march with the rest, (by reason of the precedence, to which
the Regiment of Auvergne pretended) and stayed at Constans, under the Command of
Tilly.

The Marshall did what Belliere had desired him; he brought these Regiments
along with him, who renewed their pretensions to that height that he was forced
to cause all the Officers of the Regiment of Auvergne to be secured, till the
Enterprise of Girona was over, besides which he brought 3000 pound of Powder
with him from Perpignan. Plessis Belliere went out to meet him, and brought him
to the Camp the 27. of July; He took upon him the Command of the Kings Armies
in those parts; Belliere fell sick of a Fever, which kept him in his bed
several days. The French resolving to put an end to the siege, battered the
walls, made a breach, and attempted to have carried it by assault; but whether
the breach was not wide enough, or that the Parapets and Flankers were not well
razed, or whether the Soldiers commanded to the assault, did not perform their
duties, not following their Officers. They could not make their way through,
and desisted from their Enterprise, in hopes that the besieged forwant of
provision, would yield of themselves; and indeed they were reduced to the utmost
extremity when their supplies began to appear, entering on the 24. of September.
(at the most difficult side of the Town to pass) with a great quantity of meal
in Mailes. The Swiss, and the Queens Regiment, seconded by the Regiment of
Horse of Carvisson had the Guard of that quarter, but these were no sooner
charged by the Spaniards, but they fled, and gave them liberty to join with
those who sallied out of the City.

The Marshall was gone to visit certain Posts, where having News that the said
Regiments were attacked, he repaired thither with all diligence, but arriving
found his own men Flying, and the enemy united. Belliere, at the Alarm, made
likewise to that quarter, and meeting with the Marshall he participated to him
the Accident; after convenient Consultation, they resolved to abandon the
Enterprise, without losing more time.

Hoquincourt entreated Belliere to take care of their Retreat; in order
whereunto he sent his own Regiment of Foot and the Swisses, to make good the
Great Bridge, to facilitate their passage over the River; after which he caused
the Army to march in good Order, and passing the River they encamped at
Madignan. So soon as the Guards had quitted the Bridge, the Spaniards took
possession of it; and whilst the French were marched away, the Constable of
Castile sent 400 Horse over the River with some Musketeers, who placed
themselves in the houses on the other side of the water. They were no sooner
over, but the French faced about, and charged them so briskly, that they forced
them back to the River, and took most of them Prisoners; This blow so cooled
the Spaniards, that they pursued their enemy no further,

From Madignan, Hoquincourt marched to Barca; And on the 26. of September came
to Villeneufve d' Ampuries, where he remained for some time, to take up what
corn was to be found in that Country, and convey it to Roses, causing each
Company to carry six quarters of that measure along with them. After this,
having nothing more to do in that Country of Lampurdam, and not being able to
maintain his Troops any longer there, he ordered them to pass the Mountain
Pertus the 28th following. The Regiments of Anjou, Languedoc, Roquelaure,
Gramont and Harcourt were left in Roses: On the 30th. the rest of the Army
arrived at Bouillon (a Town upon the River Teich) The Marshall quartred his
Troops in Rossiglion, and those of Belliere in Conflans.

All these Forces remained in that little Country, till the appearance of
those from Guienne, under the Command of the Marquess de Marinville, upon whose
Arrival in Rossillion, Hoquincourt resolved to put Provisions into Roses.

He caused all things to be prepared to that effect, and resolved to conduct
them himself with all his chief Officers, and such of his Army as could be
spared from the posts which were necessary to be kept, about Conflans.

On the 29. of October 1653. he passed the Mountains, and the next Morning put
the said Convoy into Roses The French Army advancing eagerly against the
Spaniards, They were in an ill condition near Lousteneau, but the French being
a little slow in passing the Hills they had opportunity to retire.

The Marquess de Marinville, who led the Van that day, with the Troops of
Guienne, followed the enemy as far as Feguiers, where the Spaniards, taking the
Garrison along with them. The Inhabitants upon the sight of Marinville's
Troops, cried out, Viva Francia, Long live France.

The Garrison in Castillion retired likewise in all haste. The 6. of November,
Belliere having the Van, commanded out 100 Horse to discover the enemy; who
bringing intelligence of seven Squadrons of Spaniards on the other side of the
River toward Servia, Hoquincourt and Belliere being at that time together,
they marched with all speed to the River bank: and Belliere being acquainted
with the Fordeable places, by order of the Marshall, he passed over and put
himself in pursuit of these Squadrons, with so much expedition and so good
success, that he overtook them, charged them, and beat them as far as
Bordilles, one of their quarters, where they endeavored to rally by the
assistance of those that were there, but they were routed again, and pursued to
another of their Posts, and from thence to their Headquarters, where meeting
with fresh Troops, they turned face and fought bravely for some time, but
having the disadvantage of the ground, they were at length quite broken and
dispersed, many slain and wounded, and many Prisoners, and all their baggage
taken and plundered. Of the French few were slain and wounded, and only the two
Vallavoirs, brothers, taken Prisoners, by engaging too far into a Squadron of
Spanish Officers, who were retreating very bravely toward Girona.

After this defeat the French Troops lodged themselves without any disturbance,
in the same quarters that had been taken up for the Spaniards, though more
enlarged, that they might subsist the longer in those parts, and with more
convenience, till the Arrival of Monsieur Picoy, who was expected from Court
with the Kings Orders for their Winter Quarters in France.

And in this posture the French Army continued about two months in Lampurdam,
the Spaniards not daring to approach them in the least. The 20. of December;
Picoy arrived from Court with Orders from the King, for their Winter quarters,
upon which a Counsel of Officers being called, it was concluded how the Troops
were to be disposed: In the mean time, they supplied Roses with all manner of
Provisions, and transported thither whatever they could find in Lamprudam. On
the 27. of December. 1653. the French Army repassed the Mountains, and as soon as
they were entered into Rossillon, the Marshall gave Orders to Belliere for the
quartering of his Troops, who having distributed and dispatched them to their
several places, he took his farewell of the Marshall, and repaired to the
Court, according to the leave granted him by the King. Hoquincourt stayed with
the Army, distributing the rest of them into their Winter Quarters, and making
such Provisions for them as were convenient.

Whilst the Cardinal was busied in the functions of the Field, and intent upon
the taking of St. Menehaud, the Countess of Mancini and Martinozzi, his
Sisters, with one of their daughters, (who after the Parentage betwixt the
Pope's Family, and the House of Barbarini, were departed from Rome) arrived in
Provence,, receiving great honors in all places where they passed, and
particularly in Genoua, where they were received with the greatest splendor
that could be expected from the Generosity of that State, and befitting the
merits of their Brother, and the dignity of those Ladies, who among their other
virtues where adorned with admirable Modesty, and a noble behavior. They
stayed in Provence some days.

The Court being returned to Paris; these Ladies repaired thither also, and
were received with extraordinary affection and civility, not only by the
Grandees of the Court, but by their Majesty's them selves.

The Prince of Conty arriving at Cadillac, found Langlade the Cardinals
Secretary there lying sick; In the Discourse they had together, the Prince
intimated to him his design of reconciling himself to the Court, and to fulfill
the last Precepts he received from his dying Father, which were, to keep
himself firm to the interests of the King, and never to deviate from his
obedience; he reflected upon the example of his brother the Prince of Condy,
who whilst he continued in his Allegiance, enjoyed the fruits of a fortunate
glory: He considered, that the treachery of those about him, deluded by the
private interest of their friends, had constrained him to separate from his
Brother, so that he was reduced at present to a necessity of remaining in an
ill condition, where ever he was, if he did not find out some expedient, to
return with glory and advantage to his former obedience, and preserve his
family in the same state and condition in which his father left it.

He foresaw, that to retire into Spain, would not only be against his own
genius, but also expose him to his Brothers revenge, who being prepossessed by
the sinister Informations of Marsin and Lenet, would certainly despise him. He
considered to retire into Italy, or to any of his houses in France, he could
not avoid the suspicions of the Court, so that either the one way or the other,
his life in the very flower of his Age, would become unhappy, idle, and
unworthy the vivacity of his spirit. Hereupon, considering with himself what
was most essential to his own interest, and having prudently weighed what he
was to do, he found the only way to conserve himself in the quality he was born
was to introduce himself, by some strict Alliance, into an entire friendship
with the prime Minister, and by consequence into the Kings favor. Of these
thoughts he gave some little hint to the aforesaid Langlade, but did not
declare himself too far: A while after he discovered his mind more freely to
the Duke of Candale, whom he looked upon as his particular friend; and he was
not at all deceived, for the Duke concurring in his opinion, approved his
judgment as very prudent and well-grounded, and with a generous frankness
encouraged him to proceed, though he himself at the same time was in treaty of
Marriage with the same Lady, and did most ardently desire the accomplishment of
it.

It did no seem convenient to the Prince to discover his inclinations so
suddenly to the Court: he only sent Menil the Captain of his Guards, to pass
some few Compliments, without any Letters of Credence, or others instructions
whatever; Menil was received with great Civility, and having discovered the
sentiments not only of their Majesty's, but also of the Cardinal, and the
other Ministers of the Court, he assured the Prince at his return, that he had
found such a propension in the Cardinal toward him, that he could assure him
of an eternal Oblivion of what was past, and a sincere renovation of his
affection for the time to come.

Upon this information, he concluded to send Saracin his Steward to Court (as a
person in whom he much confided) to Negotiate this Affair with more liberty,
and freedom which had bin only darkly hinted to Langlade at Cadillac.

Saracin soon discoverd the Cardinals good disposition and after some journeys
and meetings betwixt him, and Langlade, the Treaty of Marriage betwixt the
Prince of Conty, and the Countess of Martinozza the Cardinal's Niece, was so
far advanced that no doubt was made of it; Such as envyed the glory and repose
of the Prince and the Cardinal, hearing the News, endeavored to sow Tares, and
create jealousies and suspicions amongst them: Some represented to the Abbey
Ondedei, that all this was but an invention, and artifice. And that Conty held
private intelligence with the Prince, his Brother, and his Sister the Duchess
of Longueville, and that the effect would not answer the outward appearance;
Others out of their pretended zeal to the Cardinal, Suggested to him; That to
join himself in parentage with the greatest Princes in France, (he being a
stranger) was not the way to secure himself from envy, and establish more solid
foundations for the Authority which he at that time possessed, seeing the
ambition of mankind is such, that every one flattering himself with his own
proper esteem, oftimes grows weary of valuing another persons though his
principal friend; That the favors of Princes the higher they rise the nearer
they are to the disgraces of fortune. That there are but few Masters who will
make their Servants their Companions and for the most part, the Patient being
cured, the Physician is despised; As an example, they alleged Cardinal
Richlieu, who by his extravigant greatness, was become so odious to Lewis the
13th. that without doubt, had they lived longer together, that Minister must of
necessity have fallen; That it would be better therefore to settle his Alliance
further off, to secure a retreat if any accident should happen without exposing
himself to the inconstancy of that Nation, who are friends to none but their
own fortune.

But the Cardinal esteeming the advantage to be reciprocal, his inclination to
his own interest prevailed above all other Advice, so that the Contract was at
last agreed on, and the Marriage concluded by their Majesty's, to whose
determination the Cardinal left the whole disposure of that Affair, submitting
his will to their pleasure, (as he said) he had sacrificed all the rest of his
faculties to their service; but the consummation was put off, because the
Prince was unwilling to be present in the Parliament of Paris, whilst they were
forming a Process of High Treason against his Brother the Prince of Condy.

He obtein'd therefore, to protract his coming to the Court, till the latter
end of the Carnevale, about which time he arrived, and was received with all
applause and satisfaction imaginable. The first Saturday in Lent the Ceremony
of touching the hand, and signing the Articles of Marriage was performed. The
Princess had a Dowry of 200000 Crowns given her by her Uncle, and 50000 by the
Kings bounty, besides a Pension to the Prince, equivalent to his Ecclesiastical
Revenue, which he resigned into his Majesty's hands; after this followed the
Espousals and the Nuptials, which were honored by the continual Presence of
their Majesty's, the Duke of Anjou, and all the Princes and great Lords of the
Court: where there was not any one found so stimulated with envy, or
overwhelmed with rancour; no mind so enraged or corrupted that durst cavil at
this Alliance, since the deserts of the Uncle toward the Crown were
unparalled; and the Beauty of the Bride, such an entire Compendium of the
most conspicuous qualities in a woman, which were able to excite the praises
and commendations of the greatest Emulators and Detractors.

The Queen her self would needs do her the honor to see her in bed; by which
incomparable Civility, her Majesty made appear, how much she was pleased with
this Wedding.

The King afterward made a Present to the new married Prince, of all the
Estate and Offices belonging to his Brother the Prince of Condy; but he out of
an exemplary Grandeur of mind refused that grace, as despising the riches which
came from that spoil.

To express the content and joy every one conceived for the reuniting this
Branch to the Royal Stock; The days following were spent in Balls, Feasting,
Music, and other Recreations and Divertisements becoming a Royal and Majestic
Court, as is that of the most Christian King.

The HISTORY of the Managements of CARDINAL MAZARINE. Lib.II. Part III:
WHilst Paris was thus full of joy and festivity, at Brussels all was in
sadness and confusion for the Imprisonment of Duke Charles of Lorrain, who was
Arrested Prisoner in that City, as shall be related in the ensuing Narrative.
The Spanish Troops were retiring into their Winter Quarters, and the Count de
Fuensaldagna considering, that by reason of the Numbers of great Officers, and
the Generals of the three Armies, it would be impossible to quarter them all in
the Low Countries; he treated with the Duke of Lorrain, and paid him a sum of
money, upon condition he would quarter his Troops, and some of the Prince of
Condy's out of the Countries belonging to his most Catholic Majesty, as he was
accustomed to do at other times, under pretense of being General of the Empire,
by which he made bold with several Neutral Countries in those Provinces, and
other Principalities of the Empire, as were most exposed to that inconvenience.
The Duke began to take up his quarters accordingly, and about the middle of
Winter marched with his Army into the Country of Liege, pretending the Elector
of Colen had given Sanctuary to Cardinal Mazarine in his State, permitting him
to make levies there, and giving him other assistances against the Prince of
Condy. The Elector desired help of the King of France against the Troops of the
Prince and take Duke. Immediately Orders were sent to Faber the Governor of
Sedan, to draw a Body of an Army together, and march to the assistance of the
Elector. He executed the Orders with all possible expedition, marching with the
French Troops directly toward Liege. The Duke of Lorrain, so soon as he had
notice hereof, in stead of meeting and engaging them, as he might easily have
done, being much stronger then Faber, retired into the Territories of the King
of Spain, took up quarters there for his men, and came himself to Brussels. The
proximity of these Troops of the enemy, being as it were in the heart of the
Country, and the Dukes retreat, without attempting in the least to oppose
them: The various Advices they received from several parts, that what was acted
by the Duke of Lorrain, was done by private Intelligence with Cardinal
Mazarine, gave no small trouble to the Archduke and the Count of Fuensaldagne,
and so much the more, because these Advertisements did quadrate with the Treaty
the Duke made with the King of France near Paris, deserting the Princes in
their greatest need; With the withdrawing of his Troops from the siege of
Rocroy: with the Negotiations (which were lately discovered) he had held with
the Crown of Swedeland and other Princes, to hinder the New Election of the
King of the Romans, hoping himself, by the help of his money, and the
assistance of the King of France, and the Protestant Princes in Germany, to be
able to pretend to that dignity: This jealousy was not a little fomented by
the strait correspondence he held at that time with the Elector Palatines
Family, with the Swedes, and with other Princes of Germany, to whom he had sent
Ronselot his Secretary; having sent likewise for the Prince Palatine of
Sultzbach, in the place of his Brother, killed at the battle of Rhetel, with
design to marry him to his daughter. By the displeasure he express^d for the
assistance granted to the Prince of Condy, by whose Treaty with the Court of
Spain, he pretended to be very much prejudiced, by reason that all the
acquisitions made in France, being to be delivered into his hands, there
remained no place in the power of the Spaniards, to exchange afterward for
those of Lorrain, at the General Peace. He began therefore to doubt that the
bare Protection of Spain, would not be sufficient to restore him to the
Sovereignty of his Dominions. This was one of the principal Reasons that
renewed in the Duke the ancient emulation betwixt the Houses of Lorrain and
Bourbon, not being able to endure that the Prince of Condy should be Master,
not only of Stenay, Clermont, and other places belonging to Lorrain, but of the
Conquests they should make in France also, with the assistance of his forces.
He complained of these things very earnestly, urging, that Condy might be
obliged at least to deliver him one of the Towns in his Possession, belonging
to Lorrain, or otherwise, that he might equally participate of the Conquests
that should be made with the help of his Army: Declaring openly, that if they
would not consent to one of these Proposition,, neither would he assist them
with his Troops in any Enterprise to be undertaken for the sole profit of the
Prince of Condy.

Upon these suspicions and jealousies the Spaniard began to think of a remedy,
for so manifest a danger, both present and to come: that which imported most,
was to oppose the French, and to pacify the Elector of Colen, with whom it was
not convenient at that time to have any dispute.

Hereupon, it was proposed to the Duke, That with his own Troops, the Prince of
Condy's, and some of the Spanish, he should make head against the French, and
the Electors forces, the Prince of Condy being unable for that expedition, as
being sick at that time at Rocroy, but the Duke refused it, nor would so much
as stir out of Brussels; he was desired at least to consign them his Troops,
but he denied that also, which increased their jealousy more and more, and
gave them greater cause to suspect him. It was already three years, that the
Count of Fuensaldagne had received private Orders from the Court of Spain, to
secure the Person of Duke, when he should see a fit time to effect it; but as
the success of an Affair which drew so many consequences after it was
uncertain, and the Count not being able to promise himself, whether this Act
would be approved or disapproved by the Counsel of Spain when it was done,
(though the King of Spain had every day new Reasons to confirm his resolution,
without seeking further pretenses;) He addressed himself to the prime Minister
to be excused from that Commission; but could not be dispensed withal: On the
contrary, his Orders were renewed, to take the time he should judge most
convenient, without participating with the Archduke, giving him withal the
Letter that his Majesty had writ him concerning that Affair, and persuaded him
to give order about it.

The Election of the time gave no small trouble to the Count, in respect the
Dukes comportment rendered the execution of his Orders every day more necessary;
To secure his Person, and not lose his Troops, was very difficult.

For the better execution of his design, the Count with great dexterity had
gained certain of the Dukes chief Officers, but without the least discovery of
his Plot: he made sure of several who promised to stand by him in whatever he
attempted. The late occasion the Duke gave, was of very great importance for
the furtherance of this Affair; for hereby they should not only pacify the
Elector, but satisfy the Emperor (who was already informed of all the Dukes
Negotiations) and had need of the Electors of Colen and Bavaria, inseparable,
in respect of their Parentage and common interest. On the one side the securing
of the Dukes Person seemed to Fuensaldagne not very difficult, he being in
Brussels, and at a distance from his Army; but on the other he saw infinite
discouragements; for the French Army being within three leagues of Brussels,
and the Dukes troops united with the Prince of Condy's, he knew not (though the
said Princes had been perpetual enemies) how Condy might resent this
resolution, apprehending perhaps the same fortune himself.

The Dukes Troops were so near the French, they might join with them in very
few hours; the Spanish Army were dispersed in their Winter Quarters: The Count
considered likewise, that the Duke was in good correspondence with the
inhabitants of Brussels, and that there were many Lorrainers in the town; that
the Archduke perhaps would not have him taken in the manner as was to be
wished, for though he had but little friendship for the Duke, and was entirely
for the interest of the House of Austria; yet he was a Prince of so tender a
Conscience, that he imparted every thing that gave him the least trouble to the
Jesuits, who being always intent upon the greatness and conservation of their
Society, would not concern themselves in any thing that might prove a stop or
impediment to their common advantage.

All these Reasons, both on the one side and the other, kept the Count for
three days together in great perplexity of thoughts, thinking within himself,
without daring to communicate it with any one, whether he had best conceal his
Orders from the Archduke, or discover them to him: but seeing that danger does
always increase with delay, he resolved to draw the Spanish Army together under
pretense of opposing the Enemy, and to secure anew the Dukes Troops by
Regalio's and Presents, of which the said Count was always very liberal. He
determined afterward to impart all to the Archduke, to show him his Orders he
had from the King, and to present him his Majesty's Letter. His Imperial
Highness concurred immediately, and the execution of it was disposed in the
ensuing manner.

First, they drew 300 Horse about Brussels, under another pretense; and it was
resolved, that the Count de Garcies, Camp-Master General, should go with some
particular persons to find out the Duke, and conduct him to the Archduke,
under color that he must speak with him immediately about urgent Affairs.
Garcies went, and found the Duke with a Father Confessor of the converted
Courtizans in their little Church, and acquainted him that the Archduke
desired to speak with him presently about some matters of great consequence
that concerned the interest of the Crown, and that he stayed for him at the
Palace. The Duke answered, Parmi esser l' hora un poco tarda, domuttina saro a
servirlo, I suppose it is too late now, I shall wait on him in the morning. The
Count replied, Tengo ordine de condur V.A. alla Corte prima. che si faccia
notte, My Orders are to attend your Highness to the Court before it be night.
To which the Duke answered, V. S. vada che la Seguiro, If you please to go,
Sir, I shall follow you.

Being arrived at the broad place before the Palace, where the Courtiers use to
walk, the Count said to him, V. A. prenda il cammino verso quell' altro
appartamento tenendo io ordine, dal Re mio fignore d' arrestarla, Your Highness
please to walk toward that other Appartment, for I have Orders from the King
my Master to Arrest you: The Duke stopped immediately, and desired to be
conducted to the Archduke, but was denied, leading him hastily to the quarters
prepared for him, where he was honorably served, and guarded by the principal
Officers of the Army.

As Soon as he was entered the Palace, the Count de Fuensaldagne sent word to the
Burgo-Master to put the inhabitants in Arms, and place Guards in all the
streets that lead to the Palace.

He clapped double Guards at the Gates and in the Piazza's, and the same night
dispatched the Count de Bruny, to the Count de Ligneville, who commanded the
Dukes Troops to give him an Account of what had happened, and to let him know
that the next day he would come and discourse the business with the Officers,
and bring money along with him to satisfy the soldiers; he sent him word
likewise that the Count de Sant Amor was gone Post that night to acquaint the
Emperor, and to invite Duke Francis to come and take upon him the Command of
the Army, and to take care of his Brothers Concerns. The next day the Duke was
sent to the Castle of Antwerp, accompanied with 300 Horse, and the aforesaid
Camp-Master General, with several other Cavaliers, and committed to the custody
of Colonel Barnaby de Vergas.

This being dispatched, Fuensaldagne went to the quarters of the Lorrainers,
though many dissuaded him, in respect of the great danger to which he exposed
himself, among those people extremely affected to their Prince, he discoursed
with the Officers, and carried himself so dexterously, that he persuaded them,
partly by fair words, and partly by ready money, to continue in his Majesty's
service, without any more stir, assuring them Duke Francis would be with them
in a short time.

After this they consulted to oppose the French, and drive them from their
Neighboring quarters, and it was concluded, that the whole Army should march
against them. They endeavored likewise to establish a good correspondence with
the Elector of Colen, which was easily effected by the means of a Conference
held in Tirlemont, by the Prince de Ligni, and the Seecretary Navarro:
whereupon the French retired, the Elector having signified to them that he had
no more need of them, much less of the Spanish troops, by which means the
Country of Liege remained free; in this manner this great difficulty was
overcome, which might have produced great inconvenience in that country, and
the soldiers were sent again into their quarters, intending to fill up their
Companies and recruit them. Fuensaldagne issued out Orders for the good
Government, and settled all Affairs, sparing for no money, which upon such
occasions ought to be liberally dispensed.

Many are of opinion the Duke did absolutely believ he should have his life
taken away by some lingering death: But the Count de Garcies told him very
discreetly that he could not but wonder his Highness had such apprehensions;
That the King his Master desired only to secure him for some time, upon some
occasion that concerned the Crown.

A Manifesto was afterward published by the Archduke, declaring, that when the
Duke retired first into the Spanish dominions to secure himself against the
violences the French began to exercise both upon his person and Estate; He was
received by his most Catholic Majesty and his Lieutenant Generals, with
cordial friendship and assurance of protection, and with so much sincerity to
his interests that they included him in all Negotiations and Treaties for a
General Peace, giving hereby sufficient proof of their candid faith, and
honorable esteem of his person, admitting him moreover into all Councils and
Resolutions concerning the War, which was carried on by his Majesty's
Ministers. That not withstanding so many and so great obligations, contrary to
his duty, and all terms of thankfulness and gratitude, he had swerved from
these straight ties of Obligation, to the great prejudice of the interest and
welfare of the Crown; for besides the tears, sighs and general Lamentations of
the people, which had rendered the inhumanities, rapines, and sacrilege of his
soldiers sufficiently notorious, committed even upon his own subjects, whose
insolences were connived at by the Duke himself. His secret Intelligences and
private designs tending to the prejudice of the public benefit and service,
(to which he was bound to give a most sincere assistance with all his forces)
were amply discovered; every one might discern his inconstancy and dissimulated
variableness. Besides, in the resolutions of war, and the delays he affected in
the execution of the most important expeditions, form whence there happened by
his only fault so many funest and unhappy results, in several considerable
Enterprises, which according to all humane Providence would have proved
fortunate and successful. That all these things were so manifest, not only to
the Lieutenant-Generals, the Collonells, and all the Officers of the Army, but
to the very Soldiers themselves and the common People, who were eyewitnesses
thereof, every one exclaiming and wondering that such abuses should be suffered
to run on and no remedy applied. True it was, his most Catholic Majesty out of
his extraordinary kindness and affection for the house of Lorrain, had bin
indulgent to the last extremity, being very much troubled to have recourse to
such expedients, hoping still that the remorse of his own conscience would some
time or other awaken the Duke, and putting him in mind of his ingratitude
toward so favorable and incomparable a King, dispose him to return to his
duty; But growing worse every day then other, and the irregularities of his
actions beyond all tolleration, so that all his Majesty's subjects, all the
Princes and Neighboring States, had him in such detestation, that the effect
of their vengeance was like to fall heavy upon Flanders. That His Catholic
Majesty, not to provoke any longer the displeasure of Heaven, the indignation
of the people and the Princes, that were abused in their own Dominions, could
not any longer defer the necessary precautions for the stopping of these
disorders, and therefore had caused his person to be secured; in which he had
neither transgrest the Law of Nature nor Nations, which allow all Sovereign
Princes liberty to remove (without respect of persons) the oppressions and
violences against their States, or their subjects, and to do justice to
themselves, their People, and their neighboring Potentates and friends, after
the trial of all ways of sweetness and persuasion proves ineffectual: That what
was acted was not done upon any aversion to the House of Lorrain, protesting on
the contrary always to protect it, and its interests; in testimony whereof he
had proposed Duke Francis his Brother to the Command of the Dukes Troops; and
accordingly did declare and require all persons to receive and observe the
Orders of the Count de Ligneville Lieutenant General of the said Troops till
the Dukes Arrival; assuring moreover all the Officers and Soldiers of a
General Pardon of all their Disorders committed till that time, under the
command of the said Duke Charles. This Manifesto was made the same day the Duke
was Arrested, which was the 25. of Feb: 1654.

It was afterward insinuated to the Soldiers, that the Duke should not be
sent into Spain at all, but that when some certain points were adjusted, and he
had given security for his future fidelity, he should be set at liberty, by
which suggestions they appeased the minds of the Officers and Soldiers, who
being well-affected to the service of their Prince, were not a little surprised
at the novelty of this case.

Several reflections were made upon this Action, and some omitted not to
consider, whether the advantage or prejudice that might succeed upon it, was
likely to be the greater. It was considered, that the services the said Duke
had done for the Crown of Spain, were apparent: but his failings, published in
the Archdukes Manifesto and Declarations were not known to all, and that
little credit is ordinarily given to what is published by those that are
interessed. That it would be hard to disposses the people of an opinion they
had imbided, That the Duke out of mere complaisance to the Spaniards, had drawn
upon himself the displeasure chastisement of the King of France: so that if
after being beaten out of his country for their sakes, they had received him
into Flanders, it was rather what they were obliged to, then a courtesy.

That by how much the more the said Duke was blamed by the Ministers of Spain,
by so much the more justifiable were the Proceedings of the French against him,
because if the Spaniards, who were so much obliged to him had just cause to
chastise him, it might well be thought the French had more reason, he having
proceeded in a hostile manner against them: Moreover, the doubt that this
example would be mis-interpreted by others that served them, gave no small
trouble to the Spaniards, fearing it might move them to resolutions little
beneficial to their service, upon suspicion that their merits might hereafter
meet with ingratitude, and their errors never be pardoned. Upon this News the
Court of France made a great stir, endeavoring to make advantage of this
Conjuncture as favorable, to calm the Actions of their enemies: And because
the whole Affair will be more clearly comprehended by the Manifesto which was
published in the Name of his most Christian Majesty, the 2. of July 1654. at
Sedan (where the Court was then resident) it will not be amiss to insert it
here, as follows.

His most Christian Majesty being informed, that several Officers as well as
Soldiers and other persons belonging to the Wars, Natives of the countries of
Lorrain and Barrois, to the prejudice of their honor and duty,
(notwithstanding the great injury done by the Spaniards to Duke Charles their
lawful Prince, in detaining his person) have taken part and engaged themselves
with them, contemning the advantageous offers made them to enable them to set
him at liberty; and his Majesty considering further that to continue the same
tenderness toward them which he had shown ever since Lorrain was reduced under
his obedience (having never proceeded to any severity against those who
abandoned their Country, seeing they followed the fortune and commands of their
Prince) his Clemency would prove too prejudicial to his affairs, he is
resolved, as in justice he is bound, to have recourse to all such means as are
in his power, to repress them and make them sensible of his indignation, since
they acting indirectly against the interest of his Crown, as also against the
interests of their own Duke and his Family, for whom his Majesty has always
sufficiently manifested his esteem and affection. having many times, (as is
notorious to all the world) offered the said Duke to restore him to his
Country, if he would desert the Spanish interest, and come over to his Party;
but he could never be brought to any resolution, to prevent the disgrace which
is at length fallen upon him; imagining perhaps, that by refusing such
considerable and advantageous Propositions from France; and by his strict
Alliance with Spain, (so long continued, and with such extraordinary constancy)
he should have deserved of them another kind of recompense, then to be laid in
prison, and deprived of his ^state.

His Majesty therefore Orders, and expressly commands all Officers, Soldiers,
and other Natives of Lorrain and Barrois, serving in the Army of the said Duke,
and that are any way engaged with the Spaniards, to abandon them, and retire
themselves within the space of 15 days after the Publication hereof, into the
Frontiers of France, either to take up Arms under his Majesty (in which case
they shall be entertained and used as the rest under his Command) or to return
into their Native Countries, or wherever else their Estates do lie, provided
they make a Declaration in authentic manner and form before the Kings Judges,
in those places where they intend to reside, or the next they can meet with,
never to bear Arms, nor to engage directly or indirectly upon any account to
the prejudice of his Majesty's service, under penalty (to those which
transgress after the time allotted) of being declared guilty and convict of
High Treason, and as such, to be treated by the confiscation of their Estates,
the razing of their houses, cutting down their woods, and other most severe
Penalties contained in the Orders upon such crimes. His Majesty does
furthermore command and require the Sieurs de Turenne and la Ferte Mareschals
of France, to cause these Presents to be Published in every place where need
shall require, to the end that no man may pretend ignorance; and that they be
aiding, as much as in them lies, to the full and entire execution of all and
every particular herein contained; declaring, that equal credit is to be given
to the authentic Copies hereof, as to the Original it self.

To this Manifesto there was annexed a Declaration, concerning what reception
should be given to the Colonels, Captains, Officers and Soldiers of the Duke
of Lorrain's Army, which should come into the French service, in the Tenor
ensuing.

That the King being highly concerned for the detention of Duke Charles of
Lorrain by the Spaniards, and for the unworthy treatment he received from a
Nation, that have no Authority over his Person nor his Troops, he caused to be
proposed to the Count de Ligneville Commander in Chief of the said Dukes Army,
diverse ways for the procurement of his liberty, before he were conveyed into
Spain, according as the said Count had notice was intended. But he would not
hearken to this Advice to the prejudice of his honor and fidelity, having
suffered himself to be gained by the Spaniards, to whom he has shown greater
affection then to his own Master, and considering that the Colonels, Captains
and other Officers might be inclined to follow his Majesty's designs for the
enlargement of the said Duke, he did by these Presents give assurance to all
Officers and Soldiers, as well of Foot as Horse, belonging to the Lorrain
Army, which to vindicate the wrong done to their Master, and to set him at
liberty, should come into his Majesty's service and pay, That they should be
placed, and continued together in one body, under the Command of the Marshall
de la Ferte Seneterre Governor of Lorrain and Barrois.

That according as any such body or company of the said Troops shall unite and
join together, they shall immediately receive a Pay, both Officers and
Soldiers, and every one shall be preserved and maintained in the same quality
and condition as before.

That Justice shall be administered by the Colonel of every Regiment, in the
same manner as heretofore.

That his Majesty will assign them Winter Quarters, so soon as the Campaign
shall be ended, and that they shall be treated in all places, and upon all
occasions, as other foreign Troops in his Majesty's service, promising in the
faith and word of a King, to maintain and cause to be punctually observed, what
he has declared and promised.

At the first News of the Dukes Imprisonment, his most Christian Majesty had
dispatched Monsieur de la Borez to the Count de Ligneville with instructions,
to let him know the obligation that lay upon him to endeavor the enlargement of
his Master by force of Arms, if amicable ways would not prevail: But all the
Arguments used to the said Count, and to Duke Francis, (who not many days
before arrived in Flanders from Germany,) proved ineffectual, the Management of
the Spanish Ministers having had better success then the solicitations of
Cardinal Mazarine: Ligneville excusing himself that he had express Orders from
Duke Charles to obey his brother Duke Francis: and this Prince relying upon the
Promises made him of being put into the same command as his Brother, did hope
to be able to obtain more favor by his own merit then by force.

The Cardinal continued in the mean time with prudent Councils, to manage other
designs, the principal was, to carry on the Wars in the Enemies country,
thereby to force the Spaniard to a Peace, which he said they pretended very
much to wish for, but in such manner, and with such advantages to themselves,
that not being fit to be granted, they accused him of being an enemy to all
accommodation.

He reassumed the Negotiation of a League with the Protect or Cromwell at
London, to secure the French from the jealousies they had reason to conceive of
that Nation, at that time in Arms, and free from any diversion elsewhere. And
to observe the motions of the Spaniards in Biscay, that they might not
introduce any new confusions in those parts; he caused the Marshall de Gramont
(in whose valor and fidelity he relied very much) to repair to his Government
of Bayon and Bearn, there to have an eye to any attempt that might be made
against those Provinces, for the better security of which, he concluded a Truce
or Treaty of Neutrality and Commerce during the War: betwixt Bayon and the
Basques subjects of France, and the Biscailins subjects of Spain.

He sent out new Orders for recruiting the old Troops, and for levying of new,
to the end, that in the Spring they might be able to take the field in
Flanders, Catalonia and Piemont; He commanded the fitting up of the Fleet in
Provence, and all necessary Provisions to be got ready to put to sea when
occasion should require, either toward Catalonia or the Kingdom of Naples,
from whence the Duke of Guise reiterated his instances for their sudden
resolution, upon the Account of the good intelligence he held with the
malcontents in that City, by whom he was solicited over and over, and many
Messengers sent to invite him thither.

And as he was seriously intent upon his martial Affairs, so was he not
unmindful for the establishment of quiet at home, prevailing with His Majesty
to extend his clemency even toward those as were still contumacious, and to
receive every body into favor, putting an end to all domestic jealousies,
that it might appear to all men, that there was nothing he desired more, then
to render his Ministry equally profitable and grateful to all the French
Nation, toward which (notwithstanding the ill Treatment he had received) in
stead of seeking revenge, forgetting all provocations, his aim was by his
goodness and meekness, to work them gently to a repentance for their past
faults, rather then by punishing them, precipitate them into new and more
desperate offenses.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
MOnsieur de St. Agolin sollicits the Court of Spain in behalf of the Prince of
Condy page 35 Another Amnesty sent to the Bourdelots 246 Encamping of both
Armies 84 A notable Artifice 118 The Kings Army advances toward Bourdeaux 137
The Assembly of the Olmiera is prohibited 155 Additions to the Capitulations at
Bourdeaux 172 The Armies on the Frontiers of France 188 Several Persons of both
Armies meet and discourse 200 The Archduke comes to the Camp before Rocroy 220
The Order of the French Army 249 A General Amnesty granted to the Bourdelots
256 The Armies in Catalogne 303
B.
The People in Bourdeaux solicit for help from Spain 35 The Baron de
Batteville raises difficulties in the Spanish Court 38 Orders given to
Batteville from the Court 40 Propositions made by the Spaniards to the
Bourdelots 41 Bellegarde taken 66 The Count Broglia surprises the Irish 68
Bourg taken 96 Diverse disturbances in Bourdeaux 110 Brisac returns to the Kings
obedience 298
C
Cardinal Mazarine returns to Paris with universal Applause 1 Applies himself
to the War 2 By the Cardinals means the Count d' Ognon makes his Peace at Court
16 The Cardinal beloved by the Soldiers 18 His remarkable Policy ib. Count
Marsin endeavors to take Granade 31 The communalty of Paris invites the
Cardinal to a Dinner at the Town Hall 59 concourse of the People to see the
Cardinal at the Town Hall 60 The Speech of a Plebeian to the Cardinal 61 The
Count de Coligni taken Prisoner 62 The Prince Condy's of intelligence in Arras
vanishes 73 Designs of the Cardinal concerning the War 73 Council of war
held by the Spanish Commanders 77 Condy's opinion prevails 85 The Prince of
Condy deceaved by his friends 85 The Conspiracy at Bourdeaux discovered 88 The
Duke of Candale endeavors to enter Bourdeaux 92 Cromwell refuses to assist
Bourdeaux 104 The Cardinal endeavors to win Bourdeaux rather by fair means
then force 106 The Prince of Conty's answer to the Citizens of Bourdeaux 112
the Count de Fiesco returns from Spain to Bourdeaux 114 the Prince of Conty's
answer to those that persuade him to peace 117 The Prince of Conty and Duchess
of Longueville disgusted with Marsin 121 The Prince of Condy shows great
esteem for Marsin 122 The Prince of Conty resolves to consent to the peace 140
the Duke of Candale treates with the Prince of Conty 141 The Contents of the
Articles of peace at Bourdeaux 166 The Court of Rome has thoughts of defending
the Cardinal de Retz 233 He is conveyed to Nants 235 A conspiracy to Kill
Cardinal Mazarine 238 Great Clemency of the King 238. Expedient of the Cardinal
to allay the disturbances at Bourdeaux 259 decree of the Council against the
Parliment of Bourdeaux 260 Courage of the French Nobility 276 The Prince Condy
being sick orders his Commanders to succor S. Menehaud 278 The Cardinals
diligence to hinder the succor 279 The Court returns to Paris 288 The Count de
Harcourt's Negotiations with the Court 289 He complains of the Marshall 296
The Cardinal's expressions to the Duke of Elbeuf 299 The Cardinals Sisters come
into France 327. The Prince of Conty Marries the Cardinals Niece 335. The Count
de Fuensaldagna's orders after the imprisonment of the Duke 354. The Cardinal
renews the treaty with Cromwell. 373
D
The Duchess of Longueville goes to Molines. 143. Dispatches to Court for
ratification of the peace at Bordeaux 174. The Duke of Chaunes delivers up his
Government of Amiens 229. The Duke of Lorrain dissatisfied with the Spaniards
342. He is arrested prisoner 350. Duke Francis of Lorrain is sent for to
command his Brothers Troops 352. (...) the English refuse to assist Bourdeaux
24 The Count de Estrades sent with Troops toward Bourdeaux 95. Endeavors of
the well affected in Bourdeaux to dispose the people to peace 107. The
Spaniards come to an agreement with the Elector of Colen 353.
F.
Filiot put upon the Rack 96. The French besiege Mouson 213. France begins to
recover its pristin splendor 240. The French make inroad into the state of
Milan 243 A fight betwixt the French and Spaniards at Rochetta. 250. The French
attaque Castillion 305. They advance toward Girona 309. the French Troops
retire out of Catalonia to their Winter Quarters 325. Prudent reflextions of
the Count of Fuensaldagna 344. His dexterity in gaining the Lorrain Officers
346 He comunicats the Kings Order to the Archduke, for securing the Duke of
Lorrain. 349
G.
Several Persons sent out of Bourdeaux to treat with the Kings Generals 139
Gourville's Arrival at Bourdeaux, creates jealousy in the seditious. 142 Guise
attempted 202 General Monte slain 242 Situation of Girona 314 Besieged by the
French 315 Girona relieved by the Spaniards. 318
I.
The Irish desert the Spaniards. 308
K.
The King resolves to send an Act of Oblivion to the People of Bourdeaux 20 The
King goes to the Army. 190 Returns to Paris 192 The King at the Camp before
Saint Menehaud 270 His Majesty's Manifesto upon the Imprisonment of the Duke of
Lorrain 362
L.
Levies of Germane-Horse 2 The Marquess of Lusignan goes into Spain 39 Lermont
taken by the Duke of Vandome 45 Libourne attaqued 99
M.
Mazarins Orders to streighten Bourdeauz 50 Prudent Council of Mazarine 51. by
Mazarines Council the King grants another Amnesty 53. Mazarines Opinion
concerning the agreement with the Prince of Condy 54. Mazarine by his sweet
carriage wins the affection of many. 58. By the advice of Mazarine, Bellegarde
is attaquaed 62. He endeavors to reduce Bourdeaux 84. the Marquess de Theubon
complains of Marsin, to the Prince of Conty 85. Treates with the Duke of
Candale 89. Marsin endeavors to bring the Prince of Condy's Troops into
Bourdeaux 120 The Merchants of Bourdeaux assemble at the Bourse 124. A General
meeting of the Citizens 127. Marsin endeavors to disturb the agreement with
the Bourdelots 150. the Citizens oppose him 152. He endeavors to prolong the
War 157. Mazarins Maxim of temporizing 189. Diverse marches and designs of the
Armies. 195 Description of Mouson. 215 Mazarine offers to the Cardinal de Retz
231 Marsin lands with 3000 men 265 Propositions of Mazarine in the Council of
War at Laon. 271 His reasons for the attaquing of St. Menehaud 272 The
Marshall de Plessis Pralin sent to command the Army before St. Menehaud 284
St. Menehaud taken 279 Mazarines diligence in ordering the Affairs of the
Kingdom 287 By his Managements Phillipsbourg is surprised 291 The Marshall de
Hoquincourt prepares for Catalogna 316 A manifesto published by the Spaniards
concerning the imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain. 354
N.
A Notable accident 93 Negotiations betwixt the French and the Lorainers
Neutrality betwixt the Basques and Biscailins.
O.
Obstinaey of the Olmiera. 48
P.
Plessis Bezanson sent to the Princes of taly. 4 His Negotations with the Duke
of Mantua. 5 Progress of the Royallists in Guienne. 34 Preparations of the
Prince of Condy 54 Propositions made by the Count de de Fuensaldagne in the
Council of War. 77 Propositions made to the Olmeisti. 134 The Prince of Conty
signs the suspension of Arms. 160 The Peace concluded, the Princes depart
from Bourdeaux. 174 Perigueux puts it self under the Kings obedience. 176 New
Plots in Bourdeaux 183 The Prince of Condy's friends fail him. 204 He proposes
the besieging of Rocroy 205 Progress of the French Army. 226 Progress of the
War in Piemont. 240 Some seditious endeavors top disturb the Peace at
Bourdeaux 258 Provisions conveyed into Roses. 287 Progress of the Marquess de
Plessis Belliere. 302 The Prince of Conty resolves to make his Peace at Court.
328 He designs to marry the Cardinals Niece. 330
R.
Recruits sent into Flanders. 41 Great sums of money distributed by the
Spaniards among the French Rebels. 43 The Revenues of Bourdeaux consists
chiefly in Wines. 51 Progress of the Koyallists. 70 Siege of Rhetel. 71
Resolutions if the good Citizens to introduce the Royallists into Bourdeaux.
118 Resolutions of the Spanish Generals. 188 Roye taken by the Prince of Condy.
194 A remarkable Passage. 238 Roses victualled by the French. 322 Relation of
the Imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain. 338
S.
The Spaniards foment the Civil Wars in France. 28 Sarlat returns to the Kings
obedience. 32 Dispatches from Spain in favor of the Bourdelots. 37 A Spanish
Ship taken by the English. 42 The 300000 Crowns taken by the English, retards
the Spaniards from taking the field. 69 The Spaniards take the Field. 81 The
Kings Colors displayed on several steeples in Bourdeaux 133 A suspension of
Arms for 3 days 145 The arrival of the Spanish Fleet is kept secret 161 The
Spanish Generals are surprised at the peace of Bourdeaux 162 The Citizens give
the Spaniards an Account of their agreement 164 The seditious appose the peace
at Bourdeaux 171 A Skirmish betwixt the French and Spaniards 190 Another
skirmish 200 The Spaniards Land and plunder the Country 261 The Spanish Ship
retire to the Fosse of Verdun 263 A skirmish betwixt the French and Spaniards
266 The Spanish Fleet goes part to Biscay and part to Dunkirk 267 The Vice
Admiral of Spain taken by the French 268 The Plague at Bourdeaux 269 The States
of Languedoc assemble at Pezenas 301 The Spaniards routed by the French 34
T.
Troops sent into Piemont 3 The Chevalier Todias his address to the Prince of
Conty 130 The Truce at Bourdeaux is concluded indefinitely 157 Tannes taken by
the Kings forces 296 Tiliou surprised by the French 316
V.
The Duke of Vandosme promises protection to the Bourdelots 147 Ville-neuf d'
agenois returns to the Kings obedience 181 Valor of the Marquess Caracene 253
He is slightly wounded. 253
ERRATA,
Page 72. line 2. read finding. From fol. 73. to fol 97. amend the Numbers.

FINIS.

