Licensed, April 1. 1687.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Lowth's LETTER TO Dr. Stillingfleet.

In another Letter to a FRIEND.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall. MDCLXXXVII.

An Answer, etc.
SIR,
BEcause you had so often desired it, I have at last forced my self to turn
over Mr. Lowth's Letter to Dr. Stillingsleet. I found it a very tedious and
uneasy Task: You had been almost as kind, if you had changed your Penance,
and ordered me to walk to Highgate, with Pease in my Shoes. The Way you sent
me proved so rugged and uneven, that every step I took, I fancyed I was
treading upon Cinders, and Pibblestones. But I am resolved to be revenged; I Will
send you another Letter, that shall be as troublesome to you, as that was to
me. But I Will promise you for your Comfort, it shall be scarce half so long, and
not above a quarter so Ill-natured. I cannot imagine, what should move Mr.
Lowth to fall upon the Dean in such a manner: If it were pure Zeal, it is great
pity, it had not been tempered with more discresion; if there were any thing of
particular Pique in the Case, it was not managed with Artifice enough. The
World will never swallow the Potion, when the Venom swims on the top of the Cup.

The first known occasion of Mr. Lowth's engaging of Dr. Stillingsleet, was the
Pretense of the Irenicum: A Book set out by the Dean in his younger Years, in
which were many passages, which his riper Judgment could not approve. And this
he had signified to the World in other Writings which came abroad, before the
Publication of Mr. Lowth's Papers. But here you must note, the grand Objection
against the Irenicum, had been formerly made by T. G. and his Companions; they
had found, as they pretended, that the Design of it was only to Ruin and
destroy the Church of England. And that was a thing, which they, Good men! were
not able to endure; and therefore out of pure kindness, no doubt, they discover
the Plot, and warn us of the danger we had cause to apprehend, from this young
brisk Presbyterian, that had disguised himself in Irenicum Armor. The Truth of
it is, they had reason enough to be very desirous to be delivered from a
troublesome Adversary. They saw by experience they were not able to oppose his
force; and, to secure themselves, they found it necessary, if possible, to give
him a Diversion. And this seasonable assistance, Mr. Lowth very wisely affords
them, by fomenting the Jealousies they had cunningly raised.

In his Treatise concerning the Subject of Church Power, besides some
insinuations in the Book it self to the same purpose, there is a Letter to Dr.
Stillingfleet, etc. Printed after that to the Reader, wherein he is imperiously
Summoned, and little less than Commanded, to satisfy the Church of God, by a
recantation as public as his Error, Scandal, and Offense: And then he is
gravely admonished, to consider, that he has not erred in the Leviora
Evangelii, and that the Point is, whether God has a Church on Earth, with its
peculiar appropriated Power, or not. This bold and importunate demand of
Satisfaction, seconded with so heavy a Charge, urged upon him with so much
fierceness, after he had given sufficient Evidence of the contrary, and done
the Church very considerable Service, upon several occasions; could not choose
but incline the Dean to reject the Calumny, with some degree of just
resentment. Which he did in a short Epistle to my Lord Bishop of London; where
you may see, that he was not wholly insensible of the abuse, but yet,
notwithstanding the great Provocation he had received, he could not be tempted
to any rude and undecent expressions: Though Mr. Lowth has snatched up some of
them in haste, and by the help of a rare Art of Composure, which he has gotten,
has mixed, and altered, and jumbled them together, I know not how, till he has
made a shift, at last, to make them look almost as oddly as some of his own.
This you will find he has done about the beginning of this Letter, which he
tells us is, In answer to the Deans Epistle Dedicatory. For it was the gentle
rebuke, which had been given him in that Two-penny Letter, as he elegantly
calls it, that put him out of all Patience, and set his Blood into such a
violent fermentation, that I cannot observe any great abatement of the
Paroxysme for eighty four Pages together. It seems to be little else but a
continued sit of Passion, and the Dean is all along treated with that gross
disrespect, that it must needs be a very pleasing entertainment to the
Gentlemen of the Romish Persuasion, to see him, who had frequently baffled the
subtillest Advocates they could find, not confuted, but abused, and affronted
by an angry Man of our own Church. This is certain, they were the only Men, I
ever heard of, that applauded the Letter when it came abroad. His other Friends
who were not much displeased with his first Book, were quite ashamed when they
saw This: they had not a word that they could offer in defense of it. The most
partial Readers were not able to frame any Apology for so much rudeness.

That you may not think I load it with prejudice without a Cause, I will make
it evident in some Reflections upon a few passages of the Letter, and then
consider the business of the Irenicum, which gave the occasion to the whole
Debate.

If you look into the Dean's Epistle, you may observe that he has expressed a
due sense of the injury done him, but never let fall a word any ways unbecoming
a Person of Civil and Ingenuous Education. But Mr. Lowth, as I intimated
before, has raked together some scattered expressions, and by a strange Liberty
of adding, altering, and misapplying, as he thought best for his purpose, would
make the World believe, that the Dean had represented him in a woeful scandalous
manner. After some general flourishes of Clamorous Objections, riotous Page 12.
Noises, choice Epithets, and the like, he goes on thus.

If you can reap any satisfaction from loading me with the general Titles of a
Plagiary, ridiculous fool, malicious, unskillful maker of Controversies, a
barbarous and rude Disputer with his Brethren, an accuser of his Brethren, an
implacable Man, uncharitable, unjust, Slanderer, proud, void of Prudence and
common discretion, the usual Complements you are pleased to bestow upon me, you
may be happy in the enjoyment of your humor, though it has not an Irenical
Complexion: But I that design nothing but the pursuit of Truth and Honesty,
etc. And a very good Design really it is; and I hope he will be careful to keep
it always in his eye.

But I must look a little, and inquire into the Titles of Honor, he says he is
loaded with, Plagiary: I cannot find this Title in all the Dean's Epistle, nor
any thing from whence it may be gathered, without mightily straining of his
words. It has been always accounted an ill Omen to stumble at the Threshold:
therefore I should be glad to see this first Title well reconciled with the
grand Design of Truth and Honesty.

Ridiculous Fool. This is something like indeed! If he had been entered in a
Dispute at Billingsgate, or been contending with the Noted Scold in Page 39.
the Neighborhood, whom he mentions afterward, he might have expected such a
Complement as this; but it is scarce credible, that the Person, he had chosen
for his Adversary, should ever be tempted, upon the highest provocation, to let
fall such unseemly scurrilous Language. I have turned to the Epistle again, and
can find no such Title there, from the beginning to the end. It Is true, in one
place there is mention made of a Ridiculous Calumny, as every body knows all
Calumnies are; and in another, a pretty distance off, there is something spoken
of Folly; of which a Wise Man may be sometimes guilty, as I suppose, by this
time, Mr. Lowth is sufficiently convinced. For he has taken his advantage of
this Word, and craftily clapped on a Pair of Midas his ears, and so very
dexterously turns Folly into Fool, by an extraordinary skill he has in that kind
of Metamorphosis; and then he lays hold upon Ridiculous, and by main force
drags it along, a matter of a dozen lines, and couples it with the Fool he had
provided for it before hand, and when he had thus pacht up the Monster, out he
brings it with a Trumpet before it, and shows it abroad for one of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Productions; and complains hideously how he had been abused by
him. As if it were no better nor worse, but that he had even dressed him up in
a yellow Coat, and put Bells in his Cap, and exposed him to the People for a
Raree Show. Very fine sport truly! But Mr. Lowth must not think to impose upon
his Readers at such a rate. No: However, the Dean might speak of something that
was Ridiculous, and of one certain Folly; it is very plain, that the Ridiculous
Fool is of his own Making.

Malicious: This is such another trick as the last. There was something
intimated about Malice in a particular Case, and he very Judiciously changes
Malice into Malicious; a single Act into a Habit, by a Figure that is very
familiar with him. He can best tell what reason he had for it; and therefore, I
shall not offer so much as to conjecture.

Unskillful maker of Controversies: This is the sirst Title that has been truly
repeated. And I pray what great harm is there in it? That he made a
Controversy, where there was need of none, the Dean has proved; and with what
skill he has managed it, let the World judge. But yet I must confess, I think
the Dean was something to blame here, for charging him with Unskillfulness in
making of Controversies, when he had shown himself a most accomplished Artist,
in that Mystery at least.

A Barbarous and Rude Disputer with his Brethren: He is quickly come back to
his beloved Legerdemain, and has most nimbly turned a Barbarous Style, and Rude
way of Disputing, into a Barbarous and Rude Disputer, by the virtue of Hocus
Pocus: Hooper Hoper. But I perceive the Gentleman is easily provoked. What
would he have had the Dean have said, I wonder? Why, he should have slattered
him a little, and told him that he had a very Polite and Elegant Style, and
that he Disputed very civilly with him, and that he was a Courtier every inch
of him. In good time! Let it be so then. But I Will go on to the next.

An Accuser of his Brethren: This indeed is one of the Titles that is given him
in the Epistle. But what then? That he had accused Dr. Stillingfleet of a very
great Crime, he will not deny, and then I do not see what it is that he can
take amiss, unless it be that he is so Charitable as to account him a Brother,
after he had used him so much like an Enemy. But if he be not pleased with the
Name, let him learn to have a care of the Thing.

An implacable Man: This is so far true, that the Dean does speak of Implacable
Men. So that it is evident, he must mean more than One. Yet I verily believe he
did intend a good share in the Title for Mr. Lowth; but he will not be
contented with that, but very fairly takes it all to himself; and it may be he
might have more reason than every body knows of, to ingross the whole. For the
Irenicum, which was the sole occasion of the quarrel, was published I think
about 61; and his first Letter, wherein he sends the Challenge, and demands
fatisfaction, bears date in 83; and sure he may well be suspected for an
Implacable Man, that will not be pacified in above twenty years.

And now we are come to the bottom of the List; and thus it runs: Uncharitable,
Unjust, Slanderer, Proud, void of Prudence and common Discretion. These, he
says, are the Complements, and the usual Complements too, which the Dean is
pleased to bestow upon him, and yet I have looked very narrowly over the whole
Epistle, once or twice, and I Will assure you, there is not so much as one of all
these ugly Words to be found there, that I can see. These are Titles that he
has taken to himself without any authority; and so is Fool, and Nonsensical
Fellow, which he complains of in another place. All this is mere Chimaera,
nothing but an Apparition in his own disturbed Imagination. And yet Page 4.
I should be apt to think, that he has some way or other to make out a Right to
every one of these: Otherwise, sure he would be afraid of being questioned in
the Court Martial, for assuming of Titles, which never belonged to Him, nor any
of his Predecessors. Certainly therefore he must be able to justify his Claim,
if it should ever come to a Hearing. It is very well known with what an
Insolent Rudeness he set upon the Dean; and he could not but be sensible, what
manner of Reply he might have justly expected. But herein, he was happily
disappointed, by the Mildness and Civility of the short Answer that was
returned him. And yet the Natural Remorse of the Injustice he had done, might
make him dread the severity he had deserved. The guilty Mind sees its
punishment always before it. And this might occasion him to mistake the Lashes
of his own Conscience, for the strokes of the Dean's Pen. Or however it were;
Mr. Lowth may make bold, and give himself as many ill Words as he pleases; I
know, no sober man will be offended at him: But when he would make us believe
that all the rudenesses he offers himself, were shown him by the Dean, there, I
fear, he was a little unmindful of his great Design of Truth and Honestly. A
man would imagine that he had had some other aim in it; and that he had
industriously laid together a great heap of bad Language, with which he is very
well stored, and pretended it to be the Dean's; that the credulous Reader, that
was unwilling to be at the pains of a search, and could not conceive that any
man could be guilty of Forgeries that might be so easily detected, might be the
better inclined to excuse the rough usage he gives him, all through the
following Letter.

You have had a view of the Dean's Complements to him, pray take notice now, in
what a courtly manner he treats the Dean. If all the Titles and Complements, he
says the Dean bestowed upon him, had every one of them been his indeed, I Will
promise you, Mr. Lowth does not come a whit behind him: He scorns to bate him
an Ace: He gives him every jot as good as he brings. I think he has so paid him
off with Complements, that I believe the Dean will have a care, how he meddles
with such a stout Courtier again in haste. When the Grand Seignior ventures
upon another Siege of Vienna, it may be, not before, I Will warrant you: No, no,
he enough of that already. But it is worth your while to consider a little,
what a sine vein of Complements Mr. Lowth has. I shall but just give you a
taste; though there be such plenty of Provision of that kind in this Letter,
that it were easy to furnish a whole Table with three full Courses. But you
must not think to make a Meal on such rare Dainties as these: You may be glad
of a bit or two to relish your Mouth.

Well then, one of the first Complements I chanced to cast my eye upon, is
that, where he charges the Dean with making a Conclusion he Page 3.
alone can be guilty of, whose common Perceptions are choked with Choler.
Common Perceptions choked with Choler! It Is a very clean one, though something
a bold Metaphor; Borrowed, I suppose, from some of the Neighboring Farmers,
that had neglected to scour their Ditches. Very Well! But is this Choler such a
mighty dangerous thing indeed? Then let him have a special care of his own
Common Perceptions; if he has any Perceptions that be Common. For if he should
happen to fall into such a fit of Passion, as he has been sometimes known to be
in; and that famous Channel, or whatever it be, of Invention should chance to
be Choked up, it may prove a very great Annoyance; and so for ought I know,
may come within the Commission of Sewers; and he may be made to pay soundly for
that unlucky overflowing of his Gall. I would advise him theresore, as a
friend, never to be undecently angry any more. He may take it as he pleases;
but he will find, one of these days, that it is very good sober Counsel. And
so let that Complement pass.

About a leaf further he has a very pretty one, upon one of the Dean's Books, I
think it is that same Irenicum, he calls it a Farce of all manner of
Quotations. Another Metaphorical expression, I believe; and a very dainty one
too it is. But what! does not Mr. Lowth like Quotations. There are a good many,
I Am sure, in this very Letter, that might have been very well spared: But I
thought he had brought them in by Head and Shoulders, out of a particular
kindness he had for all Quotations, whether they were material, and pertinent,
or not. Yes; he loves Quotations well enough; but it is such a Farce. That it is
a very ill-favored word truly. I think I have heard it before, but I don't
thoroughly understand the meaning of it yet: only when I read it, I remember my
stomach was a little affected; I was almost Sick upon it. And I would caution
you, if you have a mind to look upon the Letter again, be sure not to do it
till after Breakfast, for fear you should be provoked to something that were
not so decent; as Mark Anthony was once in the Senate House at Rome. But out of
the respect I bear you, I will entertain you no longer with these silthy
noisome expressions.

But there is one of another kind, which though it do not belong immediately to
Dr. Stillingsleet, yet I cannot omit it, because of a certain peculiar air it
has, which, in my mind, is very surprising. It is full as civil, but not
altogether so dirty, as those you have had: when you hear it, it does not
strike your fancy presently, and make you imagine you were talking with
Farriers and Scavengers. He is beholding for it to another; but he has adopted
it for his own, by making it public. He tells you therefore that he Heard an
Honorable Person observe upon him [Dr. Burnet] That, for Six pence, Barbara,
the renowned Barbara, a noted Scold in the Neighborhood, would answer his Book
better than he has Page 39.
done. A notable Comparison! 'Twas very sacetiously done though, of the
Honorable Person, to fit Mr. Lowth so exactly, with such a suitable
Antagonist. I cannot tell what a shrewd Disputant this Barbara may be; nor how
it might have fared with him, if she had happened to have engaged in the
Controversy. But I guess he would have maintained his ground in spite of her
Teeth. For if the Honorable Person will but be pleased to read this Letter, he
must needs confess, it is never to be outdone by Barbara her self. Any one that
had but looked into it, would be apt to think, indeed, that he had lived near a
Noted Scold; and that he had been very industrious in taking all opportunities
of improving himself, by that agreeable Conversation. But yet really, when I
consider it better, I will not undertake to determine whether he might go to
School to Barbara, or Barbara to him: whichever of the two have the Glory of
it, it is plain, he met with a very apt Scholar. But does Mr. Lowth know what he
has done? see how Indignation will transport a Man; and make him run upon
dangers, which he would dread to come near, in a cool and sober mood! what if
some body should go tell honest Barbara, how she has been blazoned abroad, and
branded in Print, for a Noted Scold! What a Peal might Mr. Lowth have at his
door, the next morning! If she really deserve the Character he has sixth upon
her, she would rattle him up for it to some Tune., Sure no Wise Man would offer
to provoke such an Adversary, if he were not conscious of his own abilities,
and readiness to bear the Encounter. He cannot but know the strength of his
Arm, and the advantage he has of the Weapon: Or if Barbara should chance to be
too brisk for him, in the way of Extempore Dialogue; he has a sure retreat
certainly secured; he may write her a Letter; and then, poor Girl! she must be
fain to cross the Cudgels immediately; for alas! though some of them may be
able to manage their Tongues pretty nimbly; yet I must tell you, it is not one
Scold in a thousand, that can handle a Pen, as he has done. Then farewell
Barbara, till we meet again.

It is time now to look for another Complement, and there is an excellent one
to be had, in one of his Complaints of the Dean; where he tells us, that
Instead of an Answer to matter of Fact, and Argument, he has only Libelled him
to a principal Bishop of our Church, in a Two penny Page 54*
Paper; to which is tacked (and therein, says he, your further disingenuity
appears) one of your four penny Sermons. So the Bill of expenses runs:
Imprimis, the Paper, Two pence: Item, the Sermon, Fourpence. A very accurate
way of Calculation, lately invented, by a Well-Wisher to the Mathematics, sor
the use and better information of the Worshipful Company of Hawkers! A curious
new way of Complementing Arithmetically! I wonder at my heart, how he ever came
to stumble upon it so luckily. I have a great conce it, he had been reckoning
with his Parishoners for Petty Tithes; or discoursing the Market-Women, about
the price of Butter and Eggs: Or it may be, he had been warmed at a Friendly
Conference with his good Neighbor Barbara. Or where ever he had the hint, it
smells rank of the Plowman, or the Scold, or both. Things are come to a sine
pass, when Mr. Lowth shall be showing his Wit, and spending his Country kind of
Drollery upon any of Dr. Stillingfleet's Papers. But let him set what rate he
pleases on the Deans Writings; it is very well known how the World Values His.

But we have a Complement behind still, worth ten of these. It is not a
Two-penny, nor a Four-penny matter neither; nor any thing less than filling
whole Pockets. This is something to the purpose at last. It is set off to the
best advantage, in a Mungrel kind of Allegory: I should quite spoil it, if I
should go to take it asunder; therefore I will give it you as it lies in the
Letter; As the Church is the Tree in the Psalmist; so Episcopacy is one of the
Bearing Boughs: Very well! what Page 31.
then? In which you can be content to sit and sing: A Metaphor taken from a
Bird, that pearches up upon some of the highest Branches, and there merrily
chants out his wild Notes, for a while. But how long will this be? So long as
you fill your Pockets, and then the Tune will quickly be changed. But hold a
little; sit and sing, and fill Pockets too! How Is that? Alas! What a sad
misfortune is this! I could wish heartily, for the sake of the Allegory, that
it had been the Fashion for Birds to have Pockets in their Breeches. But let
that be as it will; we must drive on the Metaphor as well as we can. But when
the gathering time is over, it is to be cut down as that which cumbereth the
Ground.

This whole Complement you see is an Allegory pieced up with very Hetrogeneous
parts; but that is a thing may be easily pardoned. But the plain meaning of it
is this; that the Dean will be for Episcopacy as long as he can get any thing
by it, at least till his Pockets be full enough, and then he will be for
cutting of it down, Root and Branch, it may be. This every one knows, is as
much as to call him Covetous Knave, base Hypocrite, one that acts against his
Conscience to get Money; and what not? But to have spoken this broadly out, had
been two rude and clownish for Mr. Lowth. For I suppose, by this time you are
pretty well acquainted with his Style. His conceits may be sometimes a little
sharp and rough, but his expressions are highly Civil and Obliging. And
therefore here he has couched all these scurvy insinuations very neatly, in a
similitude of a Tree, and a singing Bird with Pockets, and an Ax at his back,
ready to hew down the Tree, when time shall serve. But all his glozing will do
him no good; we can see his meaning through his smooth Language. Don't you
remember the Titles, and Complements he gave himself, which he said the Dean
Bestowed upon him? Uncharitable, Unjust, Slanderer, etc. I told you I thought
he was able to make every word of it good; and if he have not offered fair for
it here, I am much mistaken.

And besides this, he talks of the Dean, as if he were engaged in a Party, and
that is a very ill thing too you know. But I marvel what Page 1.
this P^ty is: I believe they are a parcel of those Canary Birds, that are for
selling the Tree. No doubt Mr. Lowth, if he pleases, can tell you how many and
who they be, what their Opinions and Practices are, nay, what colored Ribbons
they wear in their Hats, to distinguish themselves from another Party, that he
knows of. But I would wish him to have a care, how he goes to making of Parties
any more, before he has told Noses, and be well assured of the ground he stands
upon, otherwise he may find it a very rash, and unadvised undertaking.

Well: Now you shall have but one Complement more; (for I imagine you begin to
have enough of it, as well as I) and that is in the second of the three general
Heads, he has divided his Letter into; there, says he, I shall make it appear,
that the account you give of your Irenicum is not fair nor true. Page 2.


The whole design and Plot being merely against the Re-establishment of the
Church of England. But when he comes to the proof of this heavy charge, his
heart misgives him, and he qualifies Merely, into Mostly, if not altogether.
However the account of the Irenicum is not fair nor true. Page 29.
It should seem then there has been some very foul and false play in the case.
If this had been spoken so bluntly to some warm Hectoring Blade, it would
certainly have made an uproar; and there might have been a Ducl upon it. It Is
well for him he has to do with peaceable Men. But how does he know, that the
Design was Merely, Mostly, if not altogether against the Re-establishment of
the Church of England. He that affirms so boldly, had need be very well
assured. This is not a thing to be made out by a few slight airy Conjectures
only; especially when the Dean had solemnly declared he had another quite
contrary Design: O! by virtue of a rare piercing Judgment, with the help of a
very charitable Construction, he has been enabled to tell the Dean's mind, a
great deal better then he can himself. This is a wonderful extraordinary knack
of understanding Men's Designs. But let the Dean's Design be what it will, He
Designs nothing but the pursuit of Truth and Honesty: And for all he will not
believe the Dean, yet I hope you will be so Civil, as to take this upon his
bare word. For if it should be Page 2.
questioned, it would be a task too difficult for Him to prove it. Though for
my part I think he might. Merely, or Mostly, if not altogether Design nothing
but the pursuit of Truth and Honesty; For he pursues them so violently, as if
he intended to make them run the Country. Pray look, and try how much of
either you can discover in all this long Letter to Dr. Stillingfleet. Alas!
Poor Truth and Honesty! whither will you go? But I shall leave him a while, to
consider with himself, whether this were really his only design or not

You may see, by these few passages, in what manner he Complements the Dean; If
it were not too tedious, I could show you as particularly, how Civil he is to
his Books. Some he calls Such Stuff, charging them with Contradictions, and
many imperfections at the Best. He is so Page 74.
displeased with the Vindication of Archbishop Laud, that he does much
question, whether it might not have discomposed the Calm, that most exemplary
Page 73.
Prelate died in, upon the Scaffold at Tower Hill, if he could then have been
aware that he should have had such a Vindicator. A wise remark! and he deserves
a great many thanks of some body for it. But no question it would have quieted
all again, and restored the former serene temper, if his Grace had likewise
foreseen, how severely his Vindicator was like to be chastised by such a Man as
Mr Lowth. But let that be as it will: I am sure it would please you strangely,
to see him seated in his Chair, with his Censorial Rod in his hand, passing
sentence very Critically upon the Dean's Writings; and you would not think it,
it becomes him mighty prettily. Let me give you but one Instance of his
Judgment; it is concerning The unreasonableness of separation; of which, says
he; I do not deny but that your performance is Page 78.
Competently well done; Indeed! Upon your Principles: Very good! and so far as
it reaches. 'Twas well enough offered then, it seems, but it falls short of
the main point. Most men were of another mind; but this is Mr. Lowth's Opinion;
and he is a Man of a more than ordinary Reach. But he goes on and tells us what
he approves, and what not: You have, says he, abundantly set forth the
Reasonableness of our Book of Common Prayer, etc. and urged Obedience thereunto
from the destructive consequences, that must incvitably follow, etc. This is
Competently well done, so far. Now you shall hear his Exception. But all is
still left as matter of Dispute, etc. And he that sees not with your Eyes (by
your own principles) has no Obligation for Obedience, and Conformity to any
one Rubric, Law or Injunction therein contained. This is strange, that the
Reasonableness of a thing should be Abundantly shown, and the Destructive
consequences, that must unavoidably follow the contrary persuasion, be made
appear; and yet that All should he lest still as matter of Dispute, and that no
man had any obligation to Obediencce; at least, if he did not see with the
Dean's Eyes. I had always thought that every man had been bound to yield to
Reason; and that in matters of Discipline and positive Laws, we had been
strictly obliged to Obey the commands of a Legal Authority, which was here
supposed, especially when our non-submission is attended with destructive
Consequences. For these are a sort of Practical Absurdities, and slat
Contradictions to the very Essence and Being of all Society. And as he is a
stubborn and irreclaimable Caviller, that will not be convinced by what is
Reasonable; so that is a desperate and untractable Member of any Corporation,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, that is not afraid of such pernicious
Consequences, as tend to the Ruin and Subversion of it. And it being frankly
confessed, that the Dean has carried his Point both these ways; I cannot see
what could be wanting to complete the Argument, and give him the credit of an
entire Victory. But unless a Man says whatever Mr. Lowth imagines he should, he
will hardly acknowledge that he comes fully home to the purpose. He will be
clapping in his diminishing Gradations: Competently well, upon your Principles;
and so far as it reaches. And now, what should be the meaning of these
mortifying expressions? I cannot guess, unless it be that, if he had taken the
Cause in hand, he would have done it Incomparably well, upon I cannot tell what
Principles; and been sure to have searched the whole matter to the very Bottom.
It Is likely enough: And yet the Fanatics are not sensible of the great danger
they escaped, upon His declining to engage in the Dispute. But after all, I
believe you think the business was as effectually done upon the whole account,
as if Mr. Lowth himself had undertaken it; whatever he is pleased to conceit to
the contrary. For there is no sort of Opponents the Dean ever had, but would
have been glad to have shifted their Adversary, and esteemed it a great
happiness if Dr. Stillingfleet had withdrawn, though Mr. Lowth had presently
stepped forward, and thrust himself boldly into his Place. There Is none of them
all, but would have thought it a lucky change for them; and if he does not know
it yet, they can inform him where the difference lies.

You see he cannot forbear picking of quarrels with those very Books, wherein
the Dean had very successfully endeavored to defend our Church, against her
open Enemies of all sorts; and which had been received with general
approbation, and highly applauded, if not admired, by very great numbers of his
equals, at least, for Judgment and Learning. How he uses to Complement the Dean
himself, you have had some intimations; and besides several others, I could
easily gather up, there is a fresh trial of his skill in that way, in the leaf
I looked upon last. Where he tells him of his Having Mountebank'd, and Quack'd
for full five and twenty years, etc. And that The College of Physicians, he is
sure, would not think themselves beholden to such an Empirick. Is not this
finely Civil, and curiously carried on under a very quaint Allusion? You may
perceive again, what a notable Faculty he has at persecuting a Metaphor. But
this is not the worst: He often takes occasion to intermix such foul
insinuations, that if they were true, as they are not, they would render the
Dean as Odious, as so much treachery and dissimulation, as he would imply him
to be guilty of, might most justly make him. And some of these are so utterly
impertinent to the main business, that nothing but a very great Degree of
Good Will could carry a man so far out of his way, merely to do his Friend a
Kindness. But indeed he generally uses the Dean with that disrespect and
contempt, that it is not easy to conceive what the Cause of it should be. It Is
plain that he was the Aggressor, and upon no provocation, that ever I could
hear of. I wish there be not something of Envy and Emulation in it. He
sometimes talks of Stalls and accidental Dignities; and in this Letter he
complains, that he finds a Page 61.
general Prejudice against him, because he has not a Stall in a Cathedral.
Really that is a very hard Case: For though he may not have a Stall, yet I dare
say the fault can be none of his. But if this be all that troubles him, I hope
after a while, to see him in something a better Humor. For when once his great
Deserts come to be known; and it is noised abroad that there is a man found,
that is able to encounter with Dr. Stillingfleet, and make nothing of him too;
his mere worth will quickly prefer him. So much Merit cannot be always
overlooked.

But though he may chance to be sweetened in time, yet for the present, there
appears such a sour temper all through this tedious Letter, that it is scarce
to be matched with such another piece of Moroseness and Incivility. Sure, when
he was writing, he did not mind the Stalls and accidental Dignities. A sudden
fit of impatience, may Subject of Church Power. Pref. to Reader.
make a Man forget the Regard he once thought himself obliged to Pay.

Now after all this, and a great deal more, which I will not trouble you with,
it is very pleasant to observe how the Gentleman concludes: And thus (Sir) etc.
I beg only this favor of you, that if you think fit to Page 84.
return an Answer, you will do it in a Scholar-like way; i. e. by Argument,
etc. He means, it is like, according to the Copy which he has set him: But I
fear the Dean will never be able to write after that. No, it is no such easy
matter. But he proceeds, and tells him very gravely: It is really below your
quality in the Church, to act Andrew Marvel. Yes, the Advice is very good, and
no doubt but it will be followed; especially, since it comes from such a hearty
Friend. But how came this into his mind? What should make Andrew Marvel run so
in his Head? Why, in plain terms, he had used the Dean so very unhandsomly,
that he could not be ignorant in what manner he might expect to be treated
himself. The Guilt of his own unsufferable Rudeness, made him as fearful of
being Jerked, as ever any Schoolboy was, that had been playing the Truant. And
this makes him fall into a very unusual Vein of Courtship: He talks of Begging
of Favors, and being Answered in a Scholar-like way. Don't you wonder at the
sudden alteration of his Style? Alas! This is only to prevent being handled as
he deserves: Nothing but a kind of Quaeso Praeceptor: A little Puling if
possible, to escape Correction. Well! Let him be forgiven then, for this one
time.

But why should not Mr. Lowth like the Acting of Merry Andrew? He is for rare
feats of Activity himself, sometimes; and will venture to be nibling at a Jest.
And it may be he took his pretty Tale of Barbara to be One; and the Two-penny
Paper tacked to the Fourpenny Sermon; and some others. But certainly he thought
he had paid it off with his Greekish Quible, of Irenicum and Erynnicum. He
would P^g. 40.
be no enemy to a little Jesting, if he could hope the advantage could ever lie
upon his side. No: He is ever now and then offering at a flight of Wit, and
fain would be upon the Wing, and flutters, and flutters, and as soon as ever he
has, with much ado, raised himself a little above the dull Earth, down he
tumbles again presently; like a poor callow Bird that must be crawling out of
the Nest, before it can fly. And now since, besides the general roughness and
disrespect of the whole Letter, he has made so many vain attempts to play the
Andrew, it is strange, he should think of being answered in a Scholar-like way,
as he pretends to desire. I cannot tell how he may take what I have written you
already; it may be, he may call it Trifling and Buffoonery, and I know not
what. But it is a very great mistake. For suppose I had derided him never so
much; yet he must know, that the exposing of ill-manners is a very serious
thing; and all the civilized World is concerned, not to suffer any notorious
Rudeness to pass, without fixing some public mark of shame and scorn upon it.
Dr. Stillingfleet was a person of that known worth and Learning, and had done
the Church so many eminent Services, that when he was assaulted in such an
angry and boistrous manner by Mr. Lowth, it had been a thing very pardonable,
if he had been sufficiently laughed at for his Pains: The punishment had been
too slight for the affront. But I have not taken the Liberty that might have
been justly used. Instead of that, I have only chosen a few, out of very many
unseemly expressions, and endeavored to set them in a true Light; that you
might see the man in his proper colors. But there are some things so very
foul, that they make a bare Narrative look like a Satyr: and some will complain
that they are Ridiculed, if they be but fairly represented. It may be you have
seen certain faces of such an odd Composure, that if they chance to be drawn
like themselves, you can hardly cast your eye upon the Picture without a smile:
But the fault is in the Original features, and not in the Painter, who is
always bound to work by the Life. Mr. Lowth may possibly think that I have put
a great many ill-favored Lines in this little Piece, and that I have not done
him Right: But if he will but take his Letter for the Looking-Glass, he will
quickly be convinced, that all is but an exact Copy of his own Countenance. I
have done no more but only touched a little upon a few, and but a very few, of
a great number of unhandsome expressions, and very uncharitable insinuations:
and if there be any thing in what I have said, that may seem unpleasant to him,
he must consider that it is nothing else but the reflection of his own rude and
uncivil language; you may guess at the rest, by the sample I have given you.
For besides the general Air of the whole, there is scarce a Leaf that does not
afford peculiar instances of unkindness and disrespect to the Dean. It were an
endless and unprofitable labor to search for them all; and if you are not
weary yet with raking in such a heap; I am.

I shall therefore pass on to the business of the Irenicum, which gave the
occasion to the whole Debate. And here I shall take notice, of the Writing of
it, and how it was received when it came abroad: What we may reasonably suppose
to have been the Design of it? And whether the Dean has not since given
sufficient Satisfaction for any material Errors and Mistakes that might be in
it.

As to the Writing of the Irenicum, it was occasioned thus. About the time of
the happy Restoration of his late Majesty, and the Royal Family, before the
Church of England was re-established by any new Act of Uniformity, all men's
minds were full of expectation what might be the issue of so great a
Revolution, and what influence it was like to have upon the Ecclesiastical
State of the Nation. They that were for Episcopacy and the Legal Establishment
did not doubt but that all things would return to the point from whence they
had been violently removed, and that they would settle at last upon the old
foundation. On the other side, they which Dissented, and retained still a very
great fondness for their own Schemes of Discipline, and Government. were not
without hopes that something might be determined in favor of Them. These
refused Communion with the other, and stood off with too great numbers of the
People, who had not yet done waiting for some effect of those many pretenses of
Reformation, with which they had been so long deluded. Upon the prospect of so
fatal a Division, as the separation of so great a Multitude was like to
occasion, the Dean at that time but a very young Man, boldly ventures upon the
Reconciling part. It must be confessed, and he has acknowledged it himself,
that according to the fate of most Reconcilers, he was too liberal in his
Concessions. He had showed that the Episcopal Government might not only be
allowed of, but that it had the example of the Primitive times to recommend it;
but then he thinks it mutable, and that it might be altered to some other form,
if the Exigency, or convenience of the Church should so require. This, as far
as I am able to gather, is a true account of the writing of the Irenicum; the
more particular Design of it will appear afterward.

Let us now see how it was received when it came abroad, and what the
Dissenters, what the Bishops and regular Clergy, and what Mr. Lowth thought of
it; for his Sentiments about it seem to be very peculiar, and therefore he must
make one member of the Division by himself.

Those of the Dissenters that were obstinately resolved upon their new Models,
and so strangely enamored with their own Fancies, that they could not hearken
to any proposals of accommodation rejected this with the same contempt, that
they had done all other Arguments that had been offered for their Conviction.
But some of the more moderate that gave themselves the liberty of considering
calmly, were gained over to a submission to our Church. It did not want success
in that way, both here, and in a Neighbor Nation; as the Dean has told us. And
we have no reason to question the Truth of what he says. For when he had proved
Episcopacy to be a warrantable Government at test, and given it some advantages
above other forms; it must be a more than ordinary degree of obstinacy that
could make men refuse to be obedient to it, when they were once persuaded of
this; as probably very many were upon reading the Irenicum. But Mr. Lowth
esteems this but a small piece of Service, and reflects upon some that had
received Episcopal Ordination, with how much Charity I cannot tell; and then he
talks of keeping of Benisices, and further accession of Church Page 3.
Dignities. For whatever the matter is, these Dignities are ever and anon
running in his Head. But at last he concludes this matter with his wonted
elegancy and respect: Sure I am, all the kindness you have done hereby to the
Church of England, and her Bishops, may be put in their Eyes, and they see
never the worse for it. O! the ingenuity of someMen! Don't you remember the old
Hob nail Proverb? Did you ever hear it so prettily applied? But for all this I
do not understand, but that it might be some kindness to the Church of England,
and her Bishops, to have the popular Odium removed, which the blind-Zeal, and
importunate Clamours of some interested Men had fixed upon her, in the late
Confusions, It was something sure to make it appear that Episcopacy, that had
been so violently decryed, as Tyrannical and Antichristian, was not repugnant
to the word of God, nor the Practice of the first and purest Ages of the
Church. This might serve to allay those Heats, and abate the Hatred that had
been most unreasonably raised against it; and make Men yield a quiet submission
unto it. And they that were advanced so far, were fairly disposed to proceed
on, and from being persuaded that Episcopal Government was allowable, might
come to see it Necessary, as that which was undoubtedly of Apostolical
Institution. Which was the Case of the Dean himself, and very probably of many
Others. It is a good step toward the receiving of the Truth, to have the
Prejudices against it taken away. This at least might be thought enough to
bring back the generality of the People, that had been frightened from our
Communion, in the times of Rebellion. It seems sufficient for them to be
satisfied of the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, without perplexing their Minds about
the Divine Right of it; since Mr. Lowth has acknowledged, that they cannot be
competent Judges of such Disputes. Nay, I fear some that had been admitted into
Page 8.
holy Orders, were not thoroughly qualified to determine that Controversy,
which depended so much upon some skill in Ecclesiastical History, and an
insight into the State of the Ancient Church. And many of these for ought he
can tell, might be induced by what the Dean had written, to submit to the
Power, which they could not yet fully demonstrate. And I believe there are very
few real Friends, to the Church of England, who do not think that it were some
Kindness to Her, to bring those over to a Conformity to her Discipline and
Worship, who had otherwise remained professed Dissenters, and divided
themselves into separate Assemblies. This certainly had been Competentwell
done, upon his Principles, so far as it reaches.

But the best way to know whether this were looked upon as a Kindness or not,
will be to inquire how the Irenicum was received by the Bishops and Regular
Clergy. And they, as the Dean assures us, treated him with more kindness, than
so much as to mention any such thing to him, (as a Recantation etc.) with
respect to that unlucky Book, as Mr. Lowth had called it. And as to the Errors
and Mistakes in it, They were so wise to make Allowances for the seepticalness
and injudiciousness of Youth, and for the Prejudices of Education: As he tells
us again, with Decency and Humility enough; Though Mr. Lowth is pleased to cast
it often in his Teeth, But I know not why; unless it be, that the Modesty of
the expression is very disagreeable, and a kind of Reproach to a rough and
unpolished Humor. But he may use him as contemptuously as he thinks sit; yet
better Men than he, and of a higher Order, were not ashamed, a long time ago,
to entertain him with more Respect. Indeed when the Irenicum came abroad, they
were exceedingly surprised; they could not approve of every thing in the Book,
but there was nothing but made them admire the Author. The Project was not only
Great, but Good, an attempt to heal the Wounds of a miserable, divided,
bleeding Church. A Design so vast and important, that they could not but
wonder, how it should enter the Thoughts of so young a Man. And then the Method
he pursued for compassing the end he had proposed, though not altogether such
as they would have taken, yet it inclined so far to the Episcopal side, as they
could scarce have expected from one that had been bred up among the Mists and
Confusions of those distracted and unhappy Times. And the whole was prosecuted
with that subtilty of Argument, that Perspicuity of style, and that Variety of
Learning, that in these respects, even at those years, he might have deserved
the Reputation of an Eminent Divine. There were some flashes of a Juvenile
Fancy, which would soon be corrected by a riper Judgment. Some Errors there
must be acknowledged, but commonly of that Sort, which a little further
consideration, would easily amend. And the very slips and mistakes that were to
be met with, were such as were signs of great Ingenuity; and had something
mixed with them, that could not but please those that condemned them. The Book
indeed might be compared to one of those Trees that are thick hung with plenty
of Fruit, of several growths; some Ripe, some Green, some in the Blossom, and
some in the Bud; which all together afford a very pleasant Prospect, argue an
exceeding Luxuriancy and Fertility in the Soil, and may be all brought to
perfect maturity in their due time. When the Prudent and Reverend Governors of
our Church saw the Performance, they looked upon it with Admiration: The Errors
they observed, which were almost hid in the Excellencies of the work, they
readily pardoned; and conceived that such Pregnancy of Parts, and accuracy of
Learning, which were very discernable in that first Essay of so young a Writer,
did justly deserve all the encouragement which they could give. And they
thought it Pity that those Abilities which had discovered themselves so soon,
and might be improved to the singular Advantage of the Church, should not be
always employed upon some Subject worthy of them. When therefore the Answer to
Archbishop Laud came abroad, which was not long after the publication of the
Irenicum, some of them, who had been personally known to his Grace, and all of
them great sufferers for their Religion and Loyalty, had such an opinion of Mr.
Stillingsleet, that they made choice of him to undertake the Defense of the
Conference with Fisher. Which he set about, and dispatched in a few Months, with
that success, that a very Grave and Learned Prelate thought fit to honor it
with a License under his own Hand. And it was afterward entertained with
general approbation; and I do not see what there is in it to be despised, or
cavilled at by Mr. Lowth. However it is plain that those Reverend Persons, at
whose desire he undertook the Work, had great confidence of his Skill and
Ability to manage a Controversy of that moment and consequence; and he did not
deceive their expectation in the Performance. He acquitted himself so well in
those weighty Disputes they had engaged him in, that they could not but have a
very particular respect and esteem for him, which has been constantly
maintained by those of their Order ever since. And if he stood so fair in their
good opinion, when he had so lately published the Irenicum, this manifestly
declares that they were not then so angry with the Book, nor with him for
Writing it, as Mr. Lowth was pleased to be, above twenty year after.

I will therefore, as I promised, consider his judgment about it by it self.
And what he thought of it when it first came out, I cannot tell; and it matters
not much what ever it were. But that he might not be accused for doing any
thing rashly, when he had pawsed upon the business, almost as many years as the
Dean was old when he wrote that unlucky Book, out he sends a very fierce
Epistle, and peremptorily demands a Public Recantation; and when he had been
gently reflected on for that, he seconds it with this other long Letter, which
I have before me. You see the matter was a great while a Brewing. He suffered
his Choler to boil inwardly so long, without giving it any vent, that I fear
it was become a little Adust; but now I hope since the plentiful Evacuation it
has had in these angry Letters, he may be grown more treatable, and not so apt
to break out into uncivil and passionate Expressions. For truly all the while
he was writing, he seems in a mighty wrath at the poor Irenicum. And what, do
you think, should be the reason, that he, above all men, should have such a
particular quarrel against it? The Bishops, you know, and all the Clergy, for
ought that I could ever hear, though they could not approve of the whole, yet
they were never so highly displeased, but that they could pardon the mistakes
that were in it. And it was a very long time before Mr. Lowth himself took any
notice of them; Twenty year, as I have told you at least; now if he did really
think the Book so very mischievous, as he at last pretended; why did he not
make his Animadversions upon it any sooner? if he did not; wherefore did he
publish them at all? Or if he did verily believe that the Iremcum was such a
pernicious Treatise, and might be of such dangerous insluence, as he would seem
to apprehend; what wise purpose could it serve to revive the memory of it, when
it was laid out of most men's hands, and in a manner forgotten? But I am not to
answer for the prudence, or Honesty of the Action: I will only acquaint you
with the mystery of the business, why He, of all men in the World, should
concern himself so zealously about it. And I will show it you from his own
words; for when he had mentioned that, Page 12.
and some other things which he liked as well: All this, says he, might make a
greater impression upon me, than on some others: And why so, I pray? Because I
had for some years applied my Studies to search after the Rights of the Church,
etc. And what then? Had no body else done the same, had none of the Bishops, or
Clergy of the Nation bent their minds that way? He does not tell us: Or if he
will allow they had; either it seems, they were not subject to such sad
impressions, as he was; or else they had not so deep an insight into the
matter. They could not discover the Design as he did; The desperate Design that
was most cunningly laid, to ruin the Church of England, by showing the People
that it was certainly Lawful, and, in some cases, necessary to submit to the
Episcopal Power. This is all the formidable Plot, that I can see, which
provoked him so much, and put him in such a fright, that he imagines we are
scarce out of danger of it yet.

But let us see what we may indeed suppose to have been the real Design of this
Irenicum, we are contending about. And the matter may be brought to a very
short Issue. There are but two Designs that can be tolerably pretended, the one
is the Dean's own, the other Mr. Lowth has made for him. The Dean had solemnly
professed, at the Writing of it, that his Design was to heal the wounds of the
Church: and he tells us again very lately, in the Two-penny Paper that is
tacked to one of his Four-penny Sermons, that he did adventure to Publish it,
hoping by that means to bring over those to a compliance with the Church of
England, (then like to be Re-established) who stood off upon the supposition,
that Christ had appointed a Presbyterian Government to be always continued in
his Church; and therefore they thought Prelacy was to be detested as an
unlawful Usurpation. And to the same purpose elsewhere. This he, which knew
best, often assures us was his Design, and in my mind it was not an ill one.
This Mr. Lowth, out of a wonderful Sagacity, in spying out Designs, flatly
denis, and like a Man of mettle, tells the Dean roundly, that He shall make it
appear, that the account he gives of his Irenicum is not fair, nor true; and
that he conceals his crime in the very confession of it: The whole Design and
Plot being in one place merely, in another mostly, if not altogether against
the Re-establishment of the Church of England. 'T was most bravely offered
indeed, at the beginning. But what makes him falter so soon? How comes merely
to be turned into mostly, and mostly very near into Merely again, with an If
not? What is the meaning of this staggering so strangely? This uncertainty in
pressing home the main Charge, argues that the Case is not very clear. He must
be conscious to himself of something more than ordinary, when such a Bold man's
heart begins to fail him. Well! But here you have two very different Designs,
as can well be imagined; and now which of these do you take to be the true one?
Or, which is the same question in effect, which do you think, the Dean, or Mr.
Lowth was most certainly acquainted with the real design and occasion of
writing the Irenicum? The one assirms upon his own certain Knowledge that he
intended to serve the Church; the other advances a few feeble insignificant
Conjectures to prove, that whatever he says, his meaning must be to overthrow
it. And I think this Case may be easily decided betwixt them, by any
indifferent Judge. For unless the Dean's Credit and Reputation be quite for
feited, which Malice it self dares not affirm, there is no reason but that we
should take his word. His positive and repeated Assertion of a thing, which no
man in the World can know so well as he, must needs outweigh Mr. Lowth's
groundless and uncharitable suspicion, in a matter, of which he can never be
assured. There is no Comparison in the Evidenc^, and if Mr. Lowth were of the
Jury, he must bring in a Verdict against himself. But yet that he may not
complain of Partiality, I will briefly examine the general Plea that he makes.
The grand Principle which ran through the whole Discourse, he is so angry at,
is this, That Christ had not appointed any unalterable form of Government in
his Church. This is acknowledged, it was an Error; and be it so: Yet how does
it from hence appear, that the Design was either merely or mostly against the
Re-establishment of the Church of England? All that he offers in proof of this,
is his Denying Episcopacy to be by the Laws-of Christ always binding and
imutable; and that he attributes too much Power to the Civil Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. This will be freely confessed; and yet the Design Page
25.
he speaks of, cannot be rightly gathered from it. And to convince him that his
Argument will not hold, we will turn the Tables: And let us suppose then for
once, without offense, that Mr. Lowth had been a Zealous Presbyterian; then
because the Irenicum denies that Government to be immutable, as well as the
Episcopal; and gives away some of the Power to the Civil Magistrate, which is
wont to be assumed by their Classical and Synodical Assemblies; he might have
made the very Page 40.
same Complaints in favor of the Consistory; and turned the Design quite
another way, and said it had been merely or mostly, if not altogether against
the settlement of the Church of Geneva. This he might have done with as much
reason, as what he did: For I do not see where the Disparity lies. And you know
he that proves too much, proves nothing. That Argument can never be good that
will serve the Plaintiff as well as the Defendant; and may be urged with equal
force on both sides. It Is like a man's slourishing his Weapon, with a here I
could have you, and there I could have you. I will not call it ridiculous; but
for all that, it is nothing better than an idle kind of skirmishing with the
Air. But it is not only evident that the Design of the Irenicum may be as
easily levelled against the Prerbyterian, as the Episcopal Church; but if the
Dean's word, who only could certainly know his own design, were not sufficient;
yet if you please to peruse the Book, you will find so many things spoken there
to the advantage of it, that would be enough of themselves to incline any
unprejudiced man to believe, that the intent of the Author was indeed, To bring
over Dissenters to a compliance with the Church of England. Nay, this is so
very obvious, that Mr. Lowth himself could not avoid being sensible of it. For
after he had taken a great deal of pains to lay open the Dean's Design, as he
would have it; he concludes that part of his Letter in a wonderful Heat, calls
all his Rhetoric together, and aggravates the matter very Tragically; and that
untoward Irenicum he tells us; It is a Hotch-potch or mixture Page 5.
of all Religions -- I may safely say, It has perverted many Thousands, (should
I add Millions, I did not exceed.) A very sad thing really! Millions! But don't
you think there may be something of the Hyperbole here? He says he did not
exceed, but I hope, he was mistaken. But he goes on still: It is the very
Center of Puritanisme, and Epitome of Fanatic madness. Mighty Lofty, indeed!
But the unhappiness of it is, that as soon as ever he had ended this warm
Declamation, he overturns it all immediately by an unlucky supposition: If it
be objected. What? that you have in some particular passages of this Book,
declared your self in a different manner than is here represented. Why? Are
there any such Passages in that very Center, that Epitome of Fanatic madness?
What was the Reason then, that they were all smothered? What Design was there
in that? Nothing but the pursuit of Truth and Honesty, to be sure. For he picks
out whatever he thinks is for his purpose, and slyly passes over what he
pleases. And when he has by this means mangled the Discourse, he makes most
passionate Invectives against the horrible mischievous Design of it; and when
the guilt of this false, and unjust Dealing slyes in his Face; he endeavors to
palliate all, and put it off with a slight Evasion, and only saying: I answer,
My business is not to reconcile every contradiction in your Book: That were
impossible he thinks. But though I verily believe indeed, his Business was not
to Reconcile Contradictions, or any thing else; yet certainly it was his
Business to give a fair and impartial account of the whole matter; and not to
lay together the worst he could find on one side, and conceal every thing that
had been said on the Other. Now because he has done this, by his own
Confession; I leave it to you to Judge which is the most probable: That the
Design was for the Church of England, as the Dean professes; or against it, as
Mr. Lowth pretends; and seems resolved to maintain, Right or Wrong.

But whatever your Opinion be of the Design of the Irenicum, or whatever any
one may suppose it was; Let us now see whether the Dean has not since given
sufficient Satisfaction for any material Errors and Mistakes that might be in
it. This Mr. Lowth imagines he has not, and this I will endeavor to show the
Dean has effectually done. To this, purpose it will be necessary to inquire,
what satisfaction will be accepted? I answer, in Mr. Lowths words, it must be A
Recantation as public as the Error, Scandal, and Offense. This I say had been
done a considerable time, before ever that Imperious Demand was made. For that
was in Mr. Lowth's first Letter of May the first 83. and the exceptionable
Passages of the Irenicum had been formally retracted in a Book that was
Licensed, May the sixth 79. It consists of several Conferences; and when the
Romish Priest had put the Question, in one of them: What say you to his
Irenicum, in the first place? The Dean, under the Person of the Protestant
Divine, replies thus: I will tell you freely; I believe there are many things
in it, which if Dr. Stillingfleet were to write Several Conf. p. 148. 149.
now, he would not have said: For there are some things which show his Youth,
and want of due consideration: Others which he yielded too far, in hopes of
gaining the dissenting Parties to the Church of England; but upon the whole
matter, I am fully sacisfied, the Book was written with a design to serve the
Church of England. And the design of it, I take to be this; that among us there
was no necessity of entering upon nice and subtle disputes about a strict Jus
Divinum of Episcopacy, such as makes all other Forms of Government unlawful;
but it was sufficient for us, if it were proved to be the most ancient, and
agreeable to Apostolial practice, and most accommodate to our Laws, and Civil
Government; and there could be no pretense against submitting to it, but the
demonstrating its unlawfulness, which he knew was impossible to be done. And
for what proposals he makes about tempering Episcopacy, they were no other than
what King Charles 1st. and Mr. Thorndike had made before him; and does T. G.
think they designed to ruin the Church of England? And as long as he declared
this to be the design of his Book, both at the beginning and conclusion of it,
suppose he were mistaken in the means he took, must such a Man be presently
condemned, as one that aimed at the Ruin and Destruction of the Church? This
place is so clear and remarkable; that I wonder how it could escape Mr. Lowth's
notice. I have transcribed it entire as it lies; because it contains a general
Recantation of whatever was amiss in the Irenicum. For here the Dean frankly
acknowledges, There are many things in it which if he were to write now, he
would not have said: That there are some things which show his Youth, and want
of due consideration: Others which he yielded too far. This is a free and open
Confession, and as much, I think, as could be reasonably expected. Then he
confirms, what I have showed already, that the Design was to serve the Church
of England: And he endeavors to excuse the Mistakes of it upon that account.
For what he had mentioned about tempering Episcopacy; he defends it by the
Authority of King Charles 1st. and Mr. Thorndike. The words of King Charles he
repeats again in the Epistle Dedicatory to My Lord of London; they are for the
Reducing Episcopacy, and Presbytery to such a well-proportioned Form of
Superiority and subordination, as may best resemble the Apostolical and
Primitive times. These words Mr. Lowth takes no notice of, but seems extreme
Page 55. 56.
Angry, tells the Dean he had slandered all our Princes and Bishops since the
Reformation, etc. and that his Friends of the Presbytery cannot take it well at
his hands, that he should attempt to persuade the World, they brought that
Glorious Martyr to the Block for being a Presbyterian. It is hard to imagine
what should make a Man talk at such an extravagant rate. If the Words be in the
Paper, as they are, then they can be no Slander, whatever they be. And how can
they ever make their Royal Author a Presbyterian; when they expressly mention a
superiority, and subordination, which directly overthrows the Presbyterian
Party, which is the very Life and Soul of that Government? But if he please to
inquire further into the matter, I believe he will find that King Charles, and
Mr. Thorndike, and the Dean too, meant no more, but that the Bishops retaining
all their Ancient Rights, the Presbyters should be admitted of their Council,
whose Advice and concurrence might be had in some Cases. This is very
consistent with the Practice of the first Ages; and this I take to be the same
that is by Law established in our Church. For in the Execution of some parts of
the Episcopal Power, the Assistance of Presbyters is required; and the Canons
and Constitutions, by which the Bishops Govern, are to be passed in both Houses
of Convocation, as well in the Lower, where are none but Presbyters, as in the
Upper, where the Bishops only have Right to sit. And let this be, as Mr. Lowth
thinks, from a particular Law of this Kingdom; however it is Ours. And Page 74.
if he had thought of it, he might have made the Church of England
Presbyterians; upon the same reason that he pretends the Dean had done King
Charles, for that passage he cited from him. This therefore is not yet
Recanted, but yielding too far, in some other Points, is. And besides this, in
the very Epistle which occasioned the Letter we are now considering, there is
an acknowledgment of Errors and Mistakes that were in it [the Irenicum] And we
are told that our Superiors in the Church were so wise to make allowances for
the scepticalness and Injudiciousness of Youth, and for the Prejudices of
Education. Where there is a Recantation manifestly employed again. But this as
well as the former, will not be regarded, nor ever thought upon; unless it be
to twit him now and then with the modesty of the Expressions; which is a Crime
Mr. Lowth may be secured, can never be charged upon Him.

But having passed over these, and some other places, it may be, which look the
same way, he insists stiffly upon three things, for which, he would persuade us,
the Dean has made no satisfaction: The Manuscript, the Powers of Church
Officers, and Episcopacy. I will do him the Right to inquire a little further
into every one of them.

As for the Manuscript, there has been some Controversy already about it; and
in this Letter Mr. Lowth seems enraged at it. He calls it a Vagrant,
illegitimate Script; and in one place, your counterfeit Manuscript: But he does
not offer any thing considerable, to make it appear to be so. Page 57.
And if he could have proved the sorgery, and shown the Dean to have been Page
59.
guilty of it; I suppose he is so honest and just a man, he would never have
spared him. But because he cannot accuse him of any false dealing in the Case,
I do not see what satisfaction he can be obliged to give for a Paper, of which
he cannot be pretended to have been the Author. Some part of it was published
in the Irenicum, but without any alteration from the Original writing. The
whole was set forth afterward by Dr. Burnet, in Part. 2. c. 7
his Collection of Records: and if he varied no more from his Copy, than the
Dean had done, he cannot be justly blamed. But that shall be examined Book 3.
N. 21.
presently. In the mean time it is not strange that Cranmer, and some others
should fall into some Errors in the matter of Church Power. For the
Controversy about it, was but then newly started, and could not be so fully
enquired into, as it has been since; and the Opinion of the Schools concerning
Episcopacy had been so loose, and the Question of the Supremacy so warmly
debated; that it can be no wonder if they were unacquainted with something that
was the Bishops Right, and attributed as much to the King, as ever had been
usurped by the Pope. But whatever their Mistakes might be, they who put out the
Manuscript, wherein they were contained, were bound to publish it as it was,
not as we could have wished it had been. But this Mr. Lowth averrs was not
done; for I must tell you plainly, says he, I have not met with a more
notorious Artifice, and palpable abuse, in all my reading; unless I except that
Page 63.
of the Pope's Legates in the Council of Carthage, for the Adulterating of the
Nicene Canons. The Crime you see, is very heinous, but he had endeavored to
make it out before; for speaking of the Dean and the Manuscript, he has these
words. You and Dr. Burnet are not discharged, but stand accused of
Unfaithfulness, and underhand Dealing in the Printing and Page 60.
Publishing of it; and that upon these two accounts. 1. For altering the
general method of it. 2. For leaving out Bishop Cranmer 's Subscription to Dr.
Leighton's Opinion concerning Church Power, by which he retracted his former
Erroneous Judgment. This is the Charge that is drawn up, and vehemently urged
against the Dean, and Dr. Burnet; I will tell you how far I think the Whole, or
any part of it may be made good against Both, or either of them.

The first thing for which they both Stand accused of unfaithfulness, and
under-hand-dealing, is, for altering the general method of the Manuscript. But
if there be any unfaithfulness or under-hand-Dealing in this, the Dean is
innocent of it; for I am certainly informed he advised the contrary; that all
should be Printed just as it lay in the Papers. He foresaw, I conceive, that
otherwise, though the thing imported very little, yet quarrelsome Spirits might
take occasion to cavil at it. This notwithstanding in the Publication, Dr.
Burnet adventures to put the whole in another order; but then he gives his
reason why he did it: He judged it might be more acceptable to the Reader to
see every man's Answer set down after every Question: Whereas in the
Manuscript, which was nothing but the very Original Papers gathered up and
Bound together, their Answers to every Question lay scattered in every man's
particular Paper. But least this digesting them into a more useful Method as he
thought, should breed any mistake; after their Resolutions of the Seventeenth,
which is the last Question, he sets the Names of the Bishops and Divines, as
they themselves had done, with this Note in the Margent: These are the
Subscriptions which are at the end of every Man's Paper. And what is there in
this that can deserve to be so severely condemned? There is not the change of
any one word pretended; and the Alteration that was made in the Method, was
designed for the Reader's convenience; and most men think it was so; but if any
like the old Method, or rather want of Method better, there are plain
Directions, whereby all may be easily reduced to that again. However there can
be no Unfaithfulness, nor under-hand-dealing here, where every thing is sairly,
and freely acknowledged He would never have discovered himself so openly, if
his intent had been to put a Cheat upon the World. But this is the slightest
part of the accusation, and Mr. Lowth, I presume, will not lay any stress upon
it.

The other is far more Considerable, That they have left out Bishop Cranmer's
Subscription to Dr. Leighton's Opinion concerning Church Power, by which he
retracted his former Erroneous Judgment. This indeed were a very foul thing,
and if it could be proved, would leave both the Dean and Dr. Burnet without any
excuse. For this we are told that the Archbishop subscribed to Dr. Leighton's
Opinion with his own hand, setting Page ^1.
Th. Canturariensis below the Doctors, and blotting out his first Subscription.
You, says he, have wholly omitted this. Here are no less three mistakes in
these few words; one that the Arch Bishops Name was put below Dr. Leighton's,
whereas it was not set under it, but by the side, in the Margent of the Paper:
Another that he Blotted out his first Subscription, when it remains to this Day
as Legible as any of the rest: And the Third, thas all this was wholly omitted;
whereas the Archbishops Name is Subscribed as often in the Print, as it is in
the Original. A little farther he makes a fourth mistake in the same matter,
for he supposes that Cranmer's Subscription was under Leighton's, to the
Article Concerning Church Power, which is the place where he complains it is
Omitted; whereas neither Cranmer's nor Leighton's Subscription was put
immediately to that Article, or any other, but only to the Last, which must be
understood to have been done in confirmation of all the rest, as well as that;
and there both their Names are still to be seen in Dr. Burnet's Printed
Collection. How many voluntary mistakes does he run into, that he may accuse
his Adversaries of Unfaithfulness, when by that very attempt, he makes himself
guilty of it in in a very high degree. But yet he will plead they have heen
Unfaithful too; because they have not acquainted the World with Cranmer's
Retractation of his former Opinion. To this it may be replied, that if
Cranmer's Subscription to Leighton's Paper did imply such a Retractation, then
they have acquainted the World with it, by the publication of that
Subscription; if it did not, then it was well done, not to impose upon the
World, as he would have them, by false Glosses, and forced Interpretations. But
did not Cranmer retract his first Opinion then? without doubt he did. Why then
was this wholly omitted? whatever Mr. Lowth may pretend, it was not. Dr. Burnet
had given an express account of it, in the proper place, as he knows; and used
a more convincing argument to prove it, than that Subscription, in the very
Page wherein he refers to the Record we are contending about. His words are
these. In Cranmer's Paper some singular opinions of his about Hist. R^f. Book
1st.
the Nature of Ecclesiastical Offices will be found; but as they are delivered
by him with all possible modesty; So they were not established as the Doctrine
of the Church, but laid aside as particular conceits of his own, and it seems
that afterward he CHANGED his opinion. For he Subscribed the Bock that was soon
after set out; which is directly contrary to those Opinions set down in these
Papers. This passage Mr. Lowth could not be ignorant of; but he cunningly
slides over it, because he saw it was not for his purpose. And this I think may
be enough to show that Cranmer's Subscription to Leighton's Paper was not
omitted; nor his Retractation otherwise concealed.

But indeed it was not any thing of this nature that was the real ground of the
quarrel; it is the bare Publishing of the Manuscript that seems to have made
Mr. Lowth so angry; he would have had it otherwise disposed of; and he
insinuates his mind in a Story out of Livy, which he thus relates: In the
ground of Petilius the Scribe, were found two Chests, the one had a bundle in
it containing Seven Books in Latin, de Page 60.
jure Pontificio, or relating to Religious matters; they were perused by
several, and, at last, read to the Senators, who, immediately condemned them to
the Fire, (and they were accordingly burnt before the People) because in many
things tending to the dissolution of their Religion. This is a way of
proceeding, would have fitted the Conclave, as well as it did the Senate. It Is
probable, that City has been under the Influence of the same cautious Planet
from the very beginning; but I did not think before, that the way of dealing
with Heretical Manuscripts could have been proved by such ancient Tradition.
Well! but what thinks Mr. Lowth of this? Why, he admires it much, and esteems
it a choice Example of an extraordinary Prudence. For so he goes on: The Wisdom
of that Government knew full well the ill consequences of admitting such looser
Papers into competition with their received Worship, etc. But I hope their Case
and ours are something different. A false Religion may have reason to be
jealous of all Opposition, and do that by Fire, which it cannot by Argument;
but the true One has no need to be so extremely apprehensive of danger. It
knows it self to be built upon so firm a Foundation, that it cannot be easily
shaken; and therefore it is not afraid of what can be objected against it.
Whatever others may be forced to do, the Church of England has no occasion for
any unwarrantable Artifice to support it self; we are not put to a necessity of
forging, or suppressing any Writings to maintain our Cause. We do deservedly
retain a very great Veneration for Archbishop Cranmer, but we do not think we
can suffer so much by any private Opinion of his, that we should be tempted to
Destroy his Papers, for the sake of that; especially when it was subscribed
with so much Dubiousness, and deliberately Retracted not very long after. And
when all is done, I am verily persuaded, that the Generality of the Church of
England are better satisfied to see the Manuscript Published as it is; than if
it had been Burnt, as Mr. Lowth advises very gravely, like a Roman Senator.

The next thing wherein he imagines the Dean has not given sufficient
satisfaction, is The Power of Church Officers. And to make this out, he
undertakes to examine some of his Books, where he might have found many things
that way, which he thinks fit to take no notice of; and for what he has chosen
out, he very often either mistakes, or else wilfully perverts the sense.
Sometimes it is pleasant to see how he will be Tutoring Page 66.
the Dean, and showing him how he should have expressed himself. But I must not
trouble you with such Observations as these; that were Page 64.
an Argument too Copious. The first Treatise he pitches upon, is the Appendix
to the Irenicum; where he acknowledges the Arguments for Church Power are
common, but good: This is a very kind concession for Him. But then the
exception is, that this is limited to the Power of Excommunication. Why, then
that was Competently well done, so far. And that was the Subject to be treated
of, and to have extended it farther, in that place, had been little to the
purpose. And the Dean, I believe, can hardly be sorry yet, that he was not
impertinent; though that it should seem, had been the only way to have pleased
Mr. Lowth.

The next Treatise he falls upou, is The Vindication of Archbishop Lawd, the
same which he thinks might have discomposed him upon the Page 65.
Scaffold, if he could hve been aware of it; and it is not strange, if all be
true which he says; In which I sind little amends for these your Irenicum
Doctrines; but rather, an evident confirmation of many of them, if not doing
worse. That must be very bad indeed, at least in his esteem; but then the
wonder is, that none of these very ill things should be discovered by the
Reverend Prelate that licensed the Book; who in his time was taken for as Wise
and Learned a Man, as Mr. Lowth, and had certainly done and suffered as much
forth Church. Nay, besides this public approbation of so eminent a Person,
and other acknowledgments, which some of his Graces near and Learned Relations
thought sit to make, all the Bishops of that time were pleased to give the Dean
their particular thanks for the Work: An Honor, I believe, that has not yet
been conferred upon the Author of this Letter; and which does sufficiently
signisie how different their apprehensions were from His. But an extraordinary
Good Will is extremely sagacious; and by the help of this, Mr. Lowth has been
enabled to spy out more, than any man before him could do. After a diligent
search in that large Volume, he has happened upon a little piece of a sentence,
which he conceits has a very ill Aspect upon Church Power. And it is this: The
being of a Chureh, supposes this antecedent belief [or assent to the Doctrine
of Christ] in Christians. This is Page 66.
no such Paradox, but that, it is likely, a far meaner man than the Dean might
be able to defend it. But he, when he has been at some pains to misunderstand
it, loads it with no less than five and twenty of the most monstrous
Consequences, that he could think of; and at the same rate, a man of such a
fruitful Imagination as He is, might have easily increased the number to five
and forty more; and after all, he gives up the Cause, by yielding, that
Believers, in some sense, are antecedent to the Church. Page 69.
Which is a Proposition so very like that for which he quarrels the Dean, that
the most, if not all the Objections that are made against the one, may be
returned with equal force upon the other; and, as he explains himself, not
without the Addition of some peculiar Difficulties upon Him. But I will not
insist upon them, because I cannot perceive how either of the Opinions can be
destructive of Church Power; since it is a part of the Antecedent Belief, which
is granced on both sides, that there is a Church, and that it is the duty of
every one to unite himself unto it, and to be obedient to the Governors of it.

The Dean in his Answer to sever al Treatises has reduced the Authority Answer
to several Treat. p. 267, etc.
of the Governors of the Church to these three Heads: 1. An Authority of
inflicting Censures upon Offenders; which is commonly called the Power of the
Keys, or of receiving into, and excluding out of the Communion of the Church.
2. An Authority of making Rules and Canons about matters of Order and Decency
in the Church. 3. An Authority of proposing matters of Faith, and directing Men
in Religion. If you please, you may see in that place, how every one of these
is farther explained; the passage is so express, and so very apposite to the
matter in dispute, that Mr. Lowth could by no means wholly avoid it. But he
strives to hide the Evidence of it, as much as may be; he only refers to the
Pages where it is, but dares not trust the Reader with the sight of one word of
it; for fear he should be convinced, by so clear a Testimony, that the Dean's
opinion of the Authority of the Church, was sound and Orthodox. Therefore,
without mentioning what had been said, he puts in a blind exception to the
whole in gross, and affirms considently, that notwithstanding all the Dean had
spoken in this place, yet he Has left the Church without Power to make her
Declarations Law. But this he Page 76.
does not so much as attempt to prove. I wish he had; for it is plain that here
is an Authority to Command attributed to the Church, and a Power to enforce her
Commands by inflicting of Censures upon all those that will not obey; and if
this be not enough to make a Law, I should be glad to be informed what is. But
the Authority of making Rules and Canons about matters of Order and Decency was
so plainly asserted, that there was no denying of it; yet he tryes to shift it
off, by saying, that it is no more, in effect, than what had been said before
in Page 77.
the Irenicum: and suppose it be; what then? That does not any way lessen what
is said here; but only show that the very Irenicum it self, by his own
confession, is nothing so bad a Book, nor such an irreconcilable Enemy to
Church. Power as he would make it.

Upon this he starts out of the way, if he were ever in, and runs into a
Digression full of nothing but vain surmises little to the purpose, and never
returns to the business in hand, till he comes to the Treatise of the
unreasonableness of Separation; and that he allows to be Competently well done,
so far as it reaches, as I have told you before; but then least Page 78.
any thing of the Dean's should escape without a mark of his displeasure; he
thinks that All is left still as matter of Dispute, etc. But that I have showed
already is not so; and that there is an obligation to Obedience laid upon the
Subject. And whosoever shall peruse that whole Discourse, without Prejudice,
must certainly be convinced that the Dean has given abundant satisfaction for
any former Mistakes about Church Power.

The last thing is Episcopacy; and here the Charge is but short, but it is very
vehement and pathetical. You have made no satisfaction at all to the Church of
God, for that Irenicum Doctrine, which equals the Presbyter Page 83.
with the Bishop. What? None at all? No: There is not any thing like amends for
it in all your Writings that I have met with. Then I guess there may be some
which have not yet fallen into his hands. But let us see what he has met with.
It is true, you often speak of Episcopacy, as the most Ancient Government
deriveable from the Apostles: Sure this too is Competently well done, so far;
something like amends, at least. But what should there be wanting to make it
complete? why this: You have not any where asserted it in the number of those
Institutions and Practices Page 84.
Apostolical, which are perpetual and immutable: And until you say this, all
you can say besides is to no purpose. Well, since it is resolved that nothing
else shall serve the turn, pray do but look into the Discourse of the
unreasonableness of Separation, and consider whether there be not enough said
in that Book to make it appear, than it was really the Dean's Opinion that the
Episcopal Government was unalterable. Or if this will not suffice, I think
there is something in the Two-penny Paper that may. For in that the Dean tells
us, that He does now think much more is to be said for the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy, than he at that time apprehended, when he wrote the
Irenicum. Here Episcopacy is acknowledged to be of Apostolical Institution and
that implies it to be perpetual and immutable. For though some things of mere
Apostolical Practice may, those that are of Apostolical Institution cannot be
changed: whatever they appointed to be observed in the Church, no Power upon
Earth has Authority to alter. But if this be not enough yet, then I desire you
to consult the Four-penny Sermons, in which Mr. Lowth cannot deny some Errors,
which he imputes to the Dean, to have been Retracted; and in the beginning of
his Letter he very Complementally Rejoices, and thanks him for it, No man more.
But that was suddenly slipped out of his mind; therefore I will take the liberty
to refresh his Page 3.
Memory with a passage or two which will clear the matter we are now upon. And
besides the general Scope of a great part of the Discourse, in one place he
delivers his mind thus: That the Bishops did succeed Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon.
p. 30.
the Apostles, we have the general consent of the Ancient Fathers, who were the
most competent Witnesses in this Case; which is an Argument they believed the
Apostolical Power, with respect to the Government of Churches, did not expire
with the Apostles, but was to continue, as long as Christ had promised to be
with them, i. e. to the end of the World. And afterward again: Our Church has
wisely and truly determined, that since the Apostles times there have been
three Orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; and then he adds, and in a
regular, well constituted Church, are to Continue Ib. Pa. 38.
to the World's end. These are as full declarations of his Judgment,
concerning the Perpetuity, and immutability of Episcopacy, as can be desired;
unless Mr. Lowth should conceit that the Church Triumphant is governed by
Bishops, and may hope to be made one in the other world. But how the
overlooking of these, and many things else, and insisting still upon the old
accusation, as if it had not been clearly answered, can comport with his Design
of Truth and Honesty, is worth the inquiry. I leave it to your thoughts, and
hope I have made it plainly appear that the Dean has given very good
satisfaction for all the Errors and Mistakes that have been laid to his charge.

This Letter is grown longer than I intended, when I began it, and yet I have
taken some pains to contract it. For if I had followed Mr. Lowth in all his
Rambles, and remarked every thing that was really exceptionable, it would have
been five times the length, and must have been Read by you with as little
pleasure, as his was. I have dealt with him as tenderly as I could; and if I
have said any thing that may seem severe, it has been extorted by his
unsufferable Rudeness to a better Man. Look upon his Letter once more, and you
will readily excuse the hardest word I have given him. He takes care to let the
World know that his first Book was the Result of the Course of his Subject
Church Power. Pref.
Studies, and so it might; but this can be the Result, of nothing but Anger,
and want of Consideration, and an inveterate kindness for his Adversary. For
there is not any thing in it clearly proved, but an untractable crossness, and
an impotent desire to be Cavilling at every thing the Dean can write. Of this
we have had many evidences already, and you may expect more when you shall have
the happiness to see another choice Piece, with which he is sometimes
threatening the Reader. For he seems resolved to signalize himself for ever, by
still Renewing his bold Attempts upon the Dean of St. Paul's. That he should
have the Ambition, I do not wonder; but what should give him the Confidence, I
cannot certainly tell; only I conjecture there is one thing may have done him
some harm, and put him upon enterprizing above his strength. You know he
pretends to have been very Conversant, in some of the best Authors; and his
Industry, for ought I know, might have been commendable enough; but then, as
it is probable, associating himself often with some that had little or no skill
in that way, among whom he might safely swagger with the great Names, of
Bishops, Doctors, and Fathers of the Church Ib.
Catholic, the Church Historians, Councils, and Laws Imperial etc. and they
stand all amazed, and stare upon him, and take him for nothing less than a
perfect Oracle of Antiquity: And, as most men are apt to think well of
themselves, this might increase the conceit of his own Learning, and make him
presume so far, as to Judge himselfan over-match for the Dean; and there upon
write to him with as much assurance, as if he had been dictating to his
ignorant Admirers over a Dish of Coffee. He had been so used to give Law to his
Companions, that he imagined all the World would have held their Peace, and
gaped at him, as they were Wont. But he was very much deceived, the Generality
of men had quite another sense of Things; they were something startled with the
first, but they were out of all patience at the incomparable Rudeness of this
second Attack. I am afraid I may incur his displeasure, by the freedom I have
taken to remind him of it; but I deserve his Thanks, for endeavoring to make
him sensible of those faults, for which he stands condemned by all the World.
For I am confident there is not so much as a Remnant of that little Party,
which was once carefully fomented, against the Dean and some others, about
Cosmus Blene, now remaining; it is very likely, they have all deserted: For sure
they could not be so very Weak, but that they must plainly see, that their
mighty Champion has been able to do just nothing at last, afte all his Hussing,
and Blustering for the Cause. You cannot esteem any Expression I have used too
harsh, when you reflect upon the Contempt and incivility, with which the Dean
has been treated; neither will you think any thing I have written too Light and
Ludicrous, when you consider that mere Indignation may provoke a man to Laugh.
A Person that has been most eminently seviceable to the Church, is a Public
concern; and his Reputation ought not to be blasted by every indiscreet and
passionate Writer. How Mr. Lowth will answer to his own Conscience, this bold
and repeated attempting to defame the Dean, at this time, upon false and
frivolous pretenses, I do not know. If he make an acknowledgement for the
Injury, by a Recantation as Public as the Error, Scandal, and Offense, he will
do like an Honest Man; but if he resolve to write on still, to exercise his
Style, or to discharge a little more of his Choler, he may please himself: But
unless he have something more material to say than he has yet offered, all true
Lovers of Learning, and the Church of England, will always continue upon the
Dean's side.

I am, SIR Your Humble Servant.
March the 10 th. 1686/7.
FINIS.

