A DEFENSE OF THE Catholic Faith Concerning the Satisfaction of Christ.

Written originally By the Learned HVGO GROTIVS; And now Translated by W. H.

A Work very necessary in these Times for the preventing of the Growth of
Socinianism.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and Jonathan Robinson at the
Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir CHARLES WOOSELEY Knight and Baronet.
Much Honored Sir, THE Translation of this worthy Labor of the great and
famous Grotius, may boldly Claim the Honor of being Dedicated to your
Patronage for many Causes. The Excellency of this Subject, being a Defense of
one of the most Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, requires a Patron
of Worth and Excellency; and such a one (I may speak it without flattery) is
your self, who are eminent for Learning, and exemplary for Piety. Your Works
that are published in the World, which are both greatly approved for their
Piety, and justly admired for their Profundity, are an invincible Argument, how
Greatness and Goodness are joined together in you by a a lovely Union. But
there is also a peculiar Encouragement to Dedicate this Book to you, because
you were the first that encouraged the Translation and Publication of this
Work. And verily, if the seasonableness of a thing adds to its beauty, as
Solomon has testified, this Work has found a fit time for its Impression. For
at this time, that (...), damnable Heresy, or Heresy of Destruction, as the
word in the Original signifies, that Root of Bitterness, the hellish Error of
wretched and blasphemous Socinus, who trampled under his Feet the Blood of
Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, is now beginning to spread it self in
England, and to infect whole Houses with a worse and more dangerous than any
Egyptian Plague. If the Son of Croesus, who had been dumb all his days before,
was so wonderfully affected with the danger his Father's Life was in, that the
bands of his Tongue, through the vehemence of Natural Affection, were
dissolved, so that he, that never spoke before, suddenly cried out, Kill not
my Father King Croesus; how much more zealously may I, that have been a great
while lurking in Darkness, as those that have been long dead, now appear in the
Light against those Enemies of my Redeemer, who by their horrid Blasphemies are
not ashamed to spit in the Face of my Lord Jesus with greater Impudence than
ever did the Jews at his Crucifixion. I am very glad that my blessed Redeemer
has honored me to be Instrumental for the Confutation of that filthy Error of
Socinianism, which is as ready a way to Hell, as ever the Devil of Hell found
out, since he was a Devil.

Methinks the very mention of the name of Socinus, may make the heart of a
gracious Christian to rise with holy Indignation, and his hair to stand with
amazement, that such a blasphemous Wretch could be found upon the Earth. How
did this Blasphemer strive to vilify the Blood of Christ Jesus, as if thereby
our Sins had not been expiated, as if thereby no Satisfaction had been made to
the Justice of the holy God, as if the Death and Sufferings of this Lamb of God
had not taken away the sins of the World, and had been no Propitiation for our
sins. Those wicked Blasphemies are thoroughly Confuted, both by invincible
Arguments of sound Reason, and evident Testimonies of Scripture in this Learned
Work of Grotius. God has exhorted all Christians by the holy Apostle Jude,
(...), to contend vehemently, or to contend as men that are striving for the
mastery, as the Original Word signifies, for the Faith that was once delivered
to the Saints; therefore I may justly hope that this Work will be acceptable to
all good Christians, into whose hands it shall come. And that your self, as you
were the first Encourager of its Publication, will now also willingly Patronize
its being published.

Worthy Sir, I recommend you to the Grace of the Lord Jesus, and I beg of God
that he may prolong your Life to the glory of his Name, and after you have
passed the time of your Mortality, that an Entrance may be ministered to you
abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I
am

Your much obliged Servant, W. H.

A DEFENSE OF THE Catholic Faith Concerning the Satisfaction of Christ:
AGAINST FAVSTVS SOCINVS.
Written by Hugo Grotius.
CHAP. I. The State of the Controversy is showed, and the true Opinion is
Explained in the Words of Scripture.
BEfore we come to this Dispute, we will first set down that Opinion, which
being taken out of Sacred Writings, the Church of Christ has hitherto defended
with an unwavering Faith, that afterward it may evidently appear, what is the
difference between this and the Opinion of Socinus: Therefore we shall explain
the same Opinion, bringing some Testimonies of Scripture, which because Socinus
wrested to another Sense, by the way the true Interpretation of them shall be
vindicated. Therefore the Catholic Opinion is thus: God being moved by his own
Goodness to be signally beneficial unto us, but our sins standing in the way,
which deserved Punishment, he appointed that Christ, being willing of his own
free Love toward men, should suffer punishment for our sins by enduring very
grievous Torments, and a bloody and ignomious Death, that without prejudice to
the demonstration of the Divine Righteousness we should, by Faith Interposing,
be delivered from the punishment of Eternal Death.

The first Efficient Cause of the Thing, whereof we treat, is God. God gave his
only begotten Son, that he that believes in him should not perish, John 3.16.
God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, Romans 8.32. God
laid upon Christ the sins of us all, Isai. 53.6. God made Christ sin, 2 Cor.
5.21.

The former Cause that moved God is Mercy, or (...), Love to Mankind. So God
loved the World, that he gave his Son, John 3.16. God commends his Love to us,
that when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.10.

The other Cause, which moved God, is our Sins deserving Punishment. Christ was
delivered for our sins, Romans 4.25. Where (...) is with an Accusative, which
amongst the Authors of the Greek Tongue, Sacred and Profane, is a very usual
sign of an impulsive Cause: As when it is said (...), For these things the
wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. And as often as
that Phrase, propter peccata, for Sins, is joined to Sufferings, it admits no
sense different from an impulsive Cause: I will punish you seven times for your
sins, Levit. 26.28. For those Abominations the Lord God casts them out from
your sight, Deuteronomy. 18.12. and in several other places of Scripture; neither is
it any where other ways.

And that other Phrase, pro peccatis, for sins, has the same force, as often as
it is joined with Sufferings. Hitherto belong those, Christ died (...) for our
sins, 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ suffered once (...) for sins, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ
gave himself (...) for our sins, Gal. 1.4. Christ offered a Sacrifice (...) for
sins, Hebr. 10.12. And yet in these places Socinus would have the final Cause,
and not the impulsive to be denoted. Yea, which is more, he adds, That by the
word (pro) for, and the Greek word (...) (for) there was never an impulsive
Cause declared, but always a final. Many places do evince that this latter, on
which Socinus relies, is not true: For (...) and (...) use to signify no less
the impulsive Cause, than the final Cause. The Gentiles are said to praise God
(...) for Mercy, Romans 15.9. that thanks may be given on our behalf (...), faith
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.11. (...) for you, Ephesians. 1.16. and (...) Ephesians. 5.20. We pray (...)
for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 5.21. Great is my glorying (...) on your behalf, 2.
Cor. 7.4. and 9.2. and 12.5. straits (...) for Christ, 2 Cor. 12.10. I give
thanks to God (...) for you, 1 Cor. 1.4. God will rebuke the wicked (...) for
all their ungodly Deeds, Jude 15. So also the Latins say, Pro beneficiis
gratias agere aut reddere, to give or render thanks for benefits, as Cicero
does very often. The same said, Vlcisei pro injuriis, To revenge for Injuries;
Pro magnitudine sceleris poenas persolvere, To suffer punishment for the
greatness of the Crime; Supplicia pro maleficiis metuere, To fear punishments
for evil Deeds. As Plautus, Castigare pro commerita noxia, To chastise for a
deserving Crime. And Terentius; Pro dictis and factis: ulcisci, To take
vengeance for Words and Deeds. In all these places (pro) for signifies not the
final Cause, but the impulsive. So also when Christ is said, pro peccatis
passus aut mortuus, to have suffered or died for sins; the Matter it self
suffers not the final Cause to be understood (as Socinus would have it;) for
because there is a twofold End, (...), The End to whom, and the End for whom.
As the End to whom the Medicine is made, is the diseased Man, the End for the
sake whereof is Health, and neither of them agree to sin: For whether you say
with Socinus, that it is the end of Christ's Death, that we should be drawn
back, or removed from our sins, or whether also that we may obtain the
remission of sins, (that we may omit that this End, according to his opinion)
could not be attributed unto Death, but very remotely) neither of them can be
expressed by these words, propter peccata, for sins, or, pro peccatis, for
sins: for the End to whom will be Man; but the End for what, is not for sins,
but for that which is most contrary to sins, the destruction or remission of
sins. Who ever said a Drug (or Medicine) was taken for Death, that is, to
prevent Death? But it is therefore said to be taken for the Disease, because
the Disease drives us thitherto. It follows, therefore, that the impulsive
Cause should be understood here. Wherefore when also the Particle [Min] amongst
the Hebrews denoted the Antecedent or impulsive Cause, as Psalm. 38.9. and
elsewhere often; that place of Isai. 53.5. cannot be translated better and more
agreeably to other Scriptures than, Dolor afficitur ob defectiones nostras;
atteritur ob iniquitates nostras: he is afflicted for our faults; he is bruised
for our iniquities. And that Romans 6.10. (...), died unto sin, what other
thing can it signify, but Mortuus est ob peccatum, he died for sin?

But the impulsive Cause, though it may be manifold, yet in this place it must
be taken for meritorious; for the Discourse is of Punishment, as we shall
presently show. Now sins are the cause of punishment no otherways than by way
of merit. Neither can it be showed that these words ob peccata, for sins, or
propter peccata, for sins, are any otherways taken in the holy Scriptures, than
in this signification of Merit, especially when they are joined with
Sufferings. That place does not prove the contrary 1 Kings 14.16. God will
deliver Israel for the sins of Jeroboam: for the sins of Jeroboam in that place
signify the kind it self of the sin, to wit, Idolatry, unto which Jeroboam
stirred up the People: for the following words make that evident; quibus
peccavit, and quibus peccare fecit Israelem, which he sinned, and which he made
Israel to sin. For this is the truer Interpretation, than that brought by
Socinus, Qui peccavit and qui peccare fecit Israelem, Who sinned, and who made
Israel to sin. Therefore those sins, whereof Jeroboam was the Author, and the
People the Followers, deserved that Punishment of being delivered up. Though I
may also mention, that Sacred Writings do testify, that the followers of other
men's sins are justly punished, not only for their own, but also for other men's
sins; which is so evident, that Socinus himself is compelled to confess, that a
man may be punished for other men's sins, if he is partaker of the Crime. But
that place of Psalm 39.12. which Socinus cites, makes evidently against him;
In increpationibus propter iniquitatem corripuisti aliquem, and liquefieri
fecisti ut tineam desiderium ejus; With rebukes thou have corrected man for
iniquity, and have made his beauty to consume like a Moth; that is, If thou
would punish a man as much as his sin deserves, verily that man's life would
not be worth the enjoying of it: for by this Argument he endeavors to move God
to pity. As elsewhere; If thou mark iniquities, (that is, if thou strictly
requirest punishment for them) who shall stand or endure? Psalm. 130.3.
Therefore that remains unshaken, that the Phrase ob peccata, for sins, does
denote the Impulsive Cause, and indeed the Meritorious: for that Socinus
somewhere seeks this way of escape, that he says, It is sufficient for the
truth of this Phrase, that any kind of occasion be signified. First, That is
contrary to his Position, in which he had said that the word (pro) for, was
never referred to an Impulsive Cause, but always to a Final Cause, because an
Occasion is no way a Final Cause: but if it deserves to be called a Cause, it
ought to be referred to an Impulsive, Moreover, both the Custom of Scripture
and Usual Speech, does clearly confute such an Exposition of the words, pro
peccatis, for sins, and ob peccata, for sins. Hence it may be understood how
erroneously Socinus denies, That there may be found an Antecedent Cause of the
Death of Christ, besides the Will of God and Christ. Which is manifestly
contrary to the saying of Paul, If there is righteousness by the Law, then
Christ died (...) in vain, Gal. 2.21. where the word (...), in vain, by the
acknowledgment of Socinus, signifies without Cause: but there should have been
added, without an Antecedent Cause; which is the original and most frequent
signification of this word. The original of it is from the word (...), which
signifies a Gift, that is, such a Gift as has not an Antecedent Cause of
Right: whence it began to be translated also to other things, in which the
Antecedent Cause is not found. So David, Psalm 25.19. speaking of his Enemies,
says, They hated me [hinam] in vain, that is, when I had given them no Causes
of hatred. Which Christ applying to himself, John 15.25. says, They hated me
(...) without a cause, just in the same signification. The place of Paul it
self, of which we are treating, suffers not another Cause than an Antecedent to
be understood. For the Cause which Socinus devises, to wit, That they, who
mend their lives, should be assured of the pardon of their sins, this Final
Cause appertains unto the Preaching, and the Resurrection, but not to Death:
which when Socinus saw, here he would have Christ understood by the name of
Death, and also that Preaching and the Resurrection are included; both
wrestingly and contrary to the mind of Paul: for Paul denying that Christ died
for all, signifies that there is some peculiar Cause, which should belong to
the Death of Christ; for otherways he could have preached for a certain Cause,
and for a certain Cause have received a Reward, (for according to Socinus the
Resurrection is only referred hither) and not have died. Moreover, that Paul
had a peculiar respect to the Death of Christ, that which goes before makes it
sufficiently evident, who gave himself for me; for that Giving every where in
the Scripture signifies Death. And Paul calling this same thing the Grace of
God, denies that that is despised or rejected by him, and immediately gives a
Reason; For if righteousness came by the Law, Christ then died in vain:
signifying by the contrary, that this is the peculiar Cause, why Christ gave
himself, and died, because we by the Law were not just, but guilty of
punishment; therefore our (...) iniquity is the Antecedent Cause of the Death
of Christ. The other Efficient Cause is Christ himself, and that a willing
Cause. I lay down my life, says Christ; no man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self, John 10.18. Christ gave himself for us, for the Church, Gal.
2.20. Ephesians. 5.2. and 5.25.

The Cause that moved Christ was his (...) Love to Mankind. This is, says he,
my Command, that ye love one another, as I loved you. Greater love than this
has no man, that a man should lay down his life for his Friends. Ye are my
Friends, John 15.13. In the Faith of the Son of God that loved me, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
blood, Apoc. 1.5. Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an Oblation, Ephesians.
5.2. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for her, Ephesians. 5.25.

The Matter is both the Torment going before Death, and chiefly Death it self.
Isaiah calls Torments by a pathetical name haburah, a Wound, Isai. 53.5. And
1 Pet. 2.24. calls them (...), stripes. Therefore we also see mention made of
the Cross, where this Argument is handled: He reconciled both to God by the
Cross, Ephesians. 2.16. Having made peace by the blood of the Cross, 1 Col. 12.
Neither should only those Corporal pains be understood by the name of Torments,
but chiefly those very grievous Sufferings of Mind, which the Evangelists
signify by the words (...), (...), (...), to be sorrowful, to be astonished,
to be heavy: in respect of which chiefly Christ cried out, that he was forsaken
of God.

The other part of the Matter, Death it self, is urged in many places: I lay
down my life, John 10.18. He reconciled us by Death, Coloss. 1.22. Death coming
between, for the Redemption of Transgressions, Hebr. 9.15. This Death in the
holy Scriptures is considered chiefly with two qualities, as Bloody, and as
Ignominious. That quality of bloody Death is denoted by the word Blood. This is
the Blood of the New Covenant, which is poured forth for many, for the
remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.20. God purchased the Church with his
own blood, Acts 20.28. God has appointed Christ for a Propitiation by Faith in
his Blood, Romans 3.25. Justified in his Blood, Romans 5.9. We have redemption by
his Blood, the remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Ye that sometimes were afar off,
are made near by the Blood of Christ, for he is our peace, Ephesians. 2.13. We have
redemption by his Blood, Col. 1.14. Having made peace by the Blood of the
Cross, Col. 1.14. Not by the Blood of Bulls or Goats, but by his own Blood he
entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption, Hebr. 10.12.
Without shedding of Blood there is no remission, Hebr. 10.22. Ye are come to
the Blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel, Hebr.
12.24. According to the purification of the Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2.
The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Christ washed
us from our sins in his Blood, Apocal. 1.5. But the other quality of an
Ignominious Death is signified by the very Name of the Cross: for in that very
punishment there is great ignominy: whence it is said, He suffered the Cross,
having despised the shame, Hebr. 1.2. And by the name of Contempt, which Isaiah
used, Isai. 53.3. Here by the by it may be observed, That not only in the
places now alleged, and others like them, that either only or chiefly treat of
the remission of sins, there is mention made of Death, Cross, Blood; but that
in very many places the Apostles did profess they knew nothing, they taught
nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23. and 2.2. and that therefore
the Gospel it self is by them called the Word of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.12.
Moreover, Christ appointed the Sacred Sacrament of his Supper not peculiarly
for a Commemoration of his Life or Resurrection, but of his Death and the
shedding of his Blood, 1 Cor. 11.26. Which things having been so often
repeated, do manifestly show, that some proper and peculiar Effect should be
attributed unto this Death and Blood; which Socinus cannot do: For the whole
Life of Christ gave an Example of Holiness, more than his Death it self, which
was completed in a short time. But the Confirmation of that Promise of
Celestial Life, consists properly in the Resurrection of Christ, unto which
Death is only as a way. So that the Scripture looking toward this, should have
made mention of the Resurrection, not of Death; verily not so often, and with
Marks of Emphasis adjoined. Socinus himself, lib. 1. cap. 3. endeavoring to
show that the way of Salvation was confirmed by the Effusion of Blood, when he
had taken away the true Cause, which we defend, could not substitute any other
probable Cause of that Confirmation; neither could he bring any other true
Difference, why that ought to be attributed to the Death of Christ only, and
not to the Death of other Martyrs also. Neither can Socinus ever explain how
Christ obliged God to us, (which he himself grants to be true in some sense) if
God has promised nothing for the shedding of Blood.

The Form is the suffering of Punishment for our Sins; which Socinus, lib. 3.
cap. 9. and lib. 2. cap. 4. stiffly denies. Wherefore we will briefly prove this
very thing. The Hebrews, that they may signify that which the Latins call
poenas pendere, to suffer punishment, they have no phrase more usual than this,
far peccatum, to bear sin. Like unto which is an expression of the Latins,
lucre delicta, to suffer sins, that is, the punishment of sins. If any do not
discover the Blasphemer, he feret peccatum shall bear his sin, Lev. 5.1. Qui
nuditatem Sororis sue retexit, peccatum suum ferto: He that has uncovered his
Sisters nakedness, let him bear his sin, Lev. 20.17. So Expiatory Sacrifices
are said to bear the Iniquities of them that offer them, Lev. 10.17. because
their Blood is for the soul of man, Lev. 17.11. Neither only conjunctly, but
also separately, these words are found in the same sense. So (...), to bear
Judgment, is said Gal. 5.10. Far ob peccata, to bear for sins, Ezech. 18.20.
And sin is said to overtake a man, that is, the punishment of sin. And by the
same phrase Peter said, Christ carried up our sins in his Body unto the Gross,
1 Pet. 2.24. He could have said, (...) he carried; but because he would also
signify his ascent up to the Cross, therefore he said (...), he carried up,
that is, he carried up in going, which does diminish nothing from the said
phrase, but adds something to it; therefore the Syrian translated it, portavit
and ascendere fecit, he carried and made to ascend. Socinus, that he may weaken
the strength of this place, first says (...) signifies he took away; but
contrary to the nature and use of the word: for neither does the particle (...)
suffer that interpretation, neither has any Greek Author so used that word.
Also in the New Testament it no where occurs in that signification; but it
signifies either to carry up, Luke 24.51. or to lead up, Matthew. 17. Mark 9.2.
And because the Sacrifices were carried into an upper place, that is, into an
Altar, therefore they also are said (...) to be carried up, Hebr. 2.27. James
2.21. Whence also Christ himself is said (...) to have carried up himself,
Hebr. 7.27. and we are said (...) to carry up Praises or spiritual Sacrifices,
Hebr. 13.15. And 1 Pet. 2.24. Socinus cites one place only, Hebr. 9.28. where
he would have (...) to carry up sins, to be nothing else but to take away; but
without Cause, and without Example, and the sense of the place not requiring
it: For the two Comings of Christ are opposed the one against the other; the
former, in which he did bear our sins, the other, in which he is to come (...)
without sin; that is, not loaded, not burdened with any sins, but set at
liberty, and freed from them. But these are not (...) opposite, to be (...)
without sin, and peccata auferre, to take away sins, but to be (...) without
sin, and peccatis oneratum esse, to be burdened with sins. Whence it appears,
that in that place to the Hebrews also, (...) is either to carry up, to wit,
unto the Cross, as in the place of Peter, (and that appositely, for here also
is an allusion to Sacrifices, but the Cross was as an Altar;) or simply to
suffer, as in Thucydides, (...), to suffer dangers. Therefore (...) signifies
far, to bear, not auferre, to take away: which the Text of Peter it self
proves. For the Discourse is not concerning any Benefit of Christ, but
concerning his great Patience, which is showed, not by taking away, but by
suffering. That Socinus adds, That with this sense whereby Christ is said to
bear our sins, that which follows does not rightly enough cohere, it is said
without cause; for Peter does manifestly declare, That Christ did so bear our
sins, that he might deliver us also from punishment; whence he presently adds,
By his wounds ye are made whole: But these cohere very well together: If Christ
underwent such hard things, that he might obtain the pardon of sins, verily ye
that have obtained it, ought to beware of sins in time to come. God has given
to us, that being freed from the hand of our Enemies, we should serve him in
all holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.74. Behold! thou art made whole, sin no
more, John 5.14. Ye are bought with a price, glorify therefore God in your
Body, 1 Cor. 7.20. Neither does Paul any other thing in the Seventh, and
following Chapters to the Romans, but show that we ought to be stirred up by
the great Benefits of God and Christ, to live holily; like unto that place of
Peter (yea whither Peter certainly had an eye, as it also appears by the words
following, Ye were healed by his stripes) is that of Isai. 53.11. My righteous
Servant shall justify many, and shall bear their sins: In Hebrew it is [Ve
avonotam hou jisbal.]

Now the word [avon] signifies Iniquity, and also the punishment of Iniquity,
as 2 Kings 7.9. but the word [sabal] signifies to bear or sustain; and as often
as to bear is put with the name of sin, or iniquity, that in every Tongue, and
especially in Hebraism, signifies to bear punishment: For indeed [nasha]
sometimes signifies to take away; but [sabal] signifies not so: therefore here
apparently Christ is said, that he will bear the punishment of them that are
justified. This Phrase admits of no other Interpretation: neither does it
hinder that this bearing of iniquity seems to be put by the Prophet after
death: for it is verily after death, not in time, but in order, as the Effect,
the Cause existing together with it. But Socinus says that this word [sabal]
being joined to sin, does not always include some imputation, but that it is
enough if it signify a man's being afflicted upon any occasion of another man's
deed: He proves that by no Example; neither does the Holy Scriptures speak so
at any time. Yea also Greek and Latin Authors, when they use that Phrase, do
always include imputation Socinus, for the confirming of this Exception, cites
a place of Jeremiah, which is thus: Our Fathers sinned, and are not, and we
bear their punishment: neither does he suffer here any imputation to be
understood. But by what Argument does he prove that that Phrase signifies
another thing here, than in all other places where it is put? Socinus himself
is compelled to confess, that as often as the Sons follow their Fathers
footsteps, not only their own, but their Fathers sins are imputed unto them:
for the Word of God is evident, Exodus 20.5. But that those, concerning whom
Jeremiah speaks, were like their Fathers, that makes it evident, which follows
in the Prophet, Woe to us that we have sinned, verse 16. Neither is this
different from the intent of Jeremiah: for, that he may aggravate the Misery of
those that then lived, he says, That the punishment both of their own, and
their Ancestors sins, redounds upon them: and that therefore the lot of their
Fathers was much better than their lot, who being alike guilty, were yet taken
out of life, before that those very bitter punishments heaped up, as if it were
in the Treasure of Divine Wrath, were at length poured forth together. But
though the signification of these words, far peccata, to bear sins, were
ambiguous in Sacred Writings, yet both in this place of Isaiah, and in that of
Peter, the joint mention of the Sufferings of Christ, and our Deliverance,
would make the Interpretation certain. For to bear sins by suffering, and so,
that others may be delivered from them, cannot signify another thing, but the
undertaking of another punishment. And in the same Isaiah, verse. 6. and 7. it
is; God cast, or laid on him the punishment of us all: he is punished, and he
is afflicted. Here Socinus moves every stone that he may wrest the genuine
sense from the words; and devises a new Interpretation: God did by him, or
with him, go against the iniquity of us all. But the Hebrew word does
manifestly contradict. [Hiphgiah] being of that Conjunction which signifies not
a single, but twofold Action: wherefore seeing [Phaga] properly signifies to go
against it follows that [Hiphgiah] signifies he made to go against, and by
Metaphor he deprecated, because a person that deprecates, does as it were
interpose his Prayers. To deprecate here has not place: for then God should be
said to have deprecated for Christ; for that is the signification of this word,
the Particle (Beth) following, Jer. 15.11. Neither does fecit deprecari, he
made to deprecate, agree here, both because [bo] on him, follows, when
otherways it ought to have been said, He made him deprecate: and also because
all things that next go before, and follow, pertain to Affliction, not to
Deprecation. Therefore these words do not bear another sense but this; God did
make the sins of us all occurrere illi, to go against him; that is, impegit,
incussit, he inflicted, or he did cast upon him: Sin is required, exigitur
peccatum, (that is, according to Scripture phrase) the punishment of sin. Et
ipse affligitur, and he is afflicted.

Here Socinus objects unto us that place of Lev. 16.21, and 22. where sins are
said to be put upon the Goat of Atonement, and the Goat himself is said to
carry the sins of the people into a waste Wilderness. For he thought that
nothing is more manifest, than that it could in no ways be said that this Goat
suffered punishment for the sins of the People: which, by what right he takes
upon him, I see not. For verily Punishment taken in the general, befalls Beasts
also. The blood of all your Souls will I require: Of every Beast will I require
it, Genesis 9.5. When an Ox shall push a Man or a Woman that he die, let that Ox
be stoned, Exodus 21.28. If any man lie with a Beast, let him be put to death,
also slay the Beast it self, Lev. 20.15. The Earth was cursed with a Deluge for
man's sake, Genesis 8.21. The Creature was subject to vanity, Romans 8.20. Neither
is there Cause, why Socinus should object that this (...) Scapegoat did not
use to be killed; but that the shedding of blood, or death, was required for
the remission of sins: For though the Scripture does not expressly, declare,
that that very Goat was thrown headlong from a high place in the Wilderness,
and so slain, the Hebrew Interpreters agree about it; which though it were not
so, yet what other thing did that driving into a waste Wilderness threaten, but
a death, not at all natural, either of hunger, or the tearings of wild Beasts?
Also the word [Nagash] is to be marked in Isaiah; for it is very certain that
[Nagash] Schin having a point in the left-horn, does properly signify exigere,
to require, as appears 2 Kings 23.35. Zach. 9.8. but metaphorically is taken
for opprimere, to oppress, therefore the Passive [Nagash] is either opprimitur,
he is oppressed, or exigitur, he is required. Opprimitur, he is oppressed, has
no place here, because it follows in the same [vehou] Sentence, and ipse
affligitur, and he is afflicted: whence it appears that this Verb is referred
to another Noun, than that unto which the word affligitur, he is afflicted, is
applied. Therefore it remains that that word should be taken properly, that
it may signify exigitur, is required, and may be referred to the Noun
immediately going before. Now to require sin, is, or can be nothing else but to
require the punishment of sin; therefore the requiring of Punishment, and
Christ's Affliction, are joined together.

There went before in the same Prophet, these words; The Chastisement of our
peace was laid upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. In the Hebrew
Chastisement is called [Musar] which word signifies not every Affliction, but
that which has a relation to Punishment, whether it is (...), exemplary, or
(...), admonitory only; by which words of old Taurus the Philosopher did aptly
distinguish the kinds of Punishment. And thence it came to pass, that any (...)
admonition, per (...), by the figure Catachresis, was signified by the word
[Musar.] But because the signification of (...), rebuke, has no place in
Christ, especially seeing the discourse is concerning Afflictions, including
Death, it remains that we should understand Affliction, that has joined
together with it (...), exemplary punishment; for the use of that Hebrew word,
is not found separated from all respect unto a fault. But here, if by the
subject matter we understand the good of Impunity, it will appear that Christ's
Punishment, and our Impunity, are very well opposed the one against the other:
Though nothing hinders Reconciliation to be understood by the name of Peace,
though there was no mention made of Enmity, which the matter it self, and the
following words of the Prophet do abundantly declare to have went before. For
neither did the Angels make mention of Enmity, when they proclaimed, that Peace
was to come upon the Earth Luke 2.14. nor the Apostle, when he said, We have
peace with God, Romans 5.1. And as the Hebrews put Sin for Punishment, as it
appears, besides other places now alleged, Zachar. 14.19. and Genesis 4.13. so
also the same call him sin, who suffers the punishment; as also the Latins
take piaculum both for the Crime, and also for him that suffers the punishment
of the Crime. Whence it is, that instead of peccatum, sin, the Scripture calls
the Piacular Host, or Propitiatory Sacrifice, Sin, Lev. 4.29. and 5.6.
Therefore Isaiah following this form of Speech, said concerning Christ, [Tashim
asham naphsho] he made his Soul sin; that is, he made his Soul obnoxious to the
punishment of sin. Neither did Paul speak otherways, For God made him, that
knew no sin, to become sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5.2. It appears in the words of Paul, that in both Members the Adjunct is
taken for the Subject. Socinus, that he may invalidate the authority of that
place of Paul, by the word sin, would have to be understood, a man supposed by
men to be a sinner: First without Example; for no where is the Hebrew or Greek
word so taken. Moreover, Paul attributes this Action to God, that he made
Christ sin: But yet that the Jews and others did judge of Christ, as if he had
been a wicked and flagitious man, God is in no ways the Author of that thing:
yea, on the contrary, by a Voice from Heaven, and by working Miracles, he did
that which made the Innocence of Christ manifest unto all men. Moreover, that
new Interpretation of Socinus, can in no ways agree to the words of Isaiah;
which contain the like Phrase; for that which Paul said God did, Isaiah
attributes the same to Christ, to wit, that he made his soul sin, or, that he
made himself sin. Moreover, Paul opposes sin and righteousness We are made the
righteousness of God; that is, we are justified, or delivered from Divine
punishment: but Christ, that that might come to pass, was made sin; that is, he
suffered Divine punishment. There is also another Antithesis to be observed in
these same words of Paul: for God made him that knew no sin, that is, who
deserved no punishment, to become sin; that is, he would have him suffer
punishment: Christ was innocent, not only toward the Humane, but also the
Divine Law. Therefore the force of the opposition requires that he should also
have suffered the punishment of the Divine Law. Moreover, it is a thing that
daily comes to pass, that the Innocent are evil entreated by the Wicked: but
here the Apostle observes some excellent thing. And what other thing can this
be, but that God laid punishment on him that deserved it not. Not unlike those
former places is that of Paul to the Galatians 3.13. Christ redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is
he that hangs on a Tree; that the Blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus might
come unto the Gentiles. Here we have the less difficulty in understanding the
sense of Paul's words, when he says, Christ was made (...), that is, a Curse,
or Execration, because he himself interprets himself, and alleges Moses the
Author of his saying, he shows that by (...), a Curse, he understands (...),
Accursed. And (...), Paul himself being Interpreter, is, he that is (...),
under the Curse. Execration, says Socinus, in this place is the very
punishment of Execration: which is true. For (...), a Curse, in many places
signifies the punishment proceeding from the sanction of the Law, 2 Pet. 2.14.
Matthew. 25.41. And here the mention of the Law being added, forbids the Curse to
be otherways taken. And the same Socinus confesses, That this (...), Curse,
was in Christ the Cross it self. Therefore the Cross of Christ signifies
punishment, and that is it, which we say. Perhaps Socinus will grant, that the
Cross was a punishment, because it was laid upon Christ by Pilate the Judge in
way of a punishment: But this does not contain all that Paul said. For, that he
may prove, that Christ was made liable to punishment, he cites Moses openly,
saying, That those who are hanged (to wit, according to the Law of God) are
(...), Accursed of God. Wherefore the same word also is to be supplied in Paul,
citing Moses, and referring these words to Christ: as if he had said, That
Christ was made (...), Accursed of God: that is, liable to the punishment
inflicted by God, and that very ignominious. For the Apostles, when they refer
the Passion of Christ to our uses, they do not therein look at the deeds of
men, but at the fact of God himself; as is manifest by many places before
mentioned.

To all these things this also may be added, That Death it self, that is the
destruction of that person, which is made up of a Body and Soul, inasmuch as it
is inflicted by God, has always some signification of punishment: Not that God
has no power otherways to inflict it upon man, (for he is Lord of the
Creature) but because it seemed good otherways to his Goodness.

That the state of this peculiar Controversy may be rightly understood; we deny
not, that Man, when he was created, was (...), earthly, who had a certain vital
strength, but not a life-giving strength, as Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 15.45,46.
and therefore that was the Condition of the Body, that it would have perished,
unless God sustained it; yet we contend, that by the decree of God, he was not
to die, if he had continued in Innocence. The nobleness and eminency of that
Creature proves this, as being the only Creature that is said to be made after
the Image of God, that is, endued with a Mind and Freewill, which is the
Foundation of his Dominion over other Creatures; for he cannot be Lord of other
things, who is not Lord of his own Actions. Therefore this Excellency above
other Creatures, is an Argument, that something more than a Temporal use was
regarded in the Creation of Man. And now what is more clear than that Divine
Word? If thou eatest, thou shall die. Here the Discourse is concerning the Act
of Death, whether it was to be violent, or without violence. Therefore Death it
self would not have happened unto Man, unless the Condition of Sin had been. No
less clear and general is that of Paul, The wages, that is, the punishment of
sin, is death, Romans 6.23. Before, he had said, By sin came death, and so death
passed upon all men. All men, says he, therefore he treats of the common event
of all Mankind. Therefore by man, that is, by human fact, came death; and by
man came the resurrection of the dead. As in Adam all die, (as many as die) so
in Christ all shall be made alive, (as many as shall be made alive) 1 Cor.
15.21,22. Who reading these very words, sees not that this saying to the
Corinthians is exactly answerable to that to the Romans? Therefore the
Discourse is concerning Death, that is common to the Posterity of Adam, and
from which they do rise again, which rise again. Wherefore also this place
being compared with that to the Romans, we say the Discourse is here concerning
Adam a sinner: for what he said here by man, there he said by sin. The Animal
Condition of Adam is discoursed upon in Twenty Verses, and more, by the
Apostle, on a very different occasion: for here Death is opposed to the
Resurrection; but there the Qualities of the Body, at the first created, and
afterward raised again, are compared with one another: of which, that had
joined with a natural possibility of dying, by the bounty of God, a possibility
also of living: but this shall so have life in it self, that it shall be
without any natural possibility of dying.

Here I cannot omit the adding of an excellent place of the very excellent
Writer of the Book of Wisdom, which though it is not in the Hebrew Canon, yet
it has a venerable Antiquity, and was always had in estimation among
Christians. So then says he, (...) 1.13. And next; (...), 2.23. God made not
Death, neither does he delight in the destruction of living Creatures: for he
created all things to have Existence, and their Generations are healthful, and
the Poison of destruction is not in them, neither is the dominion of Hell upon
Earth: But Righteousness is immortal. But the ungodly with their hands and
words, called it to them, and thinking it to be their Friend, were consumed,
and made a Covenant with it, because they are worthy to have a portion with it.
God created Man for uncorruption, and made him the Image of his own Deity; but
by the Envy of the Devil, Death came into the World, and they have Experience
of it that are on its side. Here he shows, that any kind of Death is
understood, which Death God is said not to have created, nor to desire, to wit,
with a will going before sin, in opposition to uncorruption, for the hope
whereof Man is said to be created, and that hope is not obscurely declared to
have been a part of the Divine Image, or at least a Consequent thereof. But
Uncorruption excludes all Death, whether it is violent, or not violent. And
what the Apostle said, That by Man and by Sin Death entered; this Author said no
less truly, That Death entered by the Envy of the Devil. For all these
Expressions signify the same Fact, to wit, That the first Sin of Man was
committed by the Suggestion of the Devil. Neither does it hinder, that this
Author observes a certain special Effect of Death upon the Wicked; for Death
having entered by the first sin, and gained power over all Men, gets a certain
peculiar strength by the great and continual sins of every Man; in which sense
sin is called the sting of death, 1 Cor. 15.56. Therefore those, from whom,
after their death, all passage to life is shut up, are deservedly called the
Confederates of Death, or its Bondslaves, and peculiar Possession. It might
very easily be demonstrated, if this were the thing that is treated upon, that
this was the constant Opinion, both of Jews and Christians, that any kind of
death of a Man is a punishment of sin: so that the Christian Emperors, not
without cause, disallowed that Opinion, besides others, in Pelagius and
Celestius, that they said, That Death did not flow from the snare of sin, but
that the Law of an unchangeable Appointment required it.

But that we may gather the things that hitherto have been said, into one,
because the Scripture says, That Christ was chastised by God, that is, was
punished; That Christ did bear our sins, (that is, the punishment of our sins;)
That he was made sin, that is, subjected to the punishment of sin; That he was
made a Curse unto God, or liable to the Curse, that is, the punishment of the
Law: But the Passion of Christ it self, having been full of Torments, bloody
and ignominious, is a very fit matter of punishment. Moreover, because the
Scripture says, That these things were inflicted on him by God for our sins,
(that is, our sins so deserving) because Death it self is called the wages,
that is, the punishment of sin; verily it cannot be justly doubted, that in
respect of God, the Passion and Death of Christ was a punishment.

Neither are the Interpretations of Socinus worthy to be regarded, which
deviates from the constant use of words without Example, especially because no
just reason hinders to retain the signification of the words, which shall
appear more evident afterward. Therefore in God the punishment is actively, in
Christ passively: yet to whose Passion a certain voluntary Action is joined, to
wit, the undertaking of the Penal Passion.

The end of the thing that is discoursed upon, according to the Intention of
God and Christ, which being placed in act, may also be called an Effect, is
twofold; to wit, a Demonstration of the Divine Righteousness, and the Remission
of Sins, in respect of us, that is, our Impunity. For if you take the exacting
of punishment impersonally, it is end is the Demonstration of Divine
Righteousness; but if you take it personally, that is, wherefore Christ was
punished, the end is, that we might obtain freedom from punishment. The former
end is expressed by Paul, when he says concerning Christ, Whom God has
appointed for a Propitiation in his Blood, for the demonstration of his
Righteousness, for the pardoning the foregoing sins in the forbearance of God.
Afterward he adds, repeating almost the same words; To declare his
Righteousness at this time, that he may be the justifier of him that is of the
Faith of Jesus, Romans 3.25,26. Here, next unto his Blood, that is, his bloody
Death, is joined the end, (...), to declare his Righteousness. By this Name of
the Righteousness of God, that Righteousness should not be understood, that God
works in us, or which he imputes unto us; but that which is in God: for it
follows, That he may be just; that is, that he may appear to be just. This
Justice of God, that is, Righteousness, according to its diverse Objects, has
diverse Effects. About the good or evil Deeds of a Creature, the Effect thereof,
amongst others, is (...) reward, unto which Paul having respect, said, (...),
that is, it is just with God, to reward Affliction to them that afflict you.
And elsewhere, Every Transgression and Disobedience received (...), a just
Recompense of Reward. And that (...), Romans 3.8. the Syrian translated it, Whose
Condemnation is reserved for Justice. Therefore (...) and (...), the Day of
Wrath, and the Day of just Judgment is the same, Romans 2.5. And it is said, That
the last Judgment will be (...), in Righousness, Acts 17.3. And elsewhere,
(...), to judge in Righteousness, is severely to punish; which is showed by
adding the word pugnare, to fight, and much more those things that follow a
little after: Out of his Mouth shall proceed a sharp Sword, that he may smite
the Nations; for he shall rule them with an Iron Rod; and he it is, who shall
tread the Lake of the Wine of the Indignation and Wrath of Almighty God. Apoc.
19.11. and 15. So God is called just, and his Judgments just, because he
severely punished sin, Apoc. 16.5,7. when also (...), Righteousness is called
both that very punishing Justice of God, Acts 28.4. and also the Punishment
brought in by it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Jude 7. And (...), the Righteousness of God is
declared by Paul to be this, That those which do, or approve Evil, are worthy
of Death, Romans 1.31. his paronyma are (...), punitor, a just Punisher, Romans
13.14. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. and (...), the requiring of punishment, Luke 21.22. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. 1 Pet. 2.14. the signification whereof is declared by the word
(...), to reward, Romans 12.19. Hebr. 10.30. We know that by the Name of Justice,
often Veracity, and often also Moderation is understood. But because by that
word, as has been already showed by many Testimonies, also that property of
God is expressed, which moves God to punish sin, and which is demonstrated in
the very punishment of sin; we say that this signification is proper to this
matter; for diverse times are opposed, before Christ, and Christ's time: To the
former time is attributed (...), peccatorum, the passing by of sins, which is
also expressed by the word (...). (...) signifies not remission, but
transmission, to which is rightly added (...), forbearance, by which word also
the Greeks call truce, because thereby, for a time, War is forborne. To this
Transmission and Inhibition is opposed the Demonstration of such Justice,
whereby God is just, that is, appears to be just. Of old, when God passed by
most sins unpunished, his (...), rewarding Justice, did not enough appear. At
length he showed what a just (...) rewarder he was, when it pleased him that
his own Son should die for this cause, That he might be a Propitiation for
Mankind, and might Redeem all those that ever had believed, or that should
afterward believe in God. So the Apostle joined together the manifest
declaration of the Grace, that is, the Goodness of God, which is conveyed unto
Creatures, and of his Justice, which is the keeper of right order, and also of
(...) recompense: Verily, the very name of Blood, the name of Propitiation, and
also of Redemption, do show that the Discourse here is not of the testifying of
Goodness only: he joined also Obtaining with Application: Obtaining is by
Blood, Application is by Faith. And that very Justice of God, of which we
treat, is said to be made manifest by Faith, to wit, that Justice, by which the
Blood of Christ is believed to have been shed for the appeasing of the Wrath of
God. Which Faith does wholly exclude all glorying of Works, and all confidence
in the Law. This end, to wit, the demonstration of Divine Righteousness is also
rightly gathered from the form of the thing concerning which we treat. For the
end of punishment is the demonstration of justicia, (...), rewarding Justice
about sins: also from the Antecedent Cause, which we showed above to be
meritorious. But the moving Cause of any Action, cannot be meritorious, unless
the End also be (...), to reward.

The other end, as we said, is our Freedom from Punishment. This Paul said
significantly; (...), Being justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from
Wrath, Romans 5.10. for (...), the Anger of God, as also Socinus acknowledged,
signifies the desire (if it is allowable so to speak) of punishing, John 3.36.
Romans 1.18. and often the punishment it self, Mich. 7.9. whence it is expressed
by the word (...), destruction, Romans 9.22. Hence the Law is said to work (...)
wrath, that is, to bring forth punishment, Romans 3.5. And the Magistrate is said
to be appointed for a taker of vengeance on evil doers, (...), for wrath, that
is, for the inflicting of punishment, Romans 13.4. and that he should be obeyed,
not only (...), that is, for fear of punishment, but also for conscience: But
freedom from Punishment is opposed to Punishment. Punishment is Eternal Death,
or a detention under Death, whose Sergeant is the Devil: who therefore having
the power of Death, is said to be destroyed by the Death of Christ, Hebr. 2.14.
for the mention of deliverance from the fear of Death, which follows, shows
that the Discourse is here rather of the Impetration of Pardon, than of the
Mortification of Sin. And Christ is called, (...), he that delivers us from
the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians 1.10. This same freedom from Punishment, by a very
usual Phrase of holy Scripture, is called Remission of sins, which properly
follows the Death of Christ, as many places show: Such as these are; This is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins,
Matthew. 26.28. We have in him redemption by his Blood, the remission of sins,
Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.9. Without shedding of Blood there is no remission, Hebr.
9.22. Which places do interpret that place of Paul above mentioned; Being
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption, which is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth, for a propitiation through Faith in his Blood,
for a declaration of his Justice for the pardoning of the sins bypast, through
the forbearance of God; for a declaration of his Righteousness, that he might
be just, and the justifier of him that is of the Faith of Jesus: where he
expressed the same things in many words signifying the same thing, Romans
23,24,25,26. For as he expressed the demonstration of his Justice twice, and
thirdly added, that God might be just, (that is, that he may appear just) which
appertain to the former End: so he expressed the other End also, both by
repeating the word Justification, and the word Redemption. Justification, as is
known, in many places of holy Writings, but chiefly in the Epistles of Paul,
signifies Absolution, which, sin being presupposed, consists in the remission
of sins. Paul himself clearly explaining himself, chiefly Romans 4.2. and 6.
wherefore unto these places, which ascribe the remission of sins to the Blood
of Christ, that place should be joined, which we just now cited, Being
justified in his Blood, Romans 5.9. Also those that attribute the washing away of
sins to Blood or Death. Te Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John
1.7. For the purging of the Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. Christ washed us
from our sins in his Blood, Apoc. 1.5. For though to wash away, to cleanse, and
the like words, may signify either to cause that sins may not be committed in
time to come, or that being committed, they may not appear, yet the other
Interpretation is more agreeable to the Phrase of Scripture. So to abolish
sins, is expounded, not to remember sins, Isaiah 43.24. and to cleanse from
Iniquity, is showed to be the same thing with forgiveing, Jer. 33.8. and (...)
that sins may be blotted out, has evidently the same sense, Acts 3.19. And
these are taken wholly for the same thing, (...), to forgive sins; and (...),
to cleanse from all inquity, 1 John 1.9. and elsewhere these are put as (...),
synonimous, (...), that is, to be cleansed, and (...), that pardon may be,
Hebr. 9.22. Wherefore also Socinus is forced to confess, that, in John's Apocal.
cap. 1. verse. 5. where (...), to cleanse, is attributed to Blood, deliverance
from punishment is more rightly understood, than the cleansing of the Soul. To
these may be joined that of Isaiah, just now cited: The chastisement of our
peace was upon him; that is, his punishment procures us peace with God;
concerning which peace the Angels speak, Luke 2.14. And that of the same
Isaiah, By his stripes we are cured; that is, by his punishment we have freedom
from punishment.

By these Testimonies therefore it is manifest, that the impunity of our sins
is the End of the Death of Christ, and also an Effect of the same Death.
Socinus, who is not willing to acknowledge this Connection of Death with the
Remission of sins, performed unto us, brings others wonderfully different from
the words and scope of the Scripture. But all these, that he has here and
there scattered in his Book, seem to be reducible to these four Heads.

The first is, That Christ, when he preached that the remission of sins lies
open to the Penitent, did not refuse Death, to give testimony to that
Preaching. But this sense makes the Death of Christ an Effect of remission,
more than remission of Death: For the Existence of a thing, is the cause of a
Testimony, not contrariways. But the Scrripture says, that we obtain remission
by Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Coloss. 1.14. And that Blood blots out our sins, 1 John
1.7. Also that the shedding of Blood is a thing Antecedent, without which there
is no Remission, Hebr. 9.22. Moreover, if this Interpretation were true, the
Martyrs also might be said to have shed their Blood for the remission of sins,
and that we obtain remission by that Blood, when yet the Scripture gives this
privilege to Christ only. Moreover, the Cause of the Killing of Christ, in
respect of men, was not properly the preaching of Repentance and Remission of
Sins, but that he called God his Father, making himself equal to God. John
5.18. and consequently that he did profess himself to be God. For which cause
his Death gave properly a Testimony to this Profession, not to the preaching of
Pardon. And also a Testimony concerning the Doctrine was given no less, but
more by the Miracles, than by the Death of Christ. But no where is this Effect
attributed unto Miracles, that by them we obtain Remission of sins.

The second thing that Socinus brings, is, That Christ by his Death obtained
the power of giving Remission. But Socinus himself overturns this Position, who
shows that Christ, living on Earth, had, and exercised this Power. But that
which is, cannot be any more made mine. And lest any man should so mistake
(which Socinus does more hint at, than affirm) as if this Power of Christ had
only respect to Punishments Temporal, and of this Life, it must be observed,
That when Christ is said to have had power upon earth to forgive sins, the
Effect is not restrained by that Addition on Earth, but the place of the Action
is (...) emphatically expressed. For it is also said to the Apostles,
Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, where though to loose is to declare to be
loosed, yet that Expression, on the Earth, signifies only the place of the
Action: for it follows, they shall be loosed in Heaven. For that is it, which
Christ signified; that that Power, though so eminent, and Celestial, belonged
to him, living on the Earth: Neither do the People wonder at any other thing,
but that so great power was given to men, (that is, (...), by enallagy to one
of the number of men) Christ himself also first forgives the sins of the man,
that had the Palsy, before he takes away the Palsy, which was a Temporal
Punishment; and manifestly distinguishing both Powers, he proves the one by the
other, to wit, the invisible by the visible. Then Christ did not at length
obtain the power to forgive sins by his Death; and consequently those sayings,
which ascribe the Effect of the remission of sins to his Death, cannot be drawn
to this sense. Moreover, the Scripture explains the way of the Connection
between Death and Remission, by the word Propitiation, and other such like
words, which cannot be applied to the power of giving Pardon.

The third thing is, That in the Death of Christ an Example of Patience and
Obedience is proposed to us. But this Example, in some respect, pertains to
Sanctification, and, that which follows it, Eternal Glory; but not any ways to
the remission of sins: for Christ by his Patience and Obedience obtained no
pardon to himself, as having no sin. Wherefore, when Christ is proposed for
Imitation, that we keeping that way, which he went, may come to the same Mark,
nothing would be more unseasonable, than to make any mention of remission of
sins. And the Phrases of Scripture, Blood cleanses us, By his Blood we have
Remission, do utterly reject this sense.

The fourth thing remains, which most pleased Socinus. So that in very many
places he inculcates this, as the support of his Cause: and it is this, That
the Death of Christ persuades us to that very thing, that is required for the
obtaining remission of sins, to wit, Faith, or, as Socinus explains himself,
the hope of obtaining Eternal Life. But verily, what is more disagreeable unto
truth, than that so bloody a death of a most innocent man, does of it self
conduce unto this, that it may persuade us, that great Joys are prepared by God
for us living holily. Wherefore Socinus seeing the absurdity of this Invention,
says, That the Death of Christ does not this, but his Resurrection, and those
things that followed his Resurrection: But, that it was requisite Death should
go before. But if the Scripture had signified so, it would have mentioned
perpetually the Resurrection, or rather the Exaltation unto Heaven, and sitting
at the right hand of God, where forgiveness of sins is discoursed of, not Death
and Blood, at least not so often, and in words so significant: For that so
frequent and usual joining of Blood with Remission, signifies some Effect not
common, but proper, not far remote, but near hand. For what By-ways are these?
The Remission of sins is granted unto none, but them that live holily; (for so
speaks Socinus:) Faith, and a certain hope of reward, makes for holiness of
Life: This Faith is begotten by the Example of Christ, raised from the Dead,
and glorified for holiness of Life, (as Socinus would have it) Death went
before that raising up: therefore rightly and fitly is Remission said to be
obtained by the Death of Christ. Is not this it really, which he finds fault
with in others; Alas! That the Pine Tree was cut in the Pelian Wood! for that
is brought for a cause, which is not some near thing, or at least not far
distant; but that which is most remote from the Effect. What if this had been
in one place of Scripture, it would perhaps have been less wonderful? But what
man, that is in his right wits, can believe that the Scripture speaks so often
so obscurely and so coldly? That Saying of Paul is very unlike, Christ was
raised from the dead for our justification, Romans 4.25. Which, that it may be
explained, there is no need to fetch so long a compass of Socinus. For the
Resurrection of Christ begets in us Faith and Reliance on God and Christ: to
which Faith is promised Remission of sins. And this Series is manifestly showed
Acts 13.33,38. Romans 1.4. and 10.9. for Death is so far from being fit to beget
Faith, that on the contrary, it most affrighteth men from that Faith. And
therefore in preaching the Gospel the Apostles do always oppose the
Resurrection to the Ignominy of the Cross, and the Misery of Death. But that by
Death, and the shedding of Blood, which the Scripture frequently expresses in
this Argument, which is not properly a Cause of the Resurrection, but only an
Antecedent, he would have the Resurrection it self to be expressed; What is it
else but to name Night, that thereby Day may be understood? Moreover, if Death
did not belong to the Remission of sins, except because of the Resurrection
that followed, how could it have happened, that Remission of sins was very
seldom referred to the Resurrection, but to Death in innumerable places? Now
add this also, that Paul does attribute to Death it self apart, that is, as it
is abstracted from the Resurrection and Glory of Christ, the Effect of
Redemption purchased. For he says, If, when we were Enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the Death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by
his Life, Romans 5.10. Death is opposed unto a glorious Life, and as
Reconciliation is ascribed distinctly unto that, so is Preservation unto this.
Reconciliation is obtained for Enemies by Death, as a Sacerdotal Act: being
reconciled, they are kept by his Kingly Power, unto which Resurrection made
access. So also elsewhere the same Apostle puts Reconciliation before
Preaching, which begets Faith. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their sins unto them; and did put in us the Word of
Reconciliation: therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, and, as if God were
requesting by us, we beseech you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God,
2 Cor. 5.19,20. Here a twofold Reconciliation is put; the former, which is
declared by the Word: the other, that is made by the Word: that is the
Reconciliation of Impetration, this of Application: that is before the Word,
this is after the Word. We treat of that former, and do justly deny that it can
be referred to the Ingeneration of Faith which comes by the Word. That also may
be added John 3.16. where Christ is said to be given (to wit, unto death) that
they who believe, may not perish. Therefore it is profitable for another thing
than that they may believe. And verily if you please to attend, the same thing
is not obscurely showed in that very place of Paul, which is by Socinus cited
for to confirm his own Opinions, to wit, that, of which we discoursed: who was
delivered (to wit, unto death) for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. Because Sins are an evil thing, and Justification a good thing,
it appears that the word propter, for, is not taken alike in both Members: and
it is convenient that the final Cause should be expressed in the latter Member;
if I am not mistaken, we sufficiently showed above, that in the former the
Impulsive Cause is signified. Just as if I say, that a Medicine is taken for a
Disease and for Health: Therefore Justification is the end proposed unto the
Resurrection, to wit, by the Ingeneration of Faith, by the Confession of
Socinus. Though verily I know not whether the Resurrection in this place is
looked upon as an Argument to persuade Faith, or whether it rather signifies
the whole glorious state of Christ, who has this end proposed to himself
amongst others, that the Preachers of the Gospel may be sent, and that their
Endeavor may be promoted with a very plentiful Influence of the Spirit, and
Faith being made after that manner, men may obtain the Remission of sins: for
so said Christ himself; All Power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth:
Therefore go ye and teach all Nations. Behold, I am with you always to the end
of the World, Matthew. 28.18,19,20. Before, as John says, the Spirit was not (to
wit) poured forth with that efficacy and abundance; the cause is added, because
Jesus was not yet exalted to Glory, John 7.39. Paul also said of Christ, When
he had ascended on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts to men: He
gave some Apostles, others Prophets, and others Evangelists, and others Pastors
and Teachers to the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.8,12. But whether of
these two ways you take it, it appears that some peculiar and is ascribed to
the Resurrection, inasmuch as it is distinguished from Death. On the other
side, it is ascribed unto Death apart, or deliverance unto Death, that it
happened for sins: but that very thing is no where ascribed unto the
Resurrection, and in this place it is not obscurely taken from the same. But
the Death of Christ in this Affair is both to be separated from the
Resurrection and from the Ingeneration of Faith; and in these places, which
deduce the Remission of sins from the Resurrection of Christ, a certain
distinct Effect is to be understood, which the very simplicity of the Words
import, agreeing with other words of Scripture, which say, That Christ for our
sins died a bloody death, and that the punishment of our sins was exacted of
him; concerning which things we have already treated: and with those words of
Scripture which testify not obscurely, That God was appeased and reconciled to
us by the Blood of Christ; That his Blood was a price given for us; That Christ
died in our stead and was our Propitiation; of which there will be occasion to
speak afterward.

CHAP. II. How God should be considered in this Affair: and it is showed that
he should be considered as a Governor.
THe State of the Controversy being understood, and that Opinion being
confirmed by Scriptures, on which the Faith of the Church is supported, that
the Objections, which the Reason of Socinus, or rather the abuse of his Reason,
furnish-him with, may be routed, it is requisite, that it should be understood,
What is God's part or office in this matter to be discoursed of. Socinus
confesses, That the Discourse is concerning Deliverance from Punishment. We
add, That the Inflicting of Punishment is also treated of. Whence it follows,
That God must needs be here considered as a Governor. For to inflict
Punishment, or to Deliver a man from Punishment, whom thou may punish, which
the Scripture calls to justify, is only the part of a Governor, as such,
firstly and of it self: As for Example, Of a Father in a Family; Of a King in a
Commonwealth; Of God in the Universe. Though this is manifest unto all, yet it
may be easily proved, because Punishment is the last thing in Compulsion: but
Compulsion belongs only to a Superior, (...), to the higher Power; whence
Seneca called Clemency the meekness of a Superior toward an Inferior in
appointing Punishment. Neither does it hinder that Revenge seems sometimes to
be attributed to men private, and furnished with no superior Power. For that
Revenge is either of fact, not of right, which is contrary to natural Justice
it self; or it signifies a certain right belonging to some man not first and of
it self, but by the concession of another; whence the Father of the ravished
Maid kills the Ravisher, and any man kills the banished man; or it signifies
not the Act of Punishment it self, but the requiring of the Punishment to be
inflicted, either by God himself, or by another Governor. Unto which ways of
revenging, so many ways of remission of sins or pardon are answerable, which
both Scripture and common Speech attributes to private men.

But this Assertion needs so much the less proof, because Socinus himself
somewhere confesses, That God should be looked upon as a Prince in punishing
and absolving men; then which nothing more true can be said. Neither did James
signify any other thing, when he said there is one Lawgiver, who can save and
destroy, James 4.12. Therefore in this matter we have a new (...), habitude of
God, which being found, it is easy to remove all others.

First then, We grant this to Socinus requiring it, That here God should not be
looked upon as a Judge appointed under a Law; for he that is such a Judge could
not free the Offender from punishment, by translating the punishment upon
another. Not because that of it self it is unjust, but because it agrees not
with the Law, whereof he is chosen a Minister. Which Lactantius expressed in
these words, concerning the Anger of God, Chap. 19. A Judge cannot give pardon
to Offenses, because he is subject to the Will of another: But God can, because
he himself is the Decider of his own Law, which when he appointed, verily he
took not away all power from himself, but has liberty to forgive. Seneca says,
well; Clemency has a Free Will, not under a Condition, but judges according
to justice and Goodness; for Equity belongs to a Judge tied to a Form of Law:
but Clemency properly so called, belongs only to the highest Governor in every
Community. The same Seneca bids a Prince think on this: Any man may kill
against the Law, bur none can save against the Law but my self. Augustinus took
notice of this distinction; It is appointed by the Judges, that it should not
be lawful to repeal a Sentence given against a guilty person. Will the Emperor
also be under this Law? For it is lawful to him only to repeal a Sentence, and
absolve a person guilty of Death, and to pardon him. And Symmachus: For there
is one condition of Magistrates, whose Sentences seem to be corrupted, if they
are milder than the Laws; and there is another power of Sacred Princes, whom it
becomes to mitigate the sharpness of a severe Law. Unto which also Cicero had
respect, when he said for Ligarius to Caesar: I did not, I thought not; such
Arguing uses to be before a Judge; but I say to a Father, I have erred, I did
rashly, I repent; I fly to thy Clemency, I beg pardon of the fault, I beseech
you that you would pardon.

But Socinus, though in the place abovecited, he looks upon God as the highest
Prince, yet in many places in all this act he attributes another (...)
habitude, to him, to wit, of a Party offended. And he would have every offended
Party to be the Creditor of the Punishment; and therein to have such a power,
as other Creditors have in things owing to them. Which power he often calls
by the name of Lordship: therefore he very often repeats, that here God should
be looked upon as a Party offended, as a Creditor, as a Lord, putting these
three as signifying the same thing. This Error of Socinus, because it is
largely spread abroad through his whole Treatise, and may be said to be in this
matter his (...), chiefest lie, must be confuted accurately.

That this may be performed, this Assertion may be put first. To punish, is not
an Act belonging to the Party offended, as such, this is proved; because
otherways the power of Punishment of it self would belong to every offended
Party; which appears to be false; because we proved that to punish is an act
(...) of Superiority. By the Confession of Socinus himself, when he says, That
God should be looked upon as a Prince, whence another firm Argument arises; If
God punishes, and takes away punishment as a Prince, then not as a Party
offended: for the same thing cannot be attributed to two diverse things as such.
But at the same time we deny not, that God who punishes sins, or lets them go
unpunished, is rightly called the offended Party. But we deny that to punish,
or let go unpunished, is attributed to him as an offended Party. For it is very
well known, that a thing may be said of a man, that does not agree to him as
such: as a Counselor of Law sings, not as a Counselor of Law, but as a
Musician. Lactantius observed this rightly. We rise to punishment, not because
we are injured, but that Discipline may be preserved, Manners may be corrected,
Licentiousness may be restrained. This is just Anger, which as it is necessary
in man, so verily is it in God; from whom the Example came to Man. It is a
received Rule, That no Man is a fit Judge in his own Cause: But this Rule is
not of Natural Law, but Positive, and therefore not Universal. For it has not
any place in the highest Governors, under which name I also comprehend
Parents, in respect of the care of the Family. Lawyers observe that Emperors
judge in their own Cause, ad l. and hoc Tiberius de Hoere. instit. This also
may come to pass in Crimes, as in the Judgment of Treason, and in Wars, which
for the Injury offered to the King, are proclaimed by the King. Of which thing
there is a famous Example, 2 Kings chapter 10. Therefore Princes, though offended,
but not as offended, punish Crimes, or let them go unpunisht; for if they did
that, as injured, then others, being injured, would have the same power, who
nevertheless can neither punish the Offender, nor cause him to be unpunished.
Again, if it should belong to Princes, as offended, to punish or let go
unpunished, then they would have no power to punish Crimes, in which they were
not offended; the contrary whereof Reason and Experience shows. And lest Men
should be mistaken by this Error, as if evil doers were therefore punished by
a Prince, because they hurt the Commonwealth, whereof he is Governor; we see,
that Subjects also, who have grievously offended out of the Territory, and
against a forreiner are rightly and with praise punished. Whence it manifestly
appears, That the power of punishing does not belong to an offended person as
offended, because, the Offense being committed, this power does not immediately
follow, neither is it removed when the Offense is removed: But on the contrary,
the same right belongs to a Superior as a Superior; for as soon as you put
Superiority, you also put the power of punishing, and that being removed, you
remove it. But whatsoever is said of the power of inflicting punishment, it is
necessary the same should be understood concerning the power of giving freedom
from punishment; for these things are by a natural Bond joined together.
Perhaps Socinus was mistaken, because smetimes in Sacred Writings, and amongst
others, in the Lord's Prayer, the Example of God forgiving sins is proposed
unto us, that we also being offended, may forgive others their sins. But he
ought to have considered, that Examples are taken not only from things that are
the same, genere proximo, in the next kind, but also from those things that
have some resemblance, chiefly because some self-same name is put upon things,
though diverse in their next kind, because of resemblance. So Christ forbids us
to judge, to wit unmercifully, lest we our selves also be judged: and adds,
That with what measure we mete unto others, with the same it shall be measured
unto us, Math. 7.1,2. where that former judging in its whole kind differs from
the other: For the former is the judgment of Liberty; the other the judgment of
Power. After the same manner it is a far other thing in God, and in other
Governors, to forgive sins, and another thing in private persons offended by
another: for to punish is opposed to that, but to the other to require
punishment, or wish it, or also to complain, Coloss. 3.13. therefore they
differ intrinsecally, but extrinsecally in some respect they agree; for the
moving Cause to both is Bounty or Love to Mankind, (...): but the Effect is,
that he, who has sinned, is freed from some Inconvenience, either really, or
at least, as much as lies in the forgiver; which Agreement is sufficient that
the Example may have its own efficacy.

This may be the other Assertion: Naturally the offended Party, as such, has
no power in punishment. This is somewhat more than what the first Assertion had
gathered. For there we denied that the very act of punishing belongs to the
offended Party: Here we deny that any power belongs unto it, not only to
exercise the act of it self, but also to oblige another to exercise: that is,
that the Party offended is not really a Creditor in punishment, which yet
Socinus thinks, and often repeats it, as a most certain thing. Here I
understand a Creditour, not in a strict signification, according to the
Original of the word, him that has given credit to another man's word; but
more generally, Creditors are they to whom Debt is due for any Cause. And it is
thus proved, that it is true, that we say: It is very well known that Right is
twofold, Natural or Positive: wherefore it is necessary that all Debt should
arise hence or thence. Naturally Right consists in the Adequation of things
among themselves; such therefore also is Natural Debt. But Positive Right is
that which proceeds from a free act of the Will: which is twofold, Contract,
and Law-Contract, is an Effect of that Power, that any man has over himself,
and his own things: But Law is an Effect of that Power, which any man has over
another man, and another man's things. Here we treat not of Positive Death;
therefore we add the word Naturally: the Cause of which thing we shall explain
afterward. Now by Nature nothing else is due to me by thy Deed, neither indeed
can be due, but an equality according to the thing; that is, that as much as I
want by thy means, so much should be restored: It may be called by this one
word, Indemnity or Restitution. Hence Aristotle rightly called a Creditor
(...), him that had less. And this has place both in (...) willing, and (...)
unwilling receivings, as the same Aristotle observes. For as thou art obliged
to restore that which was lent or entrusted, so also the thing that was taken
away by Theft. And in this sense we may naturally become Creditors through a
fault. Neither has that place only in these faults, in which the receiving of
a Corporal thing is interposed, but also in other facts hurtful to a man: So he
that has wounded another man, ought both to pay Rewards to the Physicians, and
the Charges laid out for the Cure, and Damage of Workmen. Some have wondered
that Aristotle did put Manslaughter also amongst (...), Exchanges, in which
(...), a justice of making right is exercised. But Eustathius well observed,
That that comes to pass no other way, but because there uses to be some
Recompense made unto the Wife, Children or Kinsmen of the slain man. So also he
who has hurt the Good Name of another by a Lie, ought, by the Profession of
the Truth, to make up what he detracted from his Credit. By all which it
appears, that what is naturally due through Faults, is different from
Punishment. For the Cause of that natural Debt is first, and of it self not the
viciousness of the Act, but because some thing is wanting to me: for though it
is absent without a Fault, as in a thing entrusted, yet no less is Restitution
due to me. But the cause of the Punishment is the viciousness of the Act, and
not because I want something. For though no man wants any thing, the Act will
be rightly punished, as in great Crimes, which were only begun, and were not
completed. There is also another difference, no less remarkable, that the
Nature of a thing it self determines the manner and quantity of the
Restitution. Punishment, though in its own kind it has a Natural Cause in some
sense (as we shall say afterward) yet it cannot be determined, but by a free
Act of the Will. Add this also, that Punishment, inasmuch as it consists in
speaking, or doing, is not due ordinarily before Condemnation, but Restitution
in all respects is due. The Debt of Restitution passes unto the Heir, the
Punishment passes not. Which I judge requisite to mention only for this Cause,
lest any should rashly confound that which is due to the offended with
Punishment. But yet it is true, that by a positive Law, as also by a Contract
way may be made, that a Creditor may obtain a right for Punishment, which then
also the Laws distinguish from the pursuit of a thing, or of damage, L. si
pignore parag. cum furti d. de furtis instit. de lega Aquilia parag. and in
these words. But this uses for the most part to be appointed in pecuniary
punishments, which not only bring Damage to him, who did the hurt, but also
Gain to him that was hurt. But in Corporal punishments, in which there is no
true Gain of the person that was injured, this is scarcely exercised. And
therefore we see Kings, and other chief Governors, forgive punishment to the
Guilty, against the will of the Party wronged, commanding them only to make
Restitution of the Damage; which no man judges unjust. But this would be
unjust if punishment were due to the Party wronged, especially where no
necessity of the Commonwealth required remission. Wherefore that lesser
Magistrates cannot remit Corporal punishments, that comes not to pass for any
power of the person injured in punishing (for they could not punish any thing
the more with the consent of the offended person) but because the Law of the
Superior has not granted unto them that power, yea, has expressly denied it:
which should likewise be understood concerning Kings being compared with God,
in those Crimes which the Divine Law has commanded indispensably to be
punished.

These things make for this, that it may appear, that God also being offended
with us, is not properly a Creditor in punishing: for he that affirms that,
relies either on that Right which proceeds from the things themselves, or that
Rght which is constituted. We have sufficiently showed, as I think, That the
offended person is not a Creditor in the punishment, by that Right which
proceeds from the things themselves. But a constituted Right, not whereby
punishment, but whereby such a credit of punishment may be introduced, is
neither alleged, nor if it be alleged, can it be proved: neither can any
reason be given, why it should have been so appointed. Some body will perhaps
object, That God forgiving the punishment of sinners, is somewhere compared
with a Creditor giving up his own Right, as Matthew. 18.35. But as we showed
above, Comparison does not require that things should agree genere proximo in
their next kind, but is contented with any similitude: So Christ washing his
Disciples feet, gave an Example to his Disciples, that as he did, they should
also do; that is, that they should serve one another. But the resemblance of
God forgiving sins, and of a Creditor's yielding up his own Right, is greater
than the resemblance of the same God forgiving sins, and an offended person
forgiving offenses, concerning which resemblance we just now discoursed. For
the Acts of God and the Creditor's agree, not only in the moving Cause, which
is Bounty, and the Effect, which is f^eeing from Misery or Trouble, but in that
also that in both some right goes before in God to punish, in the Creditor to
require the Debt, and on both sides there is a certain Dissolution of the
Obligation that was before; though in the Obligation it self, as also in the
Dissolution, there is something unlike which, though that Example does not
properly belong to the thing, to which it is brought, cannot wrong the
Resemblance or Parable.

This may be the Third Assertion: The right of punishing in a Governor, is not
either the right of absolute Lordship, or the right of the thing credited. This
is proved, first, from the End, which uses best to distinguish Faculties: For
the right of absolute Lordship, as also the right of the thing credited, is
procured for his sake that has that power or right; but the power of punishing
is not for the sake of the punisher, but for the sake of some Community; for
all punishment has the common good proposed, to wit, the Preservation of Order
and Example; so than it has not the nature of being desirable, but from this
end; whereas the power of Lordship, and of the thing credited, are of
themselves desirable. In this sense God says, That he delights not in the
punishment of them that are punished.

Again, It is never contrary to Justice to give up the right of Lordship, or of
the thing credited; for this is the nature of Property, that it is as lawful to
use it, as not to use it. But to let some sins go unpunished (to wit, of them
that repent not) would be unjust in a Governor, yea in God himself, as Socinus
confesses. Therefore the right of punishing is not the same with the right of
Property or Credit. Moreover, no man is called just for that, and is praised
upon the account of Justice, because he uses his own Property, or because he
requires the Debt. But any Governor, and God himself also is called therefore
Just, and Praised, upon the account of Justice, because he forgives not
punishment, but exacts it severely. Just art thou, O Lord, because thou have so
judged, Apoc. 16.5. which was proved already in many places.

Again, The diversity of Virtues arises from the diversity of Objects. But the
Virtue whereby we give up our Property, or our Debt, is called Liberality, not
Clemency: but that, whereby freedom from punishment is granted, is not called
Liberality, but Clemency. Perhaps some man may ask, seeing punishment is said
to be owing, Who is here the Creditor? for a Debtor can scarcely be understood,
where there is no Creditor. But it must be observed, that the word debere, to
owe, does not always signify a Relation between two persons. For oftentimes
Debeo hoc facere, I ought to do this, signifies no other thing; but it is
convenient that this thing should be performed by me, without respect to
another person. So Debeo poenam, I owe punishment, that is, I am worthy of
punishment, and I am absolutely obliged to suffer it, but not Relatively in
respect of this man, or that. Therefore it is the same sense in what
Commonwealth, or under what Governor any man suffers the punishment of a
Crime, for he shall be equally delivered amongst all men; which would not be
so, if there were a certain Creditor, as of other things, so also of
punishment: For payment made to him only, not to others also, except by his
Command, would free the Debtor. The contrary, for the most part appears in
Reward: for it is rightly said, a Reward is owing to him: but the certain
person that owes it (if you lay aside the Positive Law) does not appear. For if
any man say, There is a certain Commonwealth that owes a Reward, because it
received a Benefit, that man will not distinguish Favor from Reward.
Experience it self teaches, that those men also are honored with Rewards by
Governors, who have profitted, not their own Commonwealth in particular, but
Mankind, as Inventers of things profitable for the common good; yea, also we
see Rewards given to Counsels nobly undertaken, though success has been
wanting, and thereby no profit redounded unto any man. Therefore neither is
there here any relation between definite persons, such as in that kind of
owing, which is (...), of mutual Exchanges. But if any man desires something in
punishment to be given him, that is, (...), analogical to a Creditor, perhaps
it will not be said amiss, that the order of things and the public good is in
the place of a Creditor; the dispensation of which Order and Good is permitted
to the Government; for this seems to be signified by that Proverbial Speech: It
is for the Public Good, that Crimes should be punished. And hence it comes to
pass, that when in other Causes the Judge exercises Judgment between two
Parties, oftentimes in the Cases of Crimes the accused Person appears, the
Accuser appears not; because Order it self, or the Public Good, is as it were
in the place of an Accuser: which the Scripture also seems to intimate, when it
says, That sin cries against the sinner. And where a man acts for punishment,
he acts either as any man (as in those places where Accusations lie open to all
men promiscuously) or as appointed for this thing by the Law; which happens in
those places which have Accusers publicly constituted: Both of which is a
certain token, that by nature and really there is not here any definite
Adversary, and as it were a Requirer of Punishment.

Another Question follows, What is the force of that word, when any Governor is
said (...) to forgive, or (...) to pardon sins, or, which is the same, the
punishment. For many being deceived by this word, have thought, that here some
Property or Debt goes before, in which they are much deceived: For the Greek
word (...), properly signifies to remove from a man's self; and so it is taken
Matthew. 4.20. and elsewhere often: whence the Metaphor being taken, it signifies
both to forsake, and let go, and permit, but most frequently to have no regard
of a thing; which the Latins signify by a like Expression Missum aliquid
facere; therefore the Greek Scholiasts expound (...) by (...), to neglect. So
it appears this word is taken Matthew. 15.14. 18.12. 23.23. Mark 1.8. So also
(...) is peccata missa facere, to let sins pass; because elsewhere the
Scripture, further following this Translation, calls it peccata in mare
projicere, to cast sins into the Sea, Mich. 7.19. So also the Latin Poets say,
that those things which they signify are put out of care, Ventis tradi in mare
raptanda, are delivered to the Winds to be violently carried into the Sea.
Wherefore as these things are opposed missum aliquid facere, to let a thing
pass, and retinere, to retain it, so are opposed to one another (...) and
(...). Therefore missa facere peccata, to let sins pass, as also delere
peccata, to abolish sins, and tegere, to cover them, is the same thing that
elsewhere is more plainly expressed, not to remember, Jer. 31.34. But not to
remember, as the Latin ignoscere, is not to be willing to punish. Wherefore, as
in these words, not to remember, to cover, to abolish, not to be willing to
retain, there is not the signification of Lordly Right or Debt, so neither in
the word (...). But because that word that signifies to let pass, is general,
therefore it is also applied to those things that we have in our Property, and
to Names and other things by the like right. So also the word (...) belongs to
all kinds of gratifying. Christ unto the blind (...) gave sight, Luke 7.21.
(...), It was given to you to suffer for Christ. Phil. 1.29. So also the Judge,
that for the sake of another Condemns or Absolves a man, is said (...) to give
him to another man, Acts 3.14. 25.11 and 16. All which signify, that no
Property or Debt is necessarily signified by that word. Concerning the Latin
words, donandi, condonandi, remittendi, of giving, forgiving, pardoning, it is
less necessary that we should be solicitous, because they are not extant in
Holy Scripture; and yet it is easy to give an account of them; for that has
happened unto those words, that has happened unto many other, yea almost all
that they are brought from, like things to like things. Donare, to give,
properly is to make that freely another man's, which was his own by Property.
Punishment therefore is not properly given; for what is given exists before,
and afterward remains: Punishment was neither before it was given, and by
giving it is made not to be. But herein is the similitude, that as the Giver
has right in the thing, so has the Governor in punishment, but not the same
right, or equally free: For the right of Property (as we said before) is for
the sake of the Owner; but the right of Punishment, for the sake of the Common
Good; the dispensation whereof, as of other common things, belongs to the
Governor. The second Agreement is in this, that both in Donation the right of
the Giver, and in granting freedom from Punishment, the right that was the
Governor's to punish, is taken away. The third is, That both Donation and
Granting of freedom from Punishment, proceeds from the same Fountain of Bounty,
and profits another. Neither only here, but also elsewhere often the word
giving is translated to those things in which Lordly Power has no place: So a
man is said donari, to be gifted by a Magistrate, Civitate, with the
Privileges of the City, vacatione, with vacation, honor, with honor,
proemio, with Reward. So Seneca said, moram donare, to give delay, for auferre
moram, to take away delay for the sake of a man: So we are said to give our
time to others. But remittere signifies originally, as the Greek word (...), to
remove from himself; so a Tree lets go the Bark, remittit librum, a Horsman
lets go the Bridle; so the Ears are remitted, aures remittuntur, and by
translation, custodia, custody, disciplina, discipline, animus, the mind: and
in many places remitti and intendi are opposite. Hence the Debt is said
remitti, when there is no account made of it; and so Punishment. Neither is
that word applied to Punishment for Debt, nor to Debt for Punishment; but to
both for another thing, in which those agree with one another. It may be added,
that in some sense it may be said that Punishment is owing to a man; not
properly, because no man here is really a Creditor, but for some resemblance:
For, because, as the Creditor has power of exacting the Debt that is due to
him, so the Governor has power of punishing, and the Accuser of requiring
Punishment: Therefore sometimes we are said catachrestically to owe Punishment,
either to a Governor, as to God, or to an Accuser, as to the Devil; though
neither is the Devil injured if Punishment is not inflicted on a man, neither
does it consist with the Justice of God to remit in infinitum, infinitely any
kind of Punishment; neither of which can have place in real Creditors.

CHAP. III. Of what manner is the Act of God in this Business, and it is showed
that it is a Relaxation of the Law, or Dispensation.
THE Part which God undertakes in this Business, having been examined, it will
be easy to give some Name to the Act it self. And first, because God is here
to be looked upon, as we have proved, as a Governor, it follows that this Act
is an Act of Jurisdiction generally so called. Whence it follows, that the
Discourse is not here of Acceptilation, taking a Debt for paid, as Socinus
thinks, for that is not an Act of Jurisdiction. That its own Genus may be more
nearly attributed unto this Act, the Act it self may be considered, either with
relation to the Divine Sanction, or as Modern Lawyers speak, the Penal Law, or
without that relation; which we therefore add, because, though no Law had
expressed Punishment, yet naturally the Human Act it self, whether having an
intrins^al pravity from the unchangable nature of the thing, or also
extrinsical for the contrary Command of God for that very Cause deserves some
Punishment, and that a heavy one; that is, it was just, that man, being a
sinner, should be punished: If we consider it thus, the Act of God, of which we
treat, will be the Punishment of one, to procure freedom from punishment to
another; concerning the Justice of which. Act we shall presently discourse. But
if furthermore, we look back to the Sanction, or the Penal Act, the Act it self
will be a way to Indulgence, or a Moderation of the same Law, which Indulgence
at this day we call Dispensation, which may be defined an Act of a Superior,
whereby the Obligation of a standing Law about certain Persons or Things, is
taken away. This is the Sanction; Man eating of the forbidden fruit, shall
surely dye, Genesis 2.17. where, by one kind of sin every kind of sin is
signified, as the same Law expresses, being more clearly explained; Cursed is
he that continues not in all the Precepts of the Law, Dur. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
But by the word Death and Curse in these places, we understand chiefly Eternal
Death. Therefore it is the same sense, as if the Law had been expressed after
this manner; Let every man sinning bear the Punishment of Eternal Death.

Therefore there is not here the Execution of that Law; for if God should have
executed the Law, no sinner could have been saved from the Punishment of
Eternal Death. But now we know that there is no Condemnation to them that
believe, because they are delivered from Death, Romans 8.2. Gal. 3.31. Moreover,
this act is not an Abrogation of the Law; for a Law, that is abrogated, has no
power of binding. But Unbelievers are yet subject to the same Law: Therefore it
is writtten, that the wrath of God abides (...) on them that believe not, Joh.
3.36. and that the wrath of God comes upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians.
2.16. Also the Interpretation of the Law is not (...), according to Moderation,
for that Interpretation shows, that some Fact or Person has not been
comprehended under the Obligation of the Law; as the Works of Religion and
Mercy were never comprehended under the forbidding of working on the Sabbath,
Matthew. 12.5. and 6. But all men (as having been shut up under sin, Romans 11.32.
Gal. 3.22.) yea those also that are delivered, by nature, or of themselves, are
the Sons of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. that is, they were obliged to the Sanction of the
Law; therefore the Obligation is not declared to be none: But this is the
business, that that Obligation which was, may be taken away; that is, that
there may be a Relaxation or Dispensation of the Law.

Here it may be asked, Whether that Penal Law is relaxable? For there are some
Laws unrelaxable, either absolutely or upon Conditition, (...). The absolutely
unrelaxable, are those, of which the opposite contains an immutable pravity in
it self, by reason of the nature of the thing it self: As for Example, the Law,
which forbids Perjury, and bearing false Witness against a Neighbor; for as we
say, that God cannot lie, Hebr. 6.18. or deny himself, 2. Tim. 3.13. so no less
rightly shall we say, That God cannot do, or approve evil Actions, or grant a
power to do them. But Laws unrelaxable (...), upon Supposition, are those that
are made by a definite Decree, which the Scripture calls (...), or (...),
unchangableness, or unrepentableness of Will, such as is the Law of damning
them, that are not willing to believe in Christ, Hebr. 3.18. but all Positive
Laws are absolutely relaxable: neither should men fly to an hypothetical
necessity by a definite Decree, when there is no sign appearing of such a
Decree. But that some are afraid, lest if we grant that, we do an injury to
God, as if we made him mutable; in that they are greatly deceived: for the Law
is not something Internal in God, or the very Will of God, but a certain Effect
of his Will. But it is very certain, that the Effects of the Divine Will are
mutable; neither does God in promulgating a Positive Law, which he would at
sometime relax, signify that he wills another thing than he really wills.
For God seriously shows, that he wills that the Law should be ratified, and
oblige, yet retaining the power of relaxing, which is joined to Positive Law of
its own nature, neither can it be understood by any sign to be abdicated of
God. Verily it is another thing, if there adhere to a Po-Positive Law, either
an Oath or Promise, both of which are observed, Hebr. 6.18. for an Oath is a
sign of the immutableness of the thing to which it is added, Psalm. 95.11.
110.4. Hebr. 3.11. 6.17. 7.21. And a Promise gives power to a Party, which
cannot without injury be taken from it: Therefore though to promise is free,
yet there is not a freedom to break Promises; therefore that ought to be
referred to those things that have immutable pravity in themselves. Therefore
God cannot do this, who is therefore called faithful, because he keeps his
Promises, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Therefore let us see whether there is in the said
Penal Law any thing that utterly disallows Relaxation.

And first, it may be objected, That it is just naturally, that the Guilty
themselves be punished with such a punishment as is answerable to their Crime:
and therefore that it is not subject to Free Will, nor is relaxable. That this
Objection may be answered, it must be known that unjust does not follow of any
denial of just, no not at that very time when the same Circumstances are put:
for as it does not follow, if a King should be called Liberal, who gave to some
Man a thousand Talents, that he should therefore not be Liberal if he gave them
not; so it is not perpetual, that that which is performed justly, cannot be
omitted, but unjustly. Now a thing is called natural, as in Physics, so in
Morals, either properly, or less properly. Natural in Physics properly, is
that which necessarily coheres to the Essence of every thing; as for a living
Creature to have sense: but less properly that which is convenient, and as it
were fitted for any Nature; as for a man to use his right hand. So then in
Morals there are some things properly natural, which follow necessarily from
the relation of the things unto rational Natures, as that Perjury is unlawful;
but some improperly, as that a Son succeeds the Father. Therefore that he that
has offended, deserves Punishment, and therefore is punishable, this follows
necessarily from the relation of the sin and sinner to the Superior, and it is
properly natural. But that any sinner should be punished with such a Punishment
as is answerable to the Fault, is not neceslary simply, and universally.
Neither is it properly natural, but agreeable enough unto Nature; whence it
follows, that nothing hinders why the Law commanding this same thing should not
be relaxable. The sign of a definite Decree or Irrevocability, appears not in
that Law, of which we Discourse; neither is it a promising Law; therefore none
of those things hinder a Relaxation; for it should not be admitted, that a
threatening should be equallized to a Promise: for by a Promise some right is
acquired to him, to whom the Promise was made. But by threatening, only the
merit of Punishment in the sinner, and the right of punishing in the Threatner,
are more openly declared. Neither is it to be feared, least something be
detracted from the Veracity of God, if he does not fulfill all his Threatenings:
for it must be understood, that all threatenings that have not with them a sign
of Irrevocability by their own nature, do diminish nothing of the right of the
Threatner to relax, as before was declared: and it appears manifestly by the
Example of the Divine Clemency toward the Ninevites. It must not be here
omitted, that the ancient Philosophers by Natural Light judged, that no matter
was more relaxable than Penal Law. Therefore Aristotle says, that (...) is
(...). And Sopater in an Epistle to Demetrius says so: (...) That which is
called moderate Justice, comfortably interpreting the austere voice of the
Laws, seems unto me an innocent pretense of the true and free Graces: but
correcting Justice in mutual Exchanges, wholly shuns the nature of the Graces.
But that which consists in Accusations, does not abhor the meek and courteous
face of the Graces. It appears by these things, which hitherto have been said,
that that Positive and Penal Law of God was dispensable. But this hinders not,
but that there were certain Reasons, which might dissuade (that I may stammer
after humane manner) this Relaxation. And these may be taken either from the
nature of all Laws, or from the proper matter of the Law. It is common to all
Laws, that by relaxing something seems to be taken away from the Anthority of a
Law. It is a property of this Law, that though that Law, as we said, has not
an inflexible Rectitude, yet it is very agreeable to the Nature and Order of
things: from which things it follows, That the Law was not to be wholly
unrelaxable, but not easily, nor for a light Cause. And the only (...),
infinitely wise Lawgiver did according to that. For he had a very weighty
Cause, when Mankind fell into sin, to relax the Law; because if all sinners had
been to be given up to Eternal Death, two very beautiful things had utterly
perished out of the World; on Men's part Religion toward God, on God's part the
Testimony of his special Bounty toward Men. Neither did God, in relaxing the
Law, observe Causes only, and that very weighty ones, but also did set a
singular Bounds to the Relaxation, concerning which there will be a fitter
place to Discourse afterward.

CHAP. IV. Whether it is unjust that Christ should be punished for our sins?
And it is showed that it is not unjust.
THE Arguments whereby Socinus goes about to disprove this Doctrine, having not
been placed by him in a right enough Order, seems to us that they ought to be
digested in this manner: That the first rank be of those Reasonings, which
gather that That which we defend to have been performed, is unjust. The second,
of those that deny there was cause for so doing. The third, of those which deny
that God did that which we assert. For if the thing it self has
Unrighteousness in it, in vain is the Cause thereof sought for, because there
can be no reasonable Cause of that which is unjust: In vain also is it
disputed, Whether it has been? because no unjust thing can be done by God.
Also the Examination of the Cause, because by nature it goes before the
Question of the Fact, should also first be handled: therefore that we may come
to the Question of Just and Unjust, first, these things are to be separated,
Whether it was just that Chirst should be punished for our sins? And if that
could any thing Conduce to obtain a pardon for us? For this latter must be
referred to the second rank, that disputes of the Cause of the Fact: but it
belongs not properly to this first. For though such a Cause of Punishment had
not been, it would not thence follow, that some Injury is contained in the
Punishment. But it seems that an Injury may be sought, either in the Matter it
self, that is, in the very heavy Afflictions and Death compared with the
Innocence of him who suffered those things; or in the Form, that is, in the
Punishment compared with other men's Sins, as the meritorious Cause. Therefore
we shall show, that there is Injury in neither.

First then, Socinus confesses, That it is not unjust that Christ, most
Innocent, should suffer from God very heavy Punishments, and Death it self that
hence no help can come to his Cause. And the thing it self demonstrates the
same very evidently: For Sacred History shows, that Christ suffered very
grievous things, and that he died also. The Scripture no less evidently says,
that God did this very thing. But without blaspheming the Sacred Deity, it
cannot be denied, that God does nothing unjustly. Therefore passing over to the
other part, I affirm, That it is not simply unjust, or against the nature of
punishment, that a man should suffer for other men's sins. When I say unjust, it
is manifest that I speak of unjustice, which rises out of things, not which
rises out of Positive Law, as whereby Divine Liberty cannot be diminished. I
prove this that I said; Exodus 20.5. and 34.7. God visits the Iniquities of the
Fathers upon the Sons, Nephews, and Nephews Children. Our Fathers sinned, and
we bear their punishment, Lam. 5.7. For the Fact of Cham, Canaan is subjected
to a Curse, Genesis 9.25. For the Fact of Saul, his Sons and Nephews were hanged,
God approving of it, 2 Samuel 21.8,14. For the Fact of David 70000 perish, and
David cries out, I have sinned, and done wickedly, but what have these sheep
done? 2 Samuel 24.15. and 17. So for the Fact of Achan his Sons are punished,
Jos. 7.24. and for the Fact of Jeroboam his Posterity, 1 King 14. These places
manifestly show that some are punished by God for other men's sins. He that has
time, may see Chrysostom Homil. 29. on Genesis chap. 4. Tertullian against Marcion.

Socinus objects that in Ezechiel, The Soul that has sinned, it shall die; The
Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear
the Iniquity of the Son. But in these words God teaches not what he must
necessarily do, but what he has decreed freely to do. Therefore it does no
more follow hence, that it is wholly unjust, that the Son should bear any
punishment of his Father's fault, than that it is unjust that a sinner should
die. The place it self proves, That God does not here discourse of a perpetual
and immutable Law, but of the ordinary Course of his Providence, which he
professes he will after that time use toward the Jews, that he may break off
all occasions of Calumny.

Neither is that more to the purpose that is written Deuteronomy. 24.16. Let not the
Fathers be put to death for the Sons, nor the Sons for the Fathers; but let
every man be put to death for his own sin. Of which also there is mention made
2 Kings 14.6. for this Law is in part Positive, whereunto God is not tied, as
having no where made that Law to himself; neither indeed can he be tied to any
Law. Also the diversity of the Reason is manifest, because the power of Men is
narrower than that of God; which shall be more clearly explained afterward;
though now also I may intimate, that the abuse of Power is feared in men, but
it is not feared in God.

Socinus replies, That no where in Scripture the Innocent are found punished
for the sins of the Guilty. But this Reply is not to the purpose: For seeing we
read that some were punished, not only for their own sins, (in respect whereof
they were guilty) but also for other men's sins, it follows that they were also
punished, as they were not guilty. But if a man may in part be punished as he
is not guilty, the nature of the thing does not hinder, but that he may be
punished in the whole; for the right of the parts and the whole is the same:
Add also that the Posterity of Saul were wholly innocent, as to that sin, for
which they were punished. But if a man may be punished in a respect, wherein he
is innocent, he may also be punished being innocent. And, if a man rihtly
consider, Innocence hinders not punishment more than Affliction; yea it
hinders not that at all, but for this. Therefore the distinction of Guilty
and Innocent belongs to the Question, Whether any man may be justly Afflicted:
but not to this, Whether his Affliction may have the force of Punishment? For
it being granted, That Relation to a man's own Sin, is not of the Essence of
Punishment, it being also granted, that the Innocent may be afflicted, (as
Socinus confesses God may do for a while) no Reason verily can be given, why
by the very nature of things (for here we treat not of Positive Law) it should
be unjust that an innocent Person should be punished for another man's Fault
with such Affliction, especially if he has of his own accord obliged himself
to such a Punishment, and has power in himself to undertake it: which shall be
handled afterward.

Socinus urges, That at least between the Guilty, and him that is punished,
there ought to be some Conjunction; which he acknowledges between Father and
Son, but between Christ and us, he does not acknowledge. It might be said here,
that man is not without relation to man, that there is a Natural Kindred and
Consanguinity between Men, because Christ took upon him our Flesh. But another
much greater Conjunction between Christ and us was decreed by God; for he was
appointed of God, that he should be the Head of the Body of which we are
Members. And here it must observed, that Socinus did erroneously confine to the
Flesh, that Conjunction which is sufficient for the laying Punishment upon one
for the sins of another; because here the Mystical Conjunction has no less
power; which appears most in the Example of a King and People.

There was cited above the History of the People of Israel punished for the sin
of David: Concerning which thing the Ancient Author of Questions and Answers to
the Orthodox which are carried about with the Name of Justinus, discoursing
wisely, said thus; (...). As a man consists of a Soul and Body, so a Kingdom
consists of the King and People; and as a man, having sinned a sin with his
hand, if he be struck upon the back, he that struck him does no injustice; so
God does no injustice in punishing the People for the Faults of their Kings.

At length Socinus comes to this, that he says, That at least this is not
found in the Scripture, that an Innocent Person was punished for those Faults,
for which the Guilty Person himself was not punished But this also is not to
the purpose: For because it is not of it self and universally unjust to grant
Impunity to a guilty Person, (which Socinus confesses) neither is it unjust to
punish a man for another man's sins; there cannot be injustice in these, no not
when they are joined together. Yea, the Scripture makes manifest that that very
thing is not unjust, by the Example of Achab, who received the impunity of his
sins, the punishment whereof was required of his Son and Posterity, 1 Kings
21.29. 2 Kings 8, 9, and 10. But this shall be more accurately examined when we
shall come to this Question, What Cause moved God that he punished Christ for
our sins.

Therefore the Sacred Writings do not at all stand on Socinus his side, which
declare that God did that, which Socinus unjustly accuses of unjustice. But
neither has he any great Defense from right Reason, which it is wonderful that
he so often does boast of, but shows it no where. But that all this Error may
be taken away, it must be observed, that it is essential to punishment that it
should be inflicted for sin; but it is not essential to it, that it should be
inflicted upon him, who sinned: and that is manifest by the similitude of
Reward, Favor, and Revenge. For often Reward uses to be conferred upon the
Children or Kindred of a well-deserving Person, and Favor on them that are
near akin to him that bestowed the benefit, and revenge on the Friends of him
that offended: neither do they upon that account cease to be what they are,
Reward, Favor, and Revenge. To the confirmation hereof this all conduces,
That if it were against the nature of punishment, then this very thing should
not be called unjust, but impossible. But God forbid the Son to be punished by
men for the Fathers sin, but they are not forbidden things impossible. Moreover
Unjustice properly happens not to a Relation (such as Punishment is) but to
the Action it self, such as is the matter of Punishment. And here it is
necessary that the true difference should be sought, Why it should not be
equally free to all men to punish a man for another man's sins, as to bestow a
Reward or Favor for another man's Merit or Benefit: For an act in which is
Reward or Favor is a benevolent act, which in its own nature is free to all;
but the act in which Punishment is, is a hurtful act, which is neither granted
to all, nor upon all. Wherefore, that a Punishment may be just, it is required,
that the Penal act it self should be in the power of the Punisher: which
happens three ways; either by the antecedent right of the Punisher, or by a
just and valid consent of him whose Punishment is the Concernment, or by the
Crime of the same Person. When by these ways the act is made lawful, nothing
interposeth, but that it may be ordained for the punishment of another man's
sin, provided there be some Conjunction between him that sinned, and the Party
to be punished. And this Conjunction is either Natural, as between a Father and
a Son; or Mystical, as between King and People; or Voluntary, as between the
Guilty Person and the Surety. Socinus appeals to the Judgment of all Nations.
But as to God, the Philosophers doubted not that the sins of the Parents were
punished by him in the Children. Which Plutarch eloquently explaining in his
Book, (...), says thus; (...). And presently, (...). There is verily a
Generation depending upon one Beginning, which sustains a certain Power and
Natural Communion; and that which is begotten is not free from a Relation to
that which begets, as a Building that is made; for it came out of it, but
not from it; so that it has, and carries in it self, some part of the things
pertaining thereunto, being both reasonably chastised and punished. There is no
Cruelty nor Unreasonableness, that those that pertain unto them should partake
of their things. He adds thereafter something not unlike that which we just now
cited out of a Christian Writer; (...). He is ridiculous that says it is an
unjust thing to burn the Thumb, when the Joints are in danger.

And Valerius Maximus treating of Dionysius the Sicilian; Though he did not
suffer the Punishments due to so many Sacriledges, yet by the Disgrace of his
Son, he suffered the Punishment, which being alive he escaped. There are six
hundred like places in Historians and Poets. So also it was a no less received
Sentence from the time of Hesiod, who said, (...). Justice was Jupiter's
Daughter, who requested Jupiter, that the People might be punished for the sins
of the Kings. -- (...)
(...)
Socinus dares not deny that other men are punished for other men's sins; for
the thing is manifest in Pecuniary Punishments. Vlpianus l. si quis reum d. de
cust. and exhib. reorum, says, Is punished with a Pecuniary Punishment instead
of the Guilty Person. Caius says, The Surety is rightly taken into the
punishment of Theft, because great reason advises that punishment should be
suffered, for evil Deeds. L. si a reo d. de fidejuss. And this very thing is
sufficient, that it may appear that it is not of the Nature of Punishment, that
he who sinned should both pay, and necessarily suffer. But Socinus brings this
reason, why the same power is not in Corporal Punishments, because Money may be
made another man's, and therefore being paid for another by a short fiction of
the hand, it may seem given to the Delinquent, and afterward paid by him; but
Corporal Vexation cannot be made another man's; but this is said more subtilely
than truly: For that Reason makes something for the procuring Deliverance to
the Guilty Person. But that reason does not make that the Punishment which
another has deserved, should be inflicted on another: for if that were of
force, often the Reward of a well-deserving Person could not be paid to a
Person joined with him; to wit, because the thing in which the Reward should
consist, could not be made his that deserved it, either because he was dead, or
because the thing was Incorporeal. The Athenians educated the Sons of
well-deserving Persons upon the Public Charge. The Romans granted unto the
Sons of the ancient Soldiers the privileges of Corporals: They suffered
neither the Nephews, nor the Sons of the Nephews of the most Perfect (as they
called them) to be subject to Examinations. We read in Greek and Roman
Histories, that the Memory of Parents has been of advantage to Children to
save them from Punishment: but the Education, Privilege, or Impunity of
Children cannot be made the Education, Privilege or Impunity of the dead
Parents. Yea, if it were true that Socinus says, then the Punishment could not
be exacted of the Surety, not being willing that the Guilty Person, being
absent by chance, should be freed from the Obligation of a Pecuniary
punishment. Therefore as touching this Question, this is not the true
difference between Pecuniary and Corporal Punishment. We shall mention the
truer presently. But this I most wonder at, that Socinus says; That it is proved
by the Laws and Customs of all Nations and Ages, that a Corporal Punishment,
that one owes, cannot be paid by another. For verily, amongst the Persians of
old, for the Fault of one man his Kindred perished, as witnesses Marcellinus.
Amongst the Macedonians, the Heads of those were Condemned that were of the
same Blood with the Traitors, as Curtius tells. In the Cities of Grecia it was
a Custom, that, together with the Tyrants, the Children of the Tyrants were
slain, as Halicarnassoeus and Cicero observes. Indeed, these things are not
commendable, but yet they prove that that Assertion, concerning the Consent of
all Nations, is not in all respects true. And in these Examples the Conjunction
of Persons only, seemed to suffice for Punishment without any Consent: which
Halicarnassoeus observes to have been rejected by the Romans. But where any
Consent went before, I dare almost be bold to say, that there was none of all
those, whom we call Pagans, that judged it an unjust thing for one man to be
punished for another man's Fault. The power of killing Sureties shows this,
which was usual to the most courteous People. The Thessalians of old killed Two
hundred and fifty Hostages, as Plutarch tells. The Romans beheaded three
hundred Volscians. They threw down the Tarentines from the Tarpeian Rock, as is
mentioned in Livius. There are extant the like Examples of Goths, Danes and
Englishmen: And as very Learned men have rightly observed, it was judged
righteous so to do. So also in Capital Judgments the Pledges were usually
slain, if the Guilty Persons did not present themselves, whence by the Grecians
they were called (...), Souls put in stead, it appears sufficiently both from
other places, and also from the noble History of Damon and Pythias. Neither is
it any wonder that they so judged; for, because they believed that every man
had no less power of his own life, than over other things, as appears by the
frequent and so much noised (...) Self-murder among the Grecians, Romans, and
other Nations; it was clearly the Consequence that they believed Life could be
strongly obliged no less than other things; for the former being presupposed,
it was necessary the latter also should be granted. And verily, if any man
examine this Business with requisite diligence, he will find a true difference
why a man is less obliged by consent to Coporal, than Pecuniary Punishment;
that is, that he that consents has not equal power over Body and Money.
Neither yet do I assent unto the Modern Lawyers approving this by a certain
Answer of Vlpianus, who said, That no man seems Lord of his own Members. L.
liber homo d. ad Legem Aquil. For he takes the word Lord strictly, according to
the use of Civil Law, as it is opposed to a Servant, because the Aquilian Law
speaks strictly of a Servant, he denies that the direct Action that is
answerable to the words of the Law, can be accommodated to a Freeman wounded:
yet so that by the likeness of Respects he thinks an useful Action should be
given. And that I may truly say what I think, though I very much admire the
Equity of the Romans in moderating this Extension of Punishment, yet I cannot
be persuaded to believe that it was a thing by them supposed wholly, and of it
self unjust, that one man should be corporally punished for the Fault of
another. Neither am I therefore moved, because Suretiships were by them
forbidden under capital punishment: for many things use to be forbidden, not
because they are judged altogether unjust, but because they are dangerous, as
all Suretiships of Women, and of others also for a Dowry; this therefore
belonged to Civil Law, which because it failed in Foreign People, therefore it
was otherways observed in Hostages by the Romans themselves. Yea, so long a
time afterward Christian Emperors appointed that the Jailer, when the guilty
Person escaped through the default of his Family, should bear his Punishment,
L. ad Commentariensem C. de custod. reor. And now also, or not long since,
noble Masters of Law have taught that this Rule, That no man should oblige
himself to Capital Punishment, cease, if Law or Custom confirmed that manner.

But as touching those Punishments which respect not any Consent, but only the
Conjunction of Persons, though the Roman Laws forbid a Son to be the Successor
of his Father's Punishment, or to be marked with any Blot for his Father's
Crime, yet Halicurnassaeus observes, that this very thing obtained not from the
beginning, but from that time, in which Sp. Cassius was condemned of Tyranny.
Wherefore neither the Romans themselves thought that this Power descended from
a certain perpetual and immutable Rule of Justice. Whereas the Emperors
Arcadius and Honorius would seem to grant Life to the Sons of them that had
committed Treason, not of the Necessity of the Law, but of their Imperial
Lenity, when otherways, as they themselves speak, they ought to have perished
by their Father's Punishment, L. quisquis C. ad l. Jul. Majest. This also may
be added, That it can be proved by Histories, that the Death of Rebels was
inflicted on their Children, not only by Tiberius and Severus, but also by
Theodosius. It must also be observed, that in the same Law of Arcadius and
Honorius, Jus omne ab intestato, aut ex Testamento cuiquam succedendi^, all
right of succeeding to any man by Testament, or otherways, is taken away from
the Sons of Rebels, that Infamy is branded upon them, that they are not
suffered to attain to Preferments or Corporations. Afterward it is added; May
they be such, that unto them, being oppressed with perpetual want, Death may be
a Comfort, and Life a Punishment. Exclusion from Preferments about the Children
of them that had offended against the Commonwealth, was a long time used by the
Romans from the times of Sylla. But that Sons should suffer want for the Crimes
of their Parents, Cicero says it is an ancient thing, and of all Cities; and
namely he adds, that the Children of Themistocles suffered want: which are only
therefore brought, that it may appear that there was not that Consent of
Nations, which Socinus brings in himself: and that, the Romans themselves,
whose Equity was most conspicuous amongst all People, did not regard that
difference in punishment, that Money may be made another man's, but Corporal
Punishment may not: For neither the Poverty of Children, or Infamy, or their
Exclusion from Preferment, could be made the Poverty of Parents, their Infamy,
or their Exclusion from Preferments, except perchance by a certain Fiction,
which esteems the Father and Children as if they were one and the same man.
Also I wonder at that which Socinus pronounces of the Fact of Zaleucus, whose
History is in Diodorus Siculus and Aelianus, that he says ^e has a very ill
report, and his name is reckoned amongst headstrong and rash Princes and Judges
of People; verily all Antiquity, both for wise Laws, and also chiefly upon the
account of that Fact, commended Zaleucus; as also it appears by these Writers,
that I mentioned, and Plutarch and others; and I think that no other ancient
Writer judges otherways of that Fact. The Sentence of Valerius Maximus is in
the eyes of all men. Also there is nothing stronger than those Examples of
Justice, Zaleucus, when he had guarded the City of the Locrenses with very
wholesome and profitable Laws, when his Son being Condemned for the Crime of
Adultery, according to the Law appointed by him, should have wanted both his
Eyes, and the whole City, in respect to the Father, forgave the young man the
necessity of the Punishment, for sometime he consented not. At length, being
overcome by the Prayers of the People, first having plucked out his own Eye,
and then his Sons, he reserved the use of seeing to both. So he rendered unto
the Law, the due measure of Punishment, by a wonderful moderation of Justice,
having divided himself between a merciful Father, and a just Lawgiver. And
verily, if a man had a free power, as of Living in Banishment, so in plucking
out his own Eye, nothing could be found more praiseworthy than that Fact of
Zaleucus, especially when the precise Obligation of the Law ceased, either for
his Principality, or for the Peoples Consent. Therefore Zaleucus erred, as
almost all Pagans, that he claimed a greater power over his own Body than was
due. But that Fact so much celebrated, gives Testimony against that Knowledge
that Socinus thinks is imprinted in the minds of men, that no man can take upon
himself the punishment of another man's Fault.

That we may conclude this Question, this is not enquired, Whether it is lawful
for any Judge to inflict upon any man any punishment of another man's Crime?
For the Law of Superior Judges takes away this power from the Inferior.
Neither is this enquired, Whether this be lawful to the highest Power among
men, in any punishment, and over any man? for sometimes either the Law of God,
or natural Reason hinders. But this properly is enquired into, Whether the
Act, that is in the power of the Superior, may without consideration of
another man's Crime, be ordained by that Superior for the punishment of
another man's Crime. The Scripture denies this to be unjust, which shows that
God did this. Nature denies, because it is not proved to forbid; the Consent of
Nations openly denies. And that the thing may be presented more naked before
the Eyes, who judges Decimation that was usual in the Roman Legions to be
unjust, when he that offended, and could have been pardoned no less than
another, is punished not for his own Fault only, but for the Fault of all the
other? Who judges it unjust, if, the highest Power relaxing the Law, some man
useful to the Commonwealth, but deserving Banishment for a Fault, is retained
in the Common wealth, yet another of his own accord obliging himself to
Banishment to satisfy the Example? Who would judge it unjust, if a chief
Governor of a Commonwealth denies Preferments to Children of Rebels,
otherways not unworthy, if there are others found as fit for them? Verily there
is no injustice here; for in the first kind of Fact, the proper fault of the
Person punished; in the second, the valid Consent of the Party concerned; in
the third, the Liberty of the Governor permitted that to be performed, which
the Governor uses for punishment. In our Fact God has power to punish
Christ, being Innocent, unto a Temporal Death, as Socinus confesses, to wit, a
Lordly Power: Christ also had by Divine Concession, yea, as being God himself,
a Power which we have not, over his own Life and Body. I, says Christ, have
(...), that is, Power and Authority to lay down my Life, John 10.18. Therefore
there is no Injustice in this, That God who has the highest Power for all
things that are not of themselves unjust, he himself being subject to no Law,
would use the Torments and Death of Christ, to show a weighty Example against
the great Crimes of us all, to whom Christ was very nearly joined by Nature,
Kingdom, Suretiship: which, how not only justly but also wisely, was appointed
by the most Wise and most Just God, it will appear more in the following
Chapter, where we shall search into the Cause of this Divine Counsel.

CHAP. V. Whether there was sufficient Cause, that moved God to punish Christ
for us? and it is showed that there was.
Socinus often endeavors to prove that God was not willing that Christ should
suffer punishment for us by this Argument, because there appears no Cause that
God would do so. We need not here use the Lawyers Defense, who deny that
account can be given of all things that were appointed by Ancestors, though
this Refuge may much more justly be laid open to us than to them, because it is
not so difficult to men to search into the Causes of Human Will, because of the
Community of Nature: but the Causes of the Divine Will, many times, through
their very sublimeness, are hid from us. Who knows the mind of the Lord, who
has been his Counselor? Romans 11.32. Therefore often (...), Romans 11.33. his
ways are unsearchable. It could be added, that often the Will of God is
sufficient to it self for a Cause: for these things being excepted, that
contain in themselves a certain rectitude and determined to one, which God
wills because they are just, that is, because they agree to his Nature, in
all other things that he wills, he makes them just by willing; so on whom he
will, he has mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9.18. But it is not
necessary that we should fly to those things, because God himself has
manifestly enough declared unto us Causes of his own Counsel. But it is
convenient that we should say this only by way of Preface, that Socinus does
not rightly require that such a Cause should be rendered, which may prove that
God could not do otherways; for such a Cause in these things that God does
freely, is not requisite. But he that will say, this Action is free, will have
Augustine for a Consenter; that professes, God wanted not another possible way
of delivering us, but there was not another more convenient way for curing our
Misery. But also before Augustine, Athanasius said, (...) God could have said a
word, and so abolished the Curse, if he had not come at all; but it behooves to
consider that which is profitable to men, and not the power of God in all
things. Therefore that demand of Socinus is so much the more unjust, because he
himself gives no Causes of the Torments and Death of Christ, which draw any
necessity with them; for Oracles and Miracles could suffice to show us the way
of Holiness; and Christ could without Death, and Death without Christ: for the
Afflictions and Death of the Prophets also and Apostles, the Life also of
Christ, could be abundantly sufficient unto us for this use. Christ also could,
after a Life passed innocently here, as Enoch or Elias, have been translated
into Heaven without Death, and thence show his Majesty to the Earth. For these
are the Causes to which Socinus ascribes the Death of Christ, as appears to any
man, which are not joined with that Effect by any necessity. What if it
suffices to him to allege Causes not cogent, that I may so say, but inviting
and persuading, Equity suffers not that he should give a harder Law to them
that dispute with him.

But it will not be difficult to us to give a sufficient Cause, and that very
weighty, out of the Scriptures, whether we ask this, Why God would forgive
Eternal Punishment to us? or, Why he was not willing otherways to forgive the
same, but by punishing Christ? The former has Cause in his Goodness, which of
all the Properties of God is most proper to God: for every where God describes
himself chiefly by this Attribute, that he is bountiful and gracious, Exodus
34.7. Josh. 4.2. 2 Chronicles. 30.9. Psalm. 86.4. and 14. 103.8. 111.4,5. Isai. 55.7.
Jer. 31.20. Joel 2.12. Luke 6.36. Romans 2.4. Therefore God is forward to help
man, and make him happy: But this he cannot do, while that horrible and eternal
Punishment remains. Moreover, if Eternal Death should have been inflicted upon
all men, all Religion had perished through Despair of Happiness: therefore
there were great Causes of sparing. On the other side, those Testimonies of
Scripture, already brought by us, which say that Christ was for our sins
delivered up, suffered, died, do prove that God had cause, Why he laid
punishment on Christ. For these kinds of speaking, as we there showed, signify
an Impulsive Cause. But by these things that we have said of the end, it may be
understood that there was not only a Cause, but also what the Cause was; to
wit, that God would not pass by so many and so great sins, without a remarkable
Example. But this is therefore, because every sin does greatly displease God,
and so much the more, how much greater it is: Prove. 11.20. Psalm. 5.5. Isai.
66.4. Romans 1.18. Zech. 8.17. Psalm. 45.8. Hebr. 11.2. But because God is active,
and created Creatures using reason for that purpose, that he should make his
Properties more manifest, it is convenient for him to testify by some act how
much sins displease him; but the act most agreeable to that thing is
punishment. Hence is that in God, which Sacred Writings call Anger, because
there is no other word more significant, Exodus 32.10,11. Numb. 11.1. 16.22.
25.3. Psalm. 2.5,6. 1 John 3.36. Romans 1.18. 2.8. Ephesians. 5.6. Coloss. 3.6. Apoc.
5.16. By this Anger God testifies that he is hindered from doing Good to men,
Genesis 6.7. Jer. 5.25. Isai. 59.2. Deuteronomy. 32.29,30. Moreover, all impunity of sin
of it self has this, that sins are thereby esteemed to be of less value; as on
the contrary, the most expeditious way of driving from sin, is fear of
punishment. Hence that, by bearing a former Injury, thou invitest a new one,
therefore Prudence upon this account stirs up a Governor to punishment.
Moreover, the Cause of punishment is augmented, when any Law is published,
which threatens punishment: for then the omission of punishment, for the most,
detracts from the Authority of the Law amongst Subjects. Hence that Precept of
the Politicians, (...), to keep strongly the appointed Laws. Therefore God has
very weighty Causes of punishing, especially if you please to consider, both
the magnitude and multitude of sins. But, because amongst all Gods Properties,
the love of Mankind has the pre-eminence, therefore God, when he could justly,
and was moved to punish the sins of all men with a deserved and legal
punishment, that is, with Eternal Death, he would spare them that believe in
Christ; But when he was to spare, by making some or no Example against so many
and so great sins, most wisely he chose that way, by which many of his
Properties should be manifested, to wit, both Clemency and Severity, or the
hatred of Sin, and care of keeping the Law. So Aelianus praising the Fact of
Zaleucus, mentions two Causes thereof, that the young man may not be wholly
blinded, and that that which once was authorized, might not be destroyed;
(...), and (...): of which Causes the one looks thitherward, that something of
the Law may be changed through Clemency, and the other, that it should not be
changed too much. They that have written concerning the Relaxation of Laws,
observe that those are the best Relaxations, unto which Commutation or
Compensation is annexed, to wit, because that way very little of the Authority
of the Law is destroyed, and in some respect, that Reason which is the Cause of
the Law, is obeyed; as if he, that is obliged to restore a thing, be freed by
paying the price; for the same, and so much, are very near akin. Such
Commutation is sometimes admitted, not only among things, but also sometimes
among Persons, providing that may be without hurt to the other party. So
Fathers are permitted to succeed into the Prison of the Son, as Cimon succeeded
Miltiades, and that we may not go out of Penal Judgments, and those Divine,
there are extant express Footsteps of the like Fact in Sacred Scriptures.
Nathan, at the command of God, pronounced to David, being a Murderer and
Adulterer, Thy sin (that is, the punishment of sin) is translated from thee,
for thou shall not dye; (which otherways the Law required) but because thou
have given the Enemies of God occasion to blaspheme God, that Son, which is
born to thee, to wit, very near unto thee, and Vicar of thy punishment, shall
surely die 2 Samuel 12.13,14. Achab defiles himself, both with Murder and
Robbery; God denounces to him by Elias, That it should come to pass, that the
Dogs should lick his Blood. Nevertheless, the same God seeing his Fear, and a
certain Reverence to the Deity, said, I will not bring the Evil (to wit, which
himself had deserved, and I had threatened) in his days: In the days of his Son
(who, besides his own, shall also bear his Father's punishment) I will bring
the Evil upon his House. In both, God relaxeth the Law or Threatening of
Punishment, but not without some Compensation, by translating the Punishment
upon another. And so he evidenceth both his Clemency and Severity or Hatred of
Sin. So then God, willing to spare those that were to believe in Christ, had
sufficient, just and great Causes, why he exacted the punishment of our sins of
Christ being willing; to wit, that I may use the words of Aelianus, That that
which was once ratified may not be disanulled, (...) and least sins should be
less regarded, if so many, and so great, should be passed over without an
Example. Moreover, by this very thing God did not only testify his hatred
against sins,. and so by this Fact terrified us from sins; (for it is easily
gathered, if God would not forgive sins, no not to them that repent, unless
Christ succeeded into the p^shment, (much less will he suffer the Impenitent to
be unpunished) but also in a signal manner declared his great Love and
Good Will toward us; to wit, that he spared us, to whom it was not a thing
indifferent to punish sins, but who thought it a thing of so great Concernment,
that rather than he would suffer them to be wholly unpunished, he delivered up
his only begotten Son to punishment for those sins. So that, as it was said by
the Ancients, (...), That it was (...), neither according to the Law, nor
against the Law, but above the Law, and instead of the Law. That is very true
of Divine Grace: It is above the Law, because we are not punished; for the Law,
because Punishment is not omitted: And therefore is Remission given, that we
may in time to come, live to the Divine Law.

These things being rightly understood, all those things fall which Socinus
objects concerning the Defect of a Cause. So that it is not necessary to go
through all particulars, in which nevertheless not a few Errors may be
observed. As, when in the first Chapter of the first Book, also in the first
Chapter of the third Book, ^e says, That punishing Justice does not reside in
God, but is an Effect of his Will. Verily to punish is an Effect of the Will;
but that Justice or Rectitude, out of which proceeds both other things, and
also Retribution of Punishment is a Property residing in God; for the Scripture
concludes God to be just, because he renders Punishment to Faults, gathering
the Cause from the Effect. But Socinus seems to have been led into this Error,
because he believed that any Effects of the Properties of God are altogether
necessary, whereas many of them are free, to wit, a free Act of the Will
interveening between the Property and the Effect: So it is an Effect of the
Goodness of God to communicate his own Goodness; but this he did not before the
Creation. It belongs to the same Goodness to spare the Guilty: but scarcely
will any man say, that God spares those, whom he punishes with Eternal
Punishment. Therefore there are some Properties of God, the Exercise whereof,
both as to the Act, and also as to the Time and Manner of the Act, yea, also as
to the Determination of the Object, depends upon his free Will, over which
nevertheless Wisdom presides. Neither can God therefore be said, because he
has the free use of these Properties, to do what he does without a Cause, when
he uses them. For God did not therefore make the World in vain, because he had
liberty not to make it; neither because it pleased God to punish some (which
Socinus confesses to be true chiefly in those, whose Repentance God waits for)
does he therefore punish without cause, where he punishes: for many things are
performed freely, and yet for a weighty cause.

The other Error is also above mentioned, that he would make God forgiving
sins, to do just the same thing that men do, who give up their own right. It
has been showed that punishment is not in Property or Debt, or that it can be
equallized to them in all things. To give a man's own, to forgive Debt is
always honorable of it self. When we say of it self, we exclude those things
which are present, (...), by accident, such as is the Poverty of the Giver
himself; which also cannot have place in God. But to forgive Punishment
sometimes, would not be honorable, no not to God himself, as Socinus
acknowledges: Therefore there is a wide difference here; but the rise of the
difference is thence, that the next Foundation of Lordly Power and Debt is a
certain Relation of a thing to a Person: but the next foundation of Punishment
is the Relation of a thing to a thing, to wit, the Equality of a Fault with
some Hurt agreeing to Order and common Good: wherefore that is not true, which
Socinus asserted as most certain, That the Commonwealth will commit no
unjustice, if it absolve a Guilty Person, except it also be injurious to the
proper right of some private Person, or break God's Law. For by the name of
Commonwealth, he either understands the Multitude that governs, or is
governed. The Multitude that is governed, as it has not the power of making
Laws, so neither has it the power of moderating them. But a Multitude that
Governs, as a Senate in the State of Peers, or the greater part of a Parliament
in a Popular State, cannot do more than other chiefest, Governors; as for
example, free Kings in a Kingdom, and Fathers in respect of a Family. But it is
part of the Justice of a Governor to keep Laws, yea, those also that are
positive and given by himself, which Lawyers prove to be true, as well in a
free University, as in the highest King. The Reason of both is, because the Act
of Making or Relaxing a Law, is not an Act of Absolute Lordship, but an Act of
Empire, which ought to tend to the Preservation of Good Order.

That also, which Socinus says, deserves Reprehension, That besides the Will of
God and Christ himself, there can be no lawful Cause given of the Death of
Christ, unless we say, Christ deserved that he should dye. For Merit is in the
Antecedent Cause, as we said above, but Impersonally; for our sins deserved
that Punishment should be required: But that Punishment was conferred upon
Christ, this we so refer to the Will of God and Christ, that that Will has
also its own Causes, not in the Merit of Christ (who when he knew no sin, was
made sin by God) but in the great fitness of Christ to show a signal Example;
which consists both in his great Conjunction with us, and in the unmatched
dignity of his Person. But that Collection of Socinus is confuted by manifest
Testimonies of Scripture. The Antecedent Cause, Why the Infant of David died?
is made manifest; because David by sinning heinously, gave occasion to the
wicked to insult over the Name of God blasphemously. Here there is Merit, but
not in the Infant. And in punishing the Posterity of Achab beyond their own
Merit, God had respect to the Merit of the sins of Achab. Whence it appears
that the Antecedent Cause of Punishment is Merit, but not always the Merit of
the Person that is punished.

CHAP. VI. Whether God willed that Christ should be punished? And it is showed
that he willed it. And also the Nature of Satisfaction is Explained.
THese two Questions having been handled, Whether God could justly punish
Christ, being willing, for our sins? And, Whether there was some sufficient
Cause why God should do it? The third remains, Whether really God did this, or,
which signifies the same, willed to do it? For Socinus denies it both in many
places elsewhere, and also in a set Discourse upon it, Lib. 3. cap. 2. We,
together with Scripture, maintain that God willed this, and did it. For Christ
is said to have been delivered up, to have suffered and died for our sins, Romans
4.25. 1 Pet. 3.18. Isai. 53.5. The Chastisement of our Peace was laid upon
Christ. God laid upon Christ our sins, that is, the punishment of sins, which
were so required, that he, upon that account was afflicted; Christ did bear our
sins, that is again, the punishment of sins, Isai. 53.5,6,7. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Christ made himself Sin and a Curse, that is, liable to the punishment of sins,
Isai. 53.10. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. The Blood of Christ was shed for the
Remission of sins; so that that Remission did not come to pass without the
shedding of Blood, but by it. Matthew. 26.28. Hebr. 9.22. and elsewhere in many
places.

Here Socinus opposes many things: Some Examples and Promises before Christ;
some sayings concerning those things, that God said he gave by Christ. The word
remittere and cordonare, to forgive and pardon, and the very nature of
Liberality, from which he thinks it follows, that God wills to grant Impunity
to us repenting, requiring no punishment of any man upon that account. As
touching the Examples of Indulgence (besides that no universal thing is rightly
concluded from them) it must be observed, that these belong either to Temporal
Punishment or Eternal. If they belong to Temporal Punishment only, the
difference is manifest: for as it is proverbially said, That which is deferred
is not taken away. Now add this, that in the very Fact of Achab, as also in the
Fact of David, the contrary appears of that which Socinus would infer,
alleging them for himself: for the Temporal Punishment was so taken away from
David and Achab, that it was translated unto others. And in the Law it self,
sins are not forgiven, except the Blood of the Sacrifices be poured out, as
shall be explained afterward. But if the remission of Eternal Punishment be
the matter of Discourse, Socinus proves by no Argument, that it was made to any
man without a respect of God to Christ. The same must be said of Promises, that
has been said of Examples: and by the way it must be observed. That when God
promises to them that repent, that he will forgive Temporal Punishments, that
should not be understood always of the whole punishment, but of so much: for
God often uses to punish them also that repent, but fatherly and gently. So
God restored his people, when they repented; from the Babylonish Captivity unto
their Country, but restored not the former Liberty and Glory of the Kingdom.
But as touching Eternal Punishment, there is no Promise of Remission, which
excludes a respect to Christ. Hitherto belong those sayings of Sacred
Scripture, which show that Christ tasted death for all men, without any
difference of time; that he gave himself (...) a Ransom for all, Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. and much more those that by a Comparison being added, admit no
restriction of time; as when all are said to have sinned, and to be justified
by Redemption in Christ, Romans 3.23. and when Righteousness is said to have come
by one Christ upon all (to wit, as many as are justified) as by one Adam
Condemnation came upon all men, Romans 3.12. 5.17,18. 1 Cor. 15.22. Hence it is
that Christ is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, Apoc.
13.8. which place is sufficiently vindicated from the Interpretation of
Socinus, both by the very coherence of the words, and also by a like place of
Peter, where Redemption is said to be made by the Blood of Christ, the
unblameable and unspotted Lamb, that was foreknown before the foundation of the
World, but made manifest in the last times, 1 Pet. 1.19,20. Wherefore elsewhere
the Death of Christ is said to have interposed for the Redemption of those
Transgressions that had been under the former Covenant, Hebr. 9.15. and the
Righteousness of God is said to be declared by his Blood, for the pardoning of
sins that went before, which God is showed to have tolerated and suffered at
that time, the declaring of Righteousness being deferred to the time of Christ,
Romans 3.25. Hereunto belongs that famous place to the Hebrews 3.25. not that he
should often offer up himself, as the Chief Priest entered once a year into the
Sancturry with the Blood of another, or else he should have suffered often from
the Foundation of the World: but now he has been made manifest once in the end
of the World, to take away sin by the offering up of himself; and as it is
appointed for all men once to die, and after this the Judgment; so Christ was
once offered, that he might carry up the sins of many, etc. The whole coherence
of which place, if it be rightly considered, and especially if that place of
Peter be compared, 1 Pet. 1.19. where the same thing is discoursed of almost in
the same words, it will appear that in this the Sacrifice of Christ differs
from the Levitical, because the Efficacy was limited within the time of a year,
but the Efficacy of that extends it self through all Ages: for his Passion was
esteemed with God as performed before all Ages, though really it was performed
in a certain time, and so the decree of God, was very manifestly revealed unto
us. And unless it had been so, Christ must often have underwent Sufferings, not
after he began to preach, but from the beginning of the World. Which words have
no signification at all, unless the Efficacy of the Death of Christ extend it
self to all sins, which have any time been forgiven to men, from the very
beginning of the World: Just as the Judgment after Death extends it self to all
sins that a man committed, during life. But the contrary Interpretation of
Socinus, does not only render the words vain, but weakens the Argument of the
Writer: for it does not follow, if it were granted that Christ should have
often been offered, that he ought to have suffered, not only often, but often
from the Foundation of the World; unless you put together, that Christ should
have been often offered from the Foundation of the World; for these have a
coherence with one another: for the Effect of the Oblation is not stretched
farther than the Dignity of the Sacrifice. But that Christ should have been
offered oft-times from the Foundation of the World, if the parity of the
Sacrifice of Christ and the Levitical were granted, which the Writer of the
Epistle to the Hebrews opposes, it would not follow from any other thing, but
because the Effect of the Oblation of Christ is extended unto those sins that
were at any time committed, and forgiven from the Foundation of the World: For
if it were equal to the Levitical, (that is, of a virtue limited within a
certain time) verily its Efficacy could not reach from the time that Christ
died, unto the most ancient sins. But it would have been altogether necessary,
that many Acts of that kind should have been interposed between both times.

Now let us come to those Testimonies, that seem to Socinus properly to belong
to the time of Christ, and the New Covenant. Jeremiah indeed says, God will be
propitious to sins: but denies not that which Paul says, That this Propitiation
is made in the Blood of Christ, or, that God has respect unto Christ; yea, all
the Prophets (among whom also Jeremiah) bear witness that remission of sins is
received by the Name, that is, the Efficacy and Virtue of Christ, Acts 10.43.
And Deliverance by Christ is said to have come to us according to that Covenant
which God made with the Fathers; and according to those things that he foretold
by the Prophets, Luke 1.68,70,71,72,73,74. The Baptist also at the Command of
God, promises remission to the Penitent, and that for the Bowels of Mercy of
our God; but the same said, That Christ is the Lamb that takes away the sins
of the World, to wit, by Sacrificing, which the Revelation expresses, or by
Blood, as Peter speaks; in which places likewise the mention of a Lamb having
been made, shows unto what the Baptist had respect.

The name remittendi, of forgiving, which Socinus urges, in the Greek is
(...), which the Ancient Interpreter (...) translated to put away. We showed
above, that that was not the force either of the Greek or Latin word, that it
should necessarily include all kinds of giving up a man's right, because the
original and primitive signification of the word is opposite to (...), which is
to retain, or bring unto: whence, by a certain resemblance, it began to be
translated both to Punishment and to Debt. Nor to those only, but also to other
things: for the Grecians call (...), forgiving, the absolving of an accused
Person, being Innocent, in Judgment. We also showed above, how much difference
there is between the remission of Debt and the remission of Punishment: and
that in the remission of sin, which is made by a Governor, there is no
abdication of such a proper and private right as Socinus mentions, to wit,
absolute Lordship, or Debt: therefore these things may be fetched thence. Now
that only must be added, That it is not true, which Socinus would have, that
remission is contrary to any payment going before. Which that it may be
understood, we shall represent a certain Description of Remission of Debt,
which contains under it both those kinds, to wit, of Debt and Punishment; and
that according to the use of that word, both in Civil Law, and in common
Speech: Therefore to forgive a Debt is an Act, either of a Creditor or
Governor, freeing the guilty Person from the Obligation of Punishment or Debt.
We shall give a larger Explication for the sake of those, who are not well
acquainted with Terms of Law; the destruction of Obligation in Law is called
liberatio, freeing. Payment may go before this, it cannot follow it; because no
Act can be exercised about that which is no more. Therefore liberatio, freeing,
comes sometimes when some Payment goes before, sometimes without any Payment:
But one Payment frees ipso facto, and another not ipso facto, at the very time
of Payment. The Payment of a thing that is wholly the same with what was in the
Obligation, frees ipso facto: and it is the same sense, whether a guilty Person
himself pay, or another for him, to this intent that he may be freed. Which
should therefore be observed, because if another man pay the same for another
intent, liberatio, freedom, is not thereby procured. L. si poena l. in summa D.
de cond. indeb. l. Cassius D. de solut. Therefore where the same is paid by a
Debtor, or by another in the name of a Debtor, there is no remission; for the
Creditor or Governor does nothing about the Debt. Wherefore if any man suffer
the punishment that he ought, hence will be deliverance, but not remission. And
Lawyers call the profession of such a Deliverance in the right of the Debt,
properly and strictly (...), L. si accepto parag. 1. D. de acceptil. but no
other payment delivers ipso facto; to wit, if another thing is paid than what
was in the Obligation, L. 1. parag. 2. d. de reb. cred. but it is necessary
that some Act of the Creditor or Governor should be added thereto, which Act
rightly and usually is called remission. And such a payment, that may either be
admitted or refused, being admitted in Law, it has the special name of
Satisfaction, which is sometimes opposed unto Payment more strictly taken, L.
Satisfactio D. de solut. And hence the true Cause is to be brought, why a Vicar
of Corporal Punishment cannot ipso facto deliver a guilty Person by paying the
punishment. For this happens first and of it self, not because another paid,
(for that hinders not the liberation, if so be it is the will of the payer)
but because he paid another thing than what is in the Obligation; for there is
in the Obligation the punishing of him who sinned: whence it uses to be said,
That the Head follows a Crime: which may also be seen in other Obligations to a
Fact that are merely personal, as in a Contract of Marriage, and in the
Obligation of Workmen in Office. L. Operae de operis libert. For in all these,
if another pay, deliverance will not follow ipso facto, because together with
that another thing is paid; therefore that by the punishment of one man,
Deliverance may come to another, some Act of the Governor should interpose:
for the Law commands him that sinned to be punished. This Act, in respect of
the Law, is Relaxation or Dispensation, in respect of the Debtor, Remission.
But deliverance without payment comes to pass, either by the substituting of a
new Obligation, or by a total rescinding thereof. The substitution of a new
Obligation, whereby deliverance is made, is called novatio, novation; and if
the Person of the Debtor is changed, delegation. But the liberatio,
deliverance, which wholly destroys the Debt without any payment, it is
performed with solemn words about the Debt; in Civil Law it is called
acceptilation, a verbal discharge of Debt. But about Punishment, it has not a
proper name, that excludes necessarily payment of what manner soever, or how
great soever; but it is called by a common name, gratia, venia, indulgentia,
abolitio, grace, pardon, indulgence, abolition. Therefore Socinus is twice
deceived, when he applies the word acceptilatio, verbal discharge, taken out of
the Law, to that Remission which God grants to us. For first, that word, at the
very time when no payment went before, may be applied to the right of Debt, but
cannot, neither uses to be applied to punishment: for no man has read that
indulgence of Crimes has been called acceptilatio by any ancient Writer; for
that thing accepta fertur, is said to be received, that can be received. But a
Governor really requires Corporal Punishment, but receives it not, because
nothing of the punishment comes properly to him. Moreover, acceptilatio is
opposed to any manner of payment: whence it is figuratively defined an
imaginary payment. But Christ gave his life (...), a ransom for us, Matthew.
20.28. and we are bought with a price; that is, we are delivered by some
payment, 1 Cor. 6.20. and 7.23. concerning which more largely afterward.
Therefore there is not acceptilation here. Also it is not the payment of the
very thing that was due, which delivers ipso facto, for our Death, and that
Eternal Death was in the Obligation: neither is it novation or delegation: for
after our being delivered, another like Debt, or another Debtor does not
succeed. But it is a Remission, Satisfaction going before; which things Socinus
falsely judges to be contrary to one another; whenas on the contrary all
Satisfaction (that is, refusable payment) is therefore admitted, that there may
be place for Remission. But when we say, Satisfaction goes before, that must be
understood either in the Act it self, as it happens in the sins of
Christians, or in a certain and irrevocable Decree, as in the sins committed
and forgiven under the Law: for what God hatch decreed to do, is esteemed as
already performed; and if so be the Debt be truly paid, it is the same sense at
what time it is paid, especially with him, who knows all things, that are
certainly to come to pass; and perpetually sees and beholds them as present;
which is the confession of Socinus himself. Therefore those things that Socinus
brings to prove that Satisfaction cannot follow after Remission, or come to
pass together, and that there is not here any novation or delagation, also that
there may be some liberation, where there is no remission, are said in vain,
and belong not to our question. But that which he says, That by Satisfaction
the Debt is wholly and presently taken away, belongs indeed to the matter, but
is not true, except Satisfaction, against the Custom of the Law, be taken for
the payment of the thing that is due, made by him that owes it; concerning
which we discourse. But where another pays for a Debtor, and where another
thing is paid than what is due, here a twofold Act of of the Will is required
for liberation. For both he that pays ought to will this, that the Debtor may
be delivered, otherways deliverance comes not, as we showed above, and the
Creditor or Governor ought to admit the payment of one thing for another.
Wherefore seeing that every man may impose a Law upon an Act depending upon his
own Will, as that which is purely due, may be novated (renewed) upon a
Condition, L. quoties D. de Novat. So also he that pays for another, and he who
admits the paying of one thing for another, may make a Covenant that Remission
may presently follow, or upon a certain day, also either purely or upon
condition. But this was the Mind and Will, this was the Agreement and Covenant
both of Christ satisfying, and of God admitting Satisfaction; not that God
should presently forgive sins in the very time of the Suffering of Christ, but
that it should be at length, when Man being converted to God by true Faith in
Christ, begs pardon humbly, to which also is joined Christ's Advocateship or
Intercession with the Father. Therefore here Satisfaction does not hinder
Remission to follow: for Satisfaction had not by this time taken away the Debt,
but performed this, that for the sake thereof the Debt should at some time be
taken away.

Socinus adds a prop to the word Remission, that was it self without Efficacy,
out of a Parable, Matthew. 18. and that with a twofold Argument: First, That God
is compared to a King forgiving a Servant the money that he owed him; adding no
mention of any Satisfaction: and then, That we are implicitly commanded to do
the same thing that God does: and that we ought not so to forgive our
Offenders, as to require punishment of their Friends. But the Answer is easy,
that the Comparison is stretched beyond that whereunto it has respect: which
is vicious in every Argument drawn from similitude. Christ compares himself to
a Thief, and us to a Steward giving gifts of that which was another man's; not
that either he himself takes away a thing that is another man's, without the
will of its Possessor, or that it behooves us to do the same: but he compares
himself to a Thief, because he comes at unawares; and us to a Steward, because
it becomes us to do that with our own, which he did with that which was not his
own. So in that Parable Matthew. 18. Bounty toward our Neighbor is commended
unto us, because God is bountiful toward us. In this the King and God agree in
the Parable, That they are bountiful to them that are far below them. God
testifies this bounty by pardoning sins; the King by pardoning money that was
due. As there is another kind of owing, so there is another kind of forgiving.
The King and God disagree in this, That a King forgives without Satisfaction,
God not without Satisfaction. But the Comparison lies not in that. Also there
is another Reason: for concerning Debt, which right is provided for the profit
of the Creditour, every man has a most free power of appointing: and how much
less he requires, he is so much the more liberal: but in exacting he exercises
no Act of Virtue. But concerning Punishment, which belongs to the common Good
and Order, a Governor indeed has power, but not such a power as goes beyond
bounds: And when he requires Punishment, he uses a certain Virtue, that is
called Rewarding Justice, as we showed above. As touching the other Comparison
which is made between God and us in the Moral of the Parable, no other thing
can be inferred from thence, but that it is not just that we should be rigider
toward an Equal, than God, who is so much above us, is toward us that are
miserable men. Hence it follows, that we ought not to require Revenge, more
than God requires Punishment. But God delivered us from Punishment: Therefore
we also ought to be without the desire of Revenge. But how God performed that
Deliverance, it is not said there, neither is it to the purpose: for in that
there is not a Similitude, but a Dissimilitude; for God is a Judge, we are
private Persons. It is convenient for a Judge to be solicitous concerning an
Example: that Care belongs not to private Persons. The power of Punishing is
comprehended in the Office of a Judge: the same is taken away from private
Persons. What if that Comparison be too much pressed (as it is by Socinus) it
would follow, that men being Judges, ought not to require Punishment of any
guilty Persons.

Socinus, in some respect, acknowledging the name of Remission not to be
forcible enough to exclude all kinds of Payment or Satisfaction, expects some
more help from that other word (...), to give freely, which Paul upon this
subject uses thrice, Col. 2.13. and 3.13. and Ephesians. 4.31. concerning the force
of which word, we have said before, that it was nothing else but to signify
any benefit, especially that which was not due. But that, which Socinus puts
for a thing most certain, that this also is required to the signification of
that word, that a man should take something from himself, and should deprive
himself of a benefit of his own, is not true. For not only all those things,
that are mentioned in many places of the Scripture, concerning (...), the free
Gifts of God; as amongst others, for example, when it is said (...), to be
given to us to believe in Christ, and to suffer for Christ. Jesus (...) freely
gave to the blind man his sight. When did Christ deprive himself of any benefit
when he did so? He, that for the sake of any man condemns an innocent person,
is said (...), freely to give him, Acts 25.11, and 16. who yet did not belong
to the Condemner. Paul exercised the severity of Apostolic Discipline toward
the person guilty of Incest, not being injured himself, neither for any
advantage of his own. And forgiving this, he said, (...), that he forgave, 2
Cor. 2.10. admonishing also the Corinthians to admit the same man unto the
privilege of their former Friendship: this also he calls (...), freely to
give, Ib. 7.10. By these, and many other places both of the New Testament, and
also of other Writers, it evidently appears, that it is sufficient to the
signification of the word (...), that something of advantage that was not due,
comes to the Patient, though nothing is taken away from the Agent.

Moreover, we showed above, that a Governor in punishment does not abdicate
any thing proper and private; and that is the more evident in this matter,
because the word (...), is not only attributed to God, but also to Christ, Ephesians.
4.32. but the injury of sin is directed properly against God; so that if, upon
that account, God forgiving sins, should be said, to take away from himself
that which is his own, yet the same cannot be said of Christ, as Mediator.
Neither is that more true which Socinus deduceth from that already supposed, to
wit, That (...) is contrary to any Satisfaction. For it is not contrary to that
Satisfaction, which is both freely admitted, when it could have been rejected,
and unto which he that receives the benefit contributed nothing himself: We are
in vain solicitous concerning that word condonare, because the Holy Spirit
caused not any thing to be written in that Language. What if yet this word also
should appear in Sacred Scripture? Yet, because in Punishment a Donation
properly so called, has no place, neither is the Translation of that word
unusual, nothing could hence be inferred against Satisfaction, a thing may be
said rightly to be forgiven, as also to be pardoned then also, when payment is
made, but such a payment as has no power to purchase Liberation without an act
of the Will. For Princes also when they give pardon unto persons guilty of
Capital Crimes, they use to require of them both some Mulct, and a certain
public deprecation of the Fault: neither yet are they therefore said the less
to forgive Crimes. Therefore how much more justly may that word be used here,
where the required satisfaction proceeds not from us, but Liberation comes
altogether freely in respect of us, though not freely absolutely? which the
Scripture declares, when it says, we are justified freely; and immediately
adds, (...), by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 30.24. Verily,
seeing the Scripture says not in one place only, that we are redeemed, and that
with a price, and that Christ gave himself, or his Flesh, to deliver us, no
Equity suffers to overthrow all the force of these, by urging the word
condonare beyond what the use of the word requires.

But to that other Argument of Socinus, which is drawn from the imitation of
God and Christ in freely giving, which we are commanded, there is no need that
any other thing should be answered, but what we have already said on the
Parable, Matthew. 13. that the thing is proposed to our imitation, not the manner
of the thing. The thing is the Bounty it self, even after sin; and the
Remission following from it, or the Forgiving (if so you are pleased to speak)
the manner is different; in God Satisfaction going before; in us without it;
neither is it any wonder, because God is a Judge, and we private Persons. What
if a man consider the matter more nicely, he will find that all Satisfaction is
not removed wholly from that Condonation that is commanded to us, but that only
which in respect of the Person, to wit, an Equal, not a Superior, exceeds
measure. For the very Confession of a Fault and Deprecation (which Christ
forbids not to be required, Luke 17.4,5.) is so far from disagreeing with
Satisfaction, that elegant Latin Authors do call it, as it were by a peculiar
name, Satisfacere, to satisfy. So also Paul uses the word (...) concerning
the Corinthian, when yet the Rebuke of many had went before, 2 Cor. 2.6. And we
know, that in the Ages next the Apostles, the peace of the Church, as they
called it, was not given to them that fell, but after some public Acts of
Submission, which they therefore called Satisfactions.

The Reason drawn from Liberality leans upon a weak Foundation. For, as we
showed before, that the Virtue, which God uses in forgiving of sins, is not
Liberality, but Clemency, which Seneca rightly defines the Meekness of a
Superior toward an Inseriour in appointing punishment. Cicero putting the
name of a Gender for a Species, called this same Clemency Meekness, and defined
it, Justice placed in the moderation of Punishment, taking the word Justice in
so large a sense, that it comprehends Piety, and Faith, and Friendship.
Therefore this Clemency belongs to that Virtue which Aristotle in his Ethics
calls (...), Meekness; for Clemency is the Meekness of a Ruler. But Meekness
and Liberality are very much different. The Scripture by a somewhat more
general name calls this Clemency of God, (...), Goodness, Romans 2.4. and 11.22.
Tit. 2.4. but never called it (...), Liberality. Yea, which is more, the word
(...), or Liberality, is not applied to God; no not in other things that use to
be given and received; but this Virtue also is rather called the Love of God;
because it properly belongs to Liberality so to give a thing, that it perishes
to the giver. But that Socinus, with great intemperance of Speech, condemns the
constant Opinion of the Church of Impiety and Sacrilege; because that he
himself acknowledges a twofold Liberality of God, and we only a simple, in
that thing he does a great injury to the Truth: for our Opinion also
acknowledges in God a twofold, not Liberality (for that word is unsuitable to
this matter, and unusual to Scripture) but Bounty, and that much greater than
that lately started up Opinion of Socinus. The former Bounty is, that God
seeing he was stirred up with great hatred against sin, and could have as well
been utterly unwilling to spare us, as he was utterly unwilling to spare the
Angels that finned, yet that he might spare us, he did not only admit such a
payment, as he was not obliged to admit, but he also himself of his own accord
found it out. Verily this benefit is much greater and much more glorious, than
if God, judging it a matter of no value, whether some Example were made, or
not, had suffered our sins to go unpunished, as Socinus would have. Therefore
the Glemency of God is not overthrown by the payment of punishment, because to
admit such payment, and much more to invent it, proceeded from mere Clemency.

The other Bounty is, that he delivered up to death his own Son, being most
dear unto him, the Image of himself, and, if it is lawful so to speak, his
other self, not only that he might give a Testimony to the Truth of the
Doctrine, and so might attain unto the Resurrection (within which Socinus
contained himself) but chiefly that he might perform that payment or
satisfaction by suffering the punishment of our sins: in which part Socinus
ought to confess, that he would owe much less to Christ than we owe: yea, this
evidenceth that a greater love of God is declared by us, because it is just,
that Benefits should be esteemed not only for the Expense, but chiefly for the
Advantage that by the Expense redounds unto the person on whom the Benefit is
bestowed. But we, besides the Advantages which together with us Socinus
confesses, acknowledge a chief one, which he denies. Neither say we, That God
bestowed his Son, that God himself might receive his own, and so make God
sordid, with which Socinus upbraids us: but we say, God therefore did it that
he might openly declare the merit of sin, and his own hatred against our sins,
and also that he might consult the order of things, and his own Law, as much as
be could in sparing us. Neither is that less unjust, and that I may use his own
word, cruel, that he sats, we make God cruel. For that end of the Satisfaction
being added, makes the Sufferings of Christ no heavier: which Socinus is
compelled to confess, that they were laid upon him by God without any cruelty:
yea, how many more ends there are, so much farther is the appearance of Cruelty
removed: for he is a cruel person, that without cause, or for a light cause,
tormenteth any one. Moreover, this end of Satisfaction, or bearing Punishment,
coheres with the Death of Christ much more evidently, and with a much surer
connection, than those ends that Socinus acknowledges: for Miracles could give
Testimony to the Doctrine enougn and abundantly: Also Celestial Glory could
have been conferred upon Christ without the intervening of Death: but Death,
such a Death especially is fitted properly for suffering Punishments, and
punishment for procuring deliverance.

But though we hitherto showed that satisfaction was made to God by the
punishment of Christ, yet we desire not to deny that the force of satisfaction
is in the very action of Christ. For oftimes an acceptable action uses to be
admitted instead of a punishment. A benefit coming after, says Seneca,
suffers not an injury to appear, Lib. 6. cap. 5. In which place he shows,
that to render is to give a thing for a thing, and that by payment the same
thing is not paid, but so much. But though God, that needs nothing, cannot
receive a Benefit, yet his great Goodness takes any Dutifulness for a Benefit.
So Achab prevented a Temporal punishment by calling humbly upon God. Neither
does only a man's own action profit him for freedom from punishment, but also
another man's, with whom he is joined. So punishment was forgiven to the
Posterity of David, for the sake of David himself, 2. Kings 8.19. not only for
the Promises made to David; but also because the actions of David pleased God
judging graciously of them, 1 Kings 11.13. and 20.6. So Aelianus tells, That
Aeschylus was delivered from punishment, because his Brother Amyntas had acted
valiantly for bis Country. So amongst the Romans, when Titus Quintius was
accused, the Memory of his Father profitted him. Livius concerning Appius; He
commemorated the Merits of his Forefather toward the Commonwealth, that he
might deprecate punishment. Death was forgiven to Plautius Lateranus for the
eminent Merit of his Uncle. And in the general, Sallustius said, If they
offended their ancient Nobility, the valiant Acts of their Ancestors are
present for a Safeguard unto them. Cicero; It will behove him who shall require
that he may be pardoned, to produce good Deeds of his Predecessors, if any are
known. Quintilian; The Merits of Progenitors plead for a person in danger. And
as Works temporally good avail for a temporal impunity, so the Work of Christ,
being perfectly and spiritually good, availed for deliverance from eternal
punishment. Unto which that has reference, By the obedience of one man many
are made righteous, that is, they are justified, they are esteemed as innocent,
Romans 5.19. and that other for his Name, to wit, the Name of Christ, and there
was no mention of God before, as Socinus confesses. And moreover, the like
Sentence proves this same thing, Acts 10.43. Our sins are forgiven to us, 1
John 2.13. For it is certain that by this phrase, for the name of a man, the
impulsive cause is signified: Neither can Socinus prove the contrary by any
place of Scripture. But what we said of Satisfaction, that it is first given to
the punishment, and afterward to the obedient action if self, the same should
be understood concerning the appeasing God, concerning our Redemption, and
concerning Expiation, for the explaining whereof we are now preparing.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Propitiation and Reconciliation made by the Death of
Christ.
SOcinus himself took care that no man might mistake this present Disputation,
as if it were concerning a word only; for he professes in many places, That be
opposes not the naked word of Satisfaction, but the thing it self signified by
the word: Therefore, Christ reconciled God unto us by his blood; Christ
delivered us out of the hands of Divine Justice, by giving thereunto his own
blood, the price of our Redemption; Christ made amends for our wicked works by
his own obedience; Christ worthily deserved that God should bestow upon us the
remission of sins; Christ pacified the Anger of God by the loss of his life;
Socinus no less disallows all these, than the word Satisfaction it self, and
yet if this Disputation were concerning the word, the Church cannot be justly
defrauded of the liberty of interpreting Scriptures. In which this also is
comprehended, to translate very aptly into other Languages those things that
either the Prophets spoke in Hebrew words, or the Apostles in Greek words,
which savoured many times of a Hebraism or Syrianism, or to epitomize in a
perspicuous compend of words, those things which belonged to the same Matter
the Scripture has delivered in several places. So that which the Scripture
said, That Christ was delivered to death for sins, and to have suffered sins,
that is, the punishment of sins, and that his blood was shed for the remission
of sins, is expressed in elegant Latin and significantly by the word
satisfaciendi, of satisfying: for that word in Law or common use signifies the
exhibition of a Fact or Thing, from which Deliverance follows not ipso facto,
but an Act of the Will being joined. And it uses to be taken in this sense,
not only in pecuniary Debts, but also in Crimes, which Languages that are
derived of the Roman Language with depravation, call contentare, to content.
But that it may appear that Expressions of the same value, yea, those very
Expressions that Socinus rejects, are found in Sacred Scripture, we shall add
some other Testimon^s unto those that were drawn out of the Sacred Book above
in the first Explication of this Sentence, and we shall refer them to four
Classes. The first Class shall be of those Expressions, that signify the
turning away of Anger. The other of those that declare Deliverance made by
Redemption or the paying of a price. The third of those that signify
Subrogation. The fourth of those that ascribe unto the Death of Christ the
virtue of an Expiatory Sacrifice.

That we may enter upon the first Class, it is very well known, that to turn
away the wrath of a man, is called in the Greek Language, (...), and in the
Latin placare, pacare, conciliare, reconciliare, also propitiare, to appease,
to pacify, to reconcile, to propitiate. Both the act it self, and also that by
which the act is properly performed, is called by the Grecians (...), and by
the Latins placamen. In God, Anger, as we said above, is called by
anthropopathy, as it were the affection of punishing; which the Apostle says
is revealed from heaven upon all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, that
detain the Truth in unrighteousness, that is, that go against the known
Commands of Christ. But no man is excepted, because we are all by nature the
sons of wrath, that is, liable to the anger of God. This anger abides upon
some, Joh. 3.26. and it is turned from them, upon whom it abides not. Christ by
his Death attains this Aversion, and therefore it is very rightly called
Propitiation. So John the Apostle calls him twice, when he says, If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: and he is
a Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of all the
world. Epist. 1. cap. 2. verse. 2. Also, in this is love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a Propitiation for our sins, cap.
4. verse. 10. with which place that of Paul must be compared; God commends his
love, that when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. for both
Paul and John prove by the same Argument, that we did not first love, but were
beloved of God: and that which Paul calls he died, John calls, he was made a
Propitiation. Moreover, that place of Paul must be added, We are justified
freely by the Redemption in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation by Faith in his Blood. Therefore Christ was made a Propitiation in
his own blood: which what is it else but that very thing that Socinus denies,
That God was reconciled in Christ: for that he interprets in John (...),
Expiation, and by the word Expiation understands the destruction of sin, he
does that for no cause, and guarded by no example. (...) in all Greek Writers,
Poets, Historians, and others, is to propitiate, and uses to be construed with
an Accusative, signifying the person, whose anger is turned away: neither is it
otherways taken in the Septuagint, and Luke 18.13. In one place only, which is
Hebr. 2.17. Christ is said to be appointed a Chief Priest to propitiate the
sins of the people; where there is an Enallagy coming from the Hebraism, to
propitiate the sins; when it should have been said according to custom, to
propitiate God for the sins of the people. Therefore he there signifies
Expiation, but that which is made by Reconciliation. Otherways this use of the
word should have nothing common with the nature of the word, and the perpetual
signification of the same. Wherefore that word (...), to propitiate, and the
word thence derived (...), propitiation, cannot signify such an Expiation as
Socinus devises, that is, the destruction of sin, which is performed without
atonement. But Socinus interprets (...) mentioned by Paul, that in which God
shows himself appeased. We deny not that this signification may agree to the
word, and for some such reason the covering of the Ark is called (...) by the
Writer to the Hebrews. But because words of that Termination signify properly
a certain effective Virtue, and improperly a declarative, no reason suffers
us here to depart from property; for it is evident that Christ is so called
(...) by Paul, as he is called (...) by John. But (...) verily signifies
atonement, not the testimony of atonement: wherefore Scripture interpreting
Scripture, the word also (...) is to be expounded of Christ actively, not
declaratively. Moreover, the word blood being joined with it shows the same, to
which the virtue of reconciling is attributed; because without shedding blood
there is no remission. These are well known, Sanguine placastis ve'ntos and
virgin coesa.
Ye pacified the Winds with blood, and a Virgin slain.
and the like in Poets, concerning which there will afterward be place to
discourse more accurately.

The word (...) and (...) is like the word appeasing, to procure favor, and
reconcile, which Paul uses in this very Argument, Romans 5.10. and 11.292 Cor.
5.18. and Ephesians. 2.16. and Col. 1.10. Socinus opposes, That it is written, that
God was not reconciled to us, but we to God, and that upon that account,
because God was not angry at us, but we were turned away from God. For the word
reconciling, as also the word appeasing promiscuously assigns sometimes the
Dative, sometimes the Accusative to either party, both the party that is angry,
and also the party that is not angry at all, or less angry. Therefore it has
the same signification, that we are reconciled to God, and God to us. Sophacles
in Ajax. (...)
(...)
But he goes, being turned to the best Opinion, That he may be reconciled to
the Gods from his anger. Where the Quire expresses that which Ajax had said
before; (...)
(...)
(...)
But I go to washings and the brinks of the shore, that having cleansed my
faults, I may escape the heavy wrath of the Goddess. We see here manifestly
(...), to be reconciled to the Gods, is the same with escaping their anger. And
verily, he that diligently has looked into those places just now cited, cannot
deny that they speak of this Reconciliation, that is, the turning away of the
wrath of God, or verily of this also. For Romans 5. Paul after his own manner
expressing twice the same thing, that which he had said before, that Christ
died for the wicked and sinners, verse. 6. and 8. presently he expresses the
same in these words, that when we were Enemies we were reconciled unto God by
the death of his Son, verse. 10. And it appears by the opposite Member, that
this benefit is before Conversion it self: If these things, says he, are so,
much more now being justified by him, we shall be saved from wrath, verse 9.
also much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. The Apostolic
Argumentation proceeds a majori. If God was so good toward us before we were
converted, what will he be to us being converted? Here the word Reconciliation
in the formed Member cannot signify Conversion; for the Apostle observes some
singular thing in Christ; but to convert sinners, is not such a thing; for they
are not converted at any time, but being sinners: But it is a rare, and
altogether singular thing, to dye for sinners, and to reconcile sinners by
death, seeing that there have been always very few who would dye for their
Friends, being good men, verse. 7. Then Conversion is more aptly ascribed unto
the glorious Life of Christ, than his Death; but this Reconciliation is
attributed to Death, distinguished and discriminated from a glorious Life, as
the (...) opposite signification of the word shows. Moreover, by the latter
benefit it is given to be understood what the former is. The latter that comes
to the converted, is to have peace with God, verse 1. to be saved from wrath,
verse. 9. and 10. The Apostle calls this same, to receive reconciliation, verse
11. What other thing is it here to receive reconciliation, but to receive
remission of sins, as the Scripture speaks, Acts 10.43. and 26.18. but to
receive Conversion is an unknown kind of speaking. If therefore in the latter
Member to receive reconciliation is to receive the reconciliation of sinners,
and in effect to be delivered from wrath, or from punishment, in the former
Member also to be reconciled, should have an analogical signification: that the
former Member may be a right to the thing, the latter an exhibition of the same
thing. Add unto all these, that the love of God cannot be said, but very
unsutably and unaptly, to be gathered from this, that we have departed from the
hatred of God: For though Paul would have discoursed of the benefit of our
Redemption, it should have been expressed with anotherguess word, that might
signify not our action but Gods. But nothing is more plain than our
Interpretation, nothing more agreeable to the Apostle's purpose. But that
Socinus objects, that the mention of satisfaction here is not suitable, yea,
that the praise of love is thereby diminished, it is a vain thing: for mention
is not made of satisfaction in respect of its being a punishment, but as it is
a way of delivering us. Neither, as we proved before, can the love of God
toward men be more manifestly showed any way, than that being angry, that is,
requiring punishment, yet found a way for our freedom from punishment, having
bestowed Christ for that purpose. In that place 2 Cor. 5. about the end, as in
that to the Romans, there is found mention of a twofold Reconciliation. The
former Reconciliation is that whereby God reconciled all things, or the World
to himself by Christ, or in Christ, verse. 18 and 19. The latter is that, unto
which the Apostles, as Ministers of Reconciliation, in whom the word of
Reconciliation is put, exhort men in the name of God and Christ, verse. 18, 19,
20.

Therefore that former cannot be Conversion it self; for it is the Antecedent
and chief Matter of that word by which conversion is made. Moreover, Paul
himself shows that it consists in the not imputing of sins, that is, in the
decree of not imputing them. But now to impute sins, and to forgive them,
signify the same thing, Romans 4.6,7,8. But how is this Decree of not imputing
sins founded on Christ? Paul will tell: for God made him that knew no sin to
become sin for us. That which Socinus objects, That the not imputing of sins is
contrary to that way of reconciling by satisfaction, is without reason: for, as
was explained before, satisfaction goes before; afterward emission and
non-imputation of sins follow. It may also be said, that it is not absolutely
said that God imputes not sins, but that he imputes them not to them, that is,
to the sinners. And that sin may be forgiven to one man, or not be imputed to
him, and that it may be imputed to another man for example, or that another man
may upon that account be afflicted and punished, it appears sufficiently, both
by many things, that we alleged before, and also chiefly by that which
happened to David. And though these are not joined immediately in words, not
imputing sins, and he made him that knew no sin to become sin; that does not
make them not to belong to the same thing. For these are joined to one another
by conjunctive words (and) and (for) neither does any new speech and differing
from this argument come between: but this is said, that God has made the
Apostles Ambassadors and Ministers of the benefit by him bestowed, to wit, that
they were sent for this purpose through the World, that they might plant the
Faith of that benefit in men by their preaching. But the strongest argument for
making that Faith, is from the delivering up of Christ unto Death: for it is
not credible, that God would have had his Son, that was most dear to him, and
most innocent, so heavily afflicted, except he had proposed some excellent end
unto himself. But this end, to wit, the proper end, and most nearly adhering to
that fact, Scripture every where, and reason it self in some respect by
induction testifying, can scarcely be any other but the obtaining the right of
pardon by antecedent satisfaction: But that, we request you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God; though, according to the nature of the word, it may
signify, either cast ye away your hatred toward God, or receive ye the
remission of sins, to wit, by repentance, as is showed Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3. Acts
3.19. and 5.31. yet according to the nature of the thing discoursed of, it more
rightly admits the latter sense; for a weaker person uses not to be requested
to receive more powerful into favor. And those words of Paul express the
Ministry of Reconciliation, which Reconciliation he had just now described by
the Non-imputation of sins. So Christ himself said, (...), He was sent to
proclaim liberty to Captives, Luke 4.18. and commanded the Apostles to preach
in his name the remission of sins, Luke 24.47. So Paul himself said, he
declared the remission of sins, Acts 13.38. Ephesians. 2.16. It is written concerning
Christ, (...), that he may reconcile both Jews and Gentiles in one Body unto
God. This Dative (...) cannot be governed but by the Verb (...). But the
Interpretation of Socinus, that Deo here may stand by it self, or that
reconciliare Deo should be to reconcile them amongst themselves, that they may
serve God, is wrested, hard, and without example. Neither is the Argument,
drawn thence, of any force, that in that place Paul treats of the Peace made
between the Jews and the Gentiles: for it does not follow, that mention of
Peace is unsuitable to this Argument, which is purchased unto them both with
God; for the two diverse things that are joined, are so joined with one another,
that they are first and more eminently joined to the Bond it self: for they are
not joined with one another, but by and for the Bond. Therefore the Gentiles
and Jews are made Friends with one another through their Friendship with God.
And it is wonderful that Socinus does not acknowledge this, when he says
himself, Col. 1.20,21,22. That the Apostle having raised a Discourse concerning
the Agreement procured between Creatures, presently and immediately subjoyns
mention of that Reconciliation by which men are made friends to God, and that
by the interposition of the word and, which uses not to join things that have
no manner of coherence. Whence it is manifest that these things are joined with
one another: so that Paul, in that place to the Ephesians, whereof we treat,
did rightly refer the Reconciliation of men with men, unto the Reconciliation
of men with God, as an effect to its Cause. That must be added, that in that
same place the blood of Christ is named, as by which reconciliation was made.
But the Scripture in many places subjoyns remission of sins to the blood of
Christ, as its most proper effect, Matthew. 26.28. Ephesians. 1.7 Coloss. 1.14. Hebr.
9.22. Romans 3.25. and 5.9. 1 John 1.7. 1 Pet. 1.2. Apoc. 1.5. to wit, by a
Propitiatory Virtue, 1 John 2.2. and 4.10. Like unto that place to the
Ephesi^s, seems that of which already mention has been made to the Coloss.
1.20. so that for the explication of that, I think that this rather should be
brought, then that Ephesians. 1.9,10. for very many things agree; what there is said
separately by Blood and by Cross, is here said jointly by the Blood of the
Cross. There is (...), making peace, here (...), having made peace; there, that
he might reconcile both to God; here, to reconcile all unto himself, that is,
God. This is the difference, that there only mention is made of men reconciled
with one another, because they were reconciled unto God; but here of men
reconciled both with one another, and with Angels, therefore because they were
reconciled unto God. (...) is verily unto himself, as also the Syrian
interprets: for if this were the sense of these words, into one, as Socinus
would have it, it should have been written (...), or at least (...); but should
not have been (...), or (...), which is necessarily referred to a certain
person. Neither is it a new thing that the Preposition in with an Accusative,
is put for a Dative, because amongst the Hebrews there is a very frequent
change of the Particles b and l: for by the confession of Socinus himself, it
is an usual Phrase amongst the Grecians, (...), that a man is reconciled to
another. But no man can deny that (...) in Apostolic Speech is put in the
place of (...), who has looked into a few places diligently; such as Matthew.
15.24. Acts 16.40. Ephesians. 3.19. and the exchange of the same words may be also
frequently observed in profane Writers. Wherefore that is not likely that
Socinus would have, that in this Sentence only the Reconciliation of. Creatures
with one another is mentioned, but in the following Sentence the Reconciliation
of men with God: for contrariways, what is said in the general, verse. 20. that
is specially applied to the Colossians, v. 21. which the word (...), and you
signifies, that is, yea you also, or you your selves. But in this Sentence that
is not said which Socinus says, That Reconciliation was made by making us
unblameable; but that we were reconciled, that we might be made unblameable.
Socinus made the way of the end, verily very licentiously. The Scripture in
many places declares, that sins are forgiven to us, that in time to come we may
live holily, being obliged by so great a benefit, Luke 1.17. And it is to be
observed, that in this Sentence also there is made mention of the body of
Christ, which was broken for us for the remission of sins, 1 Cor. 11.24. Matthew.
26.28. and of death, to which likewise, already before we showed, that
remission, as an effect, is attributed. But that which the Apostle adds, That
we were reconciled, when we were estranged and enemies in our mind, is like
that which he said elsewhere, that Christ died for us, when we were sinners and
wicked, Romans 5.6,8. and that, it is God that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5.
Wherefore it is so much the more justly believed, that here also the same
benefit is treated of; for this was the beginning whereby the Apostle came in
to this speech, that we have in Christ redemption, to wit, the remission of
sins; and verily it cannot be better understood, how much God and Christ loved
us, and how much we are Debtors to God and Christ, than if we consider that the
remission of sins was first obtained, and afterward applied to us, being under
the wrath of God, and guilty of sins, which two things the Scripture for the
most part joins together. But that which Socinus says in another place, That
it behoved God to be thoroughly appeased toward us, and not angry at all,
before Christ was sent to make a Covenant. How disagreeable unto truth this is,
he seems himself elsewhere to have acknowledged, when he said, That at that
very moment, when God offered Conditions to renew Friendship with us, he was of
a mind not reconciled, but reconcilable. And verily Reason it self teaches
this very thing; for in all conditional things the conditional are before the
absolute. Neither should the Condition only be offered, but also fulfilled,
before an absolute Act follows. Wherefore the Scripture says, We have peace
with God, after we are justified by Faith, Romans 5.1. Before we are sons o
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. for our sins are the cause of separtion, that is, they make
God averse from us, Isai. 59.2. This Anger excludes Peace or Friendship; but
not any kind of Love generally so called, as appears John 3.16. and 1 John
4.10. And verily Socinus himself supposes, That sins are not forgiven to men
before repentance. But he cannot be said to be reconciled, or as Socinus
expresses it, thoroughly reconciled, who yet imputes sins. Which thing, that it
may be more clearly understood, there are verily three moments, that I may so
say, of Divine Will to be distinguished. The first is before the coming to pass
of the Death of Christ, either really, or in the decree and foreknowledge of
God. In this moment God is angry at a sinner, but so as he does not abhor all
ways and reasons of laying down his wrath. The second moment is, when Christ's
Death is now come to pass: In which God does not only appoint, but also
promise, that he will lay down his wrath. The third is, when a man believes
with a true faith in Christ, and Christ, according to the form of the Covenant,
commends the Believer to God. Here now God lays down his anger, and receives a
man into favor. But because Verbs Active and Passive answering to the same,
use to have a twofold signification, either that they are confined within
Virtue and Efficacy, or that they include Effect also; it follows that in the
first moment neither of these have place, and therefore in respect thereof, God
may be called only reconcilable. In the second and third he is rightly said to
be reconciled, the two Senses that I mentioned being distinguished. In the
former sense God is said to have reconciled the world to himself, and we
reconciled to God, when we were Enemies. In the latter is that, Be ye
reconciled to God, and we received Reconciliation; and the same is the
signification of the words Redemption and Expiation, and that expression,
whereby Christ is said sometimes to have died for all, sometimes for some.
Moreover that must be observed, that the word Reconciliation does not exclude
Satisfaction, or all Performance and Expense. For in Livius there is, That by
that gift he might reconcile unto himself the minds of his Country men: and
elsewhere in many places the like may be seen; so that upon that account Christ
should no less be called our Reconciler; which very thing the Scripture also
shows, when it adds to Reconciliation the mention of Blood.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning our Redemption purchased by the Death of Christ.
THat we may come to the second Class of Testimonies, which is of Redemption,
before all things it must be put beyond Controversy, that Redemption, and the
like words in holy Scripture, are applied to our deliverance from deserved
Punishment; which appears to be so, Gal. 3.13. Romans 3.24. and especially Ephesians.
1.7. and Coloss. 1.14. neither does Socinus deny it. Yea, also those places
which say that we were redeemed from iniquity and vain conversation, as Tit.
2.14. and 1 Pet. 1.18. belong to the same; for it is a very frequent thing for
sin to be put for the punishment of sin. And in that place to Titus the word
(...) being added, that is, to expiate, which we shall afterward explain, and
after that in the place of Peter, the mention of a Lamb, that is, a Sacrifice,
make this evident; because the Scripture in many places bears witness, that
this Redemption is ascribed to the Death of Christ as the cause, as Ephesians. 1.7.
Romans 3.24. Hebr. 10.12. Socinus could not deny it. But how the Death of Christ
is the cause of Redemption, this is it that is in Controversy. For we say,
That the Death of Christ is therefore the cause of Redemption, because thereby
he moved God to deliver us from punishment: but Socinus denies this thing. But
though there were something ambiguous in these Testimonies, in which mention of
Redemption is made, it would be sufficient to bring other places of the same
Argument for interpreting them, of which sort we have cited many, which
signify not obscurely, that Christ died for our sins, suffered punishment for
us, and so obtained us the remission of sins, to wit, God being reconciled by
his Death; yet we hope that the same Opinion may be proved clearly enough by
these places which use the word Redemption, and other like it. Now there is a
twofold phrase in Scripture; one which names the Redemption of sins, another
which names our Redemption by a diverse kind of speaking, but with the same
signification.

That former phrase Hebr. 9.15. where the Death of Christ is said to have been
caused (...) for the redemption of transgressions: but that by this kind of
speaking (...), and in Latin culpas, delicta, crimina redimere, to redeem
faults, offenses, crimes, there is not only signified the Cause moving to
deliver, but such also as includes Compensation or Satisfaction; it is so
manifest, that Socinus ought to have confessed that also. Therefore since this
is the most usual signification of that word, it is not allowed us to recede
from it, except two things be proved, that sometimes, though less frequently,
another thing is signified by that expression, and that there is here just
cause, why the less usual signification should be preferred before the more
usual. Neither of these is proved by Socinus. For he brings no place of Sacred
or Profane Writer, where to redeem transgression, sins, faults, offenses,
signifies any other thing but that which we said. In the Sentence of Solomon,
Prove. 16.6. there is a Hebrew word Chaphar, which does not properly answer the
Greek word (...): which very thing Socinus also acknowledges, when he says,
Expiation rather than Redemption is signified by that word. It may be added,
that the most native signification of that word is to cover, and thence it is
drawn to other things by a certain resemblance. Neither does it follow, because
the word Chaphar, which among the Hebrews, as many others, because of the
penury of primitive words in that tongue, is of many significations, so that it
may signify both other things, and also (...), to redeem, that therefore
likewise the Greek word (...) should have all the significations that Chaphar
has, because the use of the word (...) is simple among the Greeks, answering
its own Original; but other words of the Greeks express other significations of
the word Chaphar. In Dan. 4.24. there is a Hebrew word Pharak, which is not of
equal force with the Greek word (...), but both properly and frequently it
signifies to tear, to break, to pluck up; and for this also to deliver.
Howbeit, though we should interpret redimere in this place with the Ancients,
nothing compels to take this word out of the signification that we defend: For
God is moved by the fruits of repentance to withold temporal punishment, as
before also has been observed.

But the other expression, that signifies the person redeemed, very often in
holy Scripture it is found accommodated to our Argument; as Romans 3.24. Ephesians.
1.7. and elsewhere. In Greek there is the verb (...) and (...), and hence the
verbal (...) and (...). It is asked, Whether this act is attributed properly or
improperly to Christ? Socinus defines proper redemption, that is, (...), (for
otherways the word redimendi in Latin is of many significations) the
deliverance of a Captive out of the hands of him that detains him, by giving a
price to him that detains him: too narrowly. For both the nature and use of the
word is not confined to captivity only, but to every kind of hurt, as also is
the word deliverance. Therefore you may more rightly define (...), or
redemptio, redemption, is the deliverance of a man from an evil by the
interposing the payment of a price. So Maro used the word Redemption properly,
when he said, Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit.
If Pollux redeemed his brother by alternal death.
Castor is delivered from perpetual death by the alternal death of his brother
being interposed: but improperly (...) and redemptio, redemption, signifies any
kind of deliverance; yea, that also which has no price interposed. But, as
Socinus confesses, and as the Laws teach us, the property of words should not
be receded from, but for weighty causes. Therefore in a doubtful case (...),
redemption should be understood to be made by the interposing a price. But now
there is no place for doubting, because the Scripture calls him openly (...),
the price of redemption. For the son of man came, that he might give his soul
(...) a price of redemption for many, Matthew. 20.28. Mark 10.45. with which
places those are to be joined, that bear witness that the Redemption was made
by Death in Blood, as Hebr. 9.12. Because these places went strongly against
Socinus, he could invent no other thing but to say that (...), or pretium,
price, here is said improperly. And he defines a price properly called, that
which is received by him that detains. Here first, that which we said just now
must be repeated, that property should not be forsaken, unless the matter urge
it. But if Socinus brought any Causes of devising improperty, we trust they are
confuted by us, Chap. 4, 5, 6. for the comparison made between Moses and Christ
scarcely needs an answer, because every similitude has certain bounds, beyond
which it cannot be stretched. They are compared as deliverers, but in respect
of the way of delivering, neither does it more follow from thence, that Christ
by satisfying has not delivered us, than that Christ delivered us by the death
of Enemies, because Moses did that. What if the Comparison belonged also to the
way of delivering, that it might proceed the better, it should be said, that
Christ delivered us by Miracles, as Moses, but not by his own Death, or his own
Blood, which neither is ascribed, nor can be ascribed to Moses. But the
chiefest thing is, that the word (...), price, concerning the force of which we
here treat, is added to the deliverance purchased by Moses. For according to
the Opinion of Socinus himself, the way of delivering is not the same; for
Moses and Joshua and others, delivered not by doing any thing about the persons
to be delivered, (which Socinus attributes to Christ) but by removing them that
opposed their liberty, to wit, their Enemies; therefore the property of that
word should be retained: yet the definition of Socinus being somewhat
corrected, that (...) may be properly a thing or fact by which any man is
moved, that whereas he was inclined to do a man hurt, he suffers him to be
delivered from it. That we call a fact or thing (...), herein we disagree not
with Socinus, who confesses, that every thing whereby Satisfaction is made to
another, is properly called (...), or price, and not money only. But without
cause he confines (...), price, to captivity only, s^h that word agrees both to
bondage, and banishment, and death, and every inconvenience, from which we can
be delivered: for both the Original, to wit, (...), belongs to those things,
and common use is not against it. Moreover, we approve not that, that he would
have (...) properly called, to be received by some man. For if the word
receiving be taken rigidly, as it uses to be in definitions, it cannot be
applied to deeds, but to things only. But Satisfaction may be made, and
deliverance obtained by deeds: and this appears chiefly in deliverance that is
made by the translating of punishment. For it appears by those things which we
said before, that punishment is not properly received by any man, where we
showed, that in punishment no man is properly and naturally a Creditor.
Moreover, the word acception properly taken, if it does not signify the
translation of property, yet at least some benefit of the receiver. But in
punishment the proper advantage of the punisher is not regarded, but the common
good and order of things. Therefore there is here no Receiver, unless you
please to call, very improperly, a Judge a Receiver, as one that takes care of
Law and Right and Common Good. Nevertheless (...) has place properly also in
punishment. So the Eye of Zaleucus was the (...) of the Eye of the Son: and
they that are punished in decimation are a (...) of the whole Legion. The
ancient Latins, whose whole Tongue was a depravation of the Greek, putting in
one letter called (...), lustrum, and (...), lustrare. Therefore lustrare urbem
is to free a Town from punishment by a succedaneous punishment, which is also
called piaculum. So by the foolish Opinion of the Heathen, the Decii Lustrarunt
Romanum exercitum, by their suffering punishment, freed the Roman Army from
punishment. And of old Menoeceus suffered punishment for Thebae, concerning
whom his Mother in Papinius said; Lustralemne feris ego te, puer inclyte,
Thebis,
Devotumque caput, vilis ceu matter alebam?
Did I as a base Mother, nourish thee, O worthy Boy, to make Expiation, and to
be Condemned for the cruel City of Thebes? On which place Luctatius or
whosoever that ancient Scholiast is, It is the custom of France, to expiate a
City. He called that lustrare, which Caesar called placare Deorum immortalium
numen, to appease the Deity of the immortal Gods. Therefore placamen and
lustrum, which is in Greek (...) and (...), which as the Pagans in a thing
falsely believed, so the Apostles in a thing truly believed, used in the same
sense. So in the Epistle to the Hebrews (...) and (...) are put for the same
thing, as it appears Chap. 9. v. 12,14,15,22,23. Neither is it only there
inferred that (...) in this Argument should be taken properly, because no
efficacious reason compels us to go to improperty, but hence also much more,
because no place is brought, either out of Sacred or Profane Writer, in which
the signification of (...) is stretched beyond the description set down by us.
Socinus brings no place out of Greek, and out of Hebrew he brings one place
only, Prove. 13.8. in which is Chaphar. But besides that Chaphar may be of a
larger extent than (...), because (...) is from (...), which signifies to
deliver, whereas Chaphar, as we said before, is a word of many significations,
it cannot by any Argument be proved, that in that place any other thing is
signified by the word Chaphar, but that which can move him that was about to
hurt, that he hurt not; whether he have only the power and affection of
hurting, or whether he have also the right and authority. For that of Solomon,
Chaphar, or if you would have it so, the (...) of a man are his Riches, is like
the Sentence in Job 2.4. All that a man has will he give for his life. For
this, amongst other things, is the use of Riches, that they can pacify either
the just or unjust anger of many, and so turn away the punishment that hanged
over; according to that, Munera, creed mihi, placant himinesque Deosque
Believe me, Gifts appease both Gods and Men.
And verily, in that Sentence there is an elegant comparison of the Advantages
that both Fortunes bring with them: The rich man has that wherewith he may
appease the angry man; the poor man is less liable to another man's anger. What
if it were very true, that (...) may be taken for any charges, yea for such
also, by which no man is moved to deliver, (which has been proved by no
example) yet the word (...), which Paul uses 1 Timothy 2.6. is more significant
than to admit such a cold interpretation. For the word (...) in composition
signifies either contrariety or change; here contrariety has no place;
therefore compensation is signified. Neither are they called in another sense
in the Greek (...), who devote themselves unto death for another, that they may
deliver him: So (...) is such a (...) in which the deliverer undergoes
something like that evil, that hanged over the head of him that is delivered:
and there is as it were an excellent periphrasis of that word Galat. 3.13.
Christ (...) redeemed us from the curse, being made a curse for us: concerning
the sense of which place we treated before. Moreover, Peter compares the Blood
of Christ to Gold or Silver, as being something greater than them, upon that
very account that it is a price, 1 Pet. 2.18. But Gold and Silver use to be a
price truly, and not figuratively: wherefore it is necessary that blood should
be as truly, or also much more truly a price. Now a price is that by the
expense whereof some thing or right is acquired: and that is the nature of a
price, that by its worth or estimation it moves another to grant some thing or
privilege, as impunity. To these may be added those places, that show that
Christ gave his flesh or himself for the life of the world, and that he might
deliver us, John 6.51. Tit. 2.14. for this phrase to give something for
something, is very suitable to a true price.

Socinus cannot invalidate these, and many other places, in which the Death and
Blood of Christ are called the price of our deliverance, but by saying that ou^
deliverance from punishment is indeed an effect of the death of Christ (for
here is no place of treating of the deliverance from the bondage of sin) but in
respect of us, not in respect of God, that is, that God is not thereby
persuaded to deliver us, but we, that we may come to the deliverance. But both
the things that we have said, and also many other things, shut up this refuge
from him. For first the word (...), and much more the word (...), are of that
nature, that they signify a thing, the effect whereof is about the deliverer
before the delivered. Moreover, though to buy is taken sometimes simply for to
acquire, as to sell for to enslave; but the word price being added to the word
buying (as 1 Cor. 6.20. and 7.23.) requires a nearer similitude. For it most
proper to a price that it should be esteemed by any man to be of as great worth
as the thing. Moreover, the Apostle expounds (...) by (...), Romans 3.24. But
(...), is an act that is exercised about the deliverer before the person to be
delivered. And elsewhere, to wit, Hebr. 9.12. (...) is expounded by (...), that
is, expiation: concerning the force of which word we shall afterward treat.
Add to these things, that when an effect is attributed to a thing very
frequently, and so that it was never found attributed to other things, (as the
effect of Redemption is referred to the Death and Blood of Christ, Gal. 3.13.
Matthew. 20.28. Mark. 10.45. Tit. 2.14. Hebr. 9.15. Apoc. 5.9. and 20.28. Romans
3.24. Ephesians. 1.7.) then it is necessary that an end more proper, and near than
common and remote, should be understood. But about us, the effect of
deliverance is both removed many degrees from the Death of Christ, and also so
far from being proper, that is agrees much more to other things to which it
uses not to be ascribed. For any thing that Socinus says of the connection of
our deliverance with the Death of Christ may be summarily explained thus:
Deliverance (as he thinks) follows from holiness of life, holiness from the
hope of reward: Hope firstly and chiefly proceeds from the Resurrection; but it
is attributed unto Death, either in respect that it is a way to the
Resurrection, and compared with it, it confirms the same hope. Whence it
follows ( Socinus also confessing it) that we are much more delivered by the
Resurrection, then by the Death of Christ. Yea, if we acknowledge the truth,
Death is only joined with that effect by accident; for the Resurrection makes
not Faith, but as it is a part of the Glory of Christ: but the greatest glory
could have happened to Christ, though he had not been dead: But that Christ by
suffering showed us an example that we should follow, that cannot at all be
applied to the remission of sins, that happened not to Christ. Wherefore then
is that so often repeated mention of Death in this business of Redemption?
Socinus brings two things; first, because in Death there is some Expense, which
is not in the Resurrection, therefore the mention of Death is fitter for
Redemption: also because the Love of God and Christ is more declared by Death.
As touching the first, we go back to the same thing; for if by the Death of
Christ the effect of our deliverance did not follow of it self (which is the
profession of Socinus himself, expressed in manifest words) there was no need
that Christ and his Apostles should have mentioned either Redemption or Price,
especially so often: since Deliverance might be expressed more conveniently in
other words. But that other consideration, though it may belong to those
Sentences that commemorate the Love of God, yet is not very sutably brought to
explain other Sentences which do not, nor yet the very word Redemption. It may
also here be mentioned, that Love is not showed by this thing, because it was
not so much the cause, as the naked occasion of our good. Socinus thinks he
pursues our Opinion, when he says, That the Scripture so treats of the
Redemption purchased by the Death of Christ, that it sets something manifest
before the eyes, but not that it may declare some hidden Virtue, such as he
thinks that to be which we deduce from Scripture. But when he says this, he
wounds not us, but rather furnishes us with a Dart against themself. For those
things which are God's, who knows but the Spirit of God, and he to whom he will
reveal them, 1 Cor. 2.10,11. But that the Death of Christ is procured by God
for this purpose, that the punishment of our sins might be required of him, and
that he might become our (...), Isaiah said it long before, Christ himself said
it, neither did the holy Rites in the Old Covenant signify any other thing. So
that he who should take notice of these things, could not be ignorant of God's
Will and Decree about this business: though I may now also say, that Nature it
self says, that Death is the wages of sin. This Will of God being known by
Oracles, there is afterward gathered the great love of God toward us, as John
speaks 1 Epist. 4.10. and Paul Romans 5.10. Neither is it any other thing that is
signified by the word witness, 1 Timothy 2.6. as it is easy to understand by
those things that go before, verse. 4. And verily the words of Scripture
themselves, simply understood, bring these things with them: whereas it is so
impossible for any man to gather that consequence of deliverance from Death,
which Socinus deduceth through so many Degrees, and so variously, from the
words of Scripture themselves, that it cannot be easily understood out of
Socinus himself, what he would have to be the proper sense of Scripture in
these Expressions.

Therefore true Redemption has been proved by us, as just now true
Reconciliation has been proved. But either of those being proved, that which
is intended is proved, to wit, That we are delivered by the punishment of
Christ, which he paid for our sins. Not that all Redemption and Reconciliation
is such, but because the subject matter admits of no other. Therefore it is
vain, and nothing to the purpose, that Socinus so often says, both that a man
may be appeased, though nothing is performed; and also that a man may be truly
redeemed that owes nothing, and therefore without payment. For we treat of that
Propitiation and Redemption, which the Scripture declares to be made by the
performance of something, to wit, by Death, and of that Redemption, by which
the same Scripture testifies, that we are delivered from deserved punishment:
but such a performance, which frees the Debtor of punishment from punishment,
is both rightly and properly called Satisfaction; which Socinus seeing, that he
might take away Satisfaction, he took away also Propitiation and true
Redemption.

Here I think good to censure some other things, which he did not discourse of
whilst he handled the Argument of Redemption; yet he discoursed of them
elsewhere, as belonging to this Argument. He would not have the word Mediator
to signify any other thing in the holy Scripture but the Interpreter of God.
Two places do persuade me of another thing; the one 1 Timothy 2.5. where there is
said to be one Mediator of God and Men, Jesus Christ, who gave himself an (...)
for all. The other Hebr. 9.15. where Christ is called the Mediator of the New
Covenant, that Death intervening for the Redemption of Transgressions, they,
that are called, might obtain eternal life. To which fitly may be added a third
Hebr. 12.24. which shall be discoursed of afterward: it appears here, that
Mediation is placed in Redemption it self; neither is the word contrary. For it
belongs no less to the Office of a Mediator, to be in the room of Men with God,
than to be in the room of God with Men. Neither is a Mediator only among the
unlearned called, he that appeaseth a man, but also amongst those, who speak
elegantly. Whence Suidas interpreted that word Peacemaker.

Elsewhere Socinus says, The dignity of the Person makes nothing for the
estimation of the punishment, and consequently that the Divine Nature of
Christ, and his great Perfection, brings no value to the punishment. But we
believe otherways: to wit, that this punishment was thence to be esteemed, that
he who suffered the punishment was God, though he suffered not as God. For
hitherto belongs that Expression, whereby God is said to have purchased the
Church with his own Blood, Acts 20.23. After which manner also elsewhere the
Lord of Glory is said to have been crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. Also the Dignity of
the whole Person, that is, Christ, contributes not a little to this estimation:
Therefore in the Scripture it is called emphatically the Blood of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.27. the Blood of Christ, Hebr. 9.14. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, 1 John 1.7. both the most perfect innocence and holiness of Christ
comes into the same estimation. Hence it is called precious blood, to wit, of
the Lamb without blame, 1 Pet. 1.19. making allusion to the custom, received
not only by the Hebrews, but also the Gentiles, that they sacrificed Beasts
excellent for whiteness, and all beauty of Body, which because they were
exempted from the whole Flock, thence by a word invented in holy things, but
presently translated to profane, they were called eximiae, excellent. To the
same purpose belong these also, My righteous servant shall justify many, Isai.
53.11. He made him that knew no sin, to become sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. But that
Socinus disputes, because the Divinity it self does not suffer, therefore that
this comes not into the consideration of punishment, it is just as if you
should say, that it is the same thing, whether you strike a private Person or a
King, also whether you strike an unknown Person or a Father, because strokes
are directed to the Body, not to the Dignity of the Person, which gross Error
long since Aristotle has confuted. Also the common-Judgment dissents from
Socinus. For those People, whose Laws are most praised, esteemed punishments by
the dignity of the Persons and other Attributes. Wherefore according to the
Laws of the Romans, which are known evidently to be very full of equity,
Punishments are varied according to the Condition of the Persons; and it has
been abundantly demonstrated by them, that did write of Commonwealths, that
other Nations, famous for Wisdom, did not otherways appoint. And the
Interpreters of the Roman Law prove it.

CHAP. IX. What does it import that Christ died for us.
IN the third Class we did put those Testimonies which intimate Subrogation, as
when Christ is said to have tasted death for all men, Hebr. 2.9. died for the
people, John 11.50. suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.21. died for us wicked and
sinners, Romans 5.7,8. one died for all, 2 Cor. 5.14. It is received in every
Tongue, that when a Person did or suffered a thing in the room and place of
another, it is said, that he suffered, or did that for him. So it is in
Terentius, I will lead thee, (pro) instead of him; I will grind (pro) for thee.
Neither is this phrase only applied to persons, but also to things; for that is
said to be given, put, or had for him, which in his stead or room is given, put
or had. Socinus declines this Interpretation by the ambiguity of the word pro
for, which often signifies only the profit of another; which is true of the
Latin word, as also of the Greek (...). But the word (...), which is ^ound in
Matthew 20.28. and Mark 10.45. wholly rejects this signification, and requires
commutation. So evil is said to be rendered (...) for evil, 1 Pet. 3.9. Romans
12.17. an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, Matthew. 5.38. so a Serpent given
for a Fish, Luke 11.15. the birthright for one morsal, Hebr. 12.16. hair for a
covering, 1 Cor. 11.15. But as often as that Particle is applied to Persons, it
signifies that one succeeded into the place of another. So Archelaus is said to
have reigned (...) in the room of Herod his Father, that is, that he succeeded
him in the Kingdom, Matthew. 2.22. so Peter is commanded to give a piece of money
for himself and Christ, Matthew. 17.27. because he alone in that action supplied
the room of two. Neither is it otherways in profane Writers, (...) one in the
room of many, and the like. Here Socinus, being in a strait, dares not deny
that a certain change is signified, by that (...) for many. But he miserably
seeks an escape. When the Redemption is discoursed of, says he, there is place
for that Preposition (...), though a Captive owes nothing for Redemption. This
is true, but not to the purpose. For we do not from the word (...) directly
infer payment; but we gather from thence that Christ died in our stead; that
is, unless Christ had died, we should have died, and because Christ died, we
shall not die an eternal Death. For verily the word (...) being joined to a
Person and the Verb (...) requires that a Person expressed in the Genitive was
to give the same in Gender or Species, which now another gave. Neither is it
any difference, whether it be lawfully, as in a Bond for Debt, or unlawfully,
as in him that is taken by High-way-men; but this being granted, that it would
come to pass that we should have been put to death, unless Christ had died: the
payment is afterward rightly gathered from the very nature of the thing. For
either we were to have been unjustly put to death, or justly: not unjustly, for
we had deserved death; therefore justly. If justly, then we were debtors of
death. Christ procured us deliverance from this debt by giving something. But
to give something, that another by that same may be delivered from a Debt, is
to pay or satisfy. Therefore that expression (...) to give for many, signifies
a true exchange, as always; not a metaphorical, which Socinus invents without
example.

But touching the other Preposition (...), it must be observed, that it also
not always, but often signifies the same that (...). Paul wishes to be,
accursed (...), that is, in room of the Jews, whom otherways persevering in
their unbelief, he knew would be accursed, Romans 9.3. The Apostles are
Ambassadors (...) for Christ, that is, they are Ambassadors in the room of
Christ himself, 2 Cor. 5.20. Wherefore seeing (...) necessarily signifies
exchange, and (...) uses sometimes to be put for the same, nothing forbids to
interpret a word of a doubtful notation from a certain, chiefly when the same
Argument is treated of. But especially that place 2 Cor. 5.14. seems to require
that interpretation, If one died for all, then are all dead. Moreover, though
the word (...) of it self ambiguous, had not been used in these places, but it
had been openly said, that Christ died for our good, by this very thing that
exchange should not have been excluded, but rather inclued, other places being
compared. For he also who dies for this purpose, that thereby he may deliver
another from death, dies for his good. Neither can this sense be rejected,
because the fact of Christ is proposed to us for example. For unto an example
it is sufficient that there be a certain general similitude, though the
difference be in a special respect, of which nevertheless mention sometimes is
made for denoting the thing more certainly. Which is manifestly evident from
the Exhortation of Peter, 1 Pet. 2.19. he would have us be patient in bearing
afflictions, which we suffer innocently. He brings the example of Christ, who,
said he, himself also suffered. This was sufficient for a comparison: but he
added, (...), for us, which belongs not the comparison, but clearly expresses
the thing it self, that is, the suffering of Christ. Therefore Patience is a
common thing; but that manner is different. Otherways Paul should in vain ask,
if Paul was crucified for believers, 1 Cor. 1.13. for he also could have been
crucified for the Church, that is, for the use of the Church, as he said he
suffered for the Church, Col. 1.24. and afterward he himself was for the great
good of the Church beheaded, Peter and other Apostles crucified. But neither
Paul, nor any other man, could be crucified in that manner that Christ was, by
suffering punishment in our stead. Therefore that word pro expresses here
something peculiar, which cannot be communicated to the Apostles. But it could,
if the benefit of Christ's death were distinguished only by degree from the
death of the Apostles, and not also in its proper end. So also in the Epistle
to the Hebrews 2.10. there is an example in it, that Christ came to glory by
Sufferings: the special manner is in that, that Christ suffered for every man,
verse. 9. And as in those places patience, so in other places love is commended
to us by the same example of Christ, but the special manner does more openly
express the deed of Christ. Though if you will look more exactly into those
places, we shall see that not so much the act of death, as the danger of death,
is there regarded, (...), which only John uses, 10, 11, 15. and 1 John 3.16,
as also John 13.37, and 38. also John 15.13. is not properly there to lose
life, but as it were to put it in pledge, that is, to undergo the danger of
death. Therefore in those places, that very thing that is prescribed to us,
contains not only the benefit of another, but also a certain exchange, to wit,
in that sense, which Horace expressed in these Verses: Paratus omne Caesaris
periculum Subire, Moecenas, tuo
Being prepared to undergo all dangers of Caesar, Mecenas, with thine.


But in the saying of Caiaphas, not only as a Prophesy dropped from him at
unawares, but also according to his Opinion, a certain true substitution was
expressed. For he feigned the inevitable destruction of the Jews, if Christ
should be permitted to live: and on the contrary, if Christ should be slain,
that certain safety should be obtained for this very thing: Therefore he
desired to substitute really the death of Christ to a destruction otherways
hanging over. And so he would have the same in kind to befall Christ with that
which was otherways to happen to the people; and he believed that the death of
Christ was a near cause of the deliverance of the People, and fit of it self.
Which is the same thing as if you should say, he would have Christ perish in
the room of the People, that was otherways (that is, under a contrary
condition) to perish. Here it must be marked by the by, that Caiaphas did put
the first effect of the death of Christ, not about the Jews, whose deliverance
he sought, but about the Roman Governors, whose Anger he desired to escape. So
that if it be true which Socinus urges, that such an interpretation of the
words of Caiphas should be taken, which may answer both the mind of the Holy
Spirit and his mind, this dying for the people must needs signify, that safety
was to be obtained from another: but that other, according to the mind of the
Holy Ghost, can be none but God: whence it follows, it is exercised about God,
before it is exercised about men, which Socinus stubbornly denies. But those
things that have been hitherto said by us, concerning the signification of
exchange in the Particle pro, for, are much illustrated by the the nature of
the Expiatory Sacrifice. For in those the Scripture and common Opinion of
Nations do witness, that blood is given for life: which shall now be made
manifest.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Expiation made by the Death of Christ.
THere remains the last rank of Testimonies, which signify that Christ's Death
is an Expiatory Sacrifice: which because by the Artifice of Socinus they are
involved in many Mists, we reserved them for the last place, that they might
receive some light from these things that have been said before. We and Socinus
are agreed concerning the word: that Christ's Death was an Expiatory Sacrifice,
or a Sacrifice for Sin, the Divine Epistle to the Hebrews testifying the same,
especially cap. 9. But of the proper force of that word Socinus thinks one way,
and the Church of Christ another way. The disagreement shall be briefly and
perspicuously so explained, if we say, that according to Socinus the effect of
expiation first and properly is exercised about sins to come; because the Death
of Christ by ingenerating Faith, draws us from sins: but in respect of bypast
sins only secondarily, and in that respect also all this action is exercised
about us, not about God, that is, that God is not moved to pardon, but we are
prepared to receive remission, to wit, by the Amendment of Life: but according
to the Opinion of the Church, which agrees to Scripture, the effect of
expiation is properly exercised about by past sins, and the first action is
about God, who is moved to forgive. That the first action is exercised about
God, not about Men, it is proved from the nature of Priesthood. For a Priest is
appointed for Men in the things of God, Hebr. 5.1. but not for God in the
things of Men, which is the Office of a Prophet. And because Sacrifice,
especially Expiatory, Sacrifice, is an act of the Priest as such, (for a
High Priest is appointed for this purpose, that he may offer Sacrifices for
sins, Hebr. 5.1. 8.3.) it follows that Sacrifice belongs to those things, which
are performed for Man with God.

But the whole matter will be made more manifest by comparing the Sacrifices of
the Old Law with this Sacrifice, of which comparison the Writer of the Epistle
to the Hebrews is an Author unto us, and elsewhere the Prophets and Apostles.
The ancient Law is considered two manner of ways: either carnally or
spiritually. Carnally, as it was an Instrument of the Commonwealth of the Jews.
Spiritually, as it had a (...), shadow of things to come, Hebr. 10.1. As
touching the former consideration, the Expiatory Sacrifices of the Law
sanctified unto the purifying of the flesh, Hebr. 9.13. which, of what sort it
is, we shall explain. The Law of God had this sanction: he is accursed that
abides not in all the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. therefore he
shall be guilty of punishment, whosoever in the least shall deviate from the
Law, as James shows, James 2.10. This Punishment, according to a carnal sense,
was violent death: which is evident from the contrary, because life is promised
to him that fulfils the Law, Lev. 18.5. Gal. 3.12. But as in every Commonwealth
rightly governed, the King requires punishment by his Judges, and if they fail,
by himself: So in the Hebrew Commonwealth, which Josephus rightly called
Theocratia, (because God was its King, Judge. 8.23. 1 Samuel 8.7.) God ordinarily
required the punishments of the Law by Judges: yet so, that he himself required
the same punishment, if the Judges failed in their duty. Let the people, says
he, stone him; or, I setting my angry face against that man, will cut him off,
Lev. 20.3. Neither did he only threaten this, but also often performed it, as
it appears by many Examples of the Old Testament. But because a Lawyer may
somewhat relax his own Law, especially Penal, God, the King of the Hebrews, in
some Crimes admitted Expiatory Sacrifices in the room of the sinner himself,
and by these, and no other ways, would he free the sinner from the punishment
of death. He that swore rashly deserved death by the Law, Exodus 20.7. but it
might be expiated by a Sacrifice, Lev. 5.5. The Priest shall make Atonement for
him, says the Law, and it shall be forgiven him: So he that had been
unfaithful in a thing entrusted to him, or in Society, or had deceived another,
or had stolen any thing, he was guilty, says the Law, Levit. 5.23. to wit, by
the Edict, which is extant Exodus 20.15,16, and 17, but the same guilty person,
besides the restitution of the damage, to which he was obliged, unto the person
wronged, he was expiated by giving a Sacrifice, and that which he did was
forgiven, Lev. 5.26. and in many places these are joined together, Expiation
and Remission, Numb. 15.28. Lev. 4.20. 5.13,18,26. Therefore in some Crimes, as
touching carnal punishments, there was admitted an Atonement, a Redemption, a
Satisfaction, also a Compensation made by the death of a Beast for the death of
a man otherways due. But the Law did not generally admit such a relaxation of
carnal punishment in all Crimes: unto which Paul having respect, said, that
remission of sins was declared by Jesus, (to wit, a spiritual remission) and he
that believes is justified in him, from all things from which the Jews in the
Law of Moses could not be justified, no not carnally, Acts 13.38. which an
ancient Writer of Answers to the Orthodox explains) which use to be ascribed to
Justin. But other Crimes having been committed to the hurt of the Commonwealth,
(to wit, great and less tolerable) or of the life of men, it gives not (to wit,
the Law) an Atonement of such Offenses, neither by washing, nor the sacrificing
of Beasts, but gives a just and worthy recompense to them that offended by an
equal punishment. Life, says it, for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: but
where the equality of the reward is unseemly, there it renders to the Offenders
death by fire, or stone, or sword: for it destroys the daughter of the Priest,
committing whoredom by fire, but the daughter of a Layman by stoning, but the
married by sword. And the Law had no power, through mercifulness to mankind, to
save any of such by Washings and Sacrifices. And the Masters of the Hebrews
observed not amiss, Psalm 51.18. that David for Murder or Adultery promised no
Sacrifice, because the Law had set forth no Expiation for those Crimes. But
that which we said before, that in Expiation the Death of a Beast was
substituted for the death of a Man, that same thing is manifest also by that
which Deuteronomy. 2. is appointed, that, when the Manslayer is not fouud, the People
should be expiated by the killing of a Beast: where also the word. (to
expipiate) is explained, Expiate thy people, O God, and impute not innocent
blood unto them. Otherways the Land could not be expiated from blood that was
shed, but by the blood of him that shed it, as says the Law, Numb. 35.34. Unto
this place may be added the other, Levit. 17.11. The life of all flesh is in
the blood, and I have appointed it for you on the Altar, to make Atonement for
your lives; for it is blood that makes Atonement for the life. Also a third,
Lev. 10.17. where the Sacrifice is said to bear their iniquities, the force of
which phrase we have elsewhere explained. Socinus is not willing to acknowledge
this subrogation, or to confess that God was moved any way by Sacrifices, that
he might not punish sin. And that he may prove that, he brings these two
things; That the Errors of men could not be punished in Beasts, because there
is not a common Species between Men and Beasts: and That nothing can be given
to God, who is Lord of all. Of which the former is false: for as an individual
difference, as they speak, hinders not, but another may suffer for another man's
sin, provided the inflicting of the evil is not of it self unjust, (as has
been showed before) so neither will the diversity of Species hinder a Beast,
which otherways also might be justly killed, to be bestowed for an Example,
that in the death thereof it may appear what man has deserved. Neither are Man
and Beast joined only in the genus of a living Creature, but also in that
relation that is between a possessour and a thing possessed. For a Beast is in
the general under humane possession, and he that was to be expiated, was
particularly commanded to give a Sacrifice of his own, Lev. 5.6,7. But the
other is nothing to the purpose. For neither does it follow, that if nothing
comes to God by Sacrifice, therefore God is not moved by Sacrifice. For by this
very thing God is well-pleased, that a man defrauds himself of a thing granted
unto him for the honor of the Name of God: and it was elsewhere showed that
Satisfaction uses to be made as by punishment, so by some acceptable and
pleasing action. But that in Sacrifice not only the thing is rewarded, but the
mind of the Offerer, both Scripture declares, and the Heathen themselves
believed. Neither in Sacrifices, says Seneca, though they be fat and overshine
Gold, is the honor of the Gods, but in the pious and right will of the
worshipper. Whence also the Scripture, treating of the Death of Christ, makes
mention sometimes of Love, sometimes of Obedience. By these things, which we
have said, it is now evident how Sacrifices for sin in the Old Covenant did
expiate sins, to wit, by moving God to forgive a Carnal punishment, and that by
a certain Satisfaction. But what the Types performed carnally, this Christ the
Antitype performs spiritually, and what the Types did in some sins, that Christ
did in all, to wit, by moving God to forgive a Spiritual punishment, and that
by a most perfect Satisfaction. For there is always more, and not less, in the
thing signified by the Type, than in the Type; as reason shows. That is common
to the Expiatory Sacrifice of the Law and the Sacrifice of Christ, that there
is no remission without shedding of blood, Hebr. 9.22. The Divine Writer in the
same place calls this obtaining of remission by blood sometimes (...),
Sanctification, verse. 13. sometimes (...), Purification, verse. 14. and 22, and
23. But in the Old Law the Sacrifices were Beasts, verse. 12. in this of ours,
Christ himself is not only Priest, but Sacrifice, verse. 14. and 24. That Legal
Expiation was a Representation and Antitype of this Celestial and Spiritual.
How? because that brought cleanness to the flesh, that is, the taking away of
guilt: but not to the Spirit or Conscience: but this brings it to the
Conscience it self, because that which was in the Old Law a Temporal Death,
this in the New Covenant is Eternal Death, Hebr. 10.29. and therefore there was
there a Temporal Deliverance, but here an Eternal Redemption, Hebr. 9.12.
Wherefore, as in the same place an Argument is produced from the effect of the
Legal Sacrifice, to the effect of this. That was offered by the Spirit. How
much more, etc. verse. 14. So it is allowed to us to argue after this manner
most certainly: the Legal Sacrifice took away carnal guiltiness, by moving God
to remission, therefore much more the Sacrifice offered by the Spirit, takes
away spiritual guilt, by moving God also to remission.

Unto the same purpose belong those places in which Christ is called a Lamb.
Neither would it be much to the purpose, though Lambs had not been used to be
sacrificed in the Law for sin. For so also it would have been lawful for holy
men to name one Beast for another, that both the comparison might consist in
the general signification of a Beast, and a Lamb rather than a Ram or a Goat,
being named, the innocence of the Sacrifice might be expressed. For therefore
also Peter added, without blame or spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. and at the same time, by
a certain compend of words there might have been an eye upon the Prophesy of
Isai. 53.7. in the intepretation whereof was the Greek word (...), Acts 8.32.
But it is also certain, that a Lamb was used in the expiating of Pollutions,
Lev. 14.12. Numb. 6.12. which Pollutions in the Old Law, so nearly resembled
sin, that they also received the name of sin. Whence also that Lamb in both
places is said to be offered for guilt or sin. And in the other place it is
expressly added, because he sinned about the dead body. The effect also is the
same in some respect. For persons defiled were not admitted to the Society of
the Jewish Commonwealth, but by such an Expiation: Moreover, the Sacrifice of
the Passover, (which it is certain was for the most part a Lamb, Exodus 12.5.)
in its first institution, had something Expiatory. For God says, that he
looking on the blood thereof, would turn away from the Hebrews that
destruction, which otherways they were to have had common with the Egyptians,
(by the imitation of whom they had defiled themselves) Exodus 12.13. Hebr.
11.28. But also the Law shows that a Lamb was used to be offered for sin, to
wit, the sin of a rash Oath, Lev. 5.4,6. But when Christ is called a Lamb, not
only Peter shows, that a Sacrifice is understood, saying, that we were redeemed
by the blood of a Lamb, I Pet. 1.18. but also John in the Revelation in many
places, and amongst others, where he says he was slain, Rev. 5.6. 9.11. and
13.8. But no other Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice for sin, can be understood,
because as Peter witnesses, it was Redemptory. Such is only Sacrifice for sin.
Whence it is more than manifest, that when the Baptist said, Christ was the
Lamb, which took away the sins of the World. John 1.29. Sins past are there
treated of, not future; and the taking away of sins, by the obtaining of
remission with God, not by the ingenerating of Faith. Neither is it true that
Socinus says, That only the High Priest did bear the figure of Christ, and only
the anniversary Expiation the figure of his Sacrifice: for though there was a
more excellent figure in the High Priest, and that solemn Sacrifice, which
therefore the Holy Spirit pursues with a singular care in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, yet it cannot be denied, that other Priests and other Expiatory
Sacrifices looked the same way more obscurely. That same Epistle shows this,
cap. 9. verse. 13. where every carnal purification by Sacrifice, is compared
with the spiritual purification by Christ. And much more verse 21. and the
following verses, where, after it had been said in the general, that almost all
things in the Law are purged by Sacrifice, and that there is no remission of
sins without shedding of blood, there is afterward subjoyned, therefore there
was a necessity that the resemblances of Celestial things should be purged by
these things. So also chap. 10. verse. 11. daily Sacrifices are compared with
the Sacrifice of Christ: the sense of which place Socinus overthrows,
expounding daily, for yearly, without example. For that he brings a place,
Hebr. 7.27. to confirm this Interpretation, it is vain, because he falsely
pretends that the Priest ought to have offered for himself in the Anniversary
Sacrifice only. For on the contrary, he ought to have offered for himself, as
often as he was conscious to himself of sin, Lev. 4.3. Also he shows that the
Sacrifice of the Passover was a figure of the Sacrifice that was performed by
Christ, John 19.36. and Paul 1. Cor. 5.7.

But though these things could suffice, yet I think good to explain somewhat
more plentifully the natue of an Expiatory Sacrifice according to the common
understanding of the Heathen, or rather according to the most ancient
Tradition, spread abroad through all the Earth. It cannot be doubted, that
there were Sacrifices before the Law of Moses under the state of the Natural
Law, as it is called, the Rites whereof having been commanded by God, those
that survived the Flood, being dispersed through all the Earth, transmitted
unto Posterity: and Religion remained for some time uncorrupted, not only among
the Posterity of Shem, but also Japhet, (perhaps also Ham) until the worship of
many, and therefore false Gods succeeded in its room: but then also having
changed their God, the Rites and Ceremonies remained, being translated from a
pious, to a wicked use; a great testimony against themselves of the Truth being
received, but detained in unrighteousness, as says the Apostle, Romans 1.18.
Therefore those Nations esteemed it for a certain thing, that the Gods were
offended and angry at the sins of Men: and that from this Anger great
Calamities, partly private, and partly public, used to follow. See that
excellent Book of Plutarch, (...), concerning those that were heavily punished
by God; in which, if instead of Gods you write God, you will find many things,
worthy to be said by a Christian. That Anger was gathered from Causes or
Effects. From Causes, if any wicked Deeds came to be known. From Effects,
Foretokens, Prodigies, and Celestial Signs. See Cicero concerning the Answers
of Soothsayers, Lucan 1. of Pharsalia; the Greek and Roman Historians in many
places. Yet they hoped this Anger could be turned away by certain Sacrifices.
By these the Deity was said to be reconciled, the guilty, whether it was one
person, or a whole people to be purged, or, according to the ancient word, to
be februated, and the sin it self to be expiated or cleansed.

Wherefore the same Sacrifices were called (...), (...), (...), Propitiatory,
Cleansing, and Purifying, and in Latin placamina, februa, piamina,
Propitiations, Cleansings, Expiations. The word (...), to propitiate, is
applied by Homer and others very often to Sacrifices. There is in Plutarch
concerning Romulus, (...), to cleanse the City with purgings: this (...) is
also called (...) and (...). In Herodotuus lib. 1. the Phrygian Adrastus, being
polluted with Manslaughter, needed (...), an Expiatory Sacrifice: Croesus
(...), expiated him. And he says, there is the same way of Expiating amongst
the Lydians and Greeks. In Hermogenes there is, (...), neither purged from
iniquities. Plat. 2. de Rep. said, that (...) and (...), Abolishments and
Cleansings of Unrighteousness are put for the same. Plutarch, concerning the
Romans, interprets (...), that is averrunca, things that turned away the Divine
Anger. There is nothing more frequent in Virgil, and others, than the word
placandi, of appeasing in holy things: the force whereof Horace so expresses.
Mactata veniet mitior hostia.
She will come meeker, Sacrifice being slain.
Livius has often Pacem Deos exposcere, to beg peace of the Gods. Plinius
says, Beasts are acceptable in the Atonement of the Gods. Ovid, primo
Fastorum, says, the Gods are reconciled to man by Sacrifices: which word we
showed before to signify the same with the word placandi, of making Atonement:
to purge and purify being translated from the Greek (...), is taken thence,
because guiltiness seems to be a certain uncleanness. The word purifying is in
Suetonius and Plinius. Lucan said, Purgare moenia lustro; but lustrare is more
received; concerning the Original whereof we spoke before. So lustrare
exercitum is in Livius. Ovid expounds it by expurgare, 13 Met. -- Ego lustror
ab illis,
Expurgante nefas novies mihi carmine dicto.
I Am purified by them,
Nine times a sin-purging Verse having been to me.
Servius in Virgil, Lustramurque Jovi, and we are purified to Jupiter, 3 Aen.
he expounds it, we are purged, we are expiated. Seneca in Troas, himself
explains lustrale sacrum quo piantur rates, a purifying Sacrifice wherewith
Ships are expiated. And Papinius called Menoeceus, Caput lustrale, a purifying
head, which he so expounds, Terrigenam cuncto patriae pro sanguine poscunt:
They require the earth born man for all the Counreys blood.
Also, -- Date gaudia Thebis
Quoe pepigi, and toto quae sanguine prodigus emi.
-- Give joy to Thebes,
Which I covenanted, and which I bought with all the blood.
Therefore lustrale sacrum, a purifying Sacrifice, is that which buys blood,
that is, which redeems by blood: which belongs to the proving of those things,
which were formerly disputed by us concerning Redemption. And it must be
observed in the first place, that when Expiatory Sacrifices are discoursed of,
there is mention made of Blood, because, according to the most ancient Law of
God given to Noah, Genesis 9.4. and thence propagated to all people, Blood is
instead of the Life, and therefore is called by the name of Life. Hence that of
Virgil, Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum:
With Blood Returns must be sought, and Expiation made by Life.
Which words Macrobius explaining out of Trebatius, says, Those Sacrifices are
called Animal, or belonging unto life. Sins themselves are properly said to be
expiated, that is, to be satisfied for, whether by paying the due punishment,
or another thing that succeeds into the place of due punishment. As behold in
Virgil: -- Et culpam miserorum morte piabunt.
They will expiate the fault by the death of those miserable wretches.
that is, they shall cause them to be punished. Plinius, Wars use to expiate
the luxury of the people. Cicero, The Immortal Gods expiated thy crimes upon
our Soldiers. And in the same, there is often scelera supplicio expiare, to
expiate crimes with punishment: and in Sallust, to expiate slaughter with
slaughter, and blood with blood: yea also, the word supplicium was first in
holy things, whence it was translated to punishment. But in Sacrifices piare is
to expiate, by the succession of another thing into the place of due punishment.

Hence Plautus: Men' piaculum oportet fieri propter stultitiam tuam,
Vt meum tergum stultitiae tuae suba'as succedaneum.
Should I be made a Sacrifice for thy folly.
That thou may put my back in the room of thine, for thy folly.


Hence Cato: Cum sis ipse nocens, moritur cur victimo pro te?
When thou art faulty thy self, why dies a Sacrifice for thee?
Where for thee signifies in thy place. And in the same place he says, Those
that offer Sacrifices, hope for their own safety by the death of another. Hence
the Sacrifices themselves are properly piacula. Ea prima piacula sunto, Virg.
Aen. 6. Make these the first Sacrifices. Teque piacula nulla resolvent: And no
Sacrifices will expiate thee: Horatius. Which also Ovid called piamina. Februa
Romani dixere piamina Patres.
The Roman Fathers called Expiations Februa.
The force of which word he himself presently expressed, quo crimina nostra
piantur, whereby our Crimes are expiated: and Plinius called those things
piamenta. Improperly piacula are crimina propter quae piacula debentur, Crimes
for which Sacrifices are due. As Servius well observed on that Verse of Virgil:
Distulit in seram commissa piacula mortem.
He deferred his Crimes he committed unto a late death.
But though, as we said, piare properly is here to suffer punishment, and
therefore is properly said of the guilt it self and debt, yet it began to be
taken for words of a near signification, placare, lustrare, to make Atonement,
to purify by Sacrifice. So Cicero said, Cereris numen expiandum. So Livius,
that the manifest murder might be expiated by some Sacrifice, his Father was
commanded, ut filium expiaret, that is, lustraret, to purge his Son by
Sacrifice, So Seneca in Troas said, piare rates, that is, lustrare, to make
Atonement for the Ships. Also in another Author, prodigia piare, to expiate the
Prodigies, for the wickednesses for which the Anger that was raised, was
declared by Prodigies. There is a place where the Jews are discoursed of by the
same Author: There happened Prodigies which the Nation that is subject to
Superstition, and an Enemy to Religion, judged unlawful to expiate by Vows or
Sacrifices. Where by the by that may be observed, we said before, That the
Expiations in the Law of the Jews, were not set forth to expiate every kind of
anger of God. By these things it manifestly appears, that purging Sacrifices
and Expiations belonged to the appeasing of the Deity, and so to the obtaining
impunity of the sins that had been committed: which Plinius so expresses, An
ancient Opinion obtained in former times that all things are Februa, whereby
the guiltinesses of evil deeds might be purged, and sins taken away. Neither
must that remarkable place of Porphyrius, concerning Expiatory Sacrifices be
omitted: for all Divines have agreed in this; That in Expiatory Sacrifices they
should not have touched the things sacrificed, and that they should use
purgings. None went into the City, or into his own House, unless first he
washed his Garment or Body in a River or Fountain. That which he says the
Divines agreed in, that they should wash their Garments who touch Expiatory
Sacrifices, it agrees with the Law delivered by Moses to the Jews, as appears
Lev. 16.26, and 28. But because these Nations were not ignorant by the guidance
of Nature, that the greater the thing was, that was given to God, so much the
more easily pardon might be obtained; especially if there were some equality of
the (...) with that which was redeemed. Therefore they proceeded from the
sacrificing of Cattle, in making Expiations to the sacrificing of Men. Caesar
treating of the Frenchmen, explains the Cause: They think that the Deity of the
Immortal Gods cannot be reconciled, unless the life of men be rendered for the
life of man. The Canaanites are found the first of all that practiced this,
that is, the Phoenicians. For concerning them we read in holy Scripture, that
they were used to reconcile Moloch by killing their own Children. That Moloch
was Saturn, as the Masters of the Hebrews rightly explain. Porphyrius tells,
That the History of the Phoenicians, written by Sanchuniatho, abounded with
such Narrations. A part of these are Tyrians, amongst whom it was usual of old,
that a Boy of noble Birth was sacrificed to Saturn. Curtius tells, lib. 3. the
same rightly observes, that the Carthaginians, that were Inhabitants with the
Tyrians, received that Sacrifice from the Builders: concerning whom is that of
Ennius; Ille suos Divis mos sacrificare puellos.
That was their manner to sacrifice their children to their Idol Gods.
The same tells Diodorus of the Carthaginians, and Justin in these words: They
slew men as Sacrifices, and brought their young Children to the Altars,
requesting the Gods for Reconciliation with their Blood, Lib. 18. Silius
Italicus says, They were used to ask the Gods pardon with slaughter. Lactantius
out of Pessennius Festus tells, That the Carthaginians thinking the Gods angry
at them, that they might expiate their Crime, sacrificed two hundred Sons of
the Noble Men. Also Minutius Felix mentions it, and Tertullian in his
Apologetick, who says, That Saturnus was therefore called a Tomb of Sons, and
Plutarch in his Book of Superstition. Manethos did write, that men, and those
of exquisite beauty, were of old sacrificed in Egypt; and added, that the
custom was kept unto the times of Amosis, who, instead of men, substituted
images of wax. And it is reported concerning Heliopolis, that it was diligently
searched after there, whether they were clean that were appointed to be slain.
In Cyprus also a man was sacrificed to the time of King Diphilis, who
substituted the sacrificing of an Ox in the room thereof. The same was
performed of old in Rhodes, Chios, Tenedos, Salamin; also in Laodicaea; and
among the Dumathians of Arabia. The Persians buried men alive in the Earth.
Concerning the Albans, this was reported peculiarly, That the man whom they
thought to be most eminent for holiness, used to be sacrificed by them. The
Jonians, as witnesses Pausanias, sacrificed a Virgin and a Boy, that they
might reconcile Diana, when she was angry. We have read the like things of the
Blemyans, Massagets, Taurians, Neurians, and in the general of the Scythians;
which may be sufficient for Asia and Africa: To which may be added, that the
same Rite was found both in the ancient India (concerning which a long time
since Mela reported the same) and in the American World by them that made those
parts known to the World. And that also it is no long time since that practice
was in the Ganary Islands. That we may come to Europe. Ister and Apollodorus
have reported. That of old in Creta Boys were sacrificed to Saturn, and a Man
to Mars in Lacedemon. Moreover, Phylarchus reported that the same manner was
among the Grecians generally, to which Plinius assents. And there are extant
Examples also in the times of the Persian war. In Rome also a Grecian man and a
Grecian woman, a French man and a French woman, were sacrificed. Also Jupiter
of Latium was worshipped with a Humane Sacrifice: and also Diana Aricina: And
Plinius tells, that such kind of Sacrifices was of old very usual in Italy and
Sicily. Neither were they abrogated at Rome before the six hundred fifty and
seventh year of the City. Neither have the Devotions of the Decians any other
Original, by which the Ancients, as Cicero says, in the third Book de Natura
Deorum, thought the Gods were reconciled. Livius calls the Decians, the
Expiations of all the anger of the Gods: and also Expiations to make
Reconciliation for public Dangers. Neither must that remarkable place of
Juvenal be omitted: Plebeiae Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina: Pro totis legionibus hi tamen, and Pro
Omnihus auxilliis, at que omni Plebe Latina
Sufficient Dis infernis, Terraeque parenti:
Pluris enim Decii, quam qui servantur abillis.
The souls of the Decians were of the common people.
Their names were of the common people:
Yet they for the whole Legions, and for
All helps, and all the people inhabiting Italy.
Do satisfy the infernal Gods and Mother-earth:
For the Decians are more worthy than they that are saved by them.
In which place, first, that use of the Particle pro is evident, which we
before signified to be very frequent, and as it were proper to this Argument,
so that it is the same that loco alterius, in the room of another. Moreover it
appears, that it was believed by the Romans, that the estimation of the
Sacrifice was augmented by the dignity of him that was sacrificed. Furthermore,
by comparing Authors, it is manifest that these things are of like force: That
God is Reconciled by a Sacrifice; that the anger of the Gods is expiated: or
that the Soul of a Man suffices the Gods for the Souls of others. The manner
of the French men is well known by Caesar's relation, concerning which we spoke
before: which Plinius says did remain unto the Dominion of Tiberius. Cicero
concerning the same; The French re^oncile the Gods with Humane Sacrifices.
Cicero said placare Deos, to reconcile the Gods, as also Caesar: Luctatius,
Lustrare Civitatem, to purge the City by Sacrifice. The same Caesar interprets
it, to render life for life. So the Thracians worshipped Zamolxis, so the
Germans, Mercurius, and other Gods. Concerning whom Lucan said so: Et quibus
immitis placatur sanguine diro Teutates.
And they to whom unmerciful Teutates is reconciled with accursed blood.
Also Plinius reported, that in Britain Sacrifices of this kind were
celebrated. Procopius writes, that the same was practiced in the Island Thule
unto his time, that is, unto the time of Justiniau. And Porphyrius has
recorded, that that Custom was not left off before the Empire of Adrian.
Concerning the Massilians it is particularly recorded, That as often as the
Pestilence was among them, there was a poor man that used to be maintained on
public Charges, whobeing adorned with Ribbonds, and clothed with holy
Garments, was led through the Town with Cursings, that all the Evils of the
City might fall upon him: and so he was sacrificed to the Immortal Gods. All
which being gathered together into one, we shall see that Plinius, not without
cause, cried out concerning these Sacrifices; So those things agreed with all
the World, though it was at variance and unknown to it self. Thus we have
discoursed by the by concerning Humane Sacrifices: in which the Heathen sinned,
not only that they sacrificed unto false Gods, but also because they had no
command to worship God after that manner, such as Abraham had. But that Custom
of the Gentiles in Expiating the sins of Men, or Sacrificing of Beasts, brings
no little light to the understanding of the nature of an Expiatory Sacrifice,
and the proper names of that Argument. And so much the less can this labor be
de^i^d, because Socinus says, That the Baptist, when he called Christ the Lamb
of God, had respect unto Sacrifices in the general, by which, not only amongst
the Hebrews, but also among the Heathen, sins were believed to be expiated. And
it is an undoubted thing, that, seeing the Divine Writer to the Hebrews, in
this very Argument of Expiatory Sacrifice, often uses the Greek words (...)
and (...), that he used it in that sense, which the Greek Tongue had received.

Whence it is easy to understand, what that signifies, that Christ is called a
Sacrifice for sin or expiation. For whereas Socinus brings three
Interpretations; the first, That the Death of Christ, by begetting Faith in us,
draws us from sins, in time to come: The second. That Death it self is a
certain thing antecedent to the obtaining remission of sins: The third, That it
bears testimony, as it were, to the remission it self, or the Decree made
concerning it. Of these three only the second belongs hereto: Not that Christ
did not also those other things, and that much more effectually than Socinus
thinks, but because those things belong not to Sacrifices for sins: for Socinus
confesses, That the similitude of legal Sacrifices for sin, and of the
Sacrifice performed by Christ, consists in Expiation. To which may be joined
the like Sacrifices of the Gentiles, considered not according to the thing, but
according to the opinion of the Gentiles. But these Sacrifices did not withdraw
from sin, especially by procuring the belief of any thing, neither did they
bear testimony to remission performed, or certainly decreed; but, as Socinus
acknowledges, they were a certain antecedent thing requisite unto remission:
which those words of the Law show. He shall make atonement, and it shall be
forgiven. Therefore in this the Comparison consists, and it is necessary that
Expiation should signify the same when it is applied to legal Sacrifices, and
when it is applied to Christ, because the Writer to the Hebrews brings both
from the same Decree, to wit, that without shedding of Blood there should be no
remission, but expiation must be made in blood, Hebr. 9.21. It hinders not that
it is said, Hebr. 10.4. that it was not possible that the blood of Bulls and
Goats should take away sins: for (...), according to conscience, must be
repeated from what was said before, as appears manifestly, if you compare the
like places with this, chap. 9. verse. 9, and 14. The blood of beasts took away
sins, that is, Temporal Guiltiness, but not Spiritual Guiltiness; as we show
before. Neither can you, without a remarkable wresting, interpret that in the
Apocalypse, who washed us from our sins, as if it signified, who declared that
we are washed. Or 1 John 1.7. where it is said, The blood of Christ cleanses
us from all sin; as if it signified, it declares us to be clean: for both the
property of the Words, and the perpetual use of Scripture in this Argument,
contradicts it. Socinus confesses, That Guiltiness in many places is signified
by the name of Uncleanness. Hence (...) and (...) to take away that guiltiness,
or to make remission, as the Writer to the Hebrews expounds the word (...),
9.22. Christ by himself made this (...), purification, Hebr. 13. Christ purges
the conscience from dead works, Hebr. 9.14. that is, as Socinus himself
interprets, He frees the conscience from guiltiness and punishment, and the
fear of punishment. Also in the Old Testament tachar has the same sense, Psalm
51.9. But that which in these places is (...), to cleanse. The same upon a like
account is called (...), to sprinkle, 10.22. and (...), that is, to wash in the
same verse. Whereto belongs the Prophesy, Zach. 13.1. There is no reason to go
from the sense of the Apostle John in these places: for though Jesus is called
a faithful witness, Apoc. 1.5. yet that washing should not therefore be
referred unto bearing witness: for those do not cohere immediately, the
faithful witness, and he washed, but the mention of his being the firstborn
from the dead comes between them, and the mention of a Kingdom, and afterward
of Love; that it may appear to a blind man, that many Offices and Benefits of
Christ are joined together, to illustrate his Dignity. But in the Epistle of
John it is utterly absurd to interpret (...) of the declaring of purification,
and not of purification it self, because a little while after (...) and (...)
are joined. The Apostle reasons from things joined together; If you walk in
light, you have cleansing, that is, remission by the blood of Christ: because
sins are imputed unto none, that walk in the light. And the preaching of the
Baptist, naming Christ the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world, seeing
it respects the Expiatory Sacrifices both of the Hebrews and the Gentiles,
according to the acknowledgment of Socinus, suffers us not otherways to
interpret to take away sins, than to take away guiltiness: For Expiatory
Sacrifices did this, but did not withdraw from sinning. Neither is (...), to
the putting away of sin, Hebr. 9.26. any other thing, but (...), that we may be
cleansed, that we may have remission, as appears by verse. 22. But this (...),
putting away of sin was made (...), by the sacrificing of himself, verse 26.

But though Socinus endeavors to pluck away some places from the true sense,
yet being convinced by many others, he acknowledges, That in the Sacrifice of
Christ it is expressed, that an Expiation was made, which goes before the
remission of sins, as something requisite. Yet he denies that God by that
Sacrifice is moved to pardon; but he say, That a certain Faith is begotten in
us, by which being brought to amendment of life, at length we obtain remission
of sins. In which, first, he did little remember that which he said, That the
figure should agree with the thing fignified by the figure, in that in which
the Comparison is made. Neither did he remember that which the Scripture shows,
that those words, All things are cleansed by blood, belong the same way to
Legal Sacrifices and to Christ, Hebr. 9.22. But Legal Sacrifices did not at all
beget such a Faith; neither is that Exposition of the word tolerable, that to
expiate is to do something that is requisite for remission. For on the contrary
all these words, (...) and (...), and the like, which the Apostles use, of
their own nature, and by perpetual use, design not only a precedence of order,
but also a certain efficacy. The Scripture also furnishes us with other most
certain Arguments for the overthrowing this Interpretation invented by Socinus.
For it says, there was need of a new Priest after the Order of Melchisedec,
Hebr. 7.11. But the Levitical Priests also could preach Faith in God, yea, and
confirm this preaching by their Death. Wherefore, if the Priesthood of Christ
does nothing more, (which Socinus would have) it follows there was no need of
him. Moreover, this very thing, that Christ died for our sins, is believed unto
salvation, 1 Cor. 15.2,3. therefore the Expiation of Christ was not chiefly
procured for this, that it might bring a man to believe; seeing it self is
among things to be believed. For that which serves only to gain credit to a
thing, it is necessary that it should be different from the thing to be
believed. Moreover, after the implantation of Faith, the Expiation of Christ
has effect in us. For Christ is a High Priest appointed to expiate the sins of
the people, that is, of Believers, Hebr. 2.17. Therefore to expiate cannot be
to bring to Faith.

But now that we may not only beat down the false Interpretation of Socinus,
but also prove the true one, which is this, That God is moved by the Death of
Christ to forgive sins. Observe that place to the Hebrews, where Christ's blood
of sprinkling is said to speak better than the blood of Abel. The blood of Abel
cried unto God for vengeance. The blood of Christ cries for pardon. Socinus
denies that God is reconciled by Expiatory Sacrifices. But the Writers above,
alleged by us, testify the contrary, who use the word reconciling to express
those Sacrifices. Whence also that phrase came in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
(...), placare peccata, to reconcile sins, that is, to expiate sins by
reconciling God. Socinus acknowledges no Satisfaction in Expiatory Sacrifices.
Whereas the very word expiating, signifies no other thing but making
satisfaction by punishment: and in many places the Authors cited, when they
would periphrastically express Expiating, they call it to give blood for blood,
life for life, soul for soul, to purchase a thing with blood, to obtain
salvation by the death of another. Neither do the Hebrew words disagree from
this: for Chaphar is not only to cover, but also to redeem, Exodus 21.30. Psalm
49.7. and to appease, Genesis 32.20. and thence to expiate. Hata is to suffer
punishment, Genesis 31.39. whence this also began to be used for signifying
Expiation. Now Expiation is attributed first to Sacrifices, as appears Hebr.
9.13. and 23. thereafter to the Priest, for the Sacrifices that he offers, as
often in Leviticus: and then to God, admitting that Satisfaction. But as the
word Redeeming began to be used improperly for any Deliverance, so also it
began to be called Expiation for the like effect; yea, where no Satisfaction
intervenes, Psalm. 51.8. But Expiation is attributed unto Christ, as unto a
Sacrifice, and therefore the word blood is added: but blood in Sacrifices, as
before was proved, is given instead of the soul of a sinner; whence of
necessity this word Expiation must be taken properly here. Add unto these
things, that if that were true which Socinus would have, That Expiation was
made much more by the Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, than by Death and
shedding of Blood (because those are fitter to persuade us to believe than
Death it self) at least, in some place of Scripture Expiation would have been
attributed unto those acts: which it did no where.

It is false that Socinus says, That expiation or (...) purification is
attributed unto the manifestation of the Divine Will: neither do the places
alleged prove this. For Hebr. 1.3. Christ is said to sustain all by his Word,
because all things are subject to his Dominion, as the word (...) is found in
the same sense, chap. 11. verse 3. and Luke 5.5. and chap. 10. verse 26, and
29. The knowledge of the Truth, and sanctification by Blood, are not put for
the same, but many Benefits are joined together, that the Crime of an
unthankful man may appear the more odious. There is added sometimes unto Blood
the mention of a Covenant, but much more oftener of a Sacrifice, wherefore that
Interpretation is to be taken, that may join them together. But this will be,
if we look unto that part of the Covenant, in which Christ engaged, that, if he
underwent death, it should come to pass, that their sins should be forgiven
them that believed in him; and God promised the same, as appears Isai. 53.10.

But that Christ is said to offer his blood in Heaven, that is, to show his
death to his Father, and as it were to put God in remembrance thereof, which is
also read to make intercession for us; these things take not away the Expiation
that was completed upon the Cross. For the Expiation performed upon the Cross
moves God to forgive, and acquires us a right, but under a certain Condition
and Manner, in which is comprehended Intercession on Christ's part, and on our
part true Faith, as has been explained when Satisfaction was discoursed of.
But Socinus manifestly contradicts the Scripture, when he denies that Expiation
was made before Christ went into Heaven. For in many places Scripture
attributes (...), redemption, purification and sanctification, and the putting
away of sin to death, and declares the same thing to be already performed: an
Oblation indeed was made in Heaven, but so that Socinus should not have denied
that title to the death that Christ suffered on Earth, against the manifest
words of Paul, Ephesians. 5.2. where Christ is said to have delivered himself (...)
an offering for us. The looking upon the coherence of the words is a sufficient
refutation of his Interpretation. In the same place (...), an Offering, and
(...), Sacrifice, are joined together. And all the Books of Greek and Latin
Authors declare, That a Sacrifice is completed, when the thing to be
sacrificed is put to death. Whence it came to pass that mactare signifies both
to sacrifice and also to kill any way, the signification being extended from
Sacrifices to other things. Hence Ammonius distinguishes (...) and (...) as
Appellations of Genus and Species: for (...) is to kill for the honor of God,
but (...) is to kill upon any account. And Plutarch said That the Frenchmen
and Scythians believed (...), that the Gods delighted in the blood of slain
men, and that this was the most perfect Sacrifice. Neither did the Scripture
speak otherways in this Argument, Abraham being commanded to offer his Son,
Genesis 22.2. prepares to kill him, verse 10. And therefore, because he had
performed the sacrificing of him, though not with his hand, yet with his mind,
he is said to have offered his son, Hebr. 11.17. Sometimes (...) signifies
simply, and out of Sacrifice, to kill, as John 10.10. And Christ is called by
John, the Lamb slain, Apoc. 5.6, 12. and 13.8 which Paul so expresses, our
Passover Christ is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. But the Passover used not to
be brought into the most holy place, Hebr. 9.26. therefore the Sacrifice went
before, the Appearance followed. So elsewhere in the same Epistle, Christ is
said to have entered into the Celestial Sanctuary by his own blood; having
obtained eternal Redemption, Hebr. 9.2. and to have sat down at the right hand
of the Divine Throne, having made expiation for our sins. In which places the
words of bypast time do show, that Redemption or Expiation was made before
Christ entered into the Celestial Palace. Therefore though Christ is such a
High Priest that ought not to have remained on earth, as the Levitical Priests,
Hebr. 8.14. but having entered into Heaven, he ought to be higher than the
Heaven, Hebr. 4.14. and 7.26. as whose Priesthood ought to be eternal, and
intransitory, 7.24. yet he was a true Priest, and a true Sacrifice at that very
time, when he delivered himself on Earth up to Death. And therefore he is said,
to have come into the world, Hebr. 10.5. (that is, into the earth, as the
Scripture if self interprets, John 18. 37. 1 Timothy 1.15.) that he might do the
will of God, verse. 7, and 9. that he might offer his own body, being prepared
by God, that is, sacrificed, verse. 6. to God, verse. 10. for sins, verse. 12. In
which place it must be also observed, that we are said to be sacrificed by an
(...) Oblation once: whereas Christ intercedes as often as there is need for us:
So that here not killing, but intercession, must be understood.

Therefore the Oblation of Christ, as of certain Legal Sacrifices, is twofold.
The first of killing, the other of showing: the former Oblation of Christ was
performed on Earth, the later in Heaven: but that former was not a preparation
of a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice: the later is not so much a Sacrifice as a
Commemoration of a Sacrifice that was performed. Wherefore seeing Appearance
and Intercession are not properly Sacerdotal Acts, but as they depend upon the
virtue of the Sacrifice that was made, he that takes away that Sacrifice allows
not unto Christ a true Priesthood, against the manifest Authority of Scripture,
which assigns unto Christ a Pontifical Dignity, distinct from a Prophetical and
Royal: not figuratively so called, but true; for his Priesthood is opposed to
the Levitical Priesthood, which was a true Priesthood, as a more perfect
Species of the same Genus to another less perfect: neither could it be rightly
inferred, that it was necessary that Christ should have what he might offer,
Hebr. 8.3. but from the truth of that Priesthood unto which he was appointed,
verse. 3. But it is no wonder, if they who have taken away from Christ his
Natural Glory, that is, the Divinity of his true Name, if they also diminish
his Offices, and are unwilling to acknowledge his chief Benefits. To thee, O
Lord Jesus, as the true God, as the true Redeemer, as the true Priest as the
true Sacrifice for sins, together with the Father and the Spirit, one God with
thee, be Honor and Glory.

FINIS.
THE TESTIMONIES OF THE Ancients.
THE TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENTS.
IReneus lib. 5. cap. 1. For he would not really have had Flesh and Blood, by
which he redeemed us, except he had restored the ancient Creation of Adam in
himself.

Which place Theodoretus cites out of Ireneus in the Greek Language, Dialog. 2.
cap. 26. (...). For he had not really had Flesh and Blood, by which he redeemed
us.

Tertullianus against the Jews, cap. 13. It behoved Christ to be a Sacrifice
for all Nations, who was led to the slaughter as a Sheep, and as a Lamb is dumb
before the shearer, so he opened not his mouth.

Origin on Leviticus, homil. 3. almost at the beginning. If any man remember
well those things that have been said, he may say to us, that we asserted that
the Sacrifice, which we said the High Priest offered for sin, is a Type of
Christ, and it will not seem agreeable to the true Christ, who knows not sin,
that he should be said to have offered Sacrifice for sin, though the thing is
acted by a Mystery: and the same is put for the Priest, and also for the
Sacrifice. See then if we may also solve this Objection after this manner: That
Christ indeed did no sin, yet he was made sin for us, whilst he that was in
the form of God, condescends to be in the form of a Servant, whilst he, that
is immortal, dies, and he that is impassible, suffers, and he that is
invisible, is seen: and because either Death, or all other Frailty of the
Flesh, was brought upon us men by the condition of sin, he himself also, who
was made after the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man, undoubtedly
he himself for sin, which he undertook, because he carried our sins, did offer
the Calf without blemish, that is, his immaculate Flesh a Sacrifice to God.

Origin homil. 4. on Numbers. If sin had not been, it would not have been
necessary that the Son of God should become a Lamb; neither had it been needful
that he, being placed in the flesh, should be slain, but that, which was in the
beginning, would have remained, God the Word. But because sin entered into this
World, and the necessity of sin requires a Propitiation, and Propitiation is
not made but by Sacrifice, it was necessary that a Sacrifice for sin should be
provided.

On Matthew, cap. 16. Tract. 11. A man cannot give any exchange for his soul,
but God gave an exchange for the souls of all men, the precious blood of his
own Son. For we are not bought with corruptible silver or gold, but with the
precious Blood of the Lamb without blemish.

On the Epistle to the Romans, lib. 2. cap. 2. Ye confess that it is
undoubtedly true, which is written in the Epistle of Peter: because we are
redeemed no with the corruptible price of silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of the only begotten: If then we are bought with a price, as
Paul also jointly bears witness, we are without doubt bought from some person,
whose Servants we were, who also demanded the price he would have, that he
might send from under his power them that he held, but the Devil held us, to
whom we were in bondage by our sins: Therefore he required our price, the blood
of Christ. But until the Blood of Jesus was given, which was so precious, that
it was sufficient alone, for the Redemption of all men, it was necessary that
those, who were instructed in the Law, every one for himself should give his
own Blood, as it were in imitation of the future Redemption: and therefore we,
for whom the price of the blood of Christ was fulfilled, have no need to offer
for our selves a price that is the blood of Circumcision.

Cyprian Epist. 8, to Clem. and the People. He prayed for us, though he was not
a sinner himself, but bore our sins. The same Epist. 63. to Cecilius parag. 9.
Christ carried us all, who also carried our sins.

The same in his Book to Demetrianus, parag. 22. Christ imparts this Grace, he
gives this gift of his mercy, by subduing Death with the Triumph of the Cross,
by redeeming the Believer with the price of his Blood, by reconciling man to
God the Father, by enlivening mortal man with the Celestial Regeneration.

The same, or rather another Writer of the Book of the Cardinal Works of Christ
to Cornelius the Pope, Sermon. 7. which is concerning the manner of Circumcision:
that one Oblation of our Redeemer was of so great Dignity, that it was
sufficient alone to take away the sins of the World, who with so great
Authority went into the holy place with his own Blood, that afterward no
request of Suppliants needed the Blood of any other.

The same Sermon. 16. which is concerning the Ascension of Christ: Who for our
sakes having been sold for thirty pieces of silver, would have it to be
understood, how great an unequality there was in the price that was given for
him, and in that, which he himself gave for the World: Whereas, he being bought
and sold for a little silver, redeemed us at so great a price: so that it
cannot be a doubtful case, that the greatness of the price exceeded the
bargain. Neither could the damage, that verily just damnation deserved, be
equallized to the Obedience of Christ, which proceeded unto Death it self, and
over and above paid what it owed not.

Lactantius concerning the Benefits of Christ. Whosoever thou art that art
present, and comes within the threshold of the middle Temple, look on me, who
being guiltless, suffered for thy sin, etc.

And presently: For thee, and for thy life, I entered the Virgins womb, was made
Man, and suffered a dreadful Death, etc.

Eusebius Coesariensis, lib. 10. of the Demonstration of the Gospel. For it
behoved the Lamb of God, that was taken up by the great High Priest, to be
offered a Sacrifice to God for the other Lambs of the same kind, and for all
the Flock of Mankind. For because by man came Death, by man also came the
Resurrection of the Dead.

The same lib. 10. cap. 1. And as, when one Member suffers, all the other
Members suffer with it: so also, when many Members suffered and sinned, he also
suffered according to the ways of sympathy. For, forasmuch as it pleased God,
being the Word, to take the form of a Servant, and to be joined to the common
Tabernacle of us all, he takes upon himself the pain of the suffering Members,
and makes our Diseases his own, and suffers grief and pain for us all,
according to the Laws of Love to Mankind. And the Lamb of God having not only
performed these things, but having been punished for us, and having endured the
sufferings that he himself did not deserve, but we, for the sake of the
Multitude of them that trespassed, he became to us the Author of the
forgiveness of sins, having undertaken Death for us, and translated unto
himself, the stripes and reproaches and shame that was due to us, and drawn
upon himself the Curse that was due to us, becoming a Curse for us; and what
other thing was this but the giving life for life? Therefore the Oracle says
in our person, we were healed by his stripes, and the Lord delivered himself
for our sins.

Eusebius concerning the Preparation of the Gospel, lib. 1. cap. 10. And God
had respect to Abel and his Gifts, but unto Cain and his Sacrifice he had no
respect. Hence you may understand, that he that offered Beasts was more
acceptable than he that offered a Sacrifice of the Fruits of the Earth. And
Noah immediately offered upon the Altar Burnt-offerings of all clean Beasts,
and of all clean Fowl, and the Lord smelled a smell of sweet savor: But
Abraham also is recorded to have sacrificed, so that by testimony of sacred
Scripture, those that were lovers of God of old, esteemed the Sacrifice of
Beasts the chiefest of all. But I suppose the reason of this thing was not
accidental, or found out by man's wit, but taught by the Divine Wisdom; for
seeing they saw, that they who in their manners were holy, and conversant with
God, and enlightened in their souls by the Divine Spirit, and that they needed
to perform great service for the cleansing away of the sins of Mortals, they
supposed that the price of their Salvation was due to him that is Prince both
of life and soul. Moreover, having nothing better, nor more precious to
sacrifice than their soul, instead thereof they offered a Sacrifice of brute
Beasts, bringing them in the room of their own life, thinking that they sinned
not, nor offended in this thing, because they were taught that the soul of
unreasonable Creatures was not equal to the reasonable and intellective faculty
of Men, and having been taught that their life is no other thing but their
blood, and the lively power in the blood; which they also presented, offering
it as a life for a life unto God. And Moses also evidently declares this same
thing, the life of all flesh is the blood thereof, and I have given you the
blood upon the Altar to make atonement for your sins: for their blood shall
make atonement for the life: Therefore I have commanded the Children of Israel,
that no soul of you should eat blood: therefore consider diligently of these
things, how it is said, I gave you blood upon the Altar to make Atonement for
your souls. For blood shall make atonement for the soul: For he does manifestly
say, that the blood of slain Beasts makes atonement for the soul of man. And
the Law concerning Sacrifices, gives him that looks into it attentively to
understand this same thing. Therefore he commands every man that sacrifices to
lay his hands upon the Head of the thing sacrificed, and to bring the Beast
that is to dye to the Priest, as offering the Sacrifice instead of his own
life. Therefore he says of every one, He shall present it before the Lord, and
shall put his hands upon the Head of the Offering; and so it was observed in
every Sacrifice, no Sacrifice being otherways offered. For which things it is
said, that the Beasts were brought, that their lives might be offered for
theirs.

Antonius the Hermit, Epist. 2. in which also the Father of Creatures being
moved in his Bowels for our wound, which could not be heled, but by his
goodness only, sent his only Begotten to us, that by our Bondage he might take
the form of Bondage, and deliver himself up for our sins. And our very sins
humbled him; but by his stripes we all were healed.

Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, Lib. 2. Act. Council. Nicen. But he came a
Savior of all men, and undertook for our sake in his own flesh, the
punishments that were due to our sins.

Athanasius concerning the Incarnation of the Word of God. And because it was
necessary that that which was due from all should at length be restored, for it
was due that all men should dye, as I said before, for which chiefly he came.
For this cause, after his manifesting of his Divinity by his Works, it
remained, that he should offer a Sacrifice for all, having given the Temple of
his own Body unto Death for all men, that he might make all men unblameable and
free from the ancient Transgression, and might declare himself also to be more
powerful than death, having showed his own body uncorruptible as a First Fruits
of the Resurrection of all.

And presently: For there was need of Death, and there was need that Death
should be for all; that that which was due from all might be performed: whence
as I said before, the Word, because it was impossible that he should dye (for
he was Immortal) took upon himself a Body that could dye, that he might offer
it, as being his own, instead of all men. And that he suffering for all men by
entering thereinto, he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that is,
the Devil; and might deliver those that through fear of Death were subject to
Bondage. The Savior of all men having died for us, we that believe in Christ,
do not now dye the death as of old, according to the threatening of the Law.

The same in the same place. And by such a manner of death Salvation came to
all men, and all the Creation was redeemed: this is the life of all. And as a
Sheep, he gave his Body unto Death instead of all men, for their Salvation.

The same upon the Passion and Cross of Christ. But beholding the visibleness
of the wickedness, and that the Mortal Generation was not able to stand against
Death, nor able to suffer the punishment of their sins, for the excessive
greatness of the evil exceeded all punishment, and seeing the goodness of his
Father, seeing also his own fitness and power. For Christ is the power of God,
and the wisdom of God, he was moved with love to Mankind, and pitying our
weakness, he clothed himself therewith, for he himself, as says the Prophet,
took our Infirmities, and carried our Diseases, and pitying our Mortality,
clothed himself therewith; for Paul says, He humbled himself unto death, and
that the death of the Cross; and seeing the impossibility of our bearing the
punishment, took it upon himself: For Christ became a Curse for us, and so
being compassed about, and clothed with Humane Nature by himself, brought us
to the Father, that he himself suffering, may make man's suffering to be without
damage, and may exchange small things for great.

Hilarious Pictaviensis on cap. 14. Matthew. in the Hymn on the Epiphany: Jesus
has forth shined,
The gracious Redeemer of all Mankind.
Blessed John with fear does shiver,
To dip him in the River,
Whose Blood is able to purge out
The sins of all the world throughout.


Optatus Milevitanus concerning the Schism of the Donatists against
Parmenianus, lib. 3. When ye say, redeem your souls: whence bought ye them,
that ye may sell them? Who is that Angel, who makes a fair of souls, which the
Devil possessed before his coming? Christ the Savior redeemed these with his
Blood, according as the Apostle said, Ye are bought with a price; for it is
evident, that all men were redeemed by the Blood of Christ.

Victor Antiochenus on the fifteenth Chapter of Mark. And wherefore, say
thou, was the Lord and Maker of all things made Man for our sakes, and suffered
so much reproach, and so great punishments? He was made like unto us, and took
our Miseries and our Crosses upon himself, that he might raise up our Nature,
that was fallen down by sin, and might again restore it unto its ancient degree
of Dignity. Therefore the Advantages that have redounded unto us by his
Torments, are very many; for he paid our Debts for us, he bore our sins, he
both lamented and sighed for our sake.

Cyrillus of Jerusalem, Catechis. 13. But he set free all that were kept in
Bondage under sin, and redeemed the whole World of Mankind. And you need not
wonder that the whole World was redeemed, for he was not a mere man, but the
only begotten Son of God who died for them. And verily the sin of one man Adam
was effectual to bring death upon the World. But if Death reigned over the
World by the sin of one man, how much more shall life reign by the
Righteousness of one man? And if then they were thrown out of Paradise for the
Tree of Food, verily now by the Tree of Jesus Believers shall more easily enter
into Paradise* If the first man that was formed of the Earth, brought Death
upon the World; certainly it must needs be, that he that formed him of the
Earth, being Life himself, should bring Eternal Life. If Phinehas, being
zealous against the Evil-doer, caused the Anger of God to cease, does not
Jesus, who slew not another, but delivered up himself, the Price of our
Redemption, take away the Anger of God that was provoked against men?

Basilius Homil. on Psalm 48. One thing was found that was worthy of all
together, which was given for the price of the Redemption of our Souls, the
holy and precious Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Gregor. Nazianz. in the two and fortieth Oration, which is the second on the
Paschal Lamb. That great thing, and unsacrificeable (that I may so speak) in
respect of the first Nature, was mingled with Legal Sacrifices, and not for a
small part of the World, nor for a little time, but for all the World, and it
eternized the Purification.

The same in the same place. A few drops of Blood renew the Creation of the
whole World, and they have united and gathered all men into one Body.

And in the same Oration. It is therefore requisite to search into the Matter
and Doctrine, which has been neglected by many, but by me has been very
diligently searched after. For unto whom was that great and much celebrated
Blood of God, and the High Priest, and the Sacrifice poured forth, and upon
what account? for we were kept in Bondange by that wicked one under sin, and
received the pleasure of Wickedness. But if the price of Redemption belongs to
no other but the Possessour, I ask to whom was this offered, and for what
cause? If you say that it was offered to that wicked one; fie upon that
Blasphemy! whereas this thing proceeds from God only. Yea, if it were so, a
Robber would receive God for a price of Redemption, and thereby a Reward over
and above of his Tyranny, for which it was just to spare us. But if it was
offered to the Father, first, how? for we were not kept in Bondage by him. But
what a saying is that, that the Blood of the only begotten delights the Father,
who did not accept of Isaac offered by his Father? but he exchanged the
Sacrifice, delivering a Beast instead of the reasonable Sacrifice. Or it is
evident that the Father receives, not having asked, nor having been requested,
but for the dispensation, and because of the necessity that man should be
sanctified by the Humane Nature of God, that he might deliver us, having laid
hold on the Tyrant by force, and might bring us to himself by his Son, being
Mediator, and dispensing this for the honor of the Father.

Gregory Nyssene to Olympius the Monk, concerning the Form of a perfect Name.
But we learn that Christ is the price of Redemption, having given himself a
price for us. This we are taught by such a saying, that we should learn, how he
having paid a certain price for every man's soul, made immortality the peculiar
possession of them that were by him redeemed from Death unto Life.

Ambrosius lib. de Tobia, cap. 10. Behold, the Prince of this world comes, and
finds nothing of his own in me; he owed nothing, but he paid for all; as he
himself bears witness, saying, Then I restored that which I took not away.

The same in his Book concerning Joseph the Patriarch. Joseph was sold in
Egypt, because Christ was to come to them, to whom it was said, Ye were sold
for your sins. And therefore he redeemed them, whom their own sins had sold.
But Christ was sold by undertaking the Condition, not the Fault. And he owes no
price for sin, because he himself did no sin. Therefore he drew on debt by our
price, not his own: he took away the Handwriting, removed the Usurer, freed
the Debtor; he alone paid that which was due from all.

Ambrose concerning Esau, cap. 7. God therefore took flesh upon him, that he
might abolish the Curse of sinful flesh: and was made a Curse for us, that the
Blessing might swallow up the Curse, the Integrity the Sin, the Indulgence the
Condemnation, and Life Death. For he undertook Death, that the Sentence might
be fulfilled; and that the Judgment due to sinful Flesh by the Curse, might be
satisfied unto the Death. Therefore nothing was done against the Sentence of
God, because the Condition of the Divine Sentence was fulfilled; for the Curse
was unto Death, and after Death came Grace.

The same Lib. 9. Epist. 7. The Lord Jesus, when he came, forgave all men the
sin, which no man could avoid, and blotted out our Handwriting by the shedding
of his own Blood: that is, as he says, Sin abounded by the Law, but Grace
superabounded by Jesus: because after all the World was subdued, the took away
the sin of all the world.

Lib. 1. Epist. 11. See whether that is the saving Sacrifice, which God the
Word offered in himself, and sacrificed in his own Body.

And a little after: But that he pours out the Blood at the Altar, thereby may
be understood the cleansing of the World, the remission of all sins. For he
pours out that Blood at the Altar as a Sacrifice, to take away the sins of
many. For the Lamb is a Sacrifice, but not a Lamb of an unreasonable Nature,
but of a Divine Power. Concerning whom it was said, Behold, the Lamb of God,
behold him that takes away the sins of the world; for he has not only with
his Blood cleansed the sins of all, but also endued them with a Divine Power.

The same upon Luke, lib. 7. cap. 12. The Adversary esteemed us at a base rate,
as Captive-slaves but the Lord has redeemed us by a great price, as being
beautiful Bondslaves, which he made after his own Image and Likeness, who is a
fit Judge of his own handiwork, as the Apostle said, For ye are bought with a
price; and well it may be called great, which is not prized by Money, but by
Blood; because Chrst died for us, who delivered us by his precious Blood, etc.
And well it may be called precious, because it is the Blood of an unspotted
Body; because it is the Blood of the Son of God, who has not only redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, but also from the perpetual death of Impiety.

The same Lib. 10. upon Luke, Chap. 22. I have sinned, because I have betrayed
innocent Blood, the price of Blood is the price of the Lord's Passion.
Therefore the World is bought by Christ with the price of Blood.

Lib. 3. concerning Virginity, near the end. We were put in pledge to an evil
Creditor by sins: we drew on the Handwriting of the Fault, we owed the price
of Blood. The Lord Jesus came, he offered his own Blood for us.

And presently: Therefore do thou also behave thy self worthy of such a price,
lest Christ come, who has cleansed thee, who has redeemed thee, and if he
find thee in sin, he say unto thee, What profit had thou by my blood? What
has it profitted thee, that I went down into Corruption?

Lib. 1. of the Apology of David, cap. 13. The Apostle says excellently,
Because the Lord Jesus has forgiven our sins, blotting out the Handwriting of
the Decree, which was against us; and he has taken it away, says he, having
fixed it to the Cross. He blotted out the Ink of Eve with his own Blood, he
blotted out the Obligation of the hurtful Inheritance.

On the Epistle to the Hebrews, cap. 9. But all the bodily cleansing of the Old
Testament belonged to him: but now there is a Spiritual cleansing of the Blood
of Christ. Therefore he says, This is the blood of the New Testament for the
remission of sins. In those there was an outside sprinkling; and again the
sprinkled person was rinsed: for the People did not always walk besprinkled
with blood. But it is not so in the Soul; but the Blood is mingled with its
Essence, making that clean Fountain, and bringing forth unspeakable beauty. For
this cause was the killing of the Lamb, and its blood was sprinkled on the
Door-posts of them that were to be delivered. For this cause also we read of
all the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, which were appointed to typifie this
Sacrifice; by which comes the true remission of sins, and the cleansing of the
Soul for ever.

The same, or rather the Writer of the Commentary on the Epistles of Paul,
attributed to Ambrose, on 1 Cor. cap. 6. Because we are bought with a dear
price, we should serve the Lord more diligently, lest being offended, he should
deliver us back to that death, from which he redeemed us: For he bought us with
a very dear price, that he might give his blood for us.

The same on the same Ep. c. 11. We take the mystical Cup of the blood, for the
preservation of our body and soul, because the blood of the Lord redeemed our
blood, that is, made the whole man safe. For the flesh of the Savior was for
the salvation of our body, and the blood was shed for our souls.

The same on the second Epistle to the Corinthians, cap. 5. Because he was
offered for sins, he is not without cause said to be made sin, because the
Sacrifice in the Law, which was offered for sins, was called sin, that we might
be the righteousness of God in him, who knew no sin; as Isaiah says, Who did no
sin, neither was guile sound in his mouth. He was slain, as if he had been a
sinner, that sinners might be justified before God in Christ.

Epiphanius Hoeres. 55. First he offered himself, that he might abolish the
Sacrifice of the Old Testament, having offered a more perfect living Sacrifice
for all the world, himself being the Temple, himself the Sacrifice, himself the
Priest, himself the Altar, himself God, himself Man, himself a King, himself an
High Priest, himself a Sheep, himself a Lamb, becoming all in all for our sake,
that he might become life to us in all respects, and might procure the
unchangeable establishment of his Priesthood.

Andraeas Caesariensis on Apoc. cap. 1. Honor, says he, Glory and Dominion
becomes him, who being inflamed with burning love, by his own Death deliverec
us from the bonds of Death, and by the pouring forth of his Life-giving blood
and water, washed us from the filth of sin, and chose us for a Royal Priesthood.

Prudentius on Roman. Mart. This is the Cross, the Salvation of us all, says
Romanus, this is man's redemption.

Chrysostomus in his Preface on the Comment. on Isaiah. How great is the
Clemency of God toward us? He spared not a Son, that he might spare a Servant:
He delivered up his only Begotten, that he might redeem Servants that were
altogether unthankful; he paid the blood of his own Son for their price.

Hieronymus lib. 1. against the Pelagians. And, says he, when he would enter
in, let him offer a Calf for sin, and a Ram for a Burnt-Sacrifice; and let him
take two Goats for the People, let him offer one of them for his own sin, and
one for the sin of the People, and a Ram for a Burnt-Sacrifice. One of the two
Goats takes all the sins of the People upon him, for a Type of the Lord our
Savior, and carries them away into the Wilderness; and so God is reconciled to
all the Multitude.

The same on Isaiah. He was despised, and not regarded, when he was hanged on
the Cross, and being made a Curse for us, bore our sins, and spoke to the
Father, My God, why have thou forsaken me?

Augustine concerning the Trinity, lib. 13. cap. 14. What is the righteousness
where-by the Devil was overcome? What other, but the righteousness of Jesus
Christ; and how was he overcome? because when he found nothing in him worthy of
Death, yet he killed him. And verily it is just that the Debtors whom he held,
should be sent away free, believing in him, whom he slew without any Debt. For
so was that innocent blood shed for the remission of our sins.

And presently: He goes on afterward to his Passion, that he might pay that,
which he owed not, for us the Debtors.

And in the next Chapter. Then that blood, because it was the blood of him that
had no sin at all, was shed for the remission of our sins, that, because the
Devil kept those deservedly in bondage, whom being guilty of sin, he bound over
to a condition of Death, he might justly set these free by him, whom being
guilty of no sin, he punished with Death without his deserving. The strong man
was overcome by this righteousness, and tied with this bond, that his Goods
might be taken away, that whilst they were in his possession, were together
with him and his Angels, Vessels of Wrath, and that they might be turned into
Vessels of Mercy.

The same on John, Tract. 41. We are not reconciled, but by the taking away of
sin, which is the Medium of Separation: but the Mediator is the Reconciler.
Therefore that the Wall of Separation may be taken away, the Mediator comes,
and the Priest himself is made a Sacrifice.

Lib. 7. de Civ. Dei. cap. 31. God sent his Word unto us, who is his only Son,
by whose Birth and Sufferings for us in the Flesh that he took, we might know
how much God prized man, and might be cleansed by that one Sacrifice from all
our sins, and Love being spread abroad in our hearts by his Spirit, having
overcome all Difficulties, we might come to everlasting rest.

In his Declaration on Psalm 95. Men were held captive under the Devil, and
served Devils; but they were redeemed from Captivity. For they could sell
themselves, but they could not redeem themselves. The Redeemer came, and gave
the price, shed his blood, and bought the world. Ask ye what he bought? See
what he gave, and find what he bought. The blood is the price. What is of so
great worth? What? but the whole world. What, but all Nations? They are very
unthankful to their own price, or they are very proud, who say, that either it
was so small a price that it purchased only Africans; or that they themselves
were so great, that it was given for them only. Therefore they should not
insult, nor be puffed up with pride, he gave for the whole as much as he gave. He
knows what he bought, because he knows for how much he bought it, and how much
he gave for it.

On Psalm 129. Our Priest received from us, what he might offer for us; for he
received flesh from us: In the flesh he was made an Expiation, he was made a
whole Burnt-Offering, he was made a Sacrifice.

Lib. 4. against the two Epistles of the Pelagians. But how say the Pelagians,
that Death only passed unto us by Adam? For if we therefore dye because he
died, and he died because he sinned, they say the punishment passes unto us
without the Fault, and that the innocent Infants are punished by an unjust
Judgment in being liable to Death, without the merits of Death. Which the
Catholic Faith acknowledges of one only Mediator between God and Men, the man
Christ Jesus, who condescended to undergo Death for us, that is, the punishment
of sin without sin. For as he only was made the Son of Man, that through him we
might be made the Sons of God. So he undertook punishment for us without evil
merits, that we throught him might obtain grace without good merits. Because,
as there was not any good due to us, so neither was any evil due to him.

Lib. 14. against Faustus the Manich, cap. 4. Christ undertook our punishment
without guilt, that thereby he might take away our guilt, and also put an end
to our punishment.

The same in the eight Sermon concerning Time. There is a twofold cause
chiefly, why the Son of God became the Son of Man. One is, that as Man, through
suffering all things for us, he might set us free from the bonds of Sins; for
so the Prophet Isaiah had foretold: he bore our sins; etc. But the other cause
of the Lord's Passion is, that he might stir us up, whom he redeemed from sins
and wickedness by his own blood, unto the study of Piety, not only by the help
of Doctrine and Grace, but also by his own Example.

De Temp. Sermon. 51. Death could not be overcome but by Death; therefore Christ
suffered Death, that an unjust Death might overcome just Death, and might
deliver them that were jus^ly condemned, whilst he was unjustly slain for them.

And Sermon. 141. Our Lord Jesus Christ by partaking with us of the punishment,
without the sin, has taken away both the sin and the punishment.

De Sermon. Dom. on Luke 37. It is thy fault that thou art unjust, but it is thy
punishment that thou art mortal. He, that he might be thy Neighbor, he
undertook thy punishment, but he took not upon him thy sin, or if he took it
upon him, he took it upon him to abolish it, not to do it. And presently after,
by taking upon him the punishment, and not taking upon him the sin, he
abolished both the sin and the punishment.

Cyrillus on Leviticus, lib. 10. Then all the People cried that he should let
Barrabbas go free, but delier up Jesus to Death. Behold, thou have the Goat
that was sent away alive into the Wilderness, carrying with him the sins of the
People, crying and saying, Crucify, Crucify. He then is the Goat was sent
alive into the Wilderness, and he is the Goat that was offered to the Lord for
a Sacrifice, to make Atonement for sins, and he made a true Propitiation for
the People that believe in him.

The same against Julian lib. 9. See therefore the Sacrament, and how it is
well delineated by the two Goats. For the Goat was slain for the sins of the
Priest and People, according to that which was commanded in the Law. And
because Christ was sacrificed for our sins, he is compared to a Goat. For so
says the Prophet Isaiah, We all went astray like sheep, every man wandered in
his own way, and God delivered him up for our sins. For two Goats are taken,
not that there are two Christ's, that is, two Sons, as some supposed. But
rather, because it was requisite that he should be seen, who was also to be
slain for us, dying indeed according to the flesh, but living according to the
spirit.

The same on John lib. 2. cap. 1. One Lamb is slain for all, that he may offer
all kind of men to God. One for all, that he may gain all, and that all may no
longer live to themselves, but to Christ, that died for all, and that rose
again for all: For, because we were in sin, and were therefore a due debt to
Death and Destruction the Father gave his Son for our Reddemption. He gave one
for all, both because all are in him, and he is better then all.

The same in the Homil. that was said at Ephesus against Nestorius. Verily
(these wicked Heretics) are the Sons of Perdition and the wicked Seed, which
deny the Lord, that bought them: for we are bought with a price, not
corruptible, as Gold and Silver, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without blemish and spot. But how could the blood of a common man like us,
have been the Redemption of the World?

In the Exegesis to Valerianus concerning the Incarnation of the Word, which is
extant Council. Ephesians. 6. c. 17. He who was without a Body, as God, confesses
that he has a Body prepared for him, that being made an oblation for us, he
might heal us all by his stripes, according to the saying of the Prophet. But
how could one dying for all pay a sufficient price for all, if we say that was
the suffering of any mere man? But if the Word having suffered according to the
Flesh, translated unto himself the Sufferings of his own Flesh, as if they were
his own Sufferings, and claimed them to himself, then indeed we do very well
affirm that the Death of one, according to the Flesh, was of greater value than
the life of all men.

Theodoretus quaest. 9. on Numb. For the Lord Christ only, as Man, is
unblameable; and the Prophet Isaiah foreseeing this, cries out, Who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. For this cause also he took upon him
the sins of others, having none of his own; for he (says he) does bear our
sins, and is in anguish for our sakes. And the great John: Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the World. For this cause he is free among the
dead, as having suffered Death unjustly.

The same Sermon. 10. concerning Providence, he brings in the Lord speaking thus:
For I have paid the Debt for that Generation; for not owing Death, I suffered
Death, and being made subject to Death, I undertook Death, and though being
unblameable, I was reckoned among them that were worthy of blame; and being
free from Debts, was reckoned amongst the Debtors. I therefore paid the Debt of
nature; and having suffered an unjust Death, I abolish the just Death: and I
having been unjustly detained, do free them that were justly detained from
their bondage. Behold the Nature's Bill of Indictment taken away, O bitter
Death, behold it nailed to the Cross! Behold it being a Bill of wickedness not
received! for the eyes of this very body have paid for the eyes that beheld
wickedly; the ears of this body, for the ears that received pollution; this
tongue, likeways, these hands, and the other parts, for those Members that
committed any manner of sin. But the Debt being paid, it is requisite, that
they who were kept in bondage upon this account, should be freed from their
bondage, and receive their former liberty, and return to the Country of their
Father.

Proclus the Constantinopolitan Homil concerning the Nativity of Christ. The
nature of man was deeply indebted through sins, and was in distress about the
Debt: for through Adam all were made guilty of sin; the Devil kept us in
slavery.

The first Inventer of our Miseries stood up arguing the Debt upon us, and
demanded of us Justice. Therefore it was necessary that one of these two things
should be: that either Death should be brought upon all according to the
Condemnation, because all have sinned, or that such a price should be given in
recompense, that contained all Righteousness that was required. Now then Man
could not save us, for he was liable to the Debt of Sin. An Angel could not
redeem the Human Nature, for the was not capable to pay such a price of
Redemption. Therefore it remained that the sinless God ought to dye for them
that had sinned; for this only way remained of deliverance from that Evil. What
then? he that brought every Nature out of nothing into being, who was not in
distress to find out a way of Deliverance, he found out for them that were
Condemned, a most sure Life, and a very honorable way of abolishing Death, and
he is born a Man of the Virgin, after such a manner as he himself knows; for
speech cannot declare the wonderfulness thereof; and he died in what he became,
and purchased Redemption by what he was, according to the saying of Paul, In
whom we have Redemption by his Blood, the remission of sins. O glorious works!
he purchased Immortality for others, for he himself was Immortal.

Leo concerning the Passion, Sermon. 12. What hope can they have in the safeguard
of this Sacrament, who deny the truth of Human Substance in the Body of our
Savior? Let them tell by what Sacrifice they are reconciled, by what Blood
they are redeemed, who is he that gave himself for us an Oblation and Sacrifice
for a savor of sweet smell? Or what Sacrifice was ever more holy than that
which the true High Priest laid upon the Altar of the Cross? For though the
Death of many Saints was precious in the sight of God, yet the killing of no
other Innocent person was the Propitiation of the World. The Just receive
Crowns, but did not give them; and from the Courage of the Faithful have arisen
Examples of Patience, but not Gifts of Righteousness; for there were singular
Debts in each one of them; neither did any of them pay another man's Debt by
his Death; whereas it was only our Lord Jesus Christ that was found among the
Sons of Men, in whom all were crucified, all died, all were buried, and also
all were raised again.

Claudianus Mamertus concerning the State of the Soul, lib. 2. Pictavus
Hilarious in many of his high Disputations, being somewhat different in his
Opinion, asserted these two things contrary to truth; one of of which was this,
That he said nothing was created Incorporeal; the other was this, That he said
Christ suffered no pain in his Passion, whose Passion, if it had not been true,
our Redemption also could not have been true.

Anastasius Sinaita Bishop of Antiochia, concerning the Right Rules of the
Catholic Faith. lib. 4. concerning the Passion, and impassible Deity of
Christ. His Blood was shed, which was sufficient to redeem many. Perhaps it
would be better to say, it was sufficient to redeem all, for all are also many.

Procopius of Gaza on the 24th of Exodus Seeing Christ was by nature joined to
the Father, if we are made partakers of him by the Spirit, we will also by him
be united to the Father, coming into the Society of the Divine Nature. Neither
did they go up into the Mountain before they were crucified with the Blood of
Christ, who gave himself a price of Redemption for us, offering his own Flesh
as an unblameable Sacrifice to God and the Father.

Gregor. M. lib. 3. Moral. cap. 13. Another that was created for Paradise would
proudly take upon him the similitude of Divine Power: Nevertheless the Mediator
paid for the fault of this Pride, being himself without fault. Hence it is that
a certain wise man said to the Father, because thou art just, thou desposest
all things justly; also thou condemnest him that ought not to be punished. But
it must be considered how he can be just, and dispose all things justly, if he
condemns him that ought not to be punished. For our Mediator, ought not to have
been punished for himself, because he had no contagion of sin. But if he had
not undertaken an undue Death, he had never delivered us from a due Death.
Therefore the Father because he is just, in punishing the just one, he
disposes all things justly. For hereby he justifies all, in that he condemns
him that is without sin for sinners.

Isychius on Levicic. cap. 16. The Law made the Children of Israel liable to
the Curse and to Death, so that they had therefore a necessity of Expiation,
and the Sacrifice of the only begotten is slain for them principally; but he is
Sacrificed for all men; so that Caiphas said, It behooves that one man should
dye for the People, and not the whole Nation perish. And the Evangelist John
confirming, and also correcting what was said, added, But this he said not of
himself, but being High Priest that year, he prophesied that Christ was to dye
for that Nation; and not for that Nation only, but that he should gather
together into one the Sons of God that are scattered, to wit, the Gentiles.
Jesus was slain for Israel, and he offered him for all Mankind, to be an
Expiation of our Uncleanness.

Antiochus in Exomologess. Thy Word was discolored with no sprinkling of sin
at all, whom thou sentest through the bowels of thy Mercy, that he might call
back his own handiwork into the way, being made flesh, he suffered himself for
our sake to be crucified, and abolished the Handwriting that was against us,
being made a Propitiation for our sins.

Sophronius of Jerusalem Epist. to Sergius Patriarch of Constantinople. Christ
condescended to dye for men, and for their redemption shed his Divine Blood,
and laid down his Soul, which was a Gift more Divine than all Dignity.

Elias Cretenses. Christ was called Redemption, because he set us at liberty
that were sold under sin, and gave himself as a price of Redemption for the
Expiation of the whole World.

Nicephorus of Constantinople Epist. to Leo 3. which is extant in Baronius Tom.
9. Annal. p. 587. Edit. Mor. 2. I believe he was crucified, not in that
Substance, wherein he shines with the Father, though it is said, the Lord of
Glory was crucified, but in our Earthly Nature, in which he took upon him our
Earthly Mass, and was made a Curse for us, that he might make us partakers of
the Blessing that comes from him, and he was content to suffer the Death of
Malefactors according to the flesh, that by suffering Death he might condemn
the sting of Death in his flesh, and might destroy him that had the Power of
Death, that is, the Devil.

Mark the Hermit in his Book concerning them that think they are justified by
Works. Christ is Lord according to his Essence, and Lord also according to
Dispensation: Because he made them that were not; and has redeemed them that
died to sin, by his own Blood, and gave Grace to them that thus believed.

Theodorus Abucara Bishop of the Carians, Disp 15. cap. 5. God in his just
Judgment required all things of us that are written in the Law: which, because
we were not able to pay, therefore our Lord paid those things for us, and
freely took, and received upon himself the Curse and Condemnation to which we
were liable: he himself suffered those things that we ought to have suffered.

The same in the same place. Now declare unto me, who are those five Enemies,
from which Christ has delivered us.

A. Death, the Devil, the Curse, and Condemnation of the Law, Sin, and Hell.

B. As touching Death, you said, it was destroyed by the Obedience of Christ:
So also after what manner he delivered us from the slavery of the Devil: Now
declare how he redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us? And after he had said a few words:

A. God in his just Judgment required of us all things that are written in the
Law, which because we were not able to pay, therefore Christ our Lord paid
those things for us, and willingly took and received unto himself the Curse and
Condemnation to which we were liable. And And he himself suffered those things
that we ought to have suffered, being scourged, besmeared with spittle, beaten,
smitten on the cheek, crucified and dyed for us.

Theophylact in the first Chapter to the Hebrews, on these words, procuring the
Expiation of our sins by him. When he had spoken concerning the Majesty of the
Divinity, of the Word, afterward he discourses of his care, that he takes for
men by his flesh, which is much more, than that he bears all things. And here
he asserts two things, both that he cleansed us from our sins, and also that he
did this by himself. For by the Cross and Death which he sustained, he purged
us, not only because he dyed for our sin, whereas himself was free of all sin,
and suffered punishment, which yet he did not owe to us, and delivered that
Nature that was simply condemned for the sin and transgression of Adam.

On Cap. 9. For that cause Christ died, that he might cleanse us; and in his
Testament bequeathed unto us the pardon of sin, the use of his Father's Goods,
being made the Mediator of our Father. For the Father would not let go the
Inheritance to us, but was angry at us as Sons rejecting him, and estranged
from him. Therefore Christ becoming Mediator, reconciled him unto us. How? what
we should have suffered (for we should have dyed) that he suffered for us, and
made us worthy of his Testament.

Anselm concerning the Conception of the Virgin, and Original Sin, cap. 22. If
every one has not the sin of Adam, says some body, how say thou that none
is saved without Satisfaction for the sin of Adam? For how does the just God
require of them Satisfaction for the sin they have not? To which I say, God
exacteth of no sinner more than he owes: But because none can restore as much
as he owes, Christ only rendered more than is due, for all that are saved.

Bernard. Epist. 190. to Innocentius. It was a man that owed, and it was a man
that paid. For, says he, if one died for all, them are all dead; to wit, that
the Satisfaction of one may be imputed to all, as he only did bear the sins of
all, and so there was not found one that purchased and another that satisfied,
because one Christ is Head and Body; therefore the Head satisfied for the
Members, Christ for his own Bowels.

Arnoldus Carnotensis in his Work concerning the seven last words that were
spoken by Christ upon the Cross. He is forsaken with them that are forsaken,
and paid a Tribute for the Nature that he took, and being to carry with him his
own kindred beyond the Sea of this World, paid the fare of his flesh to the
plundering Pirates, and deceived their greedy Teeth being glewed together, and
drew away, and carried up both himself and his prey. He offered himself to be a
Debtor for Debtors, and what he owed not of himself, he refused not to owe of
his own accord. Therefore the Exacter required the sum of the whole Debt of
him, who gave himself for all.

Nicetas Choniates in the Annals in John Commenus. Christ falling raised up the
Carcass of our Nature, stretching forth his hands upon the Cross, and with a
few Sprinklings bringing the whole World into Unity.

Nicalaus de Cusa Cardinalis excitationum lib. 10. Thus Christ acted for our
Justification: for we sinners, in him, suffered the infernal punishments that
we justly deserve.

FINIS.

