THE Grounds of Unity IN RELIGION OR AN Expedient For a General CONFORMITY AND
PACIFICATION.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

The grounds of Unity IN RELIGION, etc.
UNity and submission is desired of all Princes and Commonwealths, as that
which preserves peace and happiness in all societies, for a Nation full of
discontents and Factions, is next door to Rebellion, and consequently ruin.

2. One great foundation of peace is the due submmission of all pa^tyes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, to the temporal Prince, as supreme Governor in all
causes and subject to none but God.

3. And this may be yielded and yet not a complete satisfaction in the gene^al,
for by a tolleration in Religion, different Sects may possible submit for
pollitick ends, though this unites not, but only palliates, which yet is better
then a worse evil.

4. But that which breeds the perfect concord and complete union is this, when
the Ecclesiastics, and again, the people agree to and embrace the public
established Church Discipline without murmuring, not out of ^orce, but love and
good opinion of it.

5. To which end and purpose, it ought to be as rational and consonant to the
law of nature as possible, agreeing with the plain apprehensions of humanity
and down right sincerity of the commons, without specious circumstances or
impertinencies, which the people think are but amuzements and Sophistications
in the worship of God, bu^ yet also compliant with the ends of prudence, and
order without affectation of Novelty on the one hand, or superstition on
the other, and this will infallibly be of force, for being founded in reason, it
will be aplicable and comprehensive to all reasonable men.

6. For this is certain, the Church was pure and plain at the beginning,
without ceremonies and circumstances; and Christians met together humbly,
decently, and religiously, with hearty Prayers to God, and hearing of the word
fervently preached with such apprehensiveness and reason, that they made the
people willingly to resign their blind and superstitious opinions to such real
and demonstrated truths, pressing them to search the Scriptures and their own
consciences whether those things they taught were so or no; in this purity and
sincerity, were the primitive times, with which their innocence and holiness of
life so prevaild, that many Kings and Kingdoms in short time embraced the
Christian Religion, and strongly upheld it; but after, it grew to so much
splendour and pomp, that Superstition, Vanity and arrogance crept also by
degrees into the Clergy, that soon dimn'd the Luster, and abated the true glory
of Religion, and was the cause of many divisions.

7. For this is a rule in the discipline of the Church and worship of God, that
too much formality spoils devotion, and makes men cold in the searches after
truth; the mo^e plain and free from ceremonies and circumstantials it is,
provided it be decent, the more pure and substantial it will prove, and the
more ground for a general union; wherefore in all such cases, much care should
be taken that the great stumbling blocks of discontent be taken away, for
though they are of themselves indifferent, yet when they bring much and
considerable disturbance, they then cease to be indifferent as to peace and
quietness, and so are better regulated or removed.

8. Now doubtless though Episcopacy is the purest, as well as the most ancient
discipline of the Church, having obtained in all Christian Churches of the
world of what sort or sect soever, for 1500 years together after Christ, and
the Church of England at present is looked upon to be the best regulated of all
Episcopacy, and yet if there can be any more advantages given to it for the
farther improvement of Unity, from ancient prescription, right reason or modern
example, doubtless it might be good to be put in practice, for we should still
ascend to improvement and perfection, for the more comprehensive and generally
acceptable it is, the more firm and established it will be.

9. For there is nothing conduces more to unity and peace then by taking off
and reducing the general Factions of Religion, which is done by enlarging the
bosom of the Church and taking off things that are cavild at, provided only
they are Circumstantialls, as commonly they are, and not the materials and
Essentials of Religion; so would both the cavils cease, and Sectaryes also, and
of course fall of themselves to the ground without more ado, and incorporate to
the same Church with us unavoydably.

10. For the true way of unity, is such a composed mean of Church Discipline as
may render the major part and generality of rational people satisfied, which
may easily be done with us without altring the frame of government or taring
things to pieces, but only by joining the two great Parties of this Nation
together, (viz.) the Episcopal and Presbiterian, which parties are at least
nine parts in ten of the nation including all other Sects, which may be done by
a little regulation, abating only some things and reforming others.

11. For Episcopacy and the same discipline in general is well enough approved
by the most, but as in all times of civil government, emendations and making
Laws has been for the better convenience of the public according to the
emergencies of things, and conjuncture of times and occasions, so also is it
convenient in the Ecclesiastic^l Regiment* for some things will be always
proper at some times, and some ages, that is not proper in the other; and so
acco^dingly they must be remedied, for in an age or some long tract of time
men's manners and the constitutions of things alter extremely, and so must have
corrections proportionably.

12. And all people being now satisfied that the Church of England by
Episcopacy is to be the standing Government, being established by Parliament and
owned so in his Majesty's late Declaration for Liberty, if there be once a
further comprehension of the Presbiterians in and according to that Government;
all other parties will soon be quiet as too small to stand in computation on
the one hand, and on the other hand the Church being thus regulated will bring
in the rest daily also, so that some small regulation and abatement of the very
same Church Discipline we have already, will work the desired effect. And as
for the other dissenters they may have all the same loving connivance and
indulgence they have at present, but no legal liberty; for legal allowance will
make them impudent, and endeavor to increase, whereas otherwise they will be
humble and cautions.

13. Wherefore unite those two parties, and the Church is established and much
better and strong^r then ever, this will not only oblige our friends at home,
but all the Protestants beyond Seas, and this may be done by the rule abovesaid
without altring the mode of Government, for we differ but in a few things in
discipline and none in doctrine, they have left of themselves the notion of
Elders, and if it were in their own choice would direct moderate Episcopacy,
and would con^ede yet very much more for the gaining of our f^iendship and
b^^ng one with us which will be a very happy period of that long and great
contest now never to be heard of any more.

14. To effect this, a few things will be sufficient, as dispencing with the
Su^plice, and part of one Oath in the Act of Uniformity, also the crosing in
Baptism and kneeling at the Sacrament le^t indifferent, and pluralities taken
away; these things being abated, they would agree with all things else very
well, and be as much or more for Episcopacy then our selves, and why should not
we desire this also that will unite us so invinceably, wherefore should we
stick at such little circumstances to hinder so great a work; and as for taking
away pluralities, there are but few sober men of either party but heartily
desire it, it being that which makes ill those which have too many, and hinde^s
abundance of learned men from preferment, it being prudence in government,
rather to provide convenient and comfortable preferments for many, than great
preferments for f^w; and things thus remedyed and quallified will be so far
from weakening the P^otestant interest, that it will raise it higher th^n ever,
and make Episcopacy stand upon a firm and everlasting B^sis. I am confident
these few things last mentioned will do the work; however if there were any
other hindrances of the like nature, what matter were it to remove them for the
Churches security, the advantage will soon be perceived, this will drown and
take away the name of Presbittery as well as all nicknames of parties, and make
them have no abettors nor understand how to beget a quarrel if they would
themselves.

15. Some may say it will be ill making alterations, but that is t^^ ^^me
extraordinary thing which discontents the major part of (...) Nation; but this
is the contrary, for here the major part will not only be well pleased at it,
but will also be advantaged: where then is the inconveniency of it, the Royal
and Protestant party if Ceremonies were abated, would not be obliged, or the
less Subjects for it, they referring all such Matters to the King and
Parliament, and would be as well pleased in his Majesty's farther Directions in
this, as they were with Queen Elizabeth's before, for it is all one to them if
the Government be satisfied, they acquiess as well in taking of them away, as
setting of them up, and more because they see, its for making many Friends;
Again, the Presbiterians and other Sectaries, that were displeased before, are
by this reconciled, which will on all the scores of Humanity and Christianity,
oblige them to be grateful to Eternity, and for the Church of England, it will
very much enlarge the bosom of it, Exalting it above all Disciplines, making
it so firm, that nothing can shake it.

16. Others may object, that if these things be granted, the Sectaries will
desire more and more still, till they have pulled down all Decency, good Order,
and Ecclesiastical Government, but this does not follow, for by the same Rule,
there cant be a motion to reform any thing amiss whatsoever, but they shall
straight prevent it by a pretense of a destructive change, but this alters no
ground work or substantials in Discipline, only pruning of some superfluties,
for according to the common Maxim, take away the Cause, and the Effect
cease, for example, if a man puts on Laces on his Linen or Garment, some
will say they are to broad, others to narrow, others not fine enough, otherwise
again, no good pattern, when he that wears none gives no oppertunity to be
talked on, or for any body to be displeased with him. So its generally in all
other things, the more plain and substantial it is, the better its liked, and
so in Discipline, if they should quarrel at foundations and substantial things,
they would render their party weak and themselves rediculous, wherefore for
their own Credit and Christianity, they would not unrip those sacred Ties and
Ligaments but many Ceremonies and circumstantials, common reason tells us, is
liable to the censure of every common pretender under the notion of
superstition, whilst plainness and seriousness in Religion, fills up all peoples
hearts to applaude it, its no policy to uphold things to be argued and disputed
at or cause differences, when taking of them away cures the troubles without
any more to do, cutting off the discontented Cavil.

17. For true balance of the Church Government, is to have as few unnecessary
obligations as possible, and to be free from all Cloggs in oppression of reason
or conscience, but giving lattitude, be comprehensive of the generallity as
much as may be, for all Artifices ought to be contrived for enlarging the bosom
of the Church to the utmost Extent, and in cases of this nature private
Annimosities ought by every one to be laid aside for the public Concern.

18. All manner of Church rigor being thus calmed, how strong should we be in
our selves, it would keep many strickt sort of people from going beyond Sea,
blast all the designs of the Enemies of the Church, and oblige all sorts of
foreign and home Protestants, making them flock to it and cherish so moderate
a Government, and would not scruple at Bishops or any good Order, but would
gladly join with them, as being questionless the best Government in the world
if truly regulated, and when once the great Ones and heads of Parties are
obliged by state Prudence, the rest will soon crumble to nothing, by this all
Sectaries will diminish when once the apparent grounds of difference is taken
away, so this would not only unite us for the present, but keep people from
growing to be Schizmaticks, for the future as well as increase the body of the
Church, when they see it is not Ceremonies are stood on as some incendiaries
pretend, but instead thereof so much willingness and plain hartedness, to unite
all people in the Worship of God. Thus shall the Church of England be more
firmly established then ever, the people pleased and conformable, His Majesty
feared of his Enemies abroad, and become strong in the affections of his
Subjects at home; Trade also would soon revive and flourish, and not only the
Dutch, but other Protestants also flock over with banks of Money, and
Manufacturies, His Majesty by it gaining the hearts of all the Protestants of
Europe, as well as their Trades and Merchandise, by endeavoring to establish,
thus the purity of the Worship of God, easing of tender Consciences, and
securing them more free in their persons Religion and Property, then any place
in the world besides, which is that which increases the Trade and grandeur of
any Nation.


