THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.

Written in ITALIAN, BY The Count GVALDO PRIORATO.

Containing all the Memorable Actions IN FRANCE, AND Other Neighboring
KINGDOMS.

The Translation whereof being begun by The Right Honorable HENRY, late Earl
of Monmouth: Was finished by WILLIAM BRENT, s

LONDON: Printed for William Place, at Grays-Inne-Gate; Thomas Basset, Thomas
Dring, and John Leigh, in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVI.

To the Right Honorable and Truly Noble LADY, MARTHA, COUNTESS of MONMOUTH.
MADAM,
I Have in obedience to your Ladyships Commands turned into English so much of
the Count Gualdo his Book, as your Noble and Worthy Lord and Husband (being
prevented by Death) left untranslated.

I am not ignorant how great a rashness and presumption it was heretofore
accounted, for an unskilful Workman to attempt the finishing of Apelles Table;
but I shall hope the meanness of my Style will give your Ladyship no cause of
offense, when you consider that the defects thereof are so far from prejudicing
your Lord's Work, that like a Foil they may serve to add something unto the
Luster of it: And I am confident I shall deserve from the Reader his Thanks as
well as Pardon, for blundering at the remainder of the Book, since it is the
cause of publishing the rest, whereby our Nation may have the benefit of being
acquainted with all Designs, Intrigues, and Affairs of State, transacted in
those years whereof it treats, delivered to them by the choice Pens of two
persons so accomplished as were the Author and his Lordship.

And howsoever, I have resolved rather to expose my self unto the danger of any
Censure whatsoever, than be wanting to the profession I have made of being,

MADAM, Your Ladyship's most obedient Servant, William Brent.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMongst those changes which the vicissitude of Worldly things has in this our
Age produced, I believe there are none either more worthy to be remembered, or
that can better satisfy our Curiosities, than a clear knowledge of the late
Revolutions in France, and the War between the Crowns of France and Spain,
which still continues: for whether we consider the Slights and Policies used by
the different Factions, to advance their several Parties, or the multiplicity
of Intrigues, occasioned by those Contests; or the great Waste and Spoils
committed by the Armies in their Marches, of which the bloody marks do yet
remain in several Provinces; or the sad Consequences of that Craft, Envy, and
Emulation, wherewith all Treaties have been managed; or lastly, the deep
Prudence, Care, and Foresight, whereby the mischiefs thereby designed have been
avoided: I may with confidence affirm, no time or place can furnish us with
better instances touching all those matters, than the Transactions in those
Civil Wars.

I therefore, who* (from my first coming to look into the World) have always
thought no employment could be more Noble, than that of setting down all
memorable Actions of the present Age for the Instruction of that to come,
(since History may well be termed the Nurse of all Illustrious Actions, and the
only life of Fame and Memory) have endeavored to oblige Posterity, by giving
a sincere account of what has passed; that they may thereby be invited to
imitate what is praiseworthy, and avoid those things that deserve blame.

And since it concerns every man, who makes Truth his object, to use great
diligence in the discovery of her, because this beauteous Lady seldom appears
in public places; I resolved therefore to make a Voyage into France, as I had
done before to Germany, Flanders, England, and other Countries where action
was, that I might (being an Eyewitness) be better able to give a true relation
of all passages, wherein I can hardly express the diligence and caution I have
used, not being satisfied with a superficial knowledge of things, but
endeavoring to penetrate into the true Motives, Ends, and Interests of those
that acted.

As for the manner of my Writing, it is the same that I have always used, rude
and unpolished, suitable to the Profession of a Soldier, wherein I have the
honor to serve the famous Commonwealth of Venice, as my Ancestors have done
before me, in the principal Employments under the command of that Republic.
This I assure the Reader, that as these my Relations are not adorned with any
Flourishes of Eloquence, so he will find them void of Passion or private
Interest; no party having ever gratified or disobliged me; and the only end I
have in writing, being to give a true account of what has passed unto
Posterity.

I make use of the same freedom in relation of all actions, as well
praiseworthy as blamable: neither has that been ever the least hindrance to
me, which has deterred many, viz. The publishing a History of persons whilst
they live; and therefore if there be any who thinks I am too sparing in his
praises, I desire he would impute it to my want of skill, and would also
consider, that brave Exploits bring their own Triumphs along with them; and
Virtue is the best reward unto it self. If any one be Censured or Reproached,
he must blame not the Copy, but the Original, since History performs the Office
only of a Glass, and like an Echo does but redouble what has formerly been
spoken. And if I have mistaken any thing in this Relation, I shall be ready
upon better information to rectify it, during his Life, by acknowledging my
error in the reprinting of this History; which is a Right can never be
afforded unto any person after Death,

FAREWELL.s
THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. 1648.
The FIRST BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The general state of France: Its Alliances. How the Parliament of Paris is
composed. The great Council. The Chamber of Accounts. The Court of Ayds. The
Paoletta. Selling of Offices. The rise of the Troubles. The increase of Masters
of Requests. Monsieur Emery. Means used to discredit the Cardinal. Masters of
Requests unite. The Queen sends to reprove them. The Parliament meets,
notwithstanding the Prohibition. Deputies in the Chamber of St. Lewis. Emery's
Office taken from him. The Parliament provoked to higher designs. The
Frondeurs, or Slingers. The Cardinal maintains the Kings Authority. The Council
lay aside complying. Proposition to imprison some of the Parliament. The
Cardinal dissents. Brousel arrested in his own house: His words to his
Children. President Blanmenil arrested. Charton escapes. Commotions in Paris.
The Court prepare to maintain what they had done. The great danger of the
Chancellor: The Parliament desert him: Marshal de Milleraye relieves him. The
Chancellor's Coach assaulted: He is graciously received by their Majesty's: His
Saying. The tumult increases. The Chancellor's house plundered. The Parliament
desire freedom of Prisoners. The first President's Speech. The Queen's Answer.
People furious. First President courageous. The Cardinals opinion: He is
incognito. Parliament at Palais-Royal: they resolve to continue. The beginning
of the War. Chavigny imprisoned. Di Gaulas banished. President Nicola his
Speech. The Parliaments desire. The Answer of the Prince and Queen. Decree of
the Council. Deputies civilly received. The Duke of Orleans his Speech. The
first President his. The Duke's Reply. Resolutions for the peoples ease.
Endeavors to straiten the King, Treaty of Noysy. Duke of Longueville's
disgusts. Debates in the Kings Council. The Cardinals opinion, seconded by
Milleraye. Proceedings in Flanders. Treaty at Munster, begun by Pope Urban 8.
Richlieu dies, and the French King. Protestants at Osnaburgh. Deputies for the
several Princes. Hollanders for their own ends. The Swede constant to their
Allies. A Truce propounded. Bavaria for the French. The Hollanders conclude a
Truce apart: change it for a Peace. Zealand excepts against the Peace. Sum of
the Peace. Modena his disgusts with Spain. The King of Spain marries the
Emperor's Daughter.

FRANCE continued in the same Fortune and Condition the Year of our Lord 1648,
that King Lewis the Thirteenth left it: And was in the highest and happiest
Posture that she ever had been in the Reign of any whatsoever other King; being
wholly united, and all of a piece: She extended her Conquests from the Banks of
the Mosel, to beyond the Rhine in Germany, and beyond those of the Iberi in
Spain, by the possession of Flix and Tortosa; and scouring throughout the
Mediterranean with a powerful Fleet, was both dreaded and respected. Lewis de
Bourbon Prince of Conde, as famous for War as any of our Age, having continued
his Victories in Flanders, had filled all those Provinces with Dread and Fear.
Marshall Turenne by his preserving of so many places taken, and by his se^eral
De^eats ^iven to the ^nemy in Germany, h^d penetrated beyond ^he River Lec^^ in
the (...) of Bava^^a, and made the French For^es formi^able thr^ugh the who^^
Em^ire. Count Plessis P^alin joining with Francis Duke of Modena, declared to
be General of the King of France his Forces in Italy, occasioned no little
apprehension in all those Princes, by his Siege laid to Cremona; it being
evident, that if he should succeed in that Enterprise, the French would get
footing in the State of Milan. The Armies were composed of Warlike People, all
of them almost of the same Nation, which by Vivacity and Courage makes her self
as fit for the managing of Arms, and effecting of great Enterprises, as any
other Nation; and her Commanders were most part of tried Valor, and
conspicuous as well for Birth as Courage.

France was Confederated, in Germany, with the Swissers, and with the greatest
part of the Protestant Princes; the Peace not being yet concluded with the
Emperor: and in Italy, with the Houses of Savoy and Modena; and kept excellent
Correspondency with almost all the other Princes of Italy. In Spain, the
Catalonians continued constant, and the Portuguezes confident. Nor could she be
jealous as then of England or Holland; the former being busied in Civil Wars,
and the latter willing to enjoy that Peace, which she had obtained at the
expense of so much Money and Blood. Europe being a Spectator of these her
Prosperities, looked upon this her Prepotenza with the same reflections as she
had looked upon the Success of the Emperor Charles the Fifth's Forces, when
Fortune smiled most upon them. Nothing appeared wanting to crown her Felicity,
but a Moderation in some of her Natives, who were guided by Ambition, and by
Spleen against him, who manged this so great weight: So as these natural, and
almost unalterable defects being taken away, she might peradventure not have
found any thing to withstand her in her highest and most generous Designs.

For the better knowledge of what happened in these times, it will be requisite to
look a little back, and take the beginning and true reasons of the first
Revolution in Paris, which afforded Fuel to raise the Flame of Civil War a
little higher: And because this had no other rise, but his fortunate guidance
who directed the Kingdom, which won him so much credit, as awakened jealousies
and envy in those who saw themselves not so much respected; we must attentively
examine the Motives, that we may the more clearly deduce the Fallacies of the
Conclusions.

King Lewis the Thirteenth leaving the Queen, his Wife, Regent when he died,
left a great share of managing the Affairs to Cardinal Mazarino; moved
thereunto by the trial he had often had of his Loyalty and Worth in diverse
difficult Emergencies. And he may be truly said to be even now one of the
greatest Ministers of State that France ever had. For Fortune favoring his
designs, made him not only effect unexpected Enterprises, but won him Applause
throughout all Europe. It is rather incredible than strange, that an
Infant-King, a Queen of a Rival Nation, a Forreiner chief Minister of State,
have not only been able to resist the Contracts of so many diverse Opinions,
amongst a People so lively Spirited, but being badly looked upon by so many
Princes and Lords at Court; but have at the same time won so many Battles,
taken so many Towns, and dilated the French Dominion on all Sides, having no
reason to envy the fortunate Government of the late King, nor the
Administration of the ever-memorable Cardinal Richelieu.

The most Christian King advancing amongst so many Conquests to his Majority,
it is hard to relate what confusion arose amongst those that were enemies to
his Crown, who found clearly, that notwithstanding the Peace concluded between
Spain and Holland, the affairs of France were grown to that height, as had it
not been for Novelties introduced by the French themselves, the Spanish
Monarchy would have been reduced to very bad terms. For if you will consider
Italy, Cremona was besieged by the French; which if it had been taken, would
have put the State of Milan in much danger: and the Kingdom of Naples would
have been endangered by the Fleet at Sea, that Kingdom being more in the power
of the people than of the Spaniards: and Tarragona might have been blockt up by
the same Fleet, when the French had taken Tortosa; so as there would have been
but small hope of preserving that place, the loss whereof would have made way
for the French to have entered into the Bowels of those Kingdoms, and would
have kept the Spaniards from entering into Catalognia. And in Flanders, the
winning of the Battle of Lens by the Prince of Conde, made it be known, that
the French were sufficient to get the better of the Spaniards best Forces,
without any diversion of the United Provinces. But because by how much the
King's Authority grew greater, so much more did the jealousies and
apprehensions of some few Malcontents increase, who feared the loss of Favor
and Authority, and began to be sensible how slowly Favaours were conferred upon
them, which they desired more than became them; they thought, that in the
conjuncture of the pressing occasions of Court, they might advance their
designs by causing some rents in Court, before the King should be out of his
Minority: They therefore took a seeming pretense of the common good; and under
the specious asserting that the King's Authority ought to be bounded within the
terms of moderate Dominion, they began to invent plausible pretenses, under
which they masked their true and secret ends, and won upon the peoples
affections, who are incapable of any reason, save what suits with their own
likings.

These Malcontents were most of them the chiefest Lords of the Court, and
some of their Adherents in Parliament. For the better knowledge of whom, and to
inform those who are not fully acquainted with the Affairs of France, we will
tell of what the body of this great Assembly does consist, which has afforded
so much Matter to this present History.

The Parliament of Paris is the first of all other Parliaments of the Kingdom,
and consists of Dukes and Peers, who are born Counselors. I say Peers, because
those that are not Peers, are not admitted thereinto, though they be Dukes; and
for their admission their Peerage must be proved. Of six Presidents, which are
called del Mortaro, by reason of a Cap of Velvet with a Gold Gallown-lace,
which they carry in their hand, in shape like a Mortaro, the which they put
upon their heads upon any Solemn day, or great day of Ceremony. Of Masters of
the Requests, who are also born Counselors, and whereof only four sit at a
time in Parliament. Of Church and Lay-councellors, which are divided into many
Chambers, or Classes; as, into the Great Chamber, the five Chambers delle
Iuchieste, or of Enquiries; the Chamber della Tornella, which takes Cognizance
only of Criminal Affairs; the Chamber dell' Editto, which dispatches the
Controversies or Lawsuits only of Hugonots. There are moreover three other
Chambers, but not Sovereign, or Supreme, though they be of the body of the
Parliament: to wit, the Chamber of Requests for the King's House, and two other
Chambers of Requests for the Palace. Counselors of Honor have also place in
Parliament, who usually are great and deserving men, and for the most part
chief of the King's Council; to whom his Majesty gives Letters Patents to be
Counselors of Honor, and who are afterward received in presence of all the
Chambers assembled together, and are next to the Dukes and Peers. After these
come Counselors at Law, who having served twenty years in that Employment,
keep their place, though they have sold it: and all these Dukes, Presidents and
Councillors may amount to about the number of two hundred.

There is then another Supreme Body, which is called the great Council; this
enters not into Parliament, but walks hand in hand with it. It has sometimes
been ambulatory, as it was in these last Conjunctures, wherein it followed the
King; but usually it keeps in Paris, and meets in the Cortile of St. Iermains
Auxerrois. It consists but of one only Chamber, the Presidents whereof ought
to be Masters of the Requests. The Jurisdiction of this Council consists in
distributing matters of favor, gli Indultarii, and judging the Contests
between the Praesidiali, or Magistrates, which are subject to the Parliament.

The Chamber of Accounts is also a Body apart from Parliament; and the
incumbency thereof is to review the Accounts of all the Financiers: All the
Treasurers of France are under it; and there are of these Chambers in diverse
Provinces.

The Court of Aides is another supreme Jurisdiction, whose Power extends to
Gabels, Taxes, Impositions, and Excises. They have under them the Magistrates
which are called Eletti: And of these Courts there are diverse in many parts of
France.

The King's Exchequer being much exhausted by so long War, the Council was
forced to think upon ready and feasible Expedients to raise Moneys; which gave
occasion to the Malcontents to mask their indiscreet Zeal, and to make use of
this public necessity, so to undertake with more boldness pernicious novelties.

Diverse means were proposed to raise Moneys; but all means requiring time, and
being in some sort grievous to the people, and therefore not certain whether
the Councils resolutions would be approved in Parliament or no; Monsieur Emery,
Superintendant of the Finances, proposed the taking away of the Paoletta, or
Annual Right, upon design either to make the Parliament more submiss, and more
obedient to the will of the Court, and consequently less averse to pass the
Edicts of the Council-Royal; or else to renew the Annual Right in some other
form, which might be more advantageous, and more proper to raise ready Moneys.
This as it had a fair appearance, and came from one who was reputed to be of a
high Spirit, and of a great reach, pleased many Lords of the Council; but the
Cardinal would not have this fallen upon in haste, but wished it might be more
maturely examined. So by reason of some other Emergency which arose, it was
laid aside.

Anciently, and before the Reign of Francis the First, who was he that brought
in the selling of Offices, Places were by the King conferred only upon
well-deserving men, and such as were capable of them. In the time of Henry the
Fourth, one named Paoletto propounded a means of raising two millions of crowns
yearly, by permitting all Counselors and Officers, as well of Justice as of
the Finances, to convey over their Offices after their death to their Heirs, or
to sell them to others, reserving a certain annual sum to be duly paid. This
was embraced and agreed unto, that upon payment of a certain annual sum,
according to the worth of the Place, the Office or Place was to descend to the
Heir; or the Possessor, if he pleased, might sell it whilst he lived, to any
one that was capable of it. And that if any one should die without having paid
this Annual Right, his Heirs should not enjoy the benefit of the Place, but
that it should be left to the King's disposal. This Contract was to last for
nine years only; which time being expired, the Privilege was to be continued,
or abolished; as the King should please. Thus from this time forward, taking
the name from the inventor of it, this Annual Right was called la Paoletta.

Emery's Intention was, that the nine years of the Paoletta being expired, the
King should totally abolish it; and that if any of the Officers should desire
to dispose of their Offices after these nine years, he should make a new
Agreement, advancing some considerable sum: By which means he thought to raise
good store of Money, whereby the expense of War might be supplied without
grieving the people.

This might have taken effect, had it not met with some opposition in the
Parliament of Paris, by some troublesome Spirits, who had other particular
ends. It was therefore thought fit to exempt it from the said abolition; which
condescension, through weakness, was the cause from whence arose licentious
Resolutions, which confounded all good Government.

But the Counselors having adherences, friends and alliances with many other
Lords and Officers of the Kingdom, suspected lest this being introduced into
the parts farther off, might by little and little creep into their Employments;
wherefore they began those Novelties, which shall be the subject of the ensuing
Narrative.

Yet neither were the alteration of the Paoletta, nor the Grievances, nor the
Gabels, the sole occasions which caused Disobedience: for such burdens were
quietly suffered, and received without any innovation, under the management of
Richelieu, who making use therein of the King's Power, maintained them by
severity and force, as thinking Rigor to be a better way than Gentleness,
whereby to govern a Nation naturally as apt to forget Injuries as good turns.
But the proposal in the Edict of augmenting the number of the Masters of the
Requests, every of which Places were sold for more than 60000 Crowns, was the
true occasion of those troubles which interrupted the Prosperity of that
Kingdom, and hastened the Revolutions, though under other reasons and motives,
which seemed to aim more at the public good, than at the private end of some
particular men. These Masters of the Requests are conspicuous persons, who
after having sat as Counselors in Parliament, are admitted into that Order:
They are admitted into the King's Privy Council, they practice much in Court,
and are employed in Embassies in Provinces, and in Armies for Justice, and for
the Finances; so as they usually prove men of Courage.

All men were troubled and scandalized at the increasing of this number, the
price being lessened thereby to those who were in the Places, being
considerable persons: For nothing sways more with men, than their particular
Interest and Advantage. They used therefore all means to keep the Cardinal from
attempting this Novelty; thinking, that as he was the first Minister of State,
he was the first motioner or promoter thereof. The Cardinal knew, that to touch
upon what concerned those of the Parliament, was but a slippery business, and
therefore he did not in his heart approve entirely of the Proposal: but the
business of Moneys being urgent, and the rest of his Majesty's Council not
thinking to meet with any repugnancy in those who had such dependancy upon the
favor of the Court, and who desired to deserve those Employments which were
wont to be conferred by the King in Armies and in Provinces; the Edict stood
good in substance, but was somewhat moderated by the Cardinal, who was forced
to yield to the common desires. These Lords having acquainted the Cardinal with
their Grievances, they turned upon Emery, and reproving him as the contriver of
this Plot, they bitterly threatened him; but he stood constant to what he had
propounded, as thinking it most adequate to the necessity. Emery was a man of
great Wit, and of a profound and lively Spirit: He was brought into the
Finances by Richelieu, who sought to gratify him for services which he had
received from his Father. Being found to be a man of a deep reach, he met with
Envy immediately; but though he was accused by his Enemies of many faults, he
overcame all difficulties, and got great experience in the Finances: wherefore
the Lord Bullion being Superintendent, knowing his ready Wit, and peradventure
envying his Abilities, he endeavored to keep him at a distance from the
Employment; and thought it better to fix him Ambassador from the King in Savoy,
than to have him near himself. When Cardinal Mazarine entered upon the Affairs
of France, Emery made use of the acquaintance he had had with him in Avignon,
and in Piemont; to which the great esteem which was held of his capacity and
understanding in the Court being added, he got at last to be Superintendent of
the Finances; where thirsting after greater Fortune, it was said he aspired
after more advantages: and he was accused of having intended to shoulder out
the Cardinal, by fomenting them underhand, who went about to discredit him with
the Queen; and that having these Objects before him, he had leaned to the late
Prince of Conde his Party, and afterward to that of his Son; befriending many
persons who were well thought of at Court, by whose means he ever and anon
acquainted the King, that it was true, the Cardinal was of a refined Wit, of a
high Spirit, and very understanding in foreign Affairs: but that having never
been versed in the Finances, he wanted such Indowments as were requisite
thereunto: whence it arose, that he went less in the esteem he had hitherto
maintained himself, with many, who knew not the truth of the business.
Moreover, some, that they might render him odious to the Parliament and to the
People, gave out that he (as being the prime Minister of State) was the first
Author of the abolition of the Paoletto, and of creating new Masters of the
Requests, though he had always withstood them; and that Emery was the only
occasioner of them, being backed by the rest of the Council: And they did this,
intending that the Parliament resenting this, might make the Cardinal's conduct
be ill thought of, and that by his fall, Emery thought to succeed him. These
suspicions were increased by some conversation which he held with Peter Brussel
a Counselor of the Great Chamber, poorly spirited, but popular; and who
instead of judging Processes, was always busy in public Affairs. He willingly
took upon him the Petitions of the Poor, either out of real or feigned Charity;
and he was hereunto incited by Peter Longuile a Counselor of the same
Chamber, who spent all his talent in Intrigues and Cabals. Brussel applying
himself to Longuile's Genius, though he were ignorant enough, and not very
capable of what he went about, which made him be believed by those who knew not
his true ends, to be a well-minded man: But being displeased with the Court and
Cardinal, for that his Son who was Ensign to the Guard, was denied a
Lieutenants place that was vacant, he set himself to beget an ill opinion of
the Cardinal. This mean while the Masters of the Requests fearing lest if any
of them should die, their Heirs might not succeed unto them in their Office, by
reason of the distaste which they had already given unto the Queen, they
published a licentious Writing, whereby they did reciprocally oblige themselves
to pay for the Place of any that should die, for the Heir of the deceased;
which was thought a very bold thing. Nor did their designs cease here, but
finding themselves not able of themselves alone to make good their party, they
presented a Request in the name of the Public, for the union and joining of
the whole Parliament; representing, that it was necessary for repairing the
Ruins of the Kingdom, occasioned by the ill Administration of the Finances,
which were more employed in the profit of a few particular men, than for the
use of the Crown, from whence the peoples grievances did proceed; by which
appearances they made the people believe, that their end was only to exempt
them from all Impositions. The Queen being hereat highly displeased, she made
them be sharply reproved by Peter Segnier the Lord-chancellour, a well-meaning
Gentleman, and of great Integrity; telling them, that such Assemblies were
rash, destructive to the State, and disloyal: And she expressly forbid them
coming to the Council till they had revoked all their said Declarations, and
torn them in her presence. Wherefore all the said Masters of Requests went
jointly to the Palace-Royal to acquaint the Queen with their grievances, who
sharply upbraided them with baseness, taxt them with temerarity in opposing the
King her Son's will; and by her treating them thus, did much mortify them. For
there was not then any Faction on foot; and this would hardly have held good,
had it been disturbed at the beginning. But the Duke of Orleans thinking it fit
to apply Remedy to the Evil before it grew too contagious, interposed himself,
and wrought with the Queen that she would permit them to exercise their places:
But they not being herewith content, grew more insolent, believing that many
who did not openly applaud them, would afterward join with them in lessening
the Cardinal's power; which was envied by many, and privately practiced
against, as was suggested unto them by those who did but wait a time to give
the blow. They therefore continued their contumacy; and not long after,
notwithstanding the King's inhibition, the joining of all the Bodies of
Tribunals was decreed, and met, where Brousel, Blammenil, Charton, and others,
spoke without any regard, against the Court-government: An Act of great
Disobedience, and contrary to all Laws and Practice; all the Bodies not being
accustomed to be called together nor to meet, but by extraordinary order from
the King. But those who sought a propitious conjuncture of time to inhanse or
exalt their pretended Authority by lessening that of the Kings, being desirous
to wind themselves into the Affairs of State, laid hold of the pretense of
wasting of the King's Finances, and gave way to this fatal Union, wherein they
were applauded by many, not only for the novelty of the Act, but out of hopes
which other Malcontents and their idle followers conceived, that they should
be eased of their Grievances by the punishment of those who employed the King's
Moneys ill, and that they should thereby have Peace, which they said was
retarded out of the Officers particular ends. That which these Supreme
Companies did, (for no Appeal was to be had from their judgment) was, to send
many Deputies, who marched two and two through the City, being environed by an
infinite company of people, to show the King that they were met to provide,
during his Majesty's Minority, against the bad administration of his Finances,
from whence proceeded the Kingdoms ruin, and the emptiness of the Exchequer;
fearing lest they might hereafter be blamed by his Majesty for carelessness,
when he should come to his Majority; as (they said) Charles the Fifth had done,
who complained of the Parliament of those times, for not having hindered the
miss-spending of his Revenue in his Minority. And to this purpose they chose
some of their Deputies to meet in the Chamber called St. Lewis; which is an
extraordinary Congregation, which meets only upon urgent and grievous
occasions; which are unpleasing to the King, for that therein things contrary
to the Function of Parliament are treated of; and where the Counselors as
well of Parliament as the Chamber of Accounts, the great Council, and of the
Court of Aids sit: The power of which Deputies when they are met together,
reaches no farther than to examine and give their opinions upon such things as
they treat on; which are afterward to be reported to the Sovereign Courts,
wherein they are either approved, or rejected.

These Broulieres continued on the Parliaments side by keeping together, and by
often meeting; as on the Courts behalf, in impeding them, and crossing them,
till such time as the Court lost as much esteem as the Parliament got; and till
it was necessary for the King's Council to take away the Superintendency of the
aforesaid Emery in that Office, though it appeared necessary in that emergency
of time, he promising again to furnish moneys for some time, to maintain that
War. He was ordered to retire from Paris to his Country House, in appearance of
sacrificing him to the satisfaction of the people, and to rid the Parliament of
further trouble, by preventing them in their Decrees, which it was thought
would be by them shortly thundered out against him. This his deposing, which
was done contrary to the general belief, served to provoke the Parliament and
the Malcontents to yet higher thoughts, whereinto, upon like occasions,
humane insatiateness does usually fall. The Chambers therefore forbear not to
meet, nor the People to murmur; they railed openly against the King's Ministers
of State; they cried out aloud against the Government; they made it appear that
instead of seeing that State restored, Misery and Ruin did still increase,
though France was then more powerful and victorious than it had been known to
be at any time before. And in sequel of these giddy attempts, which are the
usual food of the petulant Vulgar, it happened that Monsieur di Bachaumont Son
to President Coigneux, hearing his Father speak in the Parliament in behalf of
the Court, being one night at Supper in Monsieur di Paris his house, Mareshal
of the Field, and discoursing there with diverse Friends touching the present
Commotions, said jeastingly to his Companions, with whom he began to sport,
throwing Oranges at one another, That he had a design to sling to some purpose
at his Father's Opinion. This jest was taken notice of, and thereupon when one
declaimed boldly in pleading against any person of Quality, men would say, that
he slung soundly that morning: so passing from one Jest to another, he that
railed most against the Government, was called a good Slinger. And this went
through every ones mouth some months before there was any talk of the Faction
called la Fronde, or the Sling; but the rise thereof was taken from the Boys,
who sometimes slung Stones under the new Bridge when the water was low; whence
the forenamed Bachaumont took occasion to say, that he would sling at his
Father's Opinion, comparing the Whizze of a Sling to the force of Discourse in
Rhetoric.

The chief men that declaiming in Parliament were first called by this Nickname
of Frondeurs, which is as much as to say Slingers, which grew as common as that
of the Gueuses, or Beggars did in Flanders, whence so great disorders arose
there afterward, were the Presidents of Novion, Viola, Blaumenil, Charton, the
Counselors of Browssel, Longuille, Coulon, and diverse others of a turbulent
disposition, and desirous of Innovation; but in time some few fell from that
Faction, and finding their errors returned to their Duties, from which the
chief Lord President never budged, who was a man of a settled and undaunted
Spirit, and who did always appear unconcerned, knowing how to make use of his
Credit in Parliament (in the Affairs whereof he was very expert) for the
service of the Court, wherein he carried himself with much Integrity and
Courage.

As all these things were a mighty prejudice to the King's Sovereignty, and of
very bad Example, and a great scandal in Subjects who were bound to obey; and
the Cardinal being therewith sorely netled, took a firm resolution to defend by
all possible means the Authority of the Minor-King, which was recommended to
his trust: and very well knowing what sad fruit might proceed from this seed,
employed first his most refined Judgment to keep it from increasing, making use
of mild ways, spinning on the time, till the conjuncture of Affairs might
afford him opportunity to make use of more powerful means: But this fair way
doing no good, the Malady grew more contagious; which made him at last aware,
that without making use of Fire and Sword, it would daily take deeper root; for
the Courts Lenity was interpreted Weakness, and the pride of some of these
Gown-men (who were blinded by Passion, and by hope of bettering their condition
by the mine of others) grew to such a height, that being cloyed with living
quietly, they began to plot all the ways they could how to arrive at their
desired end. That they might therefore irritate the hatred and fury of the
people, they thought it necessary to appear Vindicators of their Grievances,
and to lay the fault upon those that governed. Wherefore they began to allure
them by hopes of a present good, and by fear of an approaching mischief;
attributing the continuing of War to the State-Ministers, that they might
thereby provide themselves of Moneys squeezed out of the poor Subjects. So as
an universal Impression being made by these colorable pretenses, whereby
Affairs were carried on to open Sedition, the King's Council thought it fit to
lay aside all Lenity, and to put on more vigorous and rigid Resolutions.
Wherefore they thought fit to make some of them an Example, thereby to make
others more respectful and obedient: and because the famous Victory of Lens in
Germany happened at the same time, for which Te Deum was sung in the Cathedral
Church, the King and his Guards being present, it was thought now a fit time to
imprison Brousel, Charton, and President Blanmeneile, who were thought worse
minded than the rest; since they could not do it otherwise without a great
Army, especially upon old Brousel, who was protected by the people, with whom
he had won such credit as if he had been a New Cato.

The Cardinal dissented from this; who looking more inwardly into the bottom of
the business, found it to be dangerous, and exposed to great difficulties;
wherefore he thought it better to temporize, till the next Campagnia being
ended, the Army might be free to be disposed of as occasion should require. But
Count Chavigny, who in Cardinal Richelieu's time was one of the prime Ministers
of State, and was employed in all Affairs of greatest Importance, was not well
pleased to be detained from his wonted Honors. Wherefore seeking how to raise
Rumors, and to put the Court in a commotion, that he might fish in troubled
Waters, and make the Cardinal run upon some Rock. He persuaded the Queen that
her Majesty was bound to make use of some valid Expedients before the Malady
grew greater, and by the Examples of her Husband the late King, to make her
self be feared. She approving of Chavigny's Opinion, wherein many others of the
Privy Council did join, obliged the Cardinal not to gainsay it, saying, That
great Mischiefs required speedy and strong Remedies. The Cardinal obeyed,
though contrary to his judgment; but first he protested against it apart to her
Majesty, saying, That the time was not yet fit; and foretold her punctually of
all that did afterward fall out, making her see that Chavigny's Council aimed
at somewhat else than her Majesty's Service. Which succeeding just as the
Cardinal foretold, was one of the chiefest reasons which made him be the better
believed afterward, and made him be known to be as able for Government, as he
was passionately affected to make the King a great Monarch: Which made the
Queen confide so much in him, as she raised him to the highest pitch of
estimation afterward, and for the future did entirely credit his Council.

The duty of the day being over, and their Majesty's being gone from Church,
Monsieur Cominges Lieutenant of the Queens Guard was sent with some Soldiers
and an Officer to Brousel's house, to acquaint him with the Order which he had
from the King to conduct him where his Majesty had commanded him. Brousel said
he would obey; and turning to his Children, who were at Table with him, said
unto them, I have purchased you some Honor by my Actions, see that you
preserve it: Farewell, I think not that I shall ever see you any more. He went
down stairs, got into the Coach; and the Guards holding their Pistols at his
breast, the Coachman drove on space. The Coach being come into the
High Street, where the Militia stood in order, Cominges advanced toward the
new Bridge; and it was noised abroad by a Lacky of his, who had never lost
sight of the Coach, that Brousel was carried away Prisoner in that Coach: which
breaking by chance between the public Palace and the new Bridge, Cominges
making use of necessity, made the President Dasts of Bordeos his Wife light out
of her Coach, which he met by chance, and went therein along the River, where
but few people pass, and came safe to St. Germains. President Blanmenil was
arrested in his own house, and carried to the Castle of St. Vincent. Charton
hearing of this, had the fortune to escape. This News slew presently through
the whole City, where presently Clamor and Commotions arose, the people crying
out, that the Common Safety was betrayed, their Liberties injured; that they
were all threatened with eminent danger; that the Court made public
thanksgiving for having committed outrage not only against private persons,
but against the Public Faith. All men raged, and like so many mad men fell to
lamenting, to protestations, and to threats. Some ran one way, some another,
exciting all they met to rise. They scoured all their Halberts and other
Weapons; all Tradesmen ran in with their Axes, Hammers, Knives, and with what
came first to hand. Women, like those of former times, ran up and down like so
many Bacchinali, inciting their Husbands and Friends to revenge their Injuries.
All the Streets were suddenly chained up, all Shops were shut up: The most
courageous were confounded at the hearing of the peoples noise and fury. The
Parliament met that night highly displeased, and agreed to meet the next
morning, and to demand their imprisoned Members from the Queen.

But the Court being in part satisfied with the success of what they had done,
and not at all moved at the begun Commotion, prepared boldly to withstand the
peoples violence, and the Parliaments resolutions. The Guards were increased.
All the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of the Court met at the Palais-Royal:
They consulted all that night touching what was best to be done in this
confused Hurly-burly. They resolved to stand to what they had done, left they
might seem to injure the King's Reputation by retracting it. They therefore
ordered, that the Chancellor should go the next morning, it being the 27th of
August, to the great Chamber, and absolutely to forbid the Parliament in the
King's Name to debate touching what was done: But the King's Power was now too
little esteemed, the people were grown too headstrong and passionate; the
jollity of the Malcontents too much increased. The Chancellor got into his
Coach, not regarding what danger he ran, though he foresaw it, and went to the
publick' Palace. When he was come to the midst of the new Bridge, he found all
those ways full of armed people, and the Chains drawn up, yet he would pass on:
he took a further compass about by St. Augustino, but finding the Chains drawn,
and the people in arms at St. Michaels Bridge, as he endeavored to continue his
Journey he was known, and was pursued with Outcries and impertinent Threats.
The Coachman perceiving this, that he might preserve him from some evident
Disaster, drove furiously into l'Hastelle de Suinas, which by good luck had the
Gate open. The Chancellor went to the top of the house, accompanied by his
Brother the Bishop of Meaux, and by his Daughter the Duchess of Suille, who
would partake of danger with him. They hid themselves in a Closet, where they
were not seen, though many people past and repast by it, crying out, Where is
the Chancellor? where is this Traitor? let us kill, let us kill him. He
hearing these Threats, which denounced assured death unto him, you may imagine
in what a case he was. This mean while the news hereof came to the Parliament,
which was already met; where a friend of the Chancellours represented the
peoples shameful Riot, detesting the Insolency, and hoped that they would send
to appease the Tumult: but although he had many particular friends there, and
that they all appeared bound to serve him in so exorbitant a case, yet not any
one moved in his behalf, so hated were the State-Governours grown. At last
Marshal Milleraye got on horseback, and going with some Soldiers of the
Guard, and some of his and the Chancellour's friends, past, without hindrance,
over the new Bridge; and being come to St. Austins, sent some Soldiers and
Gentlemen to bring the Chancellor out of that Palace. Monsieur d'Ortis, a
Lieutenant of the Guard, went to the house, took the Chancellor by the hand,
and brought him out of the Closet, and put him into the Coach, together with
the Bishop of Meaux, and Duchess of Suilly; and instead of going by Porta
Nela, returned by the new Bridge: and the Marshal followed after the Coach on
horseback in Military order; but as they past by the Brazen Horse, the people
made several shot at the Coach, where the Chancellor was miraculusly
preserved, some being slain, The Coach was shot thorough in many places, and
the Duchess of Suilly received a slight hurt, while with much generosity she
thrust out her arm to defend her Father. At last the Chancellor came to the
Palace-Royal, and was graciously received by both their Majesty's. The Regent
could not praise him enough, wondering how he had escaped. The Chancellor
answered, That Loyalty and Obedience toward the Prince, ought to be the only
Object of every man of Honor, and that that had been his chiefest comfort in
that danger; he being to be held happy, who dies gloriously in his Masters
service. The Tumult still increasing, the City was still in greater disorder,
and the safety of the streets was provided for, not only with Chains, but by
Barricadoes in every place. Every one brought somewhat to fortify themselves.
On the King's side, the Guards stood in Battle array. The people cried round
about the Court, that they would have Brousel set at liberty: they threatened to
burn and kill all but the King's person.

When it was known that the Chancellor was found, and that he was gotten
unhurt into the Palace-Royal, it is not possible to believe how the incensed
people raged about the streets. They returned headlong to L'Hostelle de Luines,
and in great fury plundered it; wherefore the more wealthy Citizens, not
thinking themselves safe from the licentious Tumultuaries, made Barricadoes at
the ends of every street, and placed good Guards there, as well in the Suburbs
as in the City; so as that year was afterward called the year of Barricadoes.
Thus did this day pass over in Tumults, Skirmishing, and in making Barricadoes.
The Parliament amidst this confusion, resolved to go the next morning to their
Majesty's, and to desire that those that were imprisoned might be set free. The
Counselors marched on foot two by two, the first President going with his
Officers about him in the front, and the other Presidents after: The
Rabble-rout followed in the rear, armed, bawling out, That they would either
have Brousselle set at liberty, or they would put all to the Sword.

According to Custom they had Audience. The first President spoke very
efficaciously against those who had advised to imprison his Companions. He told
the Queen, That Kings were the true Image of God on Earth: That they ought to
commiserate their People, as Fathers do their Children, and hear their just
Entreaties: That in Affairs wherein the Public Good is concerned, good men
ought to speak freely, according to their Consciences, and not according to
Self-interest; dissimulation and subterfuges being in such cases the ruin of
Kingdoms. That her Majesty ought not to suffer her self to be counseled
contrary to the Public Good, since there is no falser Maxim than that, which
teaches to exasperate the minds of Subjects. That people in Arms ought always
to be feared, but dreaded when they are armed with blind fury, and void of
discretion. That as she was a merciful and gracious Princess, he beseeched her
in the name of all his Companions, and in the Peoples name, that she would give
way to the releasing of his Fellow Members out of Prison; which was the best
way to calm an incensed people.

The Queen answered in a few words, according to custom; and then the
Chancellor said, That their Majesty's would advise with their Council what to
do in the business speedily, touching giving satisfaction to their desires.

The Parliament Men returned from the Audience in the same order as they came;
and when they came to the Barricadoe before L'Hostel de Scomberg, the people
met them armed, and in a furious manner, demanding in a mutinous manner whether
or no they had obtained Brousel's freedom? and they answering, that they could
not absolutely say yes, a Plebeian who was more Hair-brained than the rest,
held his naked Sword at the first Presidents breast, and had him go back again
to the Court and get Brousel set at liberty, otherwise he and all his
Fellow Members should be cut in pieces. The Presidents and Counselors were
hereat so affrighted, as many of them ran away and hid themselves, some one
where, some another; but the first President, not at all abasht, returned
presently to the Queen, followed by those that tarried with him, and told her,
That this was no time for delays: That it was necessary to obviate the fury of
an exasperated and incensed people, with whom no fair means nor reason would
prevail. He said, There was no way to prevent greater disorder, but by setting
the Prisoners at liberty; and on his knees beseeched her Majesty, That by being
gracious, she would recover her former quiet.

The Queen called her Council unto her, and told them, that some proper
expedient for the present Emergency must be taken. Those who had advised to
this Resolution were mute, not knowing whereupon to ground their ill-given
Council. The Cardinal and Mareshal Villeroy ponderated the business, and were
of opinion, that as affairs of great importance ought not to be slightly
undertaken, so when they were once taken they were to be made good, there being
no so bad resolution as to succumb to inconstancy.

Their opinion therefore was, that if it were possible they should stand to the
first Sentence, and show no sign of weakness: but if this were not to be done,
it would be an unpardonable pertinacity to run with folly headlong upon
impossibilities. Mareshal Milleray being much incensed at the Parisians
iusolence, propounded, that if two Fieldpieces could be got, and five hundred
Foot, they should make their way to the Bastille, fighting and assaulting the
Barricadoes, firing such houses as should use any hostility. This resolution
was not embraced, for many reasons; particularly by reason of their Majesty's
goodness. The Cardinal not believing the confusion to be so great as was given
out, resolved to be an eyewitness thereof himself, and went incognito into the
streets of Beusenfans, and St. Honor, where he found the Rout making more use
of their tongues than of their hands; he therefore kept two nights on foot
undauntedly, and careful to defend himself, and to use such means as should be
fittest for the present Emergency.

The Parliament should have considered the Regent's Answer in the accustomed
great Chamber; but not being able to get thither by reason of the peoples fury
and insolency, who peradventure might have used some outrage against them, the
Counselors were desired to meet in the Gallery at the Palace-Royal, a thing
unusual: Here met that Sovereign Assembly. The Chancellor spoke in behalf of
the Court, declaiming against the rash and misbecoming behavior of the people,
and persuaded those Gentlemen not to adhere to so rash an action.

The Counselors were sumptuously feasted and entertained by the King; which
being interpreted by them to be an apprehension which the Court had of them,
made them put an higher esteem upon themselves. Several were the opinions which
were held by the King's Council, touching the setting of the Prisoners at
liberty. The Cardinal who was against the former resolution, with reflection to
what did punctually happen, would have still detained the Prisoners; and by
removing the King and Court from Paris, would have done that which necessity
forced them to do afterward. But the same reasons which made against the first
resolution, were those which made the second the harder: For it was impossible
to force obedience from so numerous a people without an Army. They therefore
resolved to let the Prisoners loose; and the King's Letters, together with his
Order, were sent to the Parliament in the Gallery at the Palace-Royal, and
given to those that were next akin to the Prisoners; and the King's Coach was
sent to bring them back to Paris. The Parliament returned thanks to the Regent
for her clemency, and every one returned home well pleased, telling in the
streets, that the King's Coaches were already sent to bring back Brousel, whom
they should suddenly see safe and free. He was so fortunate in this his
misfortune, that in the present Commotions of Paris, mention was only made of
him, President Blammenil never being named. Yet for all this the rumors ceased
not, but both sides continued to have fears and jealousies.

The people being guilty, and contumatious, expected to be punished; and the
Court feared the peoples insolency: the Inhabitants continued therefore their
Guards and Barricadoes, and the Court their Guards; but with such inconveniency
to the Soldiers, as they could not get Bread for money from the Bakers, who
assisted in the sedition. Friday-night being past over in Arms, the next
morning Brousel appeared in the King's Coach; and as he past through the Gate
St. Honor, and through the streets which led to the new Bridge and to
Nostredame, he was received with much joy and acclamations by the people, who
flocked from all places to see whether it were he or no; for he appeared like
another Messiah, and the people cried out Viva le roy, viva Brousel.

The Counselor Blanmenil came the same night from the Castle of St. Vincent,
but with much less acclamations. Thus the Tumults being appeased, and the
Parliament knowing how prejudicial the Barricadoes were to the commerce of the
City, which were not yet demolished, though the King had commanded it, ordered
it to be done after Dinner.

During all these Tumults, the Duke of Orleans sided with the Court, keeping
good correspondency by means of the Abbot Rivere, who was his favorite, with
the King's Officers, who for his Highness sake used the like respect toward
the Abbot, and as had been observed in Cardinal Richelieu's time; whereby the
Abbot got to be worth 40000 crowns a year in Ecclesiastical Livings, and
aspired at the Cardinals Cap.

But forasmuch as people having once broke the Reins of Obedience, are hardly
brought within the limits of Duty; The seditious Ringleaders knowing that the
Cardinal was the chief Obstacle between them and their desires, spoke freely
against him, accusing him of many failings in his managing of Affairs, to
discredit him with the Vulgar; hoping by his depression, to see way made for
compassing their desires. Yet they fearing that the Regent being exasperated at
their licentious proceedings, would hinder their meetings, agreed secretly to
continue their Assemblies, notwithstanding any opposition that should be made.
And to the end that the Court-party might not blame the Parliament for
arrogating an unlawful Authority, and contrary to Law, they would ask her
Majesty's permission: To which purpose they sent Monsieur Fouket
Procurator-general, who was of a ready wit and sound judgment, to her. The
Queen wrought upon by necessity, and not being able to do otherwise, gave way
to their sitting for fifteen days more; wherein nothing being likely to
succeed, but what would be very prejudicial to her Administration, she went on
Saturday the 12th of September, together with the King and the whole Court,
under pretense of taking the Air, to Ruel three leagues from Paris, upon the
way to St. Germains; which did much trouble those of the contrary party, not
only out of fear of what they might thereby expect, but for that the Cardinal
was now out of their hands, and that he might still grow in more favor. Many
of the people, set on by those who begun to take upon them the name of
Frondeurs or Slingers, met presently about the Palace, and in a threatening
manner solicited the Parliament to provide speedily against the eminent danger;
not only by sending Messengers to the Regent, to solicit her to return
together with the King to Paris, but by proceeding in the Decree against
Foreigners. And so ignorantly obsti^ate were they in this, as they foolishly
believed, that as soon as the Decree should be out, the Cardinal would be
presently destroyed; and if you would ask them by what Forces, they answered,
That above 50000 armed men would make the Decree be observed in despite of the
World. And thus they began that unhappy War, which being disorderly begun,
every wise man knew would disorder all things. The Cardinal ceased not to
labor this mean while to reduce the Subjects to their due obedience by fair
means. He gave order that 4000 Germans, old Soldiers, the remainder of
Weymar's men, who were now under General Erack Governor of Brisack, should
presently advance toward Paris; and diverse other Troops, Officers, and
Gentlemen, that were known to be well affected to his Majesty's service, were
likewise sent for from several other places: And it being known that Count
Chavigny, who was not well pleased with his present condition* might very much
prejudice the King's Affairs by holding intelligence with the public Enemy,
and with the chief of the Frondeurs in the Parliament, he being a Parisian, he
was made Prisoner in the Castle of St. Vincent by order from the King, by
Monsieur Drovet Captain of the Guard. And thus was he kept from contriving such
Plots as he endeavored to do, whereby to put himself into the same condition
he was in Richelieu's time, and from whence, through too much ambition, he was
fallen.

Monsieur di Gaulas, Secretary to the Duke of Orleans, was also banished by
means of his Enemy the Abbot di Riviere, who knew him to be inward with
Chavigny, and therefore equally subject to suspicion. By these proceedings at
Court, the Parliament grew hourly more jealous. They met on the 22 of
September, where President Viola said, That the people feared lest Paris should
be besieged; that the Court was full of hatred and revenge against the
Counselors of the Chamber, terming them Tumultuaries, disloyal, and the
causers of all Disorder: That the Public Safety was exposed to Imprisonment,
Exile, and to other Violences, wherewith they were severely threatened, who
seemed to be most concerned in the Common Safety: That therefore it was now
time to pull off Masks, and without delay to provide for their own Indemnity:
concluding, that before they should put on any further resolutions, they should
send some of their Members to the Regent to entreat her to bring the King back
speedily to Paris; and that since it was now known who was the principal Author
of all the Kingdoms troubles, all the Princes and Officers of the Crown should
be sent to the Parliament to revive the Decree of the year 1607, whereby all
Foreigners were inhibited receiving any Honors or Dignities in the State, or
any part of Government.

Viola was not well pleased with his own condition, though he was sufficiently
provided for by Monsieur Lambert; and particularly he appeared an Enemy to the
Cardinal, thinking that he had kept him from being the Queen's Chancellor.
Blanmenil maintained and backed Viola; he moved, that the Cardinal might be
made to give an account of the Money* that were sent into Italy and elsewhere;
and that he might purchase the name of an honest man, he put himself into the
number of the Iansonians. President Novion played his part also amongst the
Frondeurs.

Amidst all these Agitations, the Parliament resolved to entreat the Queen by
way of humble Remonstrance, that she would be pleased to return together with
the King to Paris, and put an end to the peoples Jealousies by her presence;
and that she would keep the Soldiers away that were coming. The Duke of
Orleans, the Prince of Conde, who was then returned from Flanders, the Prince
of Conty, the Dukes and Peers, were sent for to come the next day to
Parliament, to use necessary Expedients for the safety and good of the State;
and the Provost of Merchants, and the Consu^s were sent for to receive such
Orders as should be given them. They sent a President and two Counselors to
make their desires known to the Princes: but the Answer was not according to
their desires; for they said, They could not, nor would not do any thing
without the Queen's consent. Orleans told the Deputies, That he would come no
more to Parliament, whilst they did licentiously advance their pretentions too
far against Reason, and against the Laws, as they had done by their bold and
scandalous Proposals that morning. Conde said, That the Parliament had nothing
to do with State Affairs; that he neither could nor would go thither; and that
he would be obedient to the Queen, though it cost him his life. Conty said
only, He would not go. Longueville told them in somewhat more milder words,
That they had transgressed the bounds of Duty, and that the discourses made by
the said Presidents were too passionate, and did deviate from convenience. The
Deputies hearing this, were extremely amazed, and without making any Reply,
returned the same day to Paris, where the Frondeurs were no less troubled,
fearing that they could not do what they intended, without the assistance of
some Prince of the Blood, whose joining with the Queen hindered all their
intentions.

The first President and the other Deputies were gone to Ruel, to acquaint the
Queen with the Parliaments Remonstrance; who returned answer, That she wondered
at their incongruous desire of having her return to Paris: That she used every
year to go abroad and take the Air: That she valued more her own health, and
that of her Son's, than any vain ridiculous suspicion of the people. That they
might be ashamed to make such desires to a Sovereign King, whose satisfactions
were to be had in Reverence, and not examined by his Subjects. And forthwith a
Decree was past in the Council of State, full in the teeth of all that the
Parliament had done the day before; commanding them to keep within their due
bounds, and not to meddle any more in such resolutions, contrary to the Law,
and to Regal Authority.

Notice was given of this to the Parliament the same day that they met to hear
the first President's Report; which being diversely discussed, they resolved to
make a new Remonstrance to the Queen, not by word of mouth, but in writing: And
they began to take fitting course for the safety of the City. The
Provost-Marshal was ordered to send to all places seated upon the River, to get
Grain and all things necessary for the sustenance of so numerous a City, from
thence to Paris. They resolved that the Inhabitants should keep in Arms for a
public Guard, and that the next day they should proceed to a Decree, like to
that of the year 1617. Though this was not the means to extinguish, but rather
to increase the fire, yet the Parliament did so flatter themselves with an
imaginary pretention, and with the esteem they put upon themselves, as by the
fomenting of some few seditious people, they suffered licentious resolutions to
be hatched; thinking that they might easily gain them in the King's Minority,
under the government of a Forreigner, and in the present juncture of times.

The Queen apprehending these proceedings, and fearing left the seditious
people might detain her Son the Duke of Anjou, who was in Paris sick of the
Smallpox; she made him come from thence late that night, and the Duchess of
Orleans went also out. It was the chief endeavor of the Court to allow time,
and to interrupt the Decree which the next day was to be made by the
Parliament. It was therefore resolved, as to the point of Foreigners, and as
the most expedient means, that the Duke of Orleans should write to the
Assembly, That the best way he could think upon to come to a good agreement,
was a Conference; and that to that purpose he desired them to send some Deputy
to the Queen, to treat of such things as were fittest to fulfill the King's
will, which was well affected to Peace and Quiet, and to obviate all
inconveniences. Monsieur de Choisy was sent with this Letter, who was to supply
by word of mouth what was wanting in the Letter. Conde wrote to the same
effect, excusing himself that he could not be present at their Assembly, by
reason of his great occasions: but howsoever he advised them to send Deputies,
as the most adequate means to remedy the evil which increased. And he told
them, that he would really make known how desirous he was that the Assembly
should be satisfied; which Assembly he hoped would not abuse those Records
which tended to the Public Good.

These Letters being read in Parliament, they all wondered at the difference
between these Writings and the last days words: And though the Frondeurs grew
prouder hereupon, who the more they were gratified at Court, grew the more
insolent, yet they thought the Forces were sent for from Flanders, only that
the Court might extort that by force which they could not have of good will.
They were notwithstanding troubled that they could get never a Prince to head
them; wherefore that they might not exasperate the Duke of Orleans, nor Prince
of Conde, who by this their alteration of proceedings they hoped might change
their inclination to the Court, and be more partial for their Interests, the
Parliament seemed willing to follow their advice; and laying all Novelties
aside, Choisy, and La Riviere, who had brought the aforesaid Letters, were sent
back, with promise that Deputies should be sent to St. Germains the next day,
to treat and resolve with those Princes touching what should be best for the
Common Good.

They did this with intention to win the Princes over to them, or to make the
Queen jealous that the Princes held secret Intelligence with the Counselors
of the said Chamber. Being come thither, they were civilly received, and
sumptuously entertained; which being interpreted weakness in them, and not
grace, caused more disorders and licentiousness. The first President being in a
place where the Queen was, thought it decent to visit her; where being admitted
to Audience, he reiterated his former Assertions, that he was most constant to
their Majesty's Interests. The Queen received him with her usual cheerful
looks, saying, That he was welcome, and that she desired that Concord and
Agreement which was much desired by her from his sencire Affection and Wisdom.
He answered with an expression of great desire to serve her, That he would
employ all his endeavors to that purpose: That her Majesty might safely build
upon his uncorruptible Loyalty, and upon the sincere Affection of the whole
Parliament toward the King's service. Taking his leave of the Queen, he went
with his Associates to Dinner, which was sumptuously prepared; after which he
went to the Duke of Orleans's Lodgings, where were the Princes of Conde, Conty,
and the Duke of Longueville, and no more. The Deputies desired that the King's
Officers might not be there, thinking that they would stand too firm to the
Cardinal's instructions. So this was granted, with but little decency to the
Court, as appeared afterward; the intention of the seditious party of the
Parliament aiming at nothing else but at the dividing of the Court, that so
they might usurp that Authority, which in the Union of the Court could not be,
but according to the Example of former times. Yet the Princes did carry
themselves so, as it could not be hoped by the Deputies but that they would
continue their Duties to their Majesty's, notwithstanding which, the warier
sort were persuaded that in time they would be more ambitious and less
respectful: Nor were they deceived, for from these beginnings they began to
pretend higher things. The Prince of Conde after his Triumphant return from the
Battle of Lens, changing his former Maxims, suffered himself to be born away
to resolutions, which being opposite to the King's free Authority, were the
occasion of the ensuing Evils.

The Duke of Orleans spoke first, and showed, That the occasions of the
troubles which had happened in Paris by their means who were no friends to quiet,
ought to be wisely weighed; for it would be unwisely done to allow time to the
malignant humors which grew daily worse, and would darken the Majesty and
Glory of the Crown, unto the maintenance of which all good Frenchmen ought to
contribute their utmost. Devotions and Endeavors, by plucking up these
scandalous seeds of discord and difference at the very first. The first
President answered in the name of all the rest, recounting the chief things
that had happened since the 15th of May, which was the day that the Parliament
met: That the Parliament had labored much in finding out the best means to
ease the people of their unsupportable grievances: That to this end they had
made several Decrees and had made many Remonstrances to the Queen, and
particularly in St. Lewis his Chamber: That her Majesty had given her
approbation thereof, and had used all means to find the best way out for the
general ease; and appeared willing to put forth a Declaration upon all the
points and parts of the Conference; which not afterward well liked by the
Court, which whilst it seemed to grant much, did in effect grant nothing, but
in lieu thereof the Members of Parliament were violently snatched away, the
King privately carried out of Paris, the Soldiers made to approach, and the
City threatened to be besieged: and that though these might be thought to be but
vulgar Whisperings, yet violence did daily increase, Count Chavigny being then
imprisoned, a person of great esteem, and one who for the space of twenty years
had done the Crown good service.

To this the Duke replied, That he did not dissent that the Parliament might
take Cognizance of what concerned the Peoples ease, and that they might take
course to remedy it; for the Queen inclined to take away not only the fourth
part of the Subsidies, but more, if the present state of Affairs would permit
it.

That as for the King's going out of Paris, it was not to be wondered at, since
he went every year out of the Town about the same season to take the Air. For
what concerned Chavigny's Imprisonment, the Parliament had no reason to be
concerned therein, he being no Member of theirs; and that he was detained for
important reasons, known only to the King's Council. To this the first
President replied, It was true, he was no Member of theirs, but that he had
always, in all his employments, been advantageous to them; which made it be the
more suspected.

The Prince of Conde retorting his Argument upon him, said, That this Argument
made against him that alleged it; for if the memory of so many good services
done by Chavigny were not able to excuse him, it was the more probable that his
faults were great.

Then stepped out President Viola, and said, That if Chavigny had erred, he
should be proceeded against and punished by Law. He said, that there was but
one Imprisonment lawfully permitted in France, called La Conceirge du Palais;
and that if any other course were taken, the public liberty was injured. The
Duke of Orleans interrupted the Discourse saying, That people of better
condition than Chavigny had been imprisoned: That the late Prince of Conde,
Father to this present Prince, had been imprisoned in the Basteile, without any
notice taken by the Parliament.

The first President said, All this was true, and that it was not long since
this abuse was introduced, and that an Illegitimate Order ought not to pass for
Law. Thus the Deputies retired re infecta, and adjourned their Meeting to the
29th of the said Month; on which day they appeared again, and the Prince of
Conde assuming great Authority, by his means almost all their Proposals were
granted, unless it were the freedom of the persons imprisoned, which the
Parliament pretended should be within the space of twenty four hours.

Whereupon the Queen was content that none should be imprisoned for
State Affairs, without Process, for above six months: but the Parliament not
allowing so long a time, took a middle way, restraining the time to three
months, and said, That the Queen could not make any Declaration thereupon, but
that they might take her word. The rest were not herewith content. President
Blanmenil would not allow of three months; saying, That no king of France, by
any privilege of the Crown, can keep their Subjects Prisoners without Process
at Law; for that would be prejudicial to the Public Safety, and a hazarding of
the Princes themselves, and of the Crowns Officers; since several means might
be found in three months space to make away whom they lifted, before they could
be proved guilty before competent Judges. It was therefore said, That either
the King must have absolute liberty to imprison men as long as he would, or but
only twenty four hours; in which time no Prisoner could beput to death,
without evident sign of Violence or Tyranny. All men whatsoever being herein
concerned, it was decreed that no man should be kept Prisoner, without Process
at Law, for above twenty four hours.

At the same time that this business was discussing in Parliament, Francis
Duchess of Vendosme gave in a Petition to the House, desiring that the
Parliament, as the Sanctuary of persecuted Princes, would cause Process to be
made in the behalf of the Duke her Husband, and of the Duke her Son, who had
been denied to have their Process pleaded, not only for three or six months,
but for many years. But this being a private business, the Parliament received
the Petition, and said it should be argued when the more weighty public
Affairs should be over.

Finally, after many meetings and debates in Parliament, a Declaration was
issued forth for the re-establishment of Justice, and for a moderation of
Grievances. The abuse of Accounts was regulated, the Tax of ten Millions of
pounds Turnois was taken off. The people were eased of seven Millions which was
paid to Officers and Soldiers who assisted in gathering Taxes and Impositions.
The Officers of the Kingdoms Salaries were established. The Tax of a Crown for
every run of Wine that came into the City, was taken away. The price of Salt
was lessened, and two Millions upon what entered the Gates of Paris.

But the supreme Authority of France being only in the King's person, and no
Decrees made in Parliament being valid, though for the public benefit, without
the King's assent; this Declaration was carried some days after to St.
Germains, to have its full Vigor given it: but the Cardinal considering how
prejudicial the lessening of above two Millions of Pistols yearly would be to
the King's service, and how much the King's Authority would be diminished by
bereaving him of so great a part of his Revenues, and of forgiving faults, as
it would have been if the Institution touching Imprisonment for but twenty four
hours had been put in practice, opposed himself thereunto with all his might,
showing that if when the King had power to punish faults, so many were
committed, it would be worse when his Majesty should be deprived of that power;
and that the power to punish made more for a Prince, than the power to reward:
for people fear less to offend those they love, than those they fear; and
rewards meet oftentimes with ingratitude, when Punishment maintains Obedience.
But the Parliament's design being to deprive the King of means of continuing
War by keeping him from Money, and so to force the Cardinal to agree unto a
general Peace, or otherwise to weaken him so as he could not any longer pursue
the course of his Victories, that they might have occasion to accuse him, and
deprive him of his Administration; the King's Council was at last forced to
give way unto it, with such disadvantage to regal Authority, as that from hence
arose all the disorders which did afterward trouble the tranquillity of that
powerful Kingdom.

It is very certain, that two members of Parliament expressing upon some
occasion the like conceit to Cavelliere Luigi Contarini, who mediated the
general Peace; he wisely answered, That he liked it not: for if the Cardinal
should want moneys, and consequently means to make War, it was to be considered
whether Spain would admit of Peace, when France should be reduced to such
weakness.

This so prejudicial Concession being granted, which followed on the 28 of
October, contrary to the Cardinal's opinion; Peace was published by means of
the rest of the Council, whereby the Princes purchased the peoples applause,
they having gotten their chief ends.

A while after Count Chavigny was released from Prison, where he was so afraid
of being poisoned, as he eat but one Egg a day. The King pardoned him to
gratify the Parliament, and he was sent to a Castle of his own in Turenne. The
Court used this means with patience per force toward the Parliament; so as it
was easy to foresee, that enforced favors would prove at last but little
advantageous to the receivers.

It being therefore thought that the Parliament could now decree nothing
against the Cardinal, since they had received whatsoever they could pretend
unto, the King returned to Paris on the last of October, with the general
applause of all the people.

But as by this divorce of the Parliament from the Court, all the Malcontents
had a good occasion to endeavor their own satisfactions; Anne Princess of
Bourbon, Sister to the Prince of Conde, and Wife to Henry Duke of Longueville,
a Lady as handsome of Body as she was full of generous thoughts and lively
Spirits, began to contrive not only how she might satisfy her own
pretensions, but to make those fail of theirs, with whom she was not well
satisfied. The distaste which she pretended to have received from the Cardinal,
was, for that she thought the Duke her Husband had been deluded by Count
Serviente in his Embassy to the Assembly as Munster, by hindering him from
reaping the fruits of his labor, in completing the general Peace; and taking
Serviente to be a creature of the Cardinals, and one who kept the War on Foot,
She contracted friendship with the Count d' Avaux, a declared Enemy to
Serviente, and endeavored to make him join with the Duke her Husband against
him; which he very wisely refused to do. She likewise complained that the
Prince her Brother had not received that Declaration from the Court which he
pretended to, of being Heir to his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Brese: So a^
coming from Munster to the Court, embittered against the Cardinal for these
reasons, She spoke her opinion plainly touching the Peace, and somewhat
bitterly; whereat the Cardinal was much displeased, so as their hearts were
ulcerated; and the Duchess being resolved to be revenged, went about Autumn
from Normandy to Noycy, where she spoke with the Duke de Rets, Brother to the
Coadjutor of Paris, who was already engaged in the interest of Parliament; by
which Duke's means she held Intelligence with the said Coadjutor, who used all
the means he could to draw over the Duke her Husband to side with the
Malcontents, which the Duke did at first wisely refuse; but at last being set
upon on the one side by the Coadjutor's forcible persuasions, and on the other
side by his Wives flatteries and allurements, he was persuaded to pass his word
(wherewith the Duke de Rets acquainted the Coadjutor, and he some of the chief
Frondeurs) that he would be for the Parliament always, provided that the
Parliament did not fall upon the Court. And the same Duchess having a great
power over her Brother the Prince of Conty, a Youth of about seventeen years of
age, who might be said to enter but then into the world, she wrought him to be
of the same mind, and made him make the same promise, though he had no reason
to be displeased with the Court, nor with the Cardinal. But the said Duchess
thinking that it made for her House and Family, that they should all enter into
this Faction, she made the Coadjutor (without taking notice that she had any
hand therein) endeavor to bring her Brother the Prince of Conde also to their
Union. The Coadjutor undertook the business, and went to Noycy, together with
the Duke of Longueville, and some of the chief Frondeurs, where they
established that Union amongst themselves, which did yet more disorder all
things.

The Parliament having obtained the aforesaid Declaration, grew more
considerable; and Conde began to make friends therein, of whom he might upon
occasion make use, and become more considerable in Court; and with the Duke of
Orleans, who then discovered the pretenses which Abbot Riviere had to be made
Cardinal, as shall be said in its proper place. The Prince knew that the chief
of the Parliament did distrust the Cardinal, were it either out of fear that he
would deal ill with them whilst they dealt ill with the King's Authority, or
for that they were resolved to maintain the advantages which they had got by
the Declaration of the 28 of October; pretending to remove him from his
Administration of Government, as being a Forreigner.

Conde began therefore to look favorably upon the chief of the Parliament, and
to let them know, that he did not differ from them in their design against the
Cardinal, though his true end was, to make himself more necessary to the Court
by so doing, and to oblige the Court (lest it might loose him) to follow his
intents: for he found that the Frondeurs Animosity was such, as they would
allow him but a limitated power; and by siding with them he should increase
Orleans his Authority, who joining with the Court, would become Arbitrators of
all Affairs, and a powerful counterpoise to his designs: Wherefore to win
credit with the Parliament, he made a public Visit to Brousel, and had many
particular Conferences with Longueville, who was then in great esteem, and
suggested to his Companions what they should do. President Viola, who had
highly offended the Cardinal, and who was a Kinsman and an intimate friend to
the Duke of Chastillion, by his means made known to the Prince that he might do
well to grow great with the Parliament, to the cost of foreign Ministers of
State, who had many enemies in France. He spoke himself afterward with the
Prince, who told him, as he had done Longueville, how he was inclined to join
with the Parliament in their design; but that they must allow him time to make
use of occasions which might happen, without hazarding any thing. This being
somewhat ambiguous, they would know what he did really intend. The Coadjutor,
who was of great esteem in the Assembly, made a motion upon occasion of the
said Declaration, of suppressing all the Loans which were wont to be made by
the Partisans unto the King, under pretense that all the Revenues of France
were consumed by the Usury of more than 25 per Cent. his Majesty not making any
advantage thereby; that notwithstanding, the devouring War had obliged the
Court to take up moneys from the Partisans upon the same Interest. The
Coadjutor wrought it so, as that the Doctors of Sorbon should give their
opinion touching this detestable Usury. The Parliament took the same occasion,
pretending that it was plainly contrary to the aforesaid Declaration. The
Frondeurs striving to attempt something against the Cardinal, under so specious
a pretense, and which was so generally approved by the public, labored by
these means to bring the Court to an extreme and inevitable necessity, if their
machinations should take effect. For a long time was required to gather up the
King's Revenues, and the Expenses did the mean while daily continue. So as
having propounded unto themselves to send the Cardinal out of the Kingdom, they
were necessitated to desire Orleans and Conde to assist them. Those who hoped
that Conde would join in the design of desiring the King to send away the
Cardinal, thought it good to feel the Prince his pulse therein. So as Viola
when he showed the prejudice which the Public received by the Negotiators
borrowing, as he touched upon other disorders of the Kingdom, said, That it was
not to be remedied without searching the bottom of the business; but that it
was to be hoped that the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, who were
primarily concerned in the States preservation, would employ such remedies
therein as were requisite, and was expected from their wisdom. The Prince
thought himself much injured by these words, fearing lest because he went often
to his house, and was inward with Chastillton, the Court might think that he
himself had made him to say this; and that therefore having discovered his
hidden ends, he would in time endeavor to cross him in his ways. He therefore
interrupted him, and said, That it became not the Parliament to meddle in such
Affairs. Viola's friends, and such as were dipped in the design, could not
brook this the Prince's interruption; and therefore a great murmr was made in
the Assembly, with but small show of respect born to Orleans, or Conde, though
they were both present. The Prince could not contain himself, but changing his
color grew angry, and by a gesture of his finger, which is natural unto him,
seemed to threaten the Assembly.

Hereby the Court perceived that many of the Parliament meant no good; and
fearing lest Factions might increase, and that the people being encouraged by
her Enemies, might begin to make new Barricadoes, began to listen to those who
wished that the King would go out of Paris; being therein encouraged by the
Prince, who was much scandalized at what had been said.

The Duchess of Longueville seeing that the Prince her Brother, and Head of
her house, would not join in the common Cause, (for so it was termed by many)
thought it advantageous for the Cause to have her House divided; since not
being able to make it do what she would, it behoved that one part thereof
should withdraw it self from the hatred of the people, and might be put into a
condition of rising to such greatness as the present times seemed to afford.
The Prince of Conty was already won over by his Sister. Thus did the Treaty of
Noysy end, whereinto but few were admitted, for the more secrecy. Prince
Marsilliack, who was afterward Duke of Rochsaucot, and Governor of Porctou,
was presently acquainted therewith, who was very intimate with Conty, and
Longueville: and not being well pleased with the Queen for being denied some
Honor which he was promised, and which he pretended unto, he willingly listened
to the invitation, left his Government, came to Paris about the end of the
year, and entered into the Union; and the Duchess of Longueville being great
with Child, and Conty of a tender Complexion, the chief management of Affairs
lay upon him.

The Cardinal discovering these Plots, sought dexterously how to escape the
Blow: But it being impossible that his Glory should not be envied, since
neither Goodness, Wisdom, nor Rewards are a sufficient fence against Ambition;
Conde, who was all Life and Spirit, had projected with himself how to become
necessary to the Court, as well by Actions as Advice; and being desirous of
that power which he hated in others, he suffered all things to run to ruin,
that so he might have occasion of compassing his ends.

But because together with the known reasons of Duke Longueville's distastes,
there were some more secret ones, and of greater importance, it will not be
amiss to make this Digression.

Whilst in August the aforesaid Tumults were in Paris, Duke Longueville sent
Monsieur Priolo, a confident of his, to the Cardinal, to assure him of his
service to him, and to the Court, of^ering to come and bring 2000 Gentlemen
with him, who should carry him into Normandy. The Cardinal seemed very well
satisfied with this offer, and bad Priolo tell the Duke that he should also
receive all satisfaction from him. Where it is to be observed, that but eight
days before, the same Priolo had desired the Government of Havre de Grace for
the Duke his Master; and was answered, That it could not be done without
discomposing the State.

Priolo told the Duke, That the Cardinal, to boot with other Complements,
assured him that he the Duke should receive all content from him. It Is well,
said the Duke, then I shall have Havre de Grace. Priolo said, The Cardinal had
not spoken any thing to him concerning that Place, and that his Grace might do
well to speak with the Cardinal and thank him, that so he might know his
intention more clearly. The Duke answered, He would not do so; and that when
time and place should serve, he would make him declare himself more fully.

The King being afterward, gone to Ruel, the Prince of Conde as he returned
from Flanders was met by Longueville at Chantely, and said, That now any thing
might be got, and that he had got Havre de Grace. The Prince was surprised
thereat, who when he came to Ruel, told the Cardinal of it; who plainly denied
it. The Prince acquained his Brother-in-Law with it, who from that time forward
declared himself dissatisfied; and this incited him to novelty, and engaged him
therein. This mean while the Malcontents, who were Enemies to Peace, as
thinking they should never fill their unsatiateness thereby, gave out to the
Citizens and Merchants of Paris, That Commerce decayed, that their Purses were
emptied by the continuance of War, which was still maintained only because the
Cardinal was an enemy to Peace. They set on foot two things: the one, that the
Parliament should renew the Decree against Foreigners, which was made in the
time of Marquess d' Ancre; by which the Administration of Government would be
taken from the Cardinal: And the other, that they should endeavor to interest
more Princes and great men of the Kingdom in their Faction.

Whereupon, by the Coadjutors counsel, who by appearing Piety strengthened his
politic ends; giving large Alms to the Poor in the Streets and Churches,
whereby he got the Prayers of the meaner people; as often as the Parliament sat
to treat of this Affair, those that were most seditious appeared accompanied
with multitudes of mutinous people, who cried aloud to have the Government
taken from the Cardinal, threatening all that were against it. And this they
did, because this Proposal being several times on foot in the Parliament, it
was not approved of, as being inhumane, and contrary to Law, which does not
allow that people should be punished before they are proved guilty by Process;
so as the Negative Votes were more than the Affirmative. The design of these
discontented Lords, who were incited to Novelty only out of ambition, was,
that if their Majesty's should not grant a Reformation in the Court, according
to their desires, the Prince of Conty should head the people that were to rise;
that the Coadjutor in his Pontifical Robes should foment the Sedition; and that
every one betaking themselves to violence, they should bereave the Queen of her
Regency, imprison the Prince of Conde, and rid their hands of the Cardinal, and
of all others that should oppose their designs.

But this Design being precipitous and undecent, the Duke of Longueville, who
was of a more composed mind, appeared somewhat cool and irresolute therein. He
made some difficulty touching the new half yearly Parliament of Roan, which
being almost wholly composed of Parisians, of such Families as were interested
in the Court, would never have consented to such Novelties: But the old Six
months Parliament composed of ancient Counselors, who were disgusted for
Injuries suffered formerly by Cardinal Richelieu, seemed readier to accept of
all violent Councels. The Duke would therefore have the Conspiracy carried on
till the first were gone, and till the Army being engaged in the Field against
the Spaniards, way might be made for any Tumult.

The King's Officers perceiving these designs, and knowing that a speedy
Remedy must be found out for this spreading Malady, the fittest Expedients were
propounded, and diversely discust in the King's Privy Council. Every one knew
that the Declaration of the 28 of October struck dangerously at the Regal
Authority, since Rebels and seditious people could not be punished, nor the War
be continued in its wonted Vigor, the Revenue being so sensibly diminished,
when there was greatest need of it, and when these destructive designs were
plotted by the Frondeurs in their secret Meetings. The Prince of Conde being
desirous to increase his Reputation in Paris, and in the Court, as he had
immortalized his Glory in the Field, pressed that the King and Queen might remove
from Paris, and that the City might be besieged; promising that it would be
forced to comply with their Majesty's in all their desires, within fifteen
days. This Opinion was backed by Secretary Tillier, saying, That if Pane
Gonezza, bread from Gonezza, were but twice wanting, the City would soon be in
confusion, as not being able to subsist without abundance of Victuals. Gonezza
is a Town seven Leagues from Paris, where there are many Mills and Bakehouses,
which furnish so great a quantity of Bread twice a week, as serves to feed half
that numerous people of Paris.

The Cardinal knowing that Paris did abound in Corn and other necessaries, and
that all Provisions could not be kept out without a numerous Army, considered
that the Siege might be a business of length, and subject to some bad
accidents, and that the innocent people ought not to be punished for their sake
who were guilty: he therefore propounded that the Queen should go to the
Arsenal, pretending to go to her Devotions in St. Mary-Church, which was near
hand; that the King should also go thither out of the City, as if he meant to
go hunt, accompanied by all the Princes and great men of the Court, as also all
the Officers of the Treasury, upon usual pretense of Negotiating therein with
Marshal Milleray, who was Governor of the Arsenal, and Superintendant of the
Finances; and that bringing the Army to several quarters about the City, the
people should be told, that their meaning only was, that some few of the
Parliament should come out of the City; which when it should be done, the rest
would easily be kept within the bounds of duty, since the Cardinal was not
generally hated, and that they were but a few who excited by ambition did cavil
against the Government.

This Opinion was seconded by Marshal Milleray, a friend to bold resolutions;
and had been embraced, had not the necessity of expecting necessary Troops
which were some leagues off, and the assembling of the Regiment of Guards which
was quartered in several places, rendered the business somewhat knotty: For at
every least stirring, the people would have taken up Arms, and drawn their
Chains, as they were like to have done some days before, upon the mere
Advertisement that six Companies of the Guard were assembled together before
the Louvre, to receive Captains in the places of those that were slain at the
Battle of Lens. They were therefore forced to put on such resolutions as shall
be said in the following Book: Though when the tumultuous Frondeurs heard
afterward of this, they grew so bold as to laugh at it, declaring, That they
valued not the King's Forces, and that Paris was well enough stored with People
and Provision: So that as soon as the Decree should have been out, there would
have been above 50000 men in Arms ready to have put it in execution; and if the
Court should have attackt the Parisians, there would have been two Armies of
50000 men apiece ready in an instant; one to have followed the Court
whithersoever it had gone, and the other to have armed the Frontiers of
Flanders against the Spaniards, to the end that they might not make use of
these civil Discords. And these insulting Speeches were uttered without any
manner of shame, even by many who were well reputed in War, and in civil
Government; by which it is seen, that Humane Judgment has no more deformed
Disease than that which blindes the eyes of the Understanding.

Whilst Affairs went thus in Paris, Mareshal ^antzaw hearing that the
Spaniards, after the blow given them at Lens, were got together at Steinchirk,
a Village within a league of the Village Furnes, marched toward them; but not
being stayed for, he took the Abbey of Duns, and drew near Furnes, intending
either to take it, or to oblige Marquess Sfondra^o, who was come into those
parts to rally the remainder of the routed Troops, to retreat: from whence
Monsieur di Voubecourt, Camp-master, advanced from Burgues St. Venaux to
Bulcamp, and the Marquess di Chasteln^au Macuis^ere, who was also Camp-master,
fell upon Iaquesburg with other Soldiers taken out of Dunkirk; and joining all
the Troops together by Bridges thrown over those Channels, he forced the
Spaniards who were at Steinchirk to retreat from thence by night to Dismuda; so
as the way being open for the French to assault Furnes, they advanced toward
it: And the Prince of Conde as he went with Erlack's Troops to visit the
Trenches which were already open the 4th of September, was hit with a
Musket Shot, the force whereof being spent, it made only a contusion in the
upper part of his thigh, and did him no more hurt.

The ninth at night Arnault lodged on the right side, and Castelneau on the
left of the Brink of the Ditch, and forthwith began to pass over it, and to
fall upon the Walls of the Town; but the besieged wanting both Meat and Warlike
Ammunition, capitulated the next day that the Soldiers and Officers should
remain Hostages in the hands of Marshal Rantzaw, to be exchanged for such
French as were taken the year before in the attempt made against Ostend: to
which effect five Officers of the Garrison of Furnes were suffered to go to
Newport to negotiate the Exchange. And about 1000 Soldiers went out the same
night, and were lodged in the French Quarters, having good Guards upon them.
And thus did the Campagnia end that year; for Conde hearing of the Tumults that
were in Paris, were it either that he might assist there by his Authority, or
that he might make use of the present conjuncture of time to advantage himself
whilst the Court was weak, or that he thought it not fit to engage the Army in
other Enterprises, whilst he saw there was occasion of making use of it against
the Parisians, pursued the Victory no farther, but went to Court (as has been
said) leaving the Army at Estre upon the River Lis, under the command of
Marshal Grammont.

But if the Events which happened in so many Kingdoms and Provinces afforded
matter of Memory, the Treaty of Peace at Munster ought certainly to have the
Precedence; it being a business of such weight, as if we consider the time that
was employed therein, the Princes that did negotiate it, and the difficulties
that were to be overcome, it will be known that there has not been any
business a long time amongst Christian Princes, of greater reflection than
this: For in it the means were discussed how with safety to the reputation and
to the satisfaction of the greatest Princes of Christendom, those Arms should
be laid down, which have so long consumed and wasted so many Cities.

The Treaty was introduced by Pope Urban the VIII. and by the Venetians. The
Congress was established in Cullen upon the Rhine. In the beginning of the year
1637, Caesar's Plenipotentiaries and those of the Catholic King came thither,
and tarried there till the year 1643, none appearing there for the French, but
the Count d' Avaux, who passed quickly from thence to Hamburg, to renew the
Confederacy with the Swedes: Thither came the King of Denmark who was named to
be Mediator, and Count Curts, the Emperor's Plenipotentiarie; where they made
diverse desires to the French Agents, and to the Swedes, that they would make
some Overtures. Preliminary to the general Treaty, Signor Salvio the Swedish
Plenipotentiary gave his consent thereunto without any reservation, save that
France would concur therein also. The King of Spain also gave the Emperor
leave to choose Plenipotentiaries in his name; whereunto the Count d' Auspurg
was chosen, and by common consent Pasports were sent to such as were to come
thither.

The French interposed difficulties to procure delay, which they say they did
at the instance of the Swedes, who to keep it from being known that they were
Authors of the delay, by openly refusing the King of Denmark's Mediation, their
natural Rival, made the occasion seem to proceed from the French, who though
they had given way first that the Meeting should be at Cullen, yet they desired
that it might be removed to Munster: whereunto the Austrians consented, and
sent their Deputies thither; but when they began to treat, it was found that
Avaux was not sufficiently empowered to enter into the Treaty, whose first
pretension was, That Munster should be free from making any Oath to Caesar, or
to the Bishop thereof: which was yielded unto. The greatest part of the
Pasports being sealed up by the Cardinal Infanta, the French raised a doubt,
whether in case he should die, they should be of Validity: Nor were they
satisfied with the offer made by Don Francisco de Melo, who succeeded in the
Government, that he would ratify them. So they were fain to send for
Ratification from Spain; which made the Spaniards suspect that the French
sought pretenses of delay, and that they did not much care for Peace.

At last, after much debate, the Preliminary Agreements were assented unto, and
reciprocally underwritten; but yet the main Treaty did not begin: for Avaux
instead of going to Munster, declared that he would wait for the Ratification
of the said Preliminary at Hamburg; which the Austrians gave way unto. The
French still interposed difficulties, and demanded three weeks space to examine
Writings: And they also disputed the King of Spain's Ratification, because it
did not specify the Transaction of Hamburg, verbatim. And the Count d' Auspurg
required the King of France his Ratification from Avaux, and found it not so
particular as that of the King of Spain.

In this mean while Cardinal Richlieu died; and the King of France being very
desirous of Peace, by Cardinal Mazarin's advice (in whom he did greatly
confide) did more advance the business in two months, than he had done in four
years before; and the business had been concluded, had not the King himself
died, which disordered all, and raised better hopes in many of obtaining their
desired ends in his Son's Minority.

The Assembly commenced not till the beginning of April the ensuing year, when
the French came also thither, who took a further compass about by the way of
Holland. For thinking that the best way for Peace, was to be ready for War,
they would first agree with the States, and with the Prince of Orange, how to
employ their Arms that year; whereat the Spaniards quarrelled, for that instead
of coming readily to the Meeting, they treated at the Hague how to put more
stops to the business.

Whilst the French Agents treated in Holland, the Court of France desired that
the Pope would remove the Mediation of Cardinal Ghinetti, as being suspected to
that Crown; and Cardinal Rossetti was substituted in his place; and afterward
instead of him Monsieur Fabio Chigi, Bishop of Nardo, and the Pope's Nuntio in
Cullen, a person wholly unconcerned, and famous for exemplary conditions; who
when he had implored a blessing from God by a solemn Procession through
Munster, entered into the Treaty, together with Cavalliere Luigi Contarini
Ambassador extraordinary from Venice to this Meeting. At the very first they
fell upon stops, by pretention of the States of the Empire, who were called
together at Frankfort, whereof the French were accused to be the Authors; who
preparing in all places for the continuance of War, confirmed the opinion, that
they had no mind to Peace.

Together with Munster, the City of Osnaburg was deputed for a Rendezvous to
the Agents of the Protestant Princes and States, to the end that they might
discuss there between themselves the Interests of the Crown of Swethland and of
the Princes of their Religion, as was desired by the Swedes, in point of
Precedence; especially since the Pope's Agents did intervene there.

Count Lodovick di Nassaw, and Doctor Isack Wolmar, came to Munster for the
Emperor; and the Count of Auspurg, and Doctor John Crane to Osnaburg; it being
the custom of Germany in suchlike Cases to send a Personage of great Birth,
who was a Soldier, to maintain Decency, and a Doctor to regulate affairs with
Learning, and by the Pen. Count Lamberg did soon succeed Count Auspurg, who was
sent for to the Court; Don Diego Salavedra, and the Bishop of Boisteduke, who
was afterward made Bishop of Cambray, the Marquess of Castle Roderigo
Governour-general of Flanders, and Doctor Antonio Brown, came thither for the
King of Spain; after whom came Count Pignoranda in the beginning of July 1645,
who found Count Zappata dead, and sent Saravedra back to Spain. From the King
of France, the Counts Avaux and Servient; and at last the Duke of Longueville,
who pretending to be called by the title of Highness, caused much hindrance in
the carrying on of the business. The Elector of Bavaria sent Baron Haslare
thither as his Ambassador. All the other Potentates of Europe sent their
Deputies, for there were but few who were not in some sort concerned therei: So
as the multiplicity of affairs, the weight thereof, and the hardness of the
pretenses, (some whereof were ever and anon altered according to the success of
Arms) was the cause why the Mediators, being drawn from off the main point,
lest the affair involved in such difficulties as are not yet overcome.

The French being confederated with the Swedes and Hollanders, intended that
their Interests should be treated on jointly; but the Swedes declared that they
would have nothing to do with Spain, and the Hollanders intended not to meddle
with what concerned the Empire; so as France was forced to change her form of
proceeding; the Princes with whom she was to treat being divided into two
Classis, the one whereof included the Swedes Empire, and Emperor; the other
the Hollanders and the King of Spain: and yet this division wanted not
difficulties, which were almost insuperable. For the Hollanders would not as
then listen to any more than a Truce; and the Swedes and other Confederates
with France, declared they would have a Peace. Castle Roderigo offered a Blank
unto the Hollanders, which they might treat of at home.

The Hollanders pretended Truce only, and not Peace; for that their
Commonwealth being maintained by Arms, thought it would be dangerous to reduce
it to Idleness, which they had by experience found to be so: To this the Prince
of Orange his Interest was added, who getting great advantage by War, would not
willingly listen to a long peace. They intended also to make this Truce so, as
that if France should enter thereinto, she should oblige herself upon any
breach to reassume War. But though the other Confederates did not correspond
herein, the Treaty of Truce was continued, which was afterward converted to a
perpetual Peace.

New Articles were therefore agreed upon between the Counts of Avaux and
Servient, as they passed thorough Holland to Munster, on the one side; and the
States General on the other: Wherein the parties did reciprocally binds
themselves, not only not to treat of any thing without the assent and
participation of the other Colleague, but that the Treaty should be carried on
so equally, as if one of the parties should see the others business advance
more than its, it should desire the other to proceed no further till its
affairs were equally advanced.

The French inclined to Peace, because it made for them to have Peace in such a
conjuncture of time, as they could not be more glorious, nor more powerful: and
it proved very advantageous for them; for thereby they eased the Kingdom of the
vast expense they were at by War, and secured themselves from the Conspiracies
and Troubles which usually arise in France in their Kings minority. It is true,
they pretended thereunto upon such advantages as they thought became them, by
reason of the great Forces they were Masters of, and by the Intelligence which
they held in Germany, and elsewhere. The French Agents ends were these; nor
would they ever be drawn to any thing apart from their Confederates
concernments. The Swedes, and Princes and States of the Empire, were of the
same mind. The Hollanders, who supposed that by their abundance of Shipping
they might assume unto themselves all Traffic during the War between the two
Crowns, and thereby swallow up all the Wealth of France and Spain, seemed not
to insist upon their Colleagues sen^e* for as a Commonwealth, which measures
Affairs only so far as they tend to their own advantage, they knew they could
not advantage them more, than by the disadvantages of the two Crowns, leaving
them engaged in War; and therefore they seemed to steer a course differing from
the rest, and it was thought that thereby they did very much prejudice the
business, which was otherwise in a fair way.

The Spaniards did really desire Peace; for being weary of so many long Wars,
and depressed by the Revolts of their own Dominions, they loved once to put an
end to the inconveniences which people feel by the long course of sinister
fortune; and the rather, for that the Kingdom wanting Male succession, the
people were less willing to contribute to the Grandezza thereof, they applied
themselves to more adequate means, whereby to moderate the high pretenses of
the French, and sought to break the Union of their Enemies, that they might
make them more pliable to fair and honest things. They therefore endeavored to
make Caesar treat with the Hollanders apart, not including the French; but the
Queen of Swedeland and her Council carried her self with much faith and
constancy toward her Colleagues. They found matters better disposed with
Holland; for to boot with the aforesaid Reasons and Interests, the business was
to be managed by particular men, and more subject to be corrupted. And the
French gave out that here was the Rent; for some of the Holland-Deputies were
bribed by Count Pignoranda, but none were found guilty, but Mine here Niderolfe,
Deputy of Guelderland.

In the first Proposals the French projected, that the King of Spain should
call himself no more King of Portugal, nor of Navarre, nor Prince of Catalonia;
that the Elector of Treves should be set at liberty: And they together with the
Swedes, pretended that the Deputies of the Cities and States of the Empire
should assist in the Assembly.

Caesar would not consent hereunto, thinking that it became not his Vassals to
appear as Sovereigns in these management; he demanded the making good of the
Treaty at Ratisbone the year 1632. The Spaniards required what had been taken
from them, upon the example of the several Peaces made at Cambray, Crespy, and
Vervins; and they would not by any means have that the Duke of Braganza should
be included in the Peace, who had usurped the Kingdom of Portugal; and that
whilst the King of France was in his Minority, wherein they hoped that the face
of Affairs might alter: and for their greater security, the Parliament of Paris
was to take Cognizance of the whole Affair. The War between Sweden and Denmark
being hereunto added, the Treaties slept for eight months. This War was made by
the Swedes, not so much concerning the Sound, as to keep the King of Denmark
from meddling with their Affairs, as Mediator of Peace, whom they held to be
their ancient Rival.

The Mediators did at this time demand the Deputies, that they would show their
Plenipotentiary Patents. The French denied to deliver theirs, till those of the
Emperor and the Swedes had delivered theirs; which was thought to be a
pretense to prolong time, whilst by reason of the War with Denmark, they had
not been delivered at Osnaburgh, and their Mediator was wanting.

The Plenipotentiary Patents came at last to the Officers of the Crown, as was
agreed upon by the Mediators: and from January to June, the time was spent in
general Propositions. Upon Count Oxenstern's coming to Munster to agree the
Proposals which were to be jointly made by the Swedes and French, the
Confederate Crowns took advantage by the Victory had at Tabore, and by other
proceedings of the French and Swedish Forces, and obliged the Emperor to set
the Elector of Triers at liberty; which caused much prejudice afterward; and
they protested that unless this were done, they would be gone, and leave all
things unperfected.

The Emperor gave way thereunto, and restored all his possessions unto him,
except it were Philipsburg, which being in the hands of the French, was not
spoken of by them; and this was thought to be the effect of haste which they
made to have him freed, to oblige that Elector, and that he might speak no more
of that place. It was moreover granted that the States of the Empire might be
called at Munster and at Osnaburgh.

In the beginning of December, the Imperialists and Spaniards gave in their
Propositions: the French did the like; and upon these the business lasted for
three whole years: for when the Articles were to be concluded, they were
disturbed or altered by accidents of Arms.

The Spaniards said that the French did sometimes grant, sometimes gainsay
things that had been agreed upon. The French said that the Spaniards did
sometimes assent unto, sometimes make difficulty of Proposals that were yielded
unto.

The Writing which after a long time the French gave in, contained: That all
the Confederates of France should be satisfied, and have tehir Interests
decided together with those of the Crown: That for the affairs of Italy, the
French were ready to agree unto what the Pope, the Venetians, and the other
Potentates of that Nation should think fit, whilst they should not be
prejudicial to his Christian Majesty: And that the Princes and States of the
Empire, and of Italy, should be bound for security of these Treaties.

The Spaniards thought this Writing rather likely to break the Treaty of Peace,
than to continue it, since the number of the Confederates with France were not
named; and some Chapters thereof were not to be admitted of by the Spaniards,
whilst it was therein mentioned, that neither the Princes of the Empire, nor
those of Italy would be bound to maintain the Peace between the two Crowns; nor
that the Pope nor Venetians would accept of the Office of being Counselors to
France: All which the Spaniards said were unsubstantial, and denoted with what
design that Instrument was made. They therefore did briskly oppose it, and
pretended that the Mediators themselves did know the rubs which were cast in by
the French, and that they had desired the Mediators to moderate them, who wished
they might not be forced to that, till the Duke of Longueville should be come.
In which interim they exhibited the new Plenipotentiary Patents in the same
form as was judged by the Mediators to be agreed upon on the 20 th of November,
1644. This was also found by the Spaniards to differ in nine points more than
the Nuntio and Cavalier Contarini had contrived.

A Truce was propounded by the Mediators to Count Pignoranda six days after he
was come to Munster; as well for that it was necessary to the better
negotiating of Peace, as that they might assist the Venetians, who desired help
against the Turks, to the benefit of Christendom: But nothing was concluded
therein; for though the Spaniards seemed willing to assent thereunto, the
Interests of many Princes, besides the French, were so differing, as they could
not agree therewith.

The Spanish Agents offered to remit all to the Mediators; but the French
suspecting some deceit, said, That they had no authority to make compromises,
but that they had order to make Peace, which they were ready to do. They tried
all their power with the Mediators and States of the Empire to have the
Portuguese admitted, and were very earnest herein, that they might not abandon
their Friends; which the Spaniards complained mightily of, saying, That this
was to puzzle the whole Treaty; for they knew if this were done, the Spanish
Agents had strict orders to forego Munster presently.

The French were at this time more feared than loved in the Assembly; for their
continual Victories made all men apprehend that they might end in the common
Prejudice. Their Demands were obliquely fomented by the Elector of Bavaria, who
desired the Protection of France to be maintained in his Electoral Title, and
in the possession of his Dominions; which the Swedes did sorely threaten, who
were worse satisfied with this Prince than with any other, for having broken
the Peace which he had made at Vlm with the French and Swedes apart from the
Emperor; which was the right way to bring on the general Peace at Munster.

The Prince of Orange, who knew the States inclination, wished the French that
they should not care for making the Deputies of the United Provinces come so
soon to the Assembly, but that they should first seek their own advantages by
other means with the Spaniards: for otherwise they would be deceived by the
Holland-Deputies, who were already won by the Spanish Agents; and that they
should no sooner be come to Munster, but that the Peace would be concluded
apart, as was by them desired; and that it would be better for them to treat in
Holland, where about the Religion and civil Government they would hardly agree.
The French suspected this advice, considering that he might give it for his own
particular Interest, in keeping his Command, and in making the War continue.
They notwithstanding continued their desires by their Deputies to the Assembly,
and thought that if they were come with a real resolution of cooperating
friendly, according to the established Covenants, they might expect a glorious
and good Peace. The Council of France foresaw therefore, that though the
Spaniards should conclude of Peace upon any whatsoever conditions, yet since it
made for their interest to make use of those disorders which usually arise in a
King's Minority, they might break it upon some new pretense, upon any troubles
in France, especially when they should be sure of the disunion and disarming of
the Colleagues; it seeming almost impossible that these two Rival-Nations
should continue long together in Peace. Count Servient came Extraordinary
Ambassador into Holland, and made it appear plainly to the States, that the
true way to make a firm and lasting Peace, was to bind themselves in an
undissolvable Union, and in obliging themselves to take up Arms each other for
their Confederate, in case that the Agreement should by any accident be broken.

This business was treated of above three months: for though the Hollanders
should assent to the Proposal, yet they did not understand themselves obliged
to take up Arms, unless the Spaniards should break the Peace in Flanders. But
Servient insisting, that they should be bound to concur, if it should be broken
upon the Interest of Catalonia, Italy, or Lorrain, it was at last carried for
the League, or Guarrantian Peace; so called, because they were both of them
obliged to defend one another. Servient having obtained this, he returned to
Munster much praised for his good carrying on of this affair, and the French
reassumed the Negotiation.

Affairs being reduced to this condition, the Swedes and French Victorious, and
Bavaria wavering; Count Tratmondorf, who was already at Munster, a full
Plenipotentiary from the Emperor, following the Spaniards example, endeavored
likewise to captivate the States of the Empire, and to separate them from the
Interests of their Friends; but he mist his aim. He fought to divide the Swedes
from the French, but could not. At last, seeing himself in great straights,
Bohemia like to be lost, together with the rest of the Hereditary States
whereinto the Swedes had got, he offered Pinniarolle, and Moienueck, both which
were Feudatory to the Emperor, though possessed by France; the full Dominion
of the three Bishoprics, Mentz, Tull, and Verdune, which for a hundred years
last were held by the same Crown. He offered two Millions of Gold to the
Swedes; and the City of Stralsund in pawn, till full payment should be made. To
the Protestants, the possession of the Ecclesiastic Goods for some more years
than was mentioned in the Peace of 1645. To Bavaria, the Electoral Vote,
together with the upper Palatinate. To the Prince Palatine, the lower
Palatinate, together with the eighth Electoral Vote. The French added, that
they would have Alsatia, Sangovia, Briscovia, the four Wallstadts or Cities of
the Forest, Brisack, and Philipsburg; but this only in protection: At which
all were greatly amazed, and the Swedes grew jealous.

The French spoke high, being fomented by the advantage of their and their
Colleagues Forces every where. In particular, the taking of Courtray and
Dunkirk infused apprehension into all men, and particularly into the
Hollanders; to whom the change of Dunkirk, for the enterprise of Antwerp being
propounded by Servient, they would not assent thereunto; considering that the
Spaniards being engaged in so important a division, it might so happen, that
the King of France his forces might make further progress. And that Republic
seemed not to like to be made to confine, by new acquisitions made by the
French, upon that Nation, which was now become so considerable, for the
largeness of its Dominion, for the number and quality of its People, and by the
union of Forces; so as these politic respects increased, and the rather by the
Prince of Orange his sickness, and succeeding death, who did mainly oppose this
Peace, though his Wife was won over by the Spaniards. On the 11 th of January
1646, the Holland Plenipotentiaries came to Munster, being thereunto pressed by
the French, who doubted not but to make an advantageous conclusion by their
Union.

The Hollanders interposed presently in the business between the two Crowns,
and were allowed of by the Spaniards, though their Enemies, and were treated by
them as Agents to a Crowned Prince; for Pignoranda was willing to oblige them,
whilst they kept joined to the French. 'Twas propounded to the French, that
they would deliver up Hesden, Beaupawmes, Landrecy, and Danvilliers, with all
that belonged thereunto. These as the Spaniards said did highly disdain the
Proposal, and labored that the States of the Empire would declare that they
would treat with France without comprehending Spain, nor what concerned the
State of Millain a Fee of the Empire, nor the States which make up the Circle
of Burgundy; which they did, with intention to divide the Interests of the King
of Spain, not only from the Empire, but from the Emperor himself.

Then the Mediators endeavored that the Spaniards should cast in some other
places, putting them in good hope, that if they would do so, they trusted that
the Peace would be concluded. They therefore condescended to yield up
whatsoever else the French held in Artois, or in the County of Rossillion; but
this would not suffice, declaring by the Writing presented on the 24 th of
April, that in case they would not admit of all the points and conditions
therein expressed, which they held to be just and grantable, they held
themselves not bound to observe any thing that they had yielded to, and that
they would make higher demands.

The Hollanders made new desires, and assured the Spanish Agents, that
notwithstanding this Declaration, they did firmly believe, that if they would
add Graveling and Theonville to the other Towns which they had already
granted, there would be no doubt of an Agreement. The French said it would be
folly to restore what they did quietly and without danger possess, whilst they
were in a condition of making yet greater acquisitions; Wherefore they
absolutely refused, and were not at all satisfied.

These Deputies of the United Provinces insinuated, that the French-men's being
so averse to make Peace, was the only occasion of retarding the Agreement: So
as thinking they had done what belonged to them, by having brought the
Spaniards to reasonable conditions, which would not be accepted of by the
French, who continued to protest that they held not themselves bound to observe
any thing; the aforesaid Plenipotentiaries were the more steadfast in their
opinion of continuing Peace with the Spaniards, apart from the rest: But before
doing this, they made new offers to the French of the County of Rossilion, of a
Truce for 30 years in Catalonia, of all the Towns taken in the Low Countries
and in Burgundy, and of the reciprocal restitution of all that they held in
Italy appertaining to the Dukes of Savoy or Mantua: to all which Count
Pignoranda yielded, the promise being kept, which, as he said, was made by the
French, that no Speech should be made of Portugal, that the Duke of Lorain
should be satisfied, as also the Empire and the Emperor. Two of their Deputies
went to signify thus much to the French Agents at Osnaburg, who were there to
put on the Treaties with the Emperor and Empire, joined with the Swedes, and
excluding the Spaniards. Here they found things so well ordered, as they hoped
all would end well; and answer was made, that they would return within two
days to Munster, and that they would jointly subscribe with the Duke of
Longueville. When they returned, new troubles arose; for the French pretended
that Roses and Cadaches were comprehended in the County of Rossilion, and not
in Catalonia. The Spaniards referred this to the Arbitrament of the Mediators;
which was not so soon agreed, but that the French Agents presented another
Writing, containing, That a proviso must be had that Cassal must never return
to any of the House of Austria: That the Portion of the Infanta Donna Catherina
of Savoy should be paid: That the Treaty of Chierasco should be observed and
maintained by Arms: That the Grisons and Valtolines should return to the
condition they were in, in the year 1617. That Don Duarte of Portugal should be
set at liberty before the Treaty were ratified: That all the Goods that were
formerly belonging to the house of Aquavia in the Kingdom of Naples,
confiscated by Ferdinando King of Aragon, should be restored to Seignior de
Angliere the pretended Duke of Atria: And that the pretensions to the Kingdom
of Navar should be reserved to the King of France notwithstanding the Peace.
Some dispute arose hereupon, which the French said was made by Pignoranda to
spin on time, and to conclude nothing; for they said they had been already
determined, and that they were now mentioned only to know how they might be
established. The Spaniard said that they were new additions; but that
notwithstanding they were contented they should be decided by the Mediators, by
whom at last they were adjusted in the end of February, 1647. The Hollanders
wrought it so, as the Spaniards accepted of an Instrument of Peace presented by
the French, which contained 76 Articles; amongst which they included Portugal;
which the Spaniards absolutely refused, and the French were forced to leave it
out; but with addition of something else, which the Spaniards thought to be
contrary to the Declaration of the 17 th of September, 1646. which the
Interpositors had made, which made it be yet the more believed that the French
Agents thought not of any agreement, building upon the assurance they had from
the Hague, that the States would not treat separately. The Spaniards would by
no means yield up Piombino and Portolongona: the Count of Avaux who was an
Enemy to Count Servient, and did not square with Longueville, insisted upon the
detaining of Portugal.

This mean while Count Pignoranda made new offers to the United Provinces, as
well by means of their Plenipotentiaries, as by two Writings given in on the 13
th of March, and on the 11 th of April; which occasioned that some of the
Deputies that were returned home, were ordered to be in a readiness to return
to Munster; and they writ to all the Provinces that they should send their
Deputies to the Hague, to take a final resolution touching the Treaties begun
in Spain.

On the fourth of May the French declared that they had received orders from
Paris, that the King of France intended to be at liberty to assist the King of
Portugal; and that if Pignoranda did not presently accept of this Proposal, he
would demand a Truce for Portugal for 30 years, and perpetual Peace for
Catalonia.

Whereupon the Spaniards declared, that if the French held themselves free not
to observe what they had at first propounded, to the end that they might
occasion Novelties in the affairs of Portugal; that it was also fair for Spain
not to maintain what she had offered.

The Mediators, that the Treaty might not break, told the Spanish Agents, that
it would farther the business much, if they would admit of a new Instrument
which they had delivered to the French, wherein they insinuated how the third
Article of the already-thrown-out Writing touching each parties assisting their
Confederates might be regulated. To which the Spaniards answered, that that
Article was so well established already in the first Instruments of Peace, as
it needed no further explaining.

Notwithstanding this Negative, the Mediators did still Negotiate; and on the
first of June they framed a rough draught of a Clause, which might be severally
given, touching the manner how the Confederates might be assisted; which being
refused, the Treaty was suspended till the midst of August, at which time they
did reassume it, resolving to read distinctly all the Instruments which had
been presented by both parties the second time, and to pick out all the
contentious points; in which the Spaniard said that the French had added, that
whilst a League was established between the States and Princes of Italy, for
the security of the Peace between the two Crowns, they might reciprocally
retain the Towns which they were possessed of in the States of Savoy and Mantua;
which was refused by the Spaniards, who were resolved that each party should
have that which was theirs restored; affirming, that since Savoy and Mantua
could not dispose of the other Princes of Italy as they listed, they ought not
to be bound to expose themselves to the prejudice of no restitution till a
League were made, which depended upon the Will of others.

After this, whilst the Mediators were negotiating very hotly, the French on
the eighth of September declared that they had received orders not to treat any
longer, unless Spain would first consent to abandon totally the Duke of
Lorain's Cause: which the Spaniards absolutely refused; complaining that the
French would be at liberty to assist the Portugal, who was an unjust Usurper,
and that they must not defend Lorain, who was unduly driven out. These things
altered as occasions altered; the French were confident in their opinions of
being seconded by their Confederates to make use of the weakness of Spain,
which was at this time not a little threatened by what had happened in Sicily and
in Naples; and they were strong Reasons to make them lay hold of a conjuncture
so propitious for them. But that which appeared to be a powerful Antidote,
proved pestiferous Poison: For the greater that populous and Warlike Nation
grew, they raised the more apprehensions in their Neighbors, nay in their
Friends.

This was one of the chief reasons which was thought made the Hollanders forego
their Engagements and Agreements with the French, and which made the pretension
good of treating apart from their Colleagues; wherefore the next June, without
making it known to the Mediators, they concluded a Truce, not much unlike that
of the year 1612, to the great distaste of the French, as contrary to their
Conventions; whereat they were highly scandalized, and sent to Holland to
complain thereof. Ambassador Pau, who was Deputy for Amsterdam, did so much, as
this City of and by her self made good what was done, against the other six
Provinces. These would have saln to some other resolution; but the proceedings
of France made the Hollanders so jealous, as they bethought themselves of their
business: and being afterward left by the Spaniards to their own free will, to
accept either of Truce or Peace, the Truce was at last changed to a perpetual
Peace, as being that which established them to be a free and 80-verain State,
excluding all pretensions which the King of Spain or any of his Heirs could
have thereunto.

They therefore appointed the 30 th of January for the subscribing of this
their particular Treaty: Whereupon the French put in their Protestation before
it was published; which made the Hollanders desire a further time from
Pignoranda; but he foreseeing that if the business were discovered it might
easily be diverted, declared not only that he could not give way thereunto,
but that they should establish it before they went out of the House where they
were, or that the Treaty should be for ever broken, and all the Writings burnt.

They therefore signified to the French Agents by two of their Colleagues, that
if they should not admit of the advantageous Conditions which were offered them
by Spain, they could not defer the concluding of this their Treaty apart. The
French demanded 15 days time to dispatch away an express to the Court; without
the consent whereof, this being a new thing, they could resolve nothing.
Whereupon the Hollanders desired the Spaniards that an authentic Act might be
made, whereby they might be bound to keep the same Conditions with France
concerning Peace, for two months, which were already granted them; and this was
readily granted.

Two days after, the Duke of Longueville returned to Paris, and the Express
which was sent being come thither before him, the Queen sent for the Marquess
of Bagni, who was the Apostolic Nuntio in France, and for Cavaliere Michel
Morosini, the Venetian Ambassador, that they who were very intelligent persons
might examine the Conditions of Peace which were newly exhibited, and should
speak their opinions therein. They had several meetings hereupon, and having
well weighed the business, told her Majesty, That they thought them very fair
and advantageous: whereof the Mediators were soon advertised; who visited Count
Pignoranda, and told him, That the French were ready to continue the
Negotiation; and to and all Controversies, they in the name of France offered
to refer the Six undecided Articles to be terminated either by the Queen of
Sweden alone, or by her joined with the States of the Empire, or by those
alone, or by the United Provinces.

That therefore they might begin the Articles which were referred by Pignoranda
to the Arbitrament of Holland, and reassume the Treaties where they were left
in November and December the year 1647. the Count answered, that he was first
engaged with the Holland-Plenipotentiaries, and that he could not condescend
thereunto, till they should free him of his word, or that the French should
again declare that they did not assent to that Interposition.

Cavaliere Contarini assured him that the French were resolved not to admit of
it, knowing that the Holland-Plenipotentiaries were won over by the Spaniards;
and so he passed on to discourse upon the undecided points; which were, That
the Spaniards did not intend to yield up the Territories of the Cities which
were granted to France in Flanders, and in Rossi^^on. That the French should
not be suffered to fortify themselves in Catalonia, nor in Cassal, during the
Thirty years Truce: That Portugal should not be therein comprehended, nor the
freedom of Don Edward di Braganza, who was Prisoner in the Castle of Millain:
That Piombino and Porta Longone should be restored: That the Fortifications at
Nancy should not be demolished; and that the time wherein Cassal should be
restored to the Duke of Mantua, should be specified. Upon these differences
Pignoranda told the Mediators, That if France did not readily accept of the
Conditions which were offered, he conceived himself to be at liberty, and not
obliged to any thing which had been formerly exhibited.

The Hollanders ratified the concluded Peace, with no little diminution of the
opinion which the French had of them; since is to satisfy their Colleagues; as
they were bound to do, they had forborne ratifying but for fifteen days, the
French believed the Spaniards would either have agreed with France, or else
would have subscribed to any Conditions. Pignoranda was aware, that the
Department of the French might have made the States to be of this Opinion;
wherefore as there is nothing which more facilitates the effecting of any thing
than necessity when advised by fear, it is said that he protested to the Holland
Agents, That if they had forborne this Ratification any longer, he would have
made Peace with France upon any terms. Wherefore it was thought that this
consideration being added to what has been said, was of great force to make
the Council of the seven United Provinces at the Hague ratify what they did.

For all this, Pignoranda showed himself prone to a suspension of Arms the next
Cmapagn^a, which was thought proper to draw on a good end of the Treaties;
which he signified to Seignior Maynersuich, who was the only one that remained
at Munster for the United Provinces. But Servient, who was also the only one
that was now at the Assembly, for both Longueville and Avaux were gone, being
angry at the Hollanders proceedings, and thinking himself deluded by the
Spanish Agents, refused it, thi^king it but a trick to make advantage of the
time, and to make it be believed that the French desired Peace, which they
dreamt not on. He therefore refused another Proposal made by the Hollanders;
That notwithstanding the two months should be expired, if they would accept of
what was at first offered them, they would endeavor that the Spaniards should
grant it: but he published a sharp Writing on the 14 th of May, (as he had good
reason to do) and within a few days went to Ofnaburg, to solicit an end with
the Emperor and Empire, excluding Spain and Lorain.

The mean while, on the 16 th of May 1648, the mutual ratification of the
Hollanders was perfected; and on the 22 of June a new Proposal was made, to
facilitate an Agreement between the two Crowns: But Servient refused all both
in Words and Writing, that they were but tricks to deceive the World; and so he
retired from Munster.

The Spaniards conceiving this mean while high hopes to make great advantages
of having thus separated the Union between Holland and France, thought their
designs would succeed the better, for that they found certain Gabals arise of
some of the Parliament and other Malcontents, against the Regency, and to pull
down the Cardinal.

Pignoranda finding that all the French Agents were gone from Munster, and that
there were none left for him to treat with, he also went about the end of July
to Brussels, much praised for his wife Conduct of those affairs. He left
notwithstanding Don Antonio Brown, a person of great capacity, with the same
Plenipotentiary-power to continue any Treaties that might be made of new;
declaring that there was no more need of any meeting, since the Assembly was
broken by the French Agents, having abused the opportunity of a rational and
fair Accommodation. Don Lewis de Haro, Conde Duca d'Olivares, the King of
Spain's chief State-Minister, declared, that it was better it should be said
that the Spaniards had refused Peace, than to have made it with so much
prejudice to the Crown, just when Fortune, glutted with the prosperity of
France, began to turn the Wheel.

Cardinal Mazarine hearing that the Treaties were embroiled, and being resolved
to make Peace with credit and advantage to the Crown, forthwith reassumed the
business, and made the Nuntio write to Pignoranda, offering him a meeting
wherein the business might be quickly discust and ended. The Nuntio writ on the
7 th of August 1648, to the Count, who accepted the invitation, and answered by
the Pope's Internuntio in Flanders, that he would always be ready. The Cardinal
caused it to be signified again on the 21 of August, and replied on the fourth
of September, that it would be best for the preparing of the business, that
Pignoranda should send some body to Paris; who answered, that he knew none on
whom to trust more than on the same Nuntio, and on Cavalier Morosini the
Venetian Ambassador: but the Cardinal seeming not to be therewith pleased, the
Count thought good to employ Francisco Galleretta, Secretary of State in the
Low Countries for his Catholic Majesty. The Affair was agreed upon; Galleretta
came to Paris in the beginning of October, and had conference with the
Cardinal, who told him that anci^^^ Lo^ain should be restored to Duke Charles,
and that the Towns of Stenay, Ianitz, with what belonged unto them, should be
reserved for the King of France; and that the Walls of Nancy should be
demolished. The Secretary answered, That this was to alter the first
Propositions; and without any more ado, continued on his Journey: whereof the
French did highly complain, giving out that the Spaniards building upon the
troubles of France, did in their effects correspond to what they made show of,
making use of the Peace concluded with Holland; which though it were not very
honorable for them at the first aspect, was in effect very advantageous for
their interests, for that the chiefest reputation of Princes lay in what made
most for their advantage: That it was glorious for the Hollanders, but not much
advantageous, since it was known to be contrary and dangerous to their
condition, not to keep long in a Government which is Popular, of several
Religions, and various Interests, as theirs is; which to keep united, needs
nothing but the dread of a powerful Enemy.

The Province of Zealand made a great bustling, nor would they ratify the
Peace for a long time; blaming Knut their Plenipotentiary for having exceeded
his instructions, and for being corrupted by the Spaniards: for which, Process
was made against him, and he was banished.

The Affairs of the two Crowns being interrupted by the making of this Peace
apart by the Hollanders, the French joined more firmly with the Swedes; and
being secretly fomented by the Elector of Bavaria, they grew more servent in
making an Agreement with Caesar, and with the Empire; excluding the King of
Spain, whose Agents did no less endeavor to separate the Crown of Swedeland,
as they had done Holland from France. They bad the Imperialists consider, That
as the Union of the two Houses of Austria was the only way to make Peace
between the two Crowns, so on the contrary the separating of their two
Interests, was to make the War perpetual between those two Potentates: That the
Swedes Army was much diminished, and the Emperor's much increased: That the
Enemy might be easily driven out of Bohemia, and out of the other Provinces
which they possessed, and that the Peace might afterward be made upon better
Conditions; and the rather, if civil Discords arose in France. But the
Imperialists fearing to loose Bohemia, and being all of them weary of War,
said, The Prejudice which flourishing Bohemia and many other Provinces had
suffered, was very great by the prolonging of Peace: That the Coffers were
empty, the Armies discontented, the Provinces too much burdened: That all the
afflicted Subjects cried out for Peace; whereunto they were persuaded by good
and unconcerned friends: That the Peace with Germany did put the Emperor in
peaceful possession of the Empire; whereas he was in danger of loosing what he
had yet there by War: That by Peace many Princes would be restored to their
pristine Splendour, who were likely to undergo greater miseries by War: That
Peace did comfort many distressed people, whom War made miserable.

As for Religion, which ought to be the Rule of all Humane actions, it was to
be considered that wise men ought to believe that Religion is settled by
Doctrine, by Disputation, and by Integrity of life; and that it may very well
subsist without being upheld by interest of State, their Affairs being totally
different.

But all these considerations would have been passed by, had not another
greater been added, which was, that the Germans being weary of War, longed for
Peace; particularly the Elector of Bavaria, having the French and Swedes upon
him, declared openly for Peace, though with the Exclusion of Spain.

The French desired an end of War, as well for the apprehension they had of
Civil war, as fearing that the Swedes when they should see France embroiled at
home, and therefore not in a condition to assist Forain Wars, should resolve to
make Peace without them.

Other important reasons were added to these, which made Cardinal M^zarine
write to Servient, that he should employ all his power in appeasing the Swedes,
who declared themselves irreconcilable Enemies to Bavaria; making them see that
the Interest of both the Crowns required that this Prince might not only be
preserved, but that his Dominions should be augmented, as being the only
Catholic who could dispute the Empire, and take it out of the House of
Austria. Thus by the French men's means the Duke had not only the Electoral
Title, but was put in possession of the upper Palatinate; and on the other
side, by his means, who fomented the French underhand, they got the important
Town of Brisack.

By these and the like considerations, an end was put to the Wars of Germany
which had lasted so long, with the adjustment of Spain apart; and by a
multiplicity of Articles, Peace was concluded between the Emperor and Empire
on the one part, and the Swedes and their Confederates on the other part, in
Osn^burg, on the sixth of August, with this caution; That it should not be
taken to be of effect, unless Peace were made with France; which was made
between them and the Empire and Emperor in Munster on the 24 th of October
following.

The chief sum of the Peace was, That all the Princes, States, Cities, and
Lordships of the Empire should have the free possession and exercise of their
Religion, in the form and manner as was in the year 16^4. That the Crown of
Swedeland should for ever enjoy all Pomerania Citerior, vulgarly called
Voorpomeren, together with the Island of Rugen, containing the same limits as
were held in the Dominion of the other Dukes; and in the further Pomerania, the
Towns of Stetin, Gratz, Ga^, Golnaw, the Island Wuolin, the three Imboccatures
or Out-lets of the River Oder, to wit, Pfien; Divenaw, and the Towns adjacent
to the one and the other part, from the beginning of the Territories of Riga,
to the Baltic Sea, and to the Eastern Banks, comprehending the City and Haven
of Wismar, with the Fort Wolfeck, the Jurisdiction of Foel, and of
Nevemcloster; the Archbishopric of Bremen, the Bishopric of Werden, and the
City and Jurisdiction of Wilshawsen, together with all the Rights possessed by
the last Archbishops of Bremen, in the Chapter and Diocese of Hamburg, with
the Privileges and Grants which they were then possessed of; (the fourteen
Villages which were held by Frederick Duke of Holsatia di Gottorpe, and by
those that descended from him, in the Jurisdiction of Holsatia; Trito^^ico and
Rimbeck being for ever to remain to the said Duke F^^derick.)

To the Elector of Brandenburg, the remainder of the further ^ost Pom^rania;
and in lieu of that part that was granted to the Swedes, the Bishoprics of
Magdeburg, and Minden, together with some lesser Lordships.

The Palatine of Rhine was restored to the lower Palatinate, and to all the
prerogatives enjoyed therein before the Rebellion of Bohemia; and an eighth
Elector was to be made, which was to be the said Palatine: the upper
Palatinate, and County of C^mb, with the Title of Elector, was given to the
Duke of Bavaria, he being to renounce his pretensions to the thirteen Millions,
and all other claims upon the upper Austria.

Six hundred thousand Dollars were to be paid to the Lantgrave of H^ssen within
nine months space by the Electors of Mentz and Culen, for restitution of the
Towns taken in these Wars.

That the Town of Brisack, with all the Territories thereof, the Lantgraveship
of the upper and lower Alsatia, and of Langaw, the Provincial Jurisdiction of
the ten Emperial Cities in Alsatia, viz. Hagenan, Colmar, Slecstat, Weisemberg,
Landaw, Oberstein, Rosheim, Munster in St. George his Valley, Kaiserberg, and
Tarinhaime, should for ever be incorporated into the Kingdom of France; and the
King of France might keep a Garrison perpetually in the Town of Philipsburg, he
being to pay three Millions of French Livres in three years, which were to
commence when the King of Spain should have subscribed the Treaty; and the rest
of the Cities and Towns that were taken, were to be restored unto him.

The Emperor and Empire were to relinquish to the King of France the right of
Sovereignty which they could pretend unto in Pinarol in Italy; and to take away
all occasions of further Ruptures between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, the
King of France was to pay 494000 Crowns to the Duke of Mantua, which were
promised him by the late King at the discharge of the Duke of Savoy, to whom
the Emperor was to give the Investment of the Fee-farms and States which were
adjudged unto him at the Treaty of Chirasco; Caesar promising moreover never to
molest the Duke of Savoy in his right of Sovereignty in Rocaverano, Olmo, and
Cesol, and what belonged thereunto, as if they were wholly independent upon the
Empire.

Five Millions of Dollars were to be paid to the Crown of Sweden, at three
limited payments, with due Cautions.

Many other Articles were specified in the Articles, to the satisfaction of
other Princes, States, Cities, and interessed Seigniories; and in this Peace,
all the Confederates, Friends, and adherents, as well of the Emperor and
Empire's side, as of the French and Swede's, were comprehended: And this
Tor^ent of Miseries being thus ended, all those parts were full of joy and
content.

The Nuntio Chigi, who had carried himself zealously in the Peace between the
two Crowns, conceiving when they should be agreed the Protestants would not be
so high in their pretensions, as also in the other between the Emperor and
France; when he knew that in this Setlement certain Conditions were inserted,
which were prejudicial to the Catholic Religion, he accounted all his labor
and mediation ill spent: Out of Zeal to God and the Church, he forbad the
Plenipotentiaries to speak to him any more of that Peace; he shut up his House
where all the Meetings had been held, and protested against the Agreement made
in Osnaburg; he made his name, and the names of Pope Urban and Pope Innocent,
be canceled out of the Instrument of Peace; he protested against the
Subscription made at Munster on the 6th of October; and he also protested
against the Ratification between the Emperor and the King of France made in
the February following, as he had protested against the Peace of Spain with the
Hollanders, by reason of the prejudice that was therein done to the Catholic
Religion. And this Nuntio, who had never mediated in the Protestant Treaties,
but was against them always, that he might as much as in him lay, restore and
sustain the Catholic Religion, and Pontifical Authority, sent back the
Presents made him by the Emperor and King of France, to the value of more than
14000 Crowns, for reward of the pains he had taken; declaring, That he would
have no hand in a Peace which was made to the prejudice of the Catholic
Religion, the honor whereof he preferred before any particular advantage:
whereby he merited so much from the Holy Sea, as he was made Cardinal, and
afterward Pope.

But because Politicians value appearance much, as that which makes good or bad
impressions in peoples minds, who are not capable of the secret dealing of
Statists; the Spaniards denied what had been divulged against them by the
French, blaming them for having broken the Treaty without concluding Peace, and
giving out both in Words and Writing, that the carriage of the Cardinal, of
Count Servient, and of other of the King's Agents, did not correspond with
their appearances.

So as it was easy to make them be thought little zealous of the public
Quiet, and to be hated by those people who wished for nothing more than to have
an end of their miseries; from whence it arose, That it was not hard for those
who sought for disturbances, to augment such a pretense, and to cause the
Revolutions which are the subject of this History.

The Spaniards did also reiterate their complaints against the Emperor's
State-Ministers, for not dissuading their Master from separating himself from
the Union of their King, now that the Hollanders were no less apprehensive of
the French greatness than were the English; so as it was to be believed, that
as the one had fallen off from the French to avoid their further fomenting
their unsatiateness, the others would apply themselves to oppose so vast
presumptions.

They blamed the Caesarian State-Ministers of unadvisedness, and pointed
particularly at some of them, as if to the end they might possess Lands and
Lordships in the Country which was possessed by the Swedes, they had been
easily persuaded rather to make Peace with them to recover what they had lost,
than to do what was good for their Master. And for these reasons they were a
long time resolute not to restore Frankendal and other Towns which they
possessed in the lower Palatinate: But the Dutch, who were open enough in their
actions, not listening to such Whispers, seemed to be content with Peace. They
said, It was better for a wise Prince to purchase assured Peace to his
Subjects, though upon some disadvantage, than to continue War with uncertain
hopes of profit. They observed religiously what they had promised, and thereby
won applause.

The French on the contrary said, They needed no justification where there was
no fault; and did therefore refer themselves to the judgments of such as were
best informed. Cardinal Mazarine did in particular give a very conclusive
proof: For Process being severely made against him by the Parliament in this
point, nothing could ever be justified. Nay, the Counselors of Parliament who
were appointed to make Remonstrances to the Queen, being with Duke Longueville,
who was then a professed Enemy to the Cardinal; and it being commonly said,
That amongst other things he complained that Mazarine had taken from him the
glory of making Peace; that being solicitated to attestate this publicly, that
so they might convince the Cardinal, and prove him guilty; The Duke's Answer
was, That his Honor and his Conscience were dearer than all other
Considerations, and that therefore he was bound to aver a truth; that in the
instructions given him by the Cardinal, and in all the Orders which he had
received from Court, he had not only found the Cardinal always inclined to a
fair Peace, but that the Cardinal had also employed all his industry to obtain
it, though without effect; for the Spanish Agents pretending to such
advantages, as could not then with honor be granted by France, they had never
corresponded to that intent, save only in show, but always kept a hole open to
escape out at, so as he could never know at what rate they desired it.

Cavalier Contarini spoke often to the same purpose, and particularly when,
after the meeting at Munster, he met with some of the Parliament at Paris in
the Garden di Renarda, to whom upon the like occasion he plainly answered: That
the Cardinal was a good Minister for France, as they would find when they had
lost him.

The Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns was afterward continued by the
Mediators, and all things seemed to be quieted, unless some things of small
moment; for the Spaniards making use of the Tumults at Naples, of what had
happened at the Battle of Lens, and of the Siege laid to Cremona by the French
and Duke of Modena; they seemed to have failed much in the hopes which they had
built upon the Peace with Holland, and inclined to an Agreement upon lesser
terms than before. But when they found the Tumults of Naples lessen, that they
would quickly be appeased; when they heard that the French had removed the
Siege from before Cremona, and when they knew that the Tumults of France were
likely to last, and tended to a Civil War, and that therefore the pretensions
of France began to grow somewhat less; the Spaniards slackned in their former
Proposals, and the Tune being changed, changed their Dance. They required new
Treaties, and made it known that the true modern Maxim is, To know how to make
use of the present times as far as they are advantageous; which according as
they alter, those are accounted wise who know best how to make use of them.

Pietro de Weimbs Intendant of Luxemburg did also complain against the Articles
of the Peace of Germany; saying amongst other things, that the King of Spain,
so good a friend, and one who had always seconded the said party with
unspeakable expense, and with hazard to his Dominions, was left out; and that
he who usurped the Scepter of Portugal was called King in the Instrument of
Peace; and that other Articles were therein inserted prejudicial to the
Catholic King.

Notwithstanding all this, the Court of Spain though it were thus abandoned,
and left to wrestle alone against so many Enemies, and obliged instead of being
assisted by her own Subjects, to waste and consume them in defense of
themselves, did yet undauntedly withstand and keep down the stoutest Forces of
their Enemies, and in particular did vigorously defend the State of Millain,
assaulted by Francis Duke of Modena, who was entered into League with the King
of France, for those motives and Interests, which that they may be the better
understood, we will take from a little higher.

The Duke's propension toward the Spaniards began to cool, when by the
Invasion of Castro he confederated with other Princes in the War against the
Barbarini; hoping (as having deserved well of that Crown) to have them
propitious to him upon those occurrences; but he failed of his hopes. These
distastes were increased, when upon the same occasion, having leave from the
Emperor to levy men in Germany, he was not suffered to do so by the bad
Offices (as he said) of the Spaniards, and was served so a second time, loosing
both his men and money: yet the Duke moderated his sorrow, and attributing the
fault to the ill will of some of the Spanish State-ministers who were not well
affected to him, he did not at all recede from his respect to that Crown. The
difference of Castro being ended, in the Treaties whereof though the French
appeared to have befriended him much more than the Austrians had done, he
forbore not notwithstanding to assign over his Soldiers willingly to the
Governor of Millain, who needed them; Arona being set upon by the French, who
offered him better terms for them than the Spaniards gave. But he was here
cheated of the Moneys that were promised him for the assigning over of the same
men; and not at all satisfied with the promise made him of a good sum of Money
out of the Dowry of the Infanta Catherina Daughter to Philip the Second, due to
him as Heir by Will and Testament to his Uncle Prince Philibert of Savoy: Not
long after, the Spaniards treated of selling the Principality of Corregio to
others, excluding the Duke from it, though it were assigned over to him for a
good sum of Money due to him from that Crown. The Duke was much netled at this
usage, and pretended that he would not go out of Corregio, till he were fully
satisfied for the Debts due to him, and for his Charge in keeping it. And
beginning to take up Arms, he communicated his intention to Count Lesly Captain
of the Emperor's Guard, then in Venice, as he was going to Naples. To these
were added the distasts given to his Brother the Cardinal of Este at Rome, whom
the Spaniards seemed to treat uncivilly, procuring that Cardinal Colonne was
preferred before him in the Protection of Caesar's Patrimonial States. Hereupon
the French took occasion to invite him over to their side, knowing how much it
would make for them to have a Prince of his parts and courage join with them in
molesting the State of Millain.

Wherefore the Protection of the Affairs of France in Rome were committed to
that Prince Cardinal; which he accepted willingly, though the Duke seemed to be
not content therewith; but the Spaniards did tacitly grumble, as if this had
been done by the Duke's good will. These Jealousies growing daily, the French
offered the Duke all necessary assistance in case he would break with Spain. On
the contrary, the wisest of the Spanish State-Ministers finding that to
exasperate the Duke at this time, would be very prejudicial to the Interest of
Spain, the same Count Lesly propounded unto him, upon occasion of Count Alfonso
Montecuculi's going to Munster, that the Emperor in token of the valuation he
put upon his Excellency, would declare him to be his Vicar General in Italy.
The Duke applied himself willingly hereunto, the rather for that Duke Argos
Viceroy of Naples had made some overture therein with the Dukes Resident in
that City, and sent Don Vincenzo Tuttavilla to Millain to have intelligence
with that Governor; who as he passed by Modena, found him ready to embrace the
offer. But not finding the other Spanish Agents willing thereunto, the
Proposals, after Tuttavilla was gone, were altered, the Effects prolonged, and
finally the Viceroy's Offers were varied in the most essential parts. So as
dissidences began again to arise: for though the Duke condescended to some
advantageous Proposals, and pressed the performance, nothing was resolved of;
so as he began to conceive that these things were given out rather to make
France distrust him, than to fix him to Spain. Being therefore amidst these
Rocks, he resolved not to loose the French, whilst he could not confide in the
Spaniards; especially having such an opportunity offered him, as the risings in
Sicily and Naples, which threatened the subversion of that Monarchy.

Cardinal Grimaldi was then going toward Piombino and Portolongone, with
Plenipotentiary-power from the King of France, to negotiate with the Princes of
Italy, and chiefly to bind up the Negotiations which were in hand between
Mazarine and the Duke of Modena. At last, after several Treaties, the
Confederacy was settled upon these terms: That the King's Council resolved to
send the Neapolitan Troops which had lain long in Pio^bino and Portolongone by
the order of Signior d' Estrades, who marched with 4000 Foot and 1200 Horse by
the way of Tuscany into the Modenese, the Express not coming time enough which
was sent from Court to Grimaldi with orders to make the Troops advance to
Naples, whereby the Duke being recruited, he resolved to pass over the Poe, and
to enter the Cremonese, which is a fertile Territory, wherein the Soldiers
might be maintained with notable disadvantage to the Milanese. At the news
hereof, the Marquess Serra was advanced with 4000 Foot, 2000 Horse, and ten
pieces of Cannon to Pomponesco, to keep the French from passing over the Poe;
but they seeming that they would pass just over against the Spanish quarters,
falling down lower at the same time in 17 Vessels, passed 1000 Foot upon break
of day over the River, and not long after passed their whole body over,
pursuing the Spaniards, who fled from Pomponesco to the Gates of Cremona;
against which City the Duke would have made some attempt, had he not been
obliged to forbear by the great store of Rain, by the bad ways, by the
approaching Winter, and for that the Forces which he expected from Piemont were
not yet come; so he was forced to Winter in the Enemie's Country, distributing
his Troops, part in Cassalle Maggiore, which was abandoned by the Spaniards,
part in Riverole, and the rest in the neighboring Villages, where they lay
quiet till the February following, at which time they began to draw into the
Field: For the Count Haro who was made Governor of Millain, instead of his
Father the Constable of Castile, mustered 6000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, wherewith
he pretended to drive the Enemy from their quarters before more recruits could
be brought to the Duke.

Which the French perceiving, the Duke, being so advised by Estrades, thought
to advance 3000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and to keep the Spaniards from beating up
his quarters, to place himself between Bozolo and St. Martino. Haro advanced
with such fury, as that he broke the Enemies Right Wing, on the head whereof
was the Duke of Modena's self; who thinking he could not avoid a total Rout,
advised Estrades, who guided the Left Wing, to retreat, whilst he hindered his
own men's disorder. But Estrades thinking that the Spaniard would be the more
encouraged by so sudden a retreat, and that greater mischief might ensue,
advised the Duke to get behind his Squadrons, wherewith he would withstand the
Enemy till night, by advantage whereof they might afterward both of them
retreat jointly. He straightway took the advantage of a certain House, and two
great Ways, which were enclosed with thick strong Hedges, where the French
fought manfully for three hours space, and till the Sun being set, they might
retreat to their quarters in good order.

The Fight was fierce and bloody, many perished on each side; the action was
glorious, all the Generals having signalized themselves with undaunted valor.
Estrades received a Musket Shot on his Curass, and had two Horses killed under
him: The Duke won great glory. Both Armies being thus retreated, the French
Wintered without any other considerable event; but the Duke having made new
provisions for the next Campaigne, they reassumed Arms on the beginning of
March, with successes of important consequence; for the Marquess of Caracena,
who was now Governor of Millain, resolving to give proof of his sufficiency in
that place, after he had put all things in good order, went to Cremona,
thinking that by driving the Enemy from the greater Cassalle, he might the
better defend the Passes over the Poe: he therefore took a little Island within
the River just over against that part, and he with the rest of his Army
quartered at Gazolo, three miles off, to assist to the maintaining of the
Island that he had taken, which the French went to recover, but were repulsed
with some prejudice, and with the loss of their Boats; which made the Duke to
gather all his Troops together, and with them; and those recruits which were
then brought him by Marshal Plessis Pralin, hoped to make good Cassalle, and by
the addition of those French which were landed at Lirici, and were already on
their march toward him, to alter the face of affairs. Wherefore having
furnished that place with Victuals, he prepared to assault the aforesaid
Island, and to drive the Spaniards out.

Caracena foreseeing the Design, and the difficulty of maintaining the Island,
drew his men out of it; and mustering his whole Army at Cremona, thought by
drawing the Trench from Rebecco to the Ditch of the City, which was about
twelve miles in length, to keep the French from advancing further, and to make
them give over their first intentions: but at last the Duke's Army being grown
to be fourteen or fifteen thousand men, he by the advice of the Marshal, and of
the other Commanders, resolved to assault the Trench, and came within sight of
it on the 30th of June in a glorious order; the Forelorn-hope advanced with
some Volunteers, and assaulted the Enemies Trench in several parts, which
though they were stoutly defended by the Spaniards, were notwithstanding
quickly overcome by the French, and the Artillery taken, many Officers and
Soldiers made Prisoners; amongst which Count Galeazzo Trotti
Leiutenant-general of the Horse. Yet did the Victory prove bitter, by reason of
the Assailants loss, amongst which was a Son of Marshal Plessis Pralin, who
advancing courageously in the first Files, was slain by a Musket Shot. By this
fortunate success the French should have fallen upon Cremona, which in this
confusion would soon have yielded; but they forbore the attempt for two
reasons; the one was necessity, for they wanted Victuals, and Artillery to
batter: The other, for that the whole Council of War agreed that it would be
better to pass over the River Adda without engaging in any Siege, and march
into the bowels of the State of Millain, whereby depriving the people of
gathering in their Harvest, which was yet in the fields, they might ruin them:
but they failed in this; for being forced to tarry for the getting of Victuals,
they were forced to tarry at Cava longer than they thought to have done.
Howsoever they attempted to pass over at Maeastorna, and at several other
parts; but still in vain, by reason that the River was so swollen by the great
fall of Rain, and by the Spaniards vigilant Guards. They therefore retreated to
Crotta, and advanced to Spinadesco, and from thence with their whole Army drew
near Cremona, placing their Artillery against the Fortifications which the
besieged raised at the Mills upon the Poe.

The Marquess of Caracena was glad that the Enemies Army, which he feared would
have passed over Adda, sat down before Cremona; for knowing that he could
relieve it as he lifted, he thought to make them wait their Forces there to no
purpose. He therefore re-enforced the Garrison again, and failed not in the
part of an expert and valiant Commander. Wherefore the French knowing how hard
it is to take Towns that may be relieved by Water, they fought to keep the
Spaniards from coming upon the Poe, but failed; for other Armed Vessels coming
out against them, they forsook their Boots and got to land. The Duke of Modena
would have fallen upon the City with all his Forces, as being but weakly
walled; which being gotten, the Castle might be brought to yield the more
easily, being to be environed by a few men. He alleged the Example of Tortona
when Prince Thomaso took it; and was seconded in his opinion by Marquess Villa,
who was then come thither with a recruit of 3000 Horse and 2000 choice Foot,
accompanied by Marquess St. Andrea, Lieutenant General Mombrune, and by
Marquess Monte, who commanded in the third place. But Marquess Plessis Pralin,
and other French Commanders diverted them, making them resolve to fall only
upon the Castle, because they had not Foot enough to assault the large compass
of the City in several parts, and for that the Castle being taken, the rest
would soon be had. This advice prevailing, the French passed over the Water
which runs by the side of the Castle, and advanced against the Half Moon of
Ambrosio, where they fortified themselves. Don Alvano di Chignones Governor of
the Castle came out against them and fought them; many of both sides were
slain: of the French, Monsieur de la Lieu Marshall of the Camp, and Monsieur
Guillotiere was mortally Wounded. And of the Besieged, Count Piatti, Don
Giuseppe Monpavone, and Don Carlo Stampa were slain. The Duke then endeavored
to block up the Poe with a strong and long Chain, but did no good; for the
Besieged sallying out ever and anon with many choice Soldiers, hindered them:
amongst other Sallies one was remarkable, made by Don Diego Quintano, a Spanish
Camp-master, by night, on the 19 th of August, where both sides fought bravely,
where the same Quintano with many other brave Officers were slain: and of the
French, Count Vaian was slain, and Count Navayles mortally Wounded. Other
actions past daily, wherein sometimes one, sometimes another had the advantage;
but the French fared always worst. They were chiefly prejudiced by Marquess
Villa his failing to pass over Ada, who went from his quarters to the Camp to
advise with the Duke and Marshal, where whilst he staid expecting the springing
of a Mine which the French gave fire unto, he was slain by a Cannon, with much
sorrow to the whole Army, and much grief to the Duchess of Savoy, of whom he
had deserved very well by his long and faithful service; yet the French
continued the Siege more fervently than before; and though they were still
worsted, yet they forbore not making attempts.

At length the expected Forces from France not appearing, who were retarded by
the troubles which happened in that Kingdom, the French Army being much lessened,
and the Spaniard's increased, they resolved to raise the Siege. The French
discamped on the 8 th of October, and retreated to Castore; and when they had
carried their Artillery, Baggage, and Sick folks to Monticello, they went to
Rebecko. Thus did this Campaigne end unfortunately, which was thought at first
would have proved glorious for France.

The Austrians happiness was afterward Crowned with the Marriage between the
King of Spain and his Niece Anna Maria Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand the 3
d. She was first designed for a Wife to the Prince of Spain, who dying, and the
King of Spain having no Issue Male, he resolved to marry her himself; and writ
to the Emperor, that in remembrance of his Daughter the Empress, he had chosen
her for his Wife, whom he intended for his Daughter.

The Marriage-Ceremonies were made by the Cardinal d'Arach; and the King of
Hungary married her on the 8 th of November in the King of Spain's Name.

THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. 1649.
The SECOND BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The Queen being displeased with the Parliament, goes out of Paris with the
King and the whole Court; Retreats to St. Germains. Great Rumors arise
hereupon. The People incited by some seditious people, take up Arms. Both sides
prepare for War. The City is at last besieged by the King. Before which several
accidents happen. The Duke d'Elboeuf is with great applause chosen General of
the Parisians. The Prince of Conty and Duke Longueville come to Paris. Conty
goes to Roan, and Longueville is declared Generalissimo. The Siege continues
with advantage to the King. Archduke Leopold sends to offer himself to the
Parisians. Victuals grow scarce. The Inhabitants are aware of their loss. An
Agreement is endeavored. Peace concluded. Agreement is made in Italy between
the King of Spain and the Duke of Modena. The King of England is beheaded by
the common Hangman. The Spaniards make diverse attempts in Catalonia. Some
proceedings in Flanders.

WAR being resolved upon against Paris by the King's Privy Council, consisting
of the Queen, the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of Conde, the Cardinal, the
Marshals of Milleray and Villeroy, the Abbot della Reviera, and Monsieur
Tilliere Secretary of State; it was held expedient that the King, together with
all the great ones of the Court, should go out of Paris; to the end that the
Sun being vanished which illuminates the City, she might remain in that
obscurity whereinto her own indiscretion had concentrated her. About the
beginning of the year 1649, the Queen and Cardinal went in a Coach together
after Dinner to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, to agree upon many things with the Duke
touching their Majesty's going out of the City, and how it should be done.

But it being hard that this should be done by so many Princes and Commanders
in War, lest the people should take up Arms and hinder them from going out,
(especially since it being in the dead of Winter, they had no excuse to go out
for Recreation) the Twelf-night-Feast was thought a fitting time, when
throughout all France, and particularly in Paris, great Feastings and Jollities
are used to be had, as well amongst Plebeians as Citizens, at the solemnization
of the King of Be^nes; it being supposed that when all men should be intent
upon their Cups, or going to bed, they might then effect their intent.

The hour and moment being appointed, the greatest difficulty lay in getting
the King and Queen out. The business was given in charge to Marshal Grammont,
who was returned from Flanders the very day of the Declaration made the 28th of
October, with the French Guards, Swissers, King's Cavaliers, and Mazarine's
Gens d' Arms. The Prince of Conde and the Cardinal went to his house to Supper,
waiting for the appointed time. The mean while the King and Queen; and the Duke
of Anjou, went out at the back-gate of the ^arden; and finding Grammont there,
who had ordered all things with great secrecy, they got into Coach, and were
conducted by the Marshal and some few Guards out at the Gate delle Conference,
where were the Duke of Orleans, Cardinal, and many of the Court-Lords. They
stopped in the midst of the way, expecting Madamoselle d' Orleans, who was
advertised somewhat late, and diverse others, who had their Rendezvous appointed
there. The Prince of Conde went after midnight to waken his Brother Conty, his
Mother and Sister, who lay then in his Palace, all the doors whereof he caused
to be shut, took the Keys himself, and acquainted them with the Courts design,
and that he was bound to follow it. Conty and his Mother prepared to go with
him; but the Duchess of Longueville remembering that her Husband had passed his
Parol at Noysy, saw that he was to make good his word; since it was the Court
that fell upon Paris, in which case he was engaged to declare for the
Parliament. She therefore thought that if she should go to St. Germains, she
should anger the Duke her Husband. And for that cause pretended that being
great with Child, she was not fit to travel; and so without giving any cause
of jealousy, she avoided going out of Paris. She notwithstanding advised Conty
to follow his Brother, since he was not engaged to the Parliament, unless her
Husband should first engage, who was then in Champagnia. Conty was advised by
his Sister in this as he was in all things else, and sent a Servant to tell the
Coadjutor, that he followed the Prince his Brother, being forced by him so to
do. And whilst he was at St. Germains, he received news every day from his
Sister and the Coadjutor, by the means of his Vallet de Chamber Verboquet, who
like a Country-Peasant went to and fro between the Court and Paris. It was good
luck that Longueville was not at Paris; for if he had been there, the Court
could not have resolved so soon, lest the Duke might have revealed the
Resolution, and had caused the King be stayed, or otherwise might have
pretended to have tarried in the City. The Duchess sent him word presently,
telling him, That it was time for him to come to Paris according to
appointment; but he thought it not good to declare himself, till the Parliament
had openly declared against the Cardinal: for that otherwise the Parliament
might alter its mind, and he might be deceived. He therefore went to St.
Germains to expect what would be resolved upon; which caused great jealousy in
Paris, where the bottom of his policy was not sounded. This was the reason why
the Duke d' Elboeuf, of the House of Lorrain, elder Brother to Count Harcourt,
declared openly for the Parliament, that by making himself Head of that Party,
he might better his Interests in Court.

When their Majesty's went out, they left three Gentlemen behind them to wish
the Lords and Great ones to follow them. The Duke d' Elboeuf, Duke of Bullion,
and all the other Princes and Gentlemen had notice thereof. D' Elboeuf went to
St. Germains; but as it was thought, rather to observe what the Court did, than
to tarry there: for pretending that he had not a convenient Lodging appointed
him, and that his Mother, Wife, Children and Family were in Paris, he returned
thither that he might assist them.

The Duke of Bullion lay sick of the Gout. Before the Queen went out, she writ
two Letters, the one to the Archbishop of Paris, the other to the Coadjutor.
She acquainted the Archbishop with the reasons which had induced her to go
out, and recommended the Kings service to him. She wished the Coadjutor to go to
St. Germains the next day to treat of some important particular business. The
Letters were delivered; the Coadjutor showing a readiness to obey, got the next
morning into his Coach, but was stopped by the fury of the people, who flocking
in great numbers about him, would not suffer him to go: But it was thought that
this was done by agreement between him and some of the more popular sort. The
next Morning by break of day the whole Regiment of the French Guard and
Switzers went out of the Suburbs where they lay, with Drums beating, and passed
Company after Company toward St. Germains, not being hindered by any, though it
was known that they went to trouble Paris; perhaps because they would not
appear to be the first that should make the breach, especially being without a
Head who might be capable to issue forth Orders. Yet toward night they shut up
the City-Gates, and suffered none to go out; the people being risen of
themselves, who kept many of the Nobless and Courtiers from going out, and
plundered and broke many Coaches, committing many other insolences, whereby all
that belonged unto the Court were much endangered.

The news of the Kings going out of Paris being known the next morning, the
Frondeurs were amazed, the rather for that they saw the Princes of Conty and
Marsiliack had followed the Court; and thinking that Longueville would do the
like, contrary to the Agreement made at Noisy: But they were a little better
comforted afterward, when they saw the Prince of Marsilliack, who returned to
Paris, pretending some particular affairs, but indeed purposely to speak with
the Duchess of Longueville, and with some of the chief Frondeurs, to assure
them that the Prince of Conde and himself would be as good as their Words, and
that they could do no less than go out of the Town with the King, since they
could make no open declaration till they saw the Parliament wholly engaged.
Marsilliack pressed them to make a Decree in Parliament, as they had done against
Marshal d'Ancre in the year 1617. and leaving Gourville at Paris to solicit
them, and to come and advertise them when it was done, returned the next day to
Court. The Parliament met, and the aforesaid Decree was propounded; but of 200
that were there, there were but nine that voted against the Cardinal. For the
securing of Paris and the Suburbs, they ordered such Guards, as none durst
carry forth any Arms or Baggage either by day or night: That all Governors of
Towns should suffer Victuals and other necessaries to be brought to Paris: And
that no Cities should receive any Garrisons or Soldiers.

These Orders were observed in Paris, where the people were bound to obey; but
were laughed at by all every where else: but the greater part of the
Parliaments of the Kingdom adhered to that of Paris; and had they sent out
Letters, greater novelties would certainly have ensued.

Before the King went out of Paris, he writ a Letter to the Provost of
Merchants, and to the Consuls, which was delivered them the next Morning after
he was gone; wherein he declared, That he would not have gone out by night, had
he not been advertised, that some of the Parliament, holding intelligence with
others of the Kingdoms Enemies, would attempt something against him. This
Letter was accompanied by three others, one from the Regent, another from the
Duke of Orleans, and another from the Prince of Conde; wherein they affirmed,
that it was they who had persuaded the King to go out of Paris, knowing for
certain what Plots were in hand prejudicial to his Majesty's service.

The next day the King sent a Letter by Monsieur Sordiere Lieutenant of the
Guards, wherein he commanded the Parliament to remove to Montargis; but notice
being had hereof, it was not received: and they decreed, That the King's
Servants should return to their Majesty's, to desire them to nominate who they
were that held intelligence with the Enemy, that they might be proceeded
against as guilty of High Treason. Hereupon the Court sent to know whether they
came resolved to render obedience, and to remove the Parliament to Montargis;
but they answered, They had no other order but to desire his Majesty to
nominate those who held intelligence with the Enemies to the Crown: So by the
Prince of Conde's counsel, they were dismissed without further Audience: For he,
contrary to the opinion of all the rest, said, they ought not to be heard; for
it made for him that there should be troubles, to the end that he might make
himself necessary, and carry on his own Interests. But he seemed to be moved
hereunto, thinking that the people would not be averse unto it, whilst Forniere
one of the Sheriffs of Paris, coming with some other Deputies to have Audience
of the Queen, assured her, that the People were ready to render obedience;
moreover, that Monsieur Bignon had private orders from the Frondeurs, that if
he could not do otherwise, he should yield, and pass his word that they would
withdraw; for they feared that the People growing desperate at the King's
leaving of Paris, might turn against them, as the occasioners of this disorder.
But the Court, by Conde's means, would give no Audience; which served for an
occasion to the Frondeurs to make it appear, that their Interests were defended
by the Peoples public cause, and made them take up Arms, and to oppose the
King's Authority; whereby the Parliament being encouraged, they fell to make
Decrees against the Cardinal, which put all things into confusion and disorder.

This removing of the Parliament was the first thing wherewith the King made
the Parisians afraid: for next to the Court, this Parliament is of most
advantage to the City, by reason of the many Presidents, Counselors,
Advocates, Notaries, Proctors, and Suitors. The Chamber of Accounts was ordered
to remove to Orleans, and that of the great Council to Orleans. The latter sent
their Deputies to the King to acquaint him with their grievances; which not
being listened unto, did exasperate men's minds the more, and brought many over
to adhere to the Frondeurs, who had been otherwise minded, finding what
prejudice they were likely to receive by this removal.

The Frondeurs making use of this for their own ends, on the 8 th of January,
the Decree against the Cardinal being past in Parliament, he was commanded
thereby to be gone from Court, and to go out of France within eight days, all
men being forbidden to receive him, and every one permitted to persecute him.
The execution of this was humbly desired from the Queen, as shall be said: and
by the advice of Brousel and the other Frondeurs, the Provost of Merchants, who
is like our Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffs, were obliged to choose Commissaries to
raise men, under the color of conveying Victuals to Paris.

The Council of State made a severe Prohibition be presently published, That
none should sell either Beeves, or Sheep, or any other Victuals, to any
Parisian.

To begin the Siege, St. Denis was presently seized on, a Walled Town two
Leagues distant from Paris, where the King's Army was quartered; which quarter
was commanded by Marshal Plessis P^^^^ under the Duke of Orleans, who was the
King's Lieutenant General; and the Troops under Conde were quartered at St.
Clou, a Town standing upon the River of Seine, at the same distance from Paris
as St. Denis, commanded by Marshal Grammont. The High Dutch having s^ck^ Bercy,
were quartered at Charenton: these had express orders to deal moderately with
the Parisians, and not to do any thing but hinder the carrying in (...)
Victuals, without any noise or scandal, to keep so from irritating the People,
who have ^o other fault but in too easily believing a few seditious folk w^o
are enemies to quiet. Thus the passion of the Malcontent predominating over
the ignorance of the common People who feed upon the desire of Novelty, all
fair proceedings being interpreted the effects of fear, the resolution of
continuing War was established.

Paris may be called the Eye of the whole Body of France, a compendium of the
whole Kingdom, a World in a little; for it abounds in all things desirable
either for convenience or delight. It is divided into three parts, the one is
called the City, the other the Town, and the third the University; which are
divided by the Seine, which, taking her original in Burgundy, falls into the
Sea at Havre de Grace. In the beginning of the City it divides its self into
two parts, and then joining again makes two Islands, one whereof is that of
Nostre Dame, the other of the Palace. These three parts are joined together by
ten Bridges; of which those of Nostre Dame, the Exchange, and St. Michael, are
worth observing, being all of them covered with Houses and Shops; but above
all, the new Bridge, which was begun to be built by Henry the 3 d, and was
finished by Henry the 4 th, is most considerable both for situation and
structure. This City is thought to contain above a Million of souls: it wants
not stately Edi^^ces, richly furnished: it has in it above 200 Churches richly
adorned: it brings unto the King a yearly revenue of above a Million of
Pistols. All Arts and Sciences do flourish there: In it are 59 Colleges, 18
^^^es, 972 Streets, 25 Piazza's: It has 9 Suburbs all very well peopled; there
being in some of them above 30000 souls. It is environed with Walls partly
ancient, partly modern, but without any rules of Fortification. The strength
thereof consists in the number of People, whereof there are above 100000 men
enrolled under the Captains and Colonels of Wards. It abounds in all things;
for the Country being every where fertile, furnishes it with all necessaries;
and there being plenty of Money, Merchandise are brought thither from the
farthest parts.

And because at the first breaking out of the War, many Courtiers, Officers of
War, and Gentlemen were shut up in Paris, it was resolved that none of them
should be suffered to go out; contrary to the use of Besieged Towns, where
people are not forbid to go out, but kept from coming in. This was done, out of
consideration that many persons of quality, and who were well respected at
Court, and many of their Wives who were most engaged for the Cardinal, and the
kindred of those that commanded, the City might be the better dealt with by the
Kings Forces. Moreover, no Munition nor Arms of any sort being suffered to be
carried out, the King's Troops were much weakened, for there were not Arms
enough to be found within an hundred Leagues of Paris; and the Court was no
less incommodated by the Courtiers having neither Clothes, Money, nor Credit,
as they use to have in the City by means of Merchants and Friends. But at last,
most of those that would, went forth dignified in Clownish and Country
Apparel; Lords and Ladie^ past thus disguised, as if they went to the
neighboring Villages to sport themselves, but not without being searched
whether they had any Arms of Provision; which afterward occasioned much,
mi^th, at St. Germains, and many merry tales: Yet leave was given to many who
desired it, to return to their own homes, thinking it better out to interrupt
Commerce. Paris not being yet fully surrounded, (...) this interim many Cattle,
much Corn, and Provisions of all sorts was brought into the City.

The Marquess of Vxelles brought many of the King's Forces before Corbe^^e, a
Walled Town upon the Banks of Seine ^ Leagues from Paris; which Town they took
without much resistance, and fortified it. Hereby it appeared how negligen^ the
Parisians were, in not securing that place, which was of such importance to the
preservation of Paris; but they excused it, saying, That they would not be the
first that would break with the King. At this time came the Duke d'Elboeufe to
the Parliament, where he sat as Duke and Peer of France; he was much
solicited by the Parliament and the City, that he would be their Protector,
and head them; which offer he accepted, and offered his three Sons to serve
them, the Prince Harcourt, the Courts of Rieux and of ^abona, all of them
valiant and considerable men. This action was so applauded by the Parisians and
Parliament, that the Inhabitants cried as he past through the Street, Vive le
Roy, Vive d'Elboeufe. The next day he was declared General of the Parisians
Armies, had (...) Oath given him, and his three Sons were made Colonels of
Horse. He sought to engage the Duke of Orleans in the quarrel, but in vain:
Wherefore finding his Authority eclipsed by the Prince of Conty his unexpected
coming to Paris, he thought to face about and serve the King; which he
endeavored by means of the Duke of Orleans, who wrought his peace with the
Court, and into favor with his Majesty, to the great satisfaction of the
Court, where he was preferred, was made one of the Privy Council, and was made
Governor of Picardy.

The Duchess of Longueville growing hereupon jealous, and in danger of being
arrested, since it might be thought her Brother and Husband held intelligence
with the Court; wherefore she thought to clear her self by the Coadjutor and
chief of the Frondeurs, and to make known why those Princes came not; and
together with the Counselor Longueville, and the Son of President Maisons,
told Gourville that he must go to St. Germains to acquaint the Princes that the
Decree was past against the Cardinal, and that therefore they mu^^ needs come
to Paris that very day, where they should be waited for till an hour after
midnight; for otherwise they were resolved to make the Duke d'Elboeufe
Generalissimo the next Morning, who would use all the means he could to hinder
their coming. Gourville went presently to St. Germains, and told how affairs
went. Prince Marsilliack went to find out the Prince of Conty and Duke of
Longueville, who was come thither the Thursday before; and they agreed to go
all together that very night to Paris. And Marsilliack having left his Horses,
and those of Longueville, and of the Marquess of Noirsmonstere, with his Groom
in the Castle-court, he went to wait for them at Bevaratoio. Conty,
Longueville, Rochefancault, the Marquisses of Ronsiere and Noirsmonstere went
together with Gourville thorough the Yard, following the Marquess St. Maigrin.
The Prince of Conty's Hat fell off as he went thorough the Castle-gate, which
he recovered, not without danger of being known by Monsieur Tillier, who
chanced to pass by at the same time; which was the cause why Prince Marsilliack
went another way without them. It was strange that a thing done so publicly
should not be observed: They came all about midnight to Port St. Honor, and
past freely through the Kings Guards; for Noirsmonstere was Marshal of the Army.

Marsilliack seeing Dongions Gate shut, (which is a Tower that stands over the
Castle-gate, or Kings Palace) it being near midnight, thought the Princes had
been taken Prisoners, and thought to save himself: But not finding the Horses
where he left them, he knew they were gone, so he went along the River that
night to the Suburbs of St. Germains, where he found that neither Conty nor
Longueville were come, and that the Parliament had already declared d'Elboeufe
General; but being seen with the chief Counselors of the Treaty of Noisy, and
knowing what had past, the Princes were at last received upon their Artestate;
though the Duke d'Elboeufe's friends being jealous, gave out that Conty was
come from his Brother to deceive them; which caused such jealousies in the
Parisians, as they set a Guard upon L'Hostelle di Longueville, where they were
all lodged. Conty sent his Secretary Baracine to Councellor Longueville,
offering to go li^^ in the public Palace of the City as they did; and the Duke
of Longueville sent for his Wife and Daughter thither, showing thereby that he
put himself into the hands of the people; which made them confide in him: and
here his Wife was delivered of her second Son, called Count St. Paul, who was
Baptized with great solemnity by the Coadjutor, and had the City of Paris and
the Duchess of Boullion for his Godmothers, and was named Charles Paris. The
Duchess of Longueville, notwithstanding she lay in, would always assist in
Council; nay the people fearing, by reason of a false report that was given
out, that she was gone to St. Germains, she rose out of her Bed, and showed her
self at the Window, whereby all were appeased: and from thenceforth
d'Elboeufe's credit decreased, and the Coadjutors Faction grew considerable,
and Conty and his Sister were much esteemed.

These Princes went the very day of their arrival to the Parliament, where one
of them sat as Prince of the Blood, the other by way of honor. And after some
dispute Conty was declared Generalissimo, and Longueville equal General with
d'Elboeufe; but he would not accept of it, not so much for that d'Elboeufe
pretended precedence, as for that he was told the Parliament thought to detain
him, whereat he was scandalized: Wherefore pretending to go to his Government
of Normandy, he went from Paris thitherward; which made the Court suspect that
he intended to make himself Duke of Normandy, in case things should proceed as
he imagined.

Hence it was that when he came to Paris he began to conceive great
difficulties, and inclined too close with the Court. It is said that he left
his confident Priolo at Paris to make his peace with the King; to which purpose
Abbot Ondedei sent Francis Scappi under pretense of carrying a Procuration to
Eluet Advocate of the Parliament, to save the movables of his Chamber which
were in the Cardinal's house. This Scappi was taken for a Spy, and being stopped
at the Gate, was imprisoned; but was afterward set at liberty by Eluet's
means, that Ticket not being found about him which he carried to Priolo; for he
had wisely swallowed it. He saw and treated with Priolo often, under pretense
of speaking with some of his acqaintance of the Switzers Guard, but indeed to
draw him over to the Parisians. Having got a Pasport from the Parliament, he
went to Ruel, and spoke with Ondedei, who together with Longueville's
negotiations, discovered from Priolo whether the Prince of Conde did really
hold any intelligence with his Brother.

The Duke of Bullion being with his Wife and Children at Paris, was won over by
Longueville to join with the Parisians, hoping thereby to compose his affairs
touching Sedan the better. He offered his service, which was gladly accepted
for his great skill in commanding an Army; and being a Prince of high thoughts,
and various resolutions, he fell to improve the confidence which he had long
held with the Prince of Conde, whom he acquainted with what was done.

The Marshal de la Motte offered his service also to the Parisians, who was a
friend of Longueville's, and had a particular pique to the Court, and
particularly to Secretary Tilliere, by reason of his long Imprisonment.

The Duke of Bullion gave his Wife and Children, as Longueville had done, for
pledges of his fidelity to the Parliament.

The Parliament being encouraged by so many Princes and great men, grew more
confident, and in the presence of the Princes ratified the Decree against the
Cardinal; ordering all Captains and Soldiers not to come within 20 Leagues of
Paris, and those that were advanced to retire presently to the Frontier-Towns,
prohibiting the subministring of Victuals or Ammunition, and gave out
Commissions for raising of Horse and Foot. Monsieur di Berne was made Governor
of the Artillery, and of the Arsenal of Paris; and a Council of War was chosen,
with a President of the Grand Chamber, and two Counselors, who were Brousels
and Meverdeau. They resolved moreover to fortify the Suburbs; but nothing was
done, save cutting Trenches at the ends of such Streets where the Corpse du
Guard were kept without the Gates. The City-council, besides what was
voluntarily given by many particular men, imposed 50 Crowns upon every Gate
whereinto a Coach might enter, or else a Man and Horse armed; and upon every
little Gate and Shop ten Crowns, or else one Foot-Souldier. The Bastile was
held for the King by Monsieur Trembley, who delivered it up to the Duke
d'Elboeufe, desiring only for his credit that a piece of Cannon might be
brought before it; for which he was much blamed; and Brousel was put in his
place, who made his Son Louvieres his Lieutenant.

The first Regiment of Horse (which was raised in two days) was given to the
Marquess de la Bollay. And whilst all men wondered that they saw not Duke
Beaufort appear, he came to Paris on the 13 th of January, galloping through
the Streets that he was not known; for he had not yet won that reputation with
the Parisians which he got afterward, but was rather thought to have made his
peace with the Court, it being known how much his Brother Duke Mercurio had
dealt and obtained at Court for him, and for the Duke his Father. For the
better knowledge whereof, we must repeat from a little before what had passed
to this purpose.

The Cardinals friends knowing that his greatness in France was not upheld by
his own strength, but that it was protected by the Duke of Orleans, and Prince
of Conde; and that therefore depending upon the abitrement of others, he must
mind their satisfaction so much, as not to be able to serve the King so
faithfully as one who depends not upon others, but only upon the King; they
insinuated into him, that not so much for his own Interest, as for the King's,
he must so root himself, as not to own his Fortune from others, but merely from
the King, and from his own worth; men's minds being too variable in Court,
which he had not formerly considered; Since being an Italian Cardinal, he
propounded nothing to himself at the first but how to serve the King, as long
as his Majesty should have need of it, intending afterward to retire, and
peacefully enjoy the Glory and reputation which he had won, and make it known
how advantageous it is for the Kingdom to have a State-minister, who is
unconcerned in France, and a Forainer, who having neither Kindred nor Friends,
minded nothing but the service of the Crown.

But as this did on one side seem to make his service acceptable, on the other
side it met with so great oppositions, as his friends held themselves bound to
let him know, that one thing which did authenticate the Malcontents boldness,
was, that he should be in France without any tie of keeping there, since that
being there himself alone, he might at any time withdraw, leaving both the
public and particular affairs in confusion. So as it being dangerous for
Princes to change State-ministers, who were already instructed and capable of
State Affairs, do serve them faithfully, he was to take upon him Charges and
Employments in the Kingdom, and to bring his nearest Relations into France, to
give the greater assurance of his tarrying there, and of his fidelity to the
King. He therefore resolved to send for three of his Nephews and one Niece, who
came from Rome, though with no good will of the Pope's, who cared not for the
Cardinal, for his having backed the Barbarini, and hindered the Decree against
them, for being guilty of great misdemeanors against the Apostolic Sea.

The Cardinal had but one Brother of St. Dominick's Order, who was made
Cardinal a little before, and two Sisters who were married in Rome, the one to
Count Girolimo Martinozi di Fano, the other to Lorenzo Manzini a Gentleman of
Rome. One Daughter of the first of these Sisters came into France, and two
Daughters and one Son of the second's, who were very affectionately received by
the Queen: so as those Gentlemen were happy who could enjoy their conversation,
they being likely to be the most considerable Ladies of the Court, which
occasioned envy; and hence grew distractions against the Cardinal's Government;
not only in such as thought that the moneys of the Crown would be largely
expended in their Portions, but which imported more, in the French Ladies, who
seeing Strangers (who usually are worse looked upon in France than any where
else) were scandalized that they should be more favored by the Queen than
they, and get richer and better Husbands. For the Cabal of Women prevailing
much in that Nation, there was but few of them who were not mastered by their
passions, as were also many Lords and Princes; So as it was no wonder if this
grievance spread further. Duke Beaufort, and his Father the Duke of Vendosme
being Prisoners, Duke Mercoeur who was the only one of that Family that was
suffered to remain in France, did all he could to get his Brother's liberty;
but if he should work it underhand, and against the will of the
State-ministers, it would cause no quiet to his Family, nor facilitate his
Fathers return; wherefore he endeavored by his friends means to let the
Cardinal know that he might win over that whole Family to him, which was
powerful, and of high blood. Beaufort was got out of the Castle of Vincennes,
who made known to the Cardinal by the Marquess of Ampous, that he would be
willing to side with his Eminency, and that he would engage himself his Brother
should do so likewise.

The Cardinal embraced the motion, and Mercoeur having by his Letters assured
the Queen of his zeal to her service, diverse Treaties were had touching his
return to Court: her Majesty was well inclined to it; for she trusted in
Mercoeur's quiet nature, but did not as then correspond with Mercoeur's desire,
because the Prince of Conde was no friend to his Family, for Beaufort's having
appeared against him in the beginning of the Regency; and the Cardinal would
conclude nothing in it without Conde's knowledge, who returned victorious from
the Battle of Lens, and seemed much averse unto it when he first heard thereof.
Wherefore discovering Conde's averseness, he let Mercoeur know by means of
Madam d'Ampous, that he should not advance any further, he being come to Anet,
a Castle belonging to his House; lest by Conde's means, who was denied nothing,
the Court might be bound to order something against him. Thus Mercoeur was
forced to keep away, and to go privately to Paris, to consult with his Friends
how he might compass his desire. He concealed himself in Advocate Bluet's
house; and resolved to let Conde know, that if he pleased he would be his
friend and servant, and be obliged to him for his return. Marquess Vieville,
who was then great with the Prince, was thought to be a fit Mediator; he
undertook the business, and propounded it to Conde, who at first seemed
backward in it, remembering that Beaufort had not dealt well with him. But
knowing that he had no reason to be angry with Mercoeur, and that he might take
his Word, he was persuaded by Vieville, and did him good offices at Court;
Which the Cardinal perceiving, he let Madam d'Ampous know that the Prince began
to be more gracious, and that he hoped to work Mercoeur's return to Court
within a few days: yet it was long in effecting, by reason of two things; the
one, that though Beaufort had given it under his hand to his Brother, yet he
propounded other ways to the Cardinal by his Cosen the Duke of Nemours. And
having some about him who persuaded him to make his Peace himself, without
being beholden to others, he came incognito to Paris, and scorning his
Brother's negotiation, crossed the Treaty by means of Nemours and the Marshal
d'Ostre whom he employed. The other obstacle was, because Conde would appear
the Author of this Family's return, to the end that it might be the more
obliged to him; which Mercoeur liked not, who was desirous to be obliged to the
Prince, but not to own the whole favor to him, because if he should be brought
to Court merely by his means, he could receive no favor but by his mediation;
Whereas if the Cardinal had a hand therein, he should receive the favor
immediately from the Cardinal, without the means of others. Mercoeur's Friends
were sufficiently troubled to think how they might carry on this business; and
the means they found, was the Prince his own concernment; for Vieville told
him, That if he would take upon him to bring that Family back to the Court, he
would be obliged to maintain all the Interests thereof, and to prefer them
before his own, which he could not mention till the House of Vendome was
satisfied.

The Prince approved of this reason; he promised to favor his return at the
present by his approbation, and to foment it vigorously if it came to the
Council. Affairs being brought to this pass, Madam d'Ampous continued her
desires: The Cardinal resolved to end it, now that Conde withstood it not, and
told Madam d'Ampous that Mercoeur was much bound to the Prince for his manner
of proceeding with him. Mercoeur kept still concealed in Paris, but was
advertised of all things; but being afterward to return to his Castle d'Anet,
Beaufort having troubled this Treaty, the Cardinal sent Abbot Ondedei, together
with Advocate Bluet to him, who discoursed long with him. Ondedei wished
Mercoeur to write to the Cardinal to intercede with the King for his return:
The Duke answered, that he had written often, but never received any return;
and that therefore he need not write again: That his actions were caution
sufficient for his serving the King faithfully; and that though his return to
Court would be a particular favor, which he would acknowledge from the
Cardinal. But that notwithstanding he desired he would not be offended if he
came not thither unless it were to some purpose; for if he came, he must
solicit his Father's and his Brother's return; which if the Cardinal were
unwilling to, he was ready to renounce all favor, and to return to from whence
he was come. Ondedei found this to be so generous a resentment, as he persuaded
him the Cardinal would grant it; which not being to be done unless the Abbot
should return to Paris to acquaint the Cardinal with it, it was thought fit
that the Duke should come thither also incognito, that Answers might pass more
readily, and Resolutions might be more easily taken. Being in Paris in the
house of Marquess Vieville, he met there with some impediments by the intrigues
of his Family; but at last, having overcome all difficulties, and the Cardinal
being satisfied with what Ondedei had said, he received an Order from the King
to return to Court; which he did, and lighted at L'Hostelle de Vendome, from
whence Ondedei brought him to the Cardinal's Lodgings; who after many Embraces
and Caresses, brought him to kiss the King and Queen's Hand.

When he had spoken with the King, Conde took him by the hand, and was with him
about a quarter of an hour in a corner of the Chamber, reciprocal shows of good
will passing between them: But their Discourse was interrupted by the Prince
his pretending too near Friendship, and too strong engagements to his friends;
and Mercoeur not being able otherwise to give satisfaction to the Prince with
Loyalty to the Court, went presently to Paris, and renewed the Treaty which had
been formerly in hand touching his marrying Madamoselle de Guise Sister to the
Duke of Guise; which business if there had been no other Irons in the fire, had
been accomplished; but Beaufort crossed it, who had no mind that his Brother
should marry: Wherefore the Cardinal, by his Friends persuasion, began to think
again upon what had been proposed by Madam d'Ampous, touching the Match between
his Niece Mancini, and Mercoeur: But considering afterward, that it might be
more advantageous for him, that Duke Beaufort should marry one of his Nieces,
whereby an alliance with two or three great Families might be made. For by
marrying Beaufort to Mancini, he might reconcile himself perfectly to him; and
if Mercoeur should marry Madamoselle de Guise, and that the Court should
approve of the match between the Duke de Ioyeuse and Madamoselle d'Angolesme;
at one and the same time the House of Guise would be won, that of Angolesme
gotten, and a new Consanguinity would be made with the Prince of Conde, who was
near allied to Angolesme. All parties were ^ell pleased with this, and the
Proposal was approved: Madam d'Ampous writ thereof to Beaufort; he liked it,
and at the same time answered his Brother, and gave him his Word that he would
observe whatsoever he should promise in his behalf. But then, thinking that he
might make better advantage by the troubles in Paris, instead of going to St.
Germains, according to his promise, went directly to Paris; where having
concealed himself in President Conieux's house, after he was got out of Prison,
he was sent for by the Frondeurs, and hoped to do Wonders: So declaring himself
still to be a great Enemy to the Cardinal, he came to the Parliament, where he
was graciously received, had place in Parliament as Peer of France, and was
made one of the Generals under the Prince of Conty.

Beaufort did very much Caress the meaner sort of People; to which purpose he
made use of several persons, amongst which the Curate of la Flesche, and
Chappelle, who went blazoning forth his Worth and Gallantry through the Streets
of Paris. Moreover, he hired certain people to make Songs and Verses in his
commendations, whereby he did win the good will of many particular persons: For
all this, he was held by others to be no wise Prince; and as being a great
friend to the Duchess of Monbason, he acquainted her with all his Secrets;
which made the other Generals despise him, not revealing any thing of
importance to him, lest he should divulge it: wherefore the Regent cared not to
negotiate with him; for she knew all by the Duchess of Monbason, which caused
other inconveniences, as shall be said.

And because the Marshals of France fit not in Parliament but when the King is
present, the Marshal de la Motte was made Counselor of honor, to the end that
by that Title he might enter into Parliament. As for the employments in War,
places were thus disposed of; Duke Beaufort and Marshal de la Motte had the
charge of the Western part of the River toward Orleans: D'Elboeus, Bullion,
and Marsilliack commanded the Eastside toward St. Den^is: The Marquess of
Noirsmonstere was made their Lieutenant General. The Prince of Conty, who was
Generalissimo, being in an Ecclesiastic habit, and but of a weak constitution,
went seldom into the Field, but assisted only in the Council of War, which was
held every day in the City's Palace. Count Fiesca was given for an assistant to
the Duke of Longueville, who was to go for Normandy; for he sided against the
King, as did also Duke Luines, Marquess Vitry, and others who went to Paris,
pretending still to be the King's Servants, but Enemies to the Cardinal.

The Duke of Longueville went from Paris with a Convoy of 500 Horse; he
traveled all night by unknown ways, and concealed himself in a Wood three
Leagues distant from Roan, treating by some of his party who were disguised, to
have admittance.

Which being granted, he went presently toward the Riverside which was
opposite to the Palace, together with the Marquess de Beveron, who met him by
the way; and passing over in small Boats, was received together with his
Accomplices; and whilst Eghestote was ready to sit down to Supper, Longueville
and Beveron entering into the house suddenly, said, they were come to sup with
him. The Son wondered; but seeing his Father and the Duke, he was forced to be
patient.

The first President Ris was told of this arrival the next morning by Monsieur
di Miressa, Captain of the Duke's Guard; he was much amazed, and struck ^o less
with Wonder than with Sorrow, for he was faithful to the King. When Harcourt,
who by order from the King was advanced with some Troops to keep the
Inhabitants in their Duty, with whom he treated to be introduced, upon this
news retreated to Point D'Arke, four Leagues off, where Monsieur Beaumont was
Governor for the King.

The common people flocking together, and desirous to know News, ran to the
Palace, and cried Long live the King, Long live the Duke: he answering that he
was the King's Servant, and Cardinal's Enemy, came down, past with applause
through the City, came to the Parliament, made there his protestations and
offers, soliciting them all to close with the Parisian party. The most of
those Presidents and Counselors, and the whole City declared in his behalf,
some few excepted; amongst which was the first President Ris, who after having
tarried two or three days to try whether he could do any good for the King or
no, finding all his endeavors vain, went to the Court at St. Germains; and
diverse others went to Vernon, a City upon the Seine, half way between Roan and
Paris, whither the Parliament was removed by the King's Decree, who declared
the Parliament of Paris invalid.

The distastes of the Malcontents broke forth also in Poictou, for the whole
Province turned against the Court, unless it were the Marquess Rochespossey of
the house of Chastegniere, which kept always constant to the King. For which
the Bishop of Poictiers, one of the said Family, was besieged by the Citizens
in his own House for 24 hours: the Abbot of Rochesposey, who was his Nephew,
together with the Duchess of Roan was detained in Tours; and the Marquess, who
was head of the Family, and Lieutenant General of the Province, was not safe in
his own houses.

The Court was much troubled hereat, seeing that it was now between those two
Great, Rich, and Popular Cities; not knowing what the end of so bold a
beginning might prove. But Roan chiefly expressed her ill will, for the rest of
the Kingdom was as then quiet, knowing that the happiness of Princes does not
consist in lesning the King's Authority. The other Parliaments therefore
answered that of Paris, That they liked not the Engagement, which was not the
way to bring Peace to France, but to put her in a Civil War, out of the
capriciousness of a few envious and unquiet Spirits; whence nothing but
Confusion and Ruin could be expected.

The scarcity of Victuals and Moneys, which grew daily greater, was added to
the troubles of the King's Council, who saw that many Princes and Lords
declared for Paris and Roan. Nor was the Cardinal less troubled for jealousy
of Orleans, who seemed weary of the War: Nor was he a little cruciated by
Conde's unquiet disposition, whose constancy in this enterprise he apprehended,
who was of a more fiery and lively spirit than the other: but the Cardinal
watched him carefully, knowing how apt the French were to change opinion. He
was informed that Conde treated with the Frondeurs; and he was troubled at his
being two days out of St. Germain^: especially it being said, that he was
turned over to his Brother's party; which though it were false, yet it smelt of
suspicio^. The Cardinal did therefore double his diligence in observing the
Prince his actions: and thinking that he had suffered some Victuals to be
carried into Paris which he might have hindered, the Cardinal sent a Confident
of his with a small party of Horse to discover if he did so; which Conde being
aware of, took very ill.

On the 16 th of January, Lagne was taken, a Walled Town standing upon the
Marne seven Leagues from Paris, by Monsieur Persan Camp-Master; and the
High Dutch who were quartered at Charenton were removed thither. Some Polacks
got also into Meuden, where there was a fair Castle not far off, belonging to
the Duke of Guise, whose Inhabitants held for Paris; Whereat the Parisians were
much vexed (though it was no considerable Pass) to see the King's Forces come
so near Paris. They therefore offered to recover it, but in vain; for the
Soldiery in Paris were neither enough in number, nor sufficiently Disciplined.

The Coadjutor raised a Regiment at his own expense; which was called
Corinthian, he being Archbishop of Corinth; and being more desirous of Glory
and Greatness than the rest, he desired to carry on his design by appearing
popular, and a friend to the Public. His chief end was to make the Court
afraid of him, which through too much goodness sought to win upon these
unquiet and turbulent spirits; of which number the Coadjutor was thought to be
one, who having Eloquence joined to his Learning, upon the celebrating of St.
Paul's day, which is done on the 25 th of January, resolved to preach in St.
Paul's Church, upon the present occurrences, rather to win Credit with the
common people, than to persuade them to Peace.

The Family of the Gondi, one of the noblest Families of Italy, came from
Florence into France with Queen Catherine of Medici; the chief whereof rose to
a great fortune under her Government, who was Wife to Henry the 2 d, and Mother
to three Kings. This Coadjutor was Brother to the Duke of Rets Peer of France,
Nephew to the Archbishop of Paris by the Father's side; a personage of
generous Thoughts, and of lively Spirits, full of Worth, and of a wonderful
Wit; but ambitious of Glory, and of more Greatness. The Archbishops of this
City are by right Counselors of Parliament, but not the Coadjutors: but this
man, for his Habilities and Wisdom, was made Counselor of Honor, by which
Title he had admittance into Parliament, where winning favor by his professed
enmity to the Cardinal, he had a great stroke in the management of public
affairs. His first endeavors were, to grow great with the Duchess of
Longueville, and with the Prince of Conty, excluding Prince Marsilliack, who
was the chiefest in their favor; which made Marsilliack so jealous, as he
resolved to be no longer his friend, which occasioned afterward many
inconveniences: For the Coadjutor finding his designs vain in this, joined
more straightly with the Frondeurs, and with Duke Beaufort, who made himself
their head, as also head of the Parisians, as well for his Condition, as for
the hatred he also showed to the Cardinal.

The Parliament was this mean while so diligent, as nothing issued out but
Decrees, Ordinances, and Remonstrances, whereby they thought to maintain the
War. And though it had been often known that Princes disliked nothing so much,
as to have their actions found fault with; yet the Parliament thinking, that
albeit the Regent was not to be removed from her resolutions by verbal
Remonstrances, yet they might justify their pretensions, by publishing the
groundwork of their Reasons: they made a Writing, and sent it to Guinegande
the State-Secretary, wherein speaking freely against the Cardinal, they blamed
him for having drunk in ambitious Maxims, and that as soon as he had got the
Government of the affairs of the Kingdom, abusing so high a favor, he made
himself master of the Kings person, under a new title of Superintendent of his
Education; disposing absolutely of all places, Dignities and Towns,
Governments, Arms, and Finances, he only receiving the thanks, ordering
punishments; and making not only the fortunes of private men, but of the
Public, depend wholly upon him: that his administration of Government proved a
strange piece of policy, clean contrary to the customs of France; a continuance
of War, the peoples misery, a ruin of the Finances, and which was more, the
corruption of the whole Kingdom: That he made War his fixed Star, hated Peace,
to the end that he might make his Councels more considerable, and have the
better pretense to raise Moneys, and enrich himself: That he had endeavored by
all means to divide the people and the Parliament, and so to make the people
take up Arms against the Parliament, to the end that the Parliament being
broken, he might be the absolute Master of the Kingdom.

With these and the like demonstrations, they concluded, that they had not
taken up Arms, nor made any of these Decrees, save only to defend themselves
against that State-Minister, and for the public preservation; in which case it
was necessary to proclaim the Cardinal an Enemy to the King and Kingdom: That
the preservation of Kingly Authority, and of the King, was the sole reason why
they took up Arms; which was the only reason for their particular safety;
which was necessarily annexed to that of the King: That therefore this was no
act of Rebellion, but an effect of Duty; Wherefore they desired his Majesty to
dismiss the Cardinal, and to leave him to the hands of Justice, that he might
be an example to Posterity, to deter others from such vast pretenses.

The semblance of this Writing had force enough to deceive those, who swollen
with their own opinions, did not measure them by what was just, or feasible;
hoping by the Cardinal's destruction to appropriate the places and dignities of
the Crown to themselves, and to govern France after their own manner.

But these bold attempts were opposed by more moderate and wiser men, who were
minded to curb these resolutions, and to square all things by the rule of
Reason.

The situation of Corbeile (by reason of the scarcity of Victuals) being grown
considerable, the recovery thereof was thus propounded: That a good body of
such as were fit to bear Arms, and should be willing, should attempt this.
Wherefore 4000 men were chosen, who were led on by Beaufort, Marsilliack, and
Noirsmonstere; who marched out of the Town; and being come to Ioycy, a Village
in the midway to Corbeile, fell into such confusion, as wanting Bread, but
meeting with much Wine in those abandoned houses, they were all Drunk, and fell
asleep; some died for cold, some run away: so Beaufort was forced to return to
Paris re infecta.

At the news of the Parisians being gone to recover Corbeile, Conde mustered
the Troops about St. Clou, and marched thitherward; and had he come but two
hours sooner, he had cut them all in pieces.

Afterward the Marquess of Vitry marched out of Paris with 500 Horse to scowre
the Country; and meeting in his return with a Body of the Kings Horse near Bois
de Vincennes, there happened a skirmish, wherein Tancredi de Roan, a gallant
Youth of 18 years of age, advancing, he was slain, whilst he had courageously
thrust himself into the midst of the Enemies Troops: He was Son to that Henry
of Roan who was so famous in the Wars of our times, by Margaret de Bettunes a
worthy Lady, and of one of the most Illustrious Houses of Flanders.

Whilst the avenues were blockt up every where by the Kings men, the more to
straighten Paris, diverse Troops went from the parts about St. Denis to surprise
Charenton, and to seize on that Bridge upon the Marne two Leagues from Paris;
which was a Pass of much importance, for the Convoys of Victuals part that way
which came from Bree a plentiful Province: but it was defended by Monsieur di
Chalow, so as the Kings men failed of that design then; whereat the Court
being troubled, and particularly Conde, who thought it redounded to his
disreputation, it was resolved to drive the Enemy from thence. Orleans, who
envied Conde's glory, was not willing that he should thereby purchase more
honor: Wherefore he resolved to march himself in the head of those Troops. The
Council of War was held at St. Denis, the Soldiers were listed at Charon, a
League from Paris, where being sheltered by the Castle of Vincennes, 3000 Horse
were drawn out in Battle-array to fight those that should come from Paris. The
Duke of Chastillion, Son to the late Marshal of France, advanced with 2000
veterane Foot, and fell with such resolution upon the Trenches and Barricadoes,
as a more glorious success could not have happened. The news whereof coming to
Paris, they resolved to defend that place with all their might: All the
Generals, Officers of War, a number of Soldiers, and many Inhabitants marched
out of the Suburbs of St. Antoine; where Beaufort, d'Elboeufe, with the rest of
the Generals, and the Coadjutor, put themselves in Battle-array.

Orleans would not permit that Conde should go to the assault; wherefore
Castillion fell courageously with his Foot upon the Suburbs, and Chaulew
retreated to the Church at the head of the Bridge, where fighting valiantly he
was slain, having twice refused quarter.

Chastillion coming toward the Church with his Sword in his hand, was
unfortunately shot in the Reins of the Back, by a Musket out of a Window,
whereof he died the next day in St. Vincennes Castle, to the great grief of the
whole Court, and particularly of the Prince of Conde. Count Saligny died there
also.

Chastillion was about 30 years old, valiant, of a handsome aspect, and of a
pleasant demeanor. He left no Children behind him, but left his Wife with
Child, who was delivered of a Son after his death, who is the only remainder
of that Famous Gaspero Coligny, who was Admiral of France in the time of
Charles the 9 th.

All the Soldiers of this station were slain or taken Prisoners, and amonst
others of condition, Monsieur de Poictiers Ca^p-master, and Marquess Coygnack
saved himself not without much ado. The Parliament did grievously resent this
misfortune, and complained much of their Generals for not fighting the Kings
Army, which was very weak. The more Reputation Conde won, the more did he
exasperate the Parisians hatred; for the whole business was attributed to him,
though it were Chastillion that did act, and Orleans that commanded; and so
bitterly did they speak against him, as almost forgetting their malice to the
Cardinal, they inveighed only against Conde. The Kings men would have fallen
upon the Parisians as they came out of Port St. Antoine, if they had thought
that they had been expected; but Conde thinking that in all reason they would
have drawn out their Cannon upon that height, which was very fit to have played
upon the King's Camp, was of a contrary opinion. The Kings men retreated to
their quarters, leaving 200 Foot to guard the Bridge. The taking of this Pass
upon the Marne proved very prejudicial for conducting Victuals; Wherefore
Beaufort and Marsilliack went out two days after upon break of day to recover
it; but were forced to forbear going, to assist a Convoy which was brought by
Noirsmonstere, and was come from Estampes to Linoys, being ready to be
assaulted and taken by the Kings Troops. They had about 500 Horse with them:
they staid that night in Vissie, a Village two Leagues from Paris, and went the
next morning to Chyly, two Leagues further, where they met Noirs^onstere; where
hearing that Marshal Grammont being already come to Borgo della Rena, adv^^ced
between Villeneuf and Chyly; instead of going that way, they went lower along
the River, and marched so fast, as the Kings men could not come to the Rear of
the Convoy till they entered into Vitry, a place surrounded with Vineyards full
of Hedges, and joining almost upon the River Seine. Beaufort and Noirsmonstere
halted at the coming out of the Village: and as the Kings men were gotten too
within the Houses, Monsieur di Nierlieu Brother to Marquess Vartimore, as he
pursued the Enemy, was unfortunately slain by his own party, taking him to be
an Enemy; yet Beaufort's Troops were charged, and the greatest part of the
Convoy taken before they could get into Vitry: And they would have fared worse,
had not the Marshal de la Motte, who was come out with some Forces that very
morning, and was joined to Marsilliack, appeared in time, and so opportunely,
as falling together with Marsilliack upon the Kings men, who were already
gotten into Vitry, they drove them back to their main Body; so they entered all
of them into Villejeuf, and fortified it. Marshal Grammont having staid a while
to expect a recruit, thought it not fit to assault Villejeuf, which was already
fortified, especially since the night drew on, and he so near Paris, so far
from his own quarters, as he might have been surprised, with prejudice to the
Court; and therefore being contented with having taken the Convoy, he retreated
to Medune, and so to St. Clou.

Beaufort's Name was so celebrated by the Parisians, as it was no sooner known
that he was out of danger, but above 30000 people, what Men, what Women, ran to
where the fight had been, showing their particular joy toward him, who had
fought hand to hand with the Count di Briole a bold and courageous Gentleman.

Though Longueville was obeyed in Normandy by almost all the Province, and that
more than 20 Gentlemen had taken Commissions to be Colonels under him; yet
being not able for want of Moneys to raise the men that he had promised; the
Parisians began to conceive that he had failed the Parliament, which expected
much from him; that he held secret intelligence with the Court; and that he
sought excuses to evade the assistance which he had promised the Parisians. It
was true, he had had some Treaty with the Marquess St. Luke, but without
concluding any thing.

The Parisians being thus troubled, as well for the irresolution of the Princes
and Commanders, as for the backwardness of the other Provinces and Parliaments
of the Kingdom, who though they had been much solicited, could never be
brought to declare any thing against Regal Authority, found how little steadfast
those hopes are which are grounded upon other means assistance, and began to
desire that Peace which they had abused.

The Passes over the Rivers, and chief Avenues by Land, being this mean while
blockt up, the Kings Camp grew daily greater, and the Besieged's courage
failed. Diverse succors came to the King; amongst which, that which was brought
by the Count di St. Aignan was a very considerable one. He of himself brought
400 Gentlemen, his friends, and such as depended in the Province of Berry,
where he was much beloved, and came with them and as many other Servants to St.
Germains, much to his praise, and to the Kings satisfaction. They were
quartered not far from the Court, that they might be ready upon any sudden
occasion. Monsieur Boisack brought other Forces to Chastres and Linoy, seven
Leagues from Paris, so as Paris was also blockt up on that side, and began to
be less eager, and to see that they must have Peace, be it either with, or
without the Cardinal. So the first heat of War began to cool, and Peace to be
desired; whereunto the Court did no less incline.

The Parliament forbore sending their Deputies to St. Germains, les^ they
should be denied Audience the second time: and it became not the King's honor
to send Proposals of Agreement to a disobedient City, and to Subjects, who in
all reason ought to humble themselves.

At last it was thought fit by some that were well minded, to send Loyaque,
Herald of France, from the Court to Paris, with two Trumpets, to intimate his
Majesty's Intentions and Orders to the Parliament, City, and to the Prince of
Conty; that occasion might be given of a Treaty, as fortunately was.

On the 1^ of February, the Herald was sent with Instructions in Writing;
which being a thing seldom heard of, it will not be amiss to relate them.

The Herald being come to Paris, was brought to the Parliament, where he spoke
as follows:

My King and your Master has sent me, by the advice of the Queen Regent, to
you Presidents and Counselors, and to give you this Declaration, whereby his
Majesty does discharge you of all your Employments, in case you go not out of
Paris within 8 days. Being notwithstanding willing that those shall enjoy their
places who shall come unto his Majesty within the said time. And because his
Majesty understands that this Declaration which was sent on the 23 day of the
last month, has not come to the knowledge of the most of you, by reason of
the diligence that was made to hinder it: His Majesty (besides the eight days
which ought to be numbered from the day of the Date, which time is already
expired) grants you four days more, to begin on this day wherein I give you
notice of it. And his Majesty being sensible of the miseries and sufferings of
his poor people of Paris, and that he will leave nothing undone to free them
thereof, be by the advice of the Queen his Mother, (to the end that none of you
may have any pretense to continue longer in your disobedience) has commanded
me to signify unto you, That he promises and grants full security for the
Persons, Places, and Goods of all those, without any exception, who shall go
out of Paris within the aforesaid time: And this his Majesty does assure you on
the Word and Faith of a King. But if you shall abuse this his Majesty's so
great Clemency and Goodness, and shall continue in disobedience to your Master
and Sovereign, I am commanded to tell you, that you must not afterward hope
for Pardon, since you will be the ruin of all the Parisians, and the occasion
of all the evils that shall ensue.

When he had said this, he gave the King's Declaration, and the same
Instruction.

From thence he came to the public Hall of the City, whereinto being brought,
he said: My King and your Master has sent me to you the Provost of Merchants,
the Sheriffs, Counselors, Quartermans, and People of Paris, to give you this
Declaration, which I am commanded to read unto you. Which when he had done, he
said: The chief reasons which moved his Majesty to send Testimonies of his
goodness to the Parliament, to the Prince of Conty, and to the other Princes
and their adherents, was, as they should find by his Declaration, to give rest
to his good City of Paris; to withdr^w the Inhabitants from the evil ways
whereinto they had suffered themselves to be seduced; and to free them from the
misfortunes which it was impossible for them to escape, if they should still
continue in their Rebellion: that they might easily see his Majesty's
tenderness toward them, by his endeavoring to give them proof thereof now,
when God had pleased to favor the right of his Cause, by the late happy
successes. He then desired to be brought to the Prince of Conty, to whom he
spoke thus:

My King and thy Master has sent me to thee Armande di Bourbon, to tell thee
by this Declaration, which here I give thee, That thou, together with the other
Dukes, Peers, Princes, Lords, and their Adherents, are guilty of High Treason,
for not having come unto him, as he commanded you, within three days: and
because it may be, that this his Declaration came not to you nor your
Confederates knowledge, His Majesty, by the advice of his Mother the Queen
Regent, has commanded me to tell thee, that he grants thee and thy Adherents
four days space more, to begin from this day, to come to his Royal Court. And
to the end that neither thou, nor the rest may have any excuse to continue
longer in disobedience, His Majesty by the advice of his Mother the Queen
Regent, has commanded me to tell thee, that he give^ thee full and free
security for thy Person, Places, Goods, and Government^; as also to all the
Princes, Dukes, Peers, and Lords thy Adherents, in case thou and they come to
him within the prefixed time. Whereof if thou fai^est, I am commanded to tell
thee, and them, that you shall all incur the punishments therein contained. All
these Instructions were signed and sealed by the Secretary of State Guinegaude;
and the King's Declaration was of the same tenor.

The Herald appeared at the Gate of St. Honor, accompanied by the Engineer
Petite, who was purposely come from Paris to the Court, and came before the
Sentinels at Sunrising, where he sounded a Call, demanding to speak with the
Captain of the Guards, of whom he demanded entrance, which was denied him; and
the Captain sent news hereof to the Parliament, Prince of Conty, and to the
Commonalty.

The Houses were met, and having tarried till three hours after Dinner, they
resolved not to receive the Herald nor the Kings Letters, supposing that they
imported little of satisfaction. But they returned him answer, That they durst
not receive him, nor listen unto him, out of respect and obedience, since it
belonged not but to Sovereigns with Sovereigns, though the ancient style of my
King, and thy Master cannot be used to a Sovereign, but to a Subject. Adding,
that they had chosen Deputies to make their submissions known to their
Majesty's, if they might have Pasports sent them. To this Petite answered, That
it was contrary to all Respect and Obedience, to refuse admittance to those
that were sent by the King; and that the Herald had no other Orders but to
execute his Commissions. Here he again demanded to be let in, and that his
Majesty's Letters might be received; which being again denied, he founded a
second Call, and was again refused; Monsieur Fournier being come thither in the
name of the City, and Monsieur di Maison on the behalf of the Prince of Conty,
to tell him that the City nor the Prince could return no other answer than what
the Parliament had done.

The mean while night came on, and the Herald sounded the third Call; and
expounding his Commission aloud by word of Mouth, left his Letters upon the
Barricado, and returned toward St. Germains.

When he was gone, the Packets were taken and carried to the Corpse de guard;
Whereupon two Letters were written, one to the Chancellor, another to Monsieur
Tilliere, wherein they were desired in the Parliaments name, to get a Pasport
for those that were appointed, from the King to represent unto his Majesty,
that their refusing to hear the Herald was not an effect of disobedience, but
of reverence due from faithful Subjects, who professing themselves to be such,
could not admit of an Herald, which was usually sent from an Enemy to an
Enemy, and not from a Patron to his Vassals; wherefore the said Deputies would
wait upon his Majesty to receive his Commands.

The resolution was well received; for after some dispute in the Kings Council,
the Queen granted Pasports to Monsieur Tallon, Monsieur Emilliand, and to
Bignon the King's Advocate, who going to St. Germains, had the means to
introduce a fortunate Treaty.

Two reasons made the Queen willing to confer of Peace; the one, by this means
to moderate the Parisians bitterness in general, by the sweetness of the Word
Peace, to foment the effects of those that desired it, and to withdraw
themselves from a greater danger, as was insinuated unto her Majesty by the
Cardinal, thinking it did not misbecome her Princely Piety, to pardon the
Errors of Subjects.

The other, out of the continual jealousy she had of the Prince of Conde, by
reason of the great sway he bore with the Army, and by the dislike which he
daily won in the Court and council, where he was so firm to his own opinion, as
few durst oppose him, though in some things they thought their own opinions
better, because their Fortunes lay in France, where Conde was a Prince of the
Blood.

But the Cardinal, who had no establishment in France, save what was grounded
upon her Majesty's great goodness, was looked upon by Conde, as an obstacle to
all those pretenses which might prejudice his Patron; Wherefore it became him
to be in continual apprehension of some change of mind in him, in respect of
his Brother, Sister, and Brother-in-law, who were all of the contrary party.

Treaties of Peace were still kept on foot by the Pope's and by the Venetian's
Agents, and some hopes seemed to be revived therein. Cardinal Mazarine sent
Monsieur Brancart to Brussels on the 17 th of January 1649, to invite Count
Pignoranda to an Interview, as was desired by the said Count some months
before. Pignoranda accepted the motion, seemed willing; and till he could put
himself in order, sent Don Iuan Friquet to advertise the Cardinal of his coming.

Friquet came to St. Germains, and began the business: The Cardinal stood still
upon generals, not permitting Pignoranda to stir from Brussels; but wished him,
that if he did not confide in Friquet, he would write to him, and send some
other Confident to him, who might freely acquaint him with the Kings
intentions; and notwithstanding the objection that was made against Friquet for
not having sufficient Plenipotentiary-power, he should be received by the
Cardinal, and the King's mind should be sincerely communicated to him.

Whilst Affairs went thus, the siege of Paris continued, and the Generals, to
keep themselves from being reduced to extremity, sought for all necessary
Provisions. To which purpose Prince Marsilliack went out with some Troops to
back a Convoy of Victuals, which was brought by Marquess Noirsmonstere from the
Brie by the Valley of Grobois the 19 th of February, which was assaulted by
Count Grance with the Kings Forces which were under him at Lagny. But when
Marsilliack was come to succor the Convoy, the Kings men forbore attempting
any thing against the Marquess, who had warily placed himself, in an
advantageous place, and made toward Marsilliack, who marched along the open
fields, and charged him. And Grance's veterane Forces having the better of the
unexperienced Parisians, Marsilliack was presently abandoned by six of the
first Squadrons, had his Horse slain under him, was Wounded, and taken Prisoner
by the Kings Forces; who whilst they strove whose prisoner he should be, Count
Rosan came in with five Squadrons, and charged the Kings men so briskly, as
Marsilliack, making use of this confusion, freed himself from these Foot; and
though he were on foot, and wounded, took a Horse from a Soldier, and got away
with Count Matha.

Grance, being reinforced in this skirmish by some of his own Squadrons, fell
so furiously upon the Enemy, as he routed them immediately. Roson was mortally
Wounded and taken Prisoner, together with diverse other Officers, and as many as
were not slain. Whereupon Grance marched into la Brie, sacked the Castles of
Lasegny, Sercon, and Villemenon, and assaulted the very Town of Brie, which was
begirt with an ancient Wall, and defended by the Inhabitants; but he forced
them to surrender the Town.

The said deputed persons were brought before the Queen as she sat in the midst
of the Council, where having done their due reverence, Tallon told her how a
Herald had appeared at the Gate of St. Honor just as the Parliament was sat,
to speak with the Assembly from her Majesty: Whereat all the Counselors being
surprised, they knew not what to think of it, but that it was to try her
Subjects fidelity, and to see whether they would treat with the King their
Master, in another manner than Vassals do when they receive his Commands. That
they therefore thought they had not disobeyed, knowing that Heralds are not
sent but to Enemies or equals; wherefore they pretending to continue the
glorious Title of most humble Subjects, thought it the lesser evil to dismiss
him, and to take the course which they had taken. Wherefore they presented
themselves before her Majesty with sorrowful Souls, and humble Hearts, to
entreat her to accept of her Parliaments excuse, who had not heard her Herald,
for fear of offending her Royal Dignity, or prejudicing her Sovereignty, of the
preservation whereof they had a greater care than all the World besides; by
which refusal, she might find the obedience of devoted Subjects, and the
innocence of their Councils, which aimed at nothing, but the preservation of
Regal Authority, against the power of the Enemies of France; concluding, that
if she had sent him as to Sovereign personages, she might see their respects,
and that they acknowledge their happiness consisted only in their obedience.
To assure her Majesty whereof, was the express cause of this their coming. But
if she sent him as to criminal people, they were come to submit themselves to
her Will, and to be punished by her.

The Queen heard these words with her wonted goodness, and afterward commanded
the Chancellor to assure them, that she was satisfied with the Declaration
which they had made: but that she could not be fully content, unless their
Words were accompanied by Effects; and they might then assure themselves of her
good will toward them, and of her care for preservation of the Persons and the
Fortune of all of them without exception.

The Duke of Orleans added, That he wondered exceedingly why the Parliament did
not readily render obedience to the Queen, being in all reason obliged to do
it; and since they might promise themselves all fair dealing, both in general
and particular, from their Majesty's Clemency. Conde spoke to the same purpose,
adding, That the Queen aimed at nothing but the good of the State, and the
preservation of the Regal Authority, and the welfare of every particular person.

These men returning to Paris, made their report unto the Parliament; whereupon
they no sooner began to treat, but Don Ieusippe Arnolsini was brought in to
disturb it; who was sent from Brussels by the Archduke on the 24 th of
February to Paris incognito, with Letters of Credence, which he presented to
the Prince of Con^y, whilst he was in private conference in L'Hostelle
d'Elb^^ufe, with the Dukes of Beaufort and Bulli^n, the Marshal de la Motte,
the Coadjutor, the Presidents Conieux, Navion, Viola, and Brousel the
Counselor. The on^ of these Letters was sealed, and sent to the Prince of
Conty: The other was sent open to the Parliament. He was privately treated with
by Sara^ine Secretary to the Prince of Conty, to find out what he would ^e at:
the Spaniards by him made specious pro^fers to advance only as the Princes and
Heads of that party should please; and that they desired nothing but to free
Paris, and to procure a general Peace. This was the Hood that caught the Prince
of Conty; for he thought i^ a glorious thing if the Kingdom might be restored
to Peace at the first unsheathing of Swords. He therefore dispatched away the
Marquess of Noirsmonstere, Monsieur Laigne, Monsieur Roussiere, and Briq^igny,
who was stopped at Quinteyns. The sum of Arnolfini's business was, that the
Archduke would advance the Spanish Troops and those of Lorain, to free Paris;
for which the Spaniards required a cautionary Town. La Motte propounded Corbie,
but with small hopes of getting it out of his Brothers hands, who was Governor
thereof, and was firm for the King. There were better hopes in the Treaties
between the Duchess of Monbason and the Marquess of Oquincourt, who being in
love with her, it was hoped that she might get Peronne from him; but neither
did this hit: For Oquincourt's affection to the King, and his honor, prevailed
over his love to Monbason; besides that this Proposal was refused by the
Parliament, who thought it unbecoming them to assign over a Town of France to
the Enemies of France, whilst they were in treaty of a general Peace, which
would prove a perpetual reproach to the Loyalty which they professed to bear
unto their King. There was nothing therefore done in it more, than that
Arnolfini was heard in the Parliament, where he appeared, and explained the
Arch-Duke's Letter, and then gave in his Commission, the Contents whereof was,
That he was sent by his Master the Archduke to the Parliament, where he could
not think but he should be welcome, since he brought the offer of Peace, which
was by all Christendom so much desired, and so necessary for the quiet of the
two Crowns. That it was true that Cardinal Mazarine would not make Peace two
years ago, though he might have done it upon very advantageous terms for
France: But that after the King went from Paris, the Cardinal propounded an
Agreement with Spain upon very large terms, saying, that his chief motive
therein was to chastise the Parliament-Rebels, and to reduce them to reason.
But that the Catholic King did not think these exhibitions fair nor safe at
this conjuncture of time, thinking that it would be a shame for him to make use
of such means, so to oppress the Capital City of the Kingdom. That his Majesty
thought it not safe to treat with one who was condemned by Parliament as an
Enemy to the King and Kingdom, since the Parliament is to register and
authenticate the Treaties of Peace. But that as his King would make no other
advantage of this conjuncture than an honest and permanent Peace, he had sent
him to the Members of Parliament, who he knew were concerned in the real
Interest of the King and State, to offer them to be Arbitrators of the Peace,
and that his Catholic Majesty would willingly submit to their judgment;
wherein if they would not be Judges, he would permit the same Parliament to
choose Deputies out of their own Members, and to let them be in what place they
pleased, yea even in Paris if they would; and that the King of Spain would send
his Deputies thither, to treat of, and to conclude a good and convenient Peace,
sufficient to give lasting quiet to the two Crowns. In which Treaty the Duke of
Lorain should be comprised, who refused to accommodate himself to the Cardinal,
but kept joined to the Spanish party. That he had declared he had well-nigh
20000 men upon the Frontiers; and that he would pass his word not to meddle
with any of the Towns of the Kingdom, as he easily might do, considering how
bad a condition they were in; there being but 200 Foot in Peronne, as many in
St. Quintins, and fewer in Chatelet, and proportionally in other Towns. That he
had offered all these Forces to serve the Parliament if they should have
occasion for them; and that they might make use of them as they should please,
and make them be conducted by French Officers, such as did depend upon the
Parliament, or that they might take what other course they pleased to free
themselves from all fear that the said Forces should do any thing otherwise
than for the service of the Parliament, and according to their intentions. And
in case they should have no occasion to make use of them, he would pass his
word they should keep upon the Frontiers, and do nothing, whilst the Peace was
negotiating. He concluded with desire of an Answer, which he might carry back
to his Master.

These offers were debated in Parliament with diversity of opinion, according
as men were diversely concerned; the greater number were minded rather to yield
to the lawful fair pretenses of their King, than to be obstinate in those
pretensions, which, being fomented by Foreigners, must needs be ruinous. The
most of the Generals were of this sense, who being sorry that they had entered
into this Labyrinth, sought all means to reconcile themselves to the Court, and
to reap that satisfaction by submission, which is easilier in the Clemency,
than in the Justice of a Sovereign. They considered that they were not of
themselves to withstand the King: That the Parisians were weary of the Siege:
That their Victuals grew daily less: That the people would one day value Bread
more than all the Victories and advantages of the Parliament or Princes. That
to throw themselves into the Arms of the Spaniards, who were naturally their
Enemies, was to shun an April-shower, and expose themselves to a
Winter-tempest; for that doubtedly they sought to weaken both parties equally,
that they might put the Yoke upon them both. That if the French could so ill
endure one sole Forreigner, who was so affectionate, and so advantageous to
their King, it was to be imagined that so many others who were naturally
Enemies to France would be more hateful to them. That if they had taken up Arms
to obtain satisfaction from the Court, they ought to endeavor the getting of
it in this conjuncture of time, than which they could not wish a better; whilst
for fear they should close with the Spaniard, the Court would be glad to come
to an agreement. These things being thus reflected upon, the first President,
the Presidents of Mesmes, and Viola for the Grand Chamber, the Counselors of
Chaumont, and others for other Chambers and Courts, were chosen to go at
Deputies from the Parliament to the Queen, to thank her for having received
their former Members so graciously; to desire her that she would make good her
words, and raise the Siege before Paris: as also to carry her a Copy of the
Arch-Duke's Letter, and acquaint her with what Arnolfini had said, that their
Majesty's might see how sincerely the Parliament was minded not to fall from
their due obedience; by which generous action they hoped to regain the Regent's
favor, and make her yield to such an agreement as was desired by those that
were wisest both in Parliament and Paris.

The Princes sent also Messengers with secret Instructions not to confer with
any of the Kings Deputies, save jointly with those of the Parliament of Paris,
of Roan, and with those of Duke Longueville; and that touching the manner of
Conference, they should do as those of the Parliament did, and regulate
themselves according to the conference at Ruel. That if those that were sent by
Longueville, and by the Parliament of Roan, should not be come to where the
meeting was to be, they should wait their coming.

That if the Court should insist upon any Instruction contrary to this
Instruction, they should presently send word to the Prince of Conty, and do
nothing till they should have received an answer.

That in case the Court-Deputies should pretend that such a condition were
repugnant to the full and absolute power which the Deputies ought to have, and
that they should refuse to do any thing without their present consent, they
should demand time to let Conty know it, that there might be no interruption in
the Conference.

That they should be careful to give daily intelligence of what should pass:
That they should demand for the Parliament and for Paris all that was demanded
at the Conference of Ruel. That they should pretend for the Parliament, and for
all the Territory thereof, whatsoever was demanded by the Parliament at the
Conference of Ruel: That they should also insist upon the execution of all the
Decrees of Parliament for the ease of the people, and for a discharge of all
the Taxes for two years for the Parishes belonging to the Territory of Paris,
and for 8 Leagues about the City, in respect of their being ruinated by the
passage, and by the abode of the Kings Army: That because the people could not
expect ease, nor the State safety during the War, they should insist upon
proceeding of the Treaty of Peace; and that they should name some of the
Parliament, and of the Prince's people, that it might be proceeded in
effectually and unimpeded by any that were concerned in the War, and before
Spain could make advantage of the present discords of France; and to oblige the
Archduke, who had offered the Parliament to become Arbitrator of all
differences, and to see all the promises performed, that nothing should be
undertaken against the Kingdom, as appeared by a Letter of the 10 th of
February; and that in case of denial, the Deputies should enter their
Protestation against whatsoever mischief might thereby happen unto France or
Christendom.

That the Article of Oblivion should be confirmed in terms answerable to the
Treaty of Loudun in the year 1606, made with the late Prince of Conde Father to
the now Prince, unless they should have other Instructions touching this
particular.

That if during this Negotiation the Generals of the Army should commit any
novelty, the Conference should be interrupted: That it should be required that
affairs should return to the same condition that they were in when the meeting
was granted, till such time as the wrong done might be satisfied: That the said
Deputies should observe this Instruction, not communicating it to any; and that
if there should be any dispute therein, they might produce the Article treated
on to the Deputies of the Parliament and Duke of Longueville, and to those of
Roan, governing themselves according to the same Article, and write word what
was done.

The Prince of Conty treated notwithstanding still secretly with the Counts
Fuentes and Garcies, by the means of Noirsmonstere and of others; and insisted
that Noirsmonstere should engage himself that the Spaniards should advance
their Forces to the River Aisne in Champagnia, where their passage was hindered
by Marshal Plessis Pralin, when the Conference of Ruel was interrupted, and
that of St. Germains began.

The Princes interposed many troubles, to afford time to the Negotiations of
Flanders, and did still insist, that the Cardinal might be persecuted; not that
they hated him so much as they seemed to do to the ignorant people, but for
that this was the most plausible pretense of continuing War to the people, who
were already weary of sufferings.

Monsieur Saracin was at the same time sent to Roan by the Prince of Conty, to
acquaint Longueville with these Treaties, who negotiated still with the
Archduke by means of Monsieur Stantibar, to foment the Counselors of Roan,
who were greater Frondeurs than those of Paris: But Saracin discovering that
Longueville was not so partial to their Interests as was believed, he wished him
to conclude the Treaties of Agreement with the Court, which were already begun
by the Prince of Conde's Mother, who piously endeavored to appease her
incensed Children, and was the chief motive of making Conde friends with his
Brother and Sister, who were jealous of Beaufort's power in Paris, whom the
people did passionately love, to the trouble of all the rest, especially by
reason of his strait joining with the Coadjutor, whose ready Wit all men feared.

The Presidents of Parliament being come to St. Germains, the first President
represented to her Majesty in the presence of the Duke of Orleans, the Prince
of Conde, and of the Cardinal: That the Kings going from Paris was prejudicial
to his Authority, the face of affairs having altered countenance; their
Majesty's affections being turned into hatred of their people, who were by
hostile acts enforced to defend themselves.

That the faithfullest and most partial amongst them were surprised, and
compelled to act contrary to their profession: That in the height of all these
disorders, the Parliament had always strove to preserve their respect unto her
Majesty: And though they were bound to receive a Letter from the Archduke, and
to listen to the Contents, yet they had returned no answer, nor taken any
resolution thereupon: and that her Majesty appearing satisfied with the
submission of the Kings Subjects, they hoped that she would be pleased to make
her Forces keep 20 Leagues from Paris, and afford them convenience for Victuals
for so vast a City, whereby she would enlarge the Hearts of the People, of
whose fidelity the Parliament sent her new attestations.

He then passed to what had been said by him whom the Archduke had sent,
showing the reasons that made the Parliament hear him; and desired her
earnestly that she would allow them 1200 Measures of Corn daily, as long as
that Treaty should hold.

The Queen answered, That it had been better for France, and more for the
honor of the Parliament, not to have accepted the Letter; but since it had
been done, they must seek to make amends by a good Peace: That she could say no
more now, by reason of the Chancellor's indisposition, but that she would
supply by Writing what was wanting in Words.

Then the first President and the President of Mesmes went to visit Orleans and
Conde, with whom they discoursed long about the means of a good Agreement. They
treated also in the Queen Cabinet with the Cardinal in presence of the Princes.
They insisted upon the opening of the Passes; and after much contestation, the
Princes promised them they should be satisfied as soon as the Parliament should
have sent Deputies with power to treat and to conclude: Which being speedily
done without loss of time, they sent people chosen for that employment; and the
business began on the first of March, not without some danger of sedition
amongst the meaner sort of the people of Paris, who incited by the fomenters of
the troubles, ran in great numbers to the public Palace, crying out, that they
were Sold and Betrayed; whereat well-minded men were troubled, who looked for
such inconveniences as usually happen when the Rabble-rout prevail: and they
were forced to send some Troops daily out of Paris, for a Convoy to those
little Victuals, which the neighboring people, allured by great gain, ventured
to bring thither; though those that went out met sometimes with the Kings
Forces, and were but ill treated.

General Turenne kept this mean while in Alsatia with the French and High Dutch
Army; and though he by his long and faithful service had won great honor in
the Wars, and esteem at Court; yet thinking that this was not answerable to his
deserts, but pretending that many promises made unto him had not been
performed, he likewise meant to make use of this occasion, and that being at
the head of an Army, he would become Arbitrator of the differences: to boot
with these instigations, he was allured by his Brother the Duke of Bullion one
of the Generals of Paris; and upon hopes of that party, which was more reputed
far off than at hand, he came also into the number of the Malcontents, so to
revenge himself for the injuries which he conceived he had received, and to
better the condition of his Family, by making the Court gratify his pretenses,
particularly of having Sedan restored to his Brother: and the like were the
ends of all the others; none daring as yet to appear so ambitious, as to dream
of being Head of any Province which was lawfully possessed by the King. Being
therefore resolved to effect these his designs, he retarded his march toward
Paris, notwithstanding that he was sent for several times by the King. The
Cardinal discovering this, sent Monsieur Eruart to that Army with Moneys, and
with Instructions to keep the Germans Loyal, whereby Turenne could not effect
what he desired. So, finding that he was followed but by a few French, who were
not able to defend him from the danger of being imprisoned by the Germans, who
were not well pleased with him for the like affront done by him some years
before the General Rosse, he withdrew with some few of his Domestics from the
Army which he had commanded with much Glory and Honor, and his Army remained
obedient to the King, commanded by General Rosse. Turenne kept in the
neighboring Towns, expecting some turn of Fortune: and though he could
persuade none of the Army to follow his perilous Fortune, he advanced to
relieve the Parisians, who were encamped at Vitry and Villeieve, and had thrown
a Bridge over the Seine, somewhat higher, where it joins with the Marne,
thereby affording means for Victuals, which were brought, though but in small
quantities, from Brie and thereabouts to the City; the Army being encamped
abroad on the West Side.

Marshal Rantzaw's misfortune may be added to that which befell Turenne; he was
Governor of Dunkirk, and being no friend to Conde, yet having caused jealousy
in the Cardinal, he thought good to make him his friend; and came to St.
Germains, where, on the 28 th of February he was arrested and sent to the
Castle of St. Vincent; and Grinoliere his Serjeant-Major, as also Priore
Pristiere his Secretary, were imprisoned in Gravelin.

This mean while the Conferences between the Kings Agents and the Deputies of
Parliament began, who though they abhorred the Cardinal's presence, pretending
that being declared guilty by the Parliament, it became them not to Treat with
one that was Condemned; yet it being the Queens will that he should be there,
or that else she would condescend to nothing, he was admitted, though against
the good will, not only of the Deputies, but also of some of the Court, who
intended to cast all the Odium upon him, and thereby to gain so much more the
affection of the People, and to make it be believed that they were only they
who were the Authors of the Agreement: Whereunto both sides being well
inclined, Peace was concluded on the 11 th of March, upon these Conditions.

That all Hostility should cease, and that the Passes should be opened: That
the Parliament should go to St. Germains, where the King being in his Seat of
Justice, the Declaration and Articles agreed upon should be verified: And that
then the Parliament should return to Paris, to perform their Employments: That
in the year 1649, all the Chambers should not meet upon any whatsoever
pretense, unless it were to receive some new Officers, and for the Merchants
affairs; wherein upon such cases nothing should be treated of save ordinary
things tending to the Civil Government of the City: That the Declarations of
May, July, and October, in the year 1648, which were made in Parliament,
together with those of the 6th of January 1649, and till that present time,
should be void and null, save what concerned Criminal affairs between
particular parties: That all the Letters under the Kings Seal, sent upon the
last Commotions of Paris, as also the Declarations and Decrees made by the
Privy Council in that point, from the 6th of January to that instant, should be
abolished: That all the Forces raised in Paris and out of it, should be
cashiered, when his Majesty should have caused his Forces to retreat to the
usual parts upon the Frontiers: That the Inhabitants should lay down their
Arms, and not reassume them without the King's permission: That he who was sent
by the Arch Duke should be sent back without any other Answer: That all
Writings and Movables should be restored to those from whomsoever they had
been taken: That the Bastile and Arsenal, together with the Artillery and
Ammunition therein, should be put into his Majesty's hands: That the Prince of
Conty, the other Dukes, Peers, Princes, Officers of the Crown, Lords, and
Gentlemen, and all of whatsoever condition, should be restored to their Statu
quo, as if nothing had happened; and that their past actions should never be
questioned: That those who would not be concluded in this present Treaty,
should receive no favor or assistance whatsoever from the City of Paris, nor
from any others: That the King should return to Paris as soon as his occasions
should permit him: That those who had raised any Moneys, Forces, sold any
Movables, Warlike Ammunition, or Victuals, either out of the Arsenal of Paris
or elsewhere, should be freed from giving any account thereof: That the
Election of Xantes, Coignack, St. John d'Angely, taken from the Court des
Aids, and attributed to the Court des Aids at Guienne, should be restored to
the Court des Aids at Paris, where they were before the Edict: That in case
the Parliament, of Roan should accept of this present Treaty within the space
of ten days, the King would take order for the abolishing of the new Six
Months, and the re-uniting of all the Officers of the said Six Months, and of
part of them, to the body of the said Parliament: That the Treaty of the
Parliament of Provence should be put in execution, according to the Form,
Tenor, and Letters sent by the King, for the revoking and abolishing the Six
Months of the Parliament of Aix, and Chamber of Requests, in conformity to the
Articles agreed upon between the Deputies of the Parliament of Paris.
Concerning the discharge of the Taxes propounded by the Election of Paris, the
King would be informed of the state or condition of the said Elections, as soon
as the Forces were retreated, and would provide for the ease of the Grievances
of the said Election as he should think fit: That when Deputies should be sent
to treat of Peace with Spain, his Majesty would be pleased amongst them to send
some of the Parliament, who should have the same Authority as the rest.

According to all Maxims of War, or Civil Government, the King ought not as
then to have made an Agreement, since, in case the Siege had been maintained
yet 15 days, the City was reduced to great extremity, and the seditious People
might have been punished according to their disobedience: yet a deeper and
more secret Maxim prevailing, it was condescended to, though with some
prejudice to the Court, only, as was believed, out of the jealousy of the
Prince his actions; and that Conde thinking that by the Peace the Besieged's
hatred would rest wholly upon him, and the praise upon the Cardinal, it is said
that he endeavored to get all advantages for the Parisians, though they were
reduced to so straight terms, as they ought rather to beg pardon, than to
demand Conditions. But were it out of this, or any other more secret reason,
many bad effects ensued upon it; for the Parisians seemed to be but badly
content with the first Articles, and much more, for that the Parliament had
refused to take protection of that of Roan. Wherefore when the Deputies of the
Chambers were seen to fit in presence of the Prince's and King's Officers, as
if they had been Commissioners from a free Commonwealth, the people were so
scandalized thereat, and grew so indiscreet, as the Decrees which were before
reverenced as Oracles, became scorned and detested. And then the Usurpers of
Regal Authority were aware, that whilst they would have climbed too high, they
fell from their own Tribunal; and instead of getting the Government of public
Affairs, they lost the lawful right of judging what was particular.

At the same time when the Parliament began to treat apart, the Princes began
to Negotiate their Agreements separately, every one according to their
particular Interests, pretending to be totally dis-engag'd from the Parliament,
whilst they saw that the Parliament, which was the primum mobile of the War,
and with whom they had confederated, endeavored Peace. The Frondeurs were very
fierce for War till the Conference at Ruel, where the chiefest of them were
wrought upon; Longueville, by his Brother the President of Maisonsi, Viola by
the Prince of Conde, Cogneux and others, though they were in some sort engaged
with the Archduke. The Prince of Conty and Duchess of Longueville broke with
the Coadjutor, for that he being Beaufort's Confident, and having drawn all the
Frondeurs and people to dance after his Pipe, he went about to blindfold them,
and make them serve his designs, and his proper Interests, and not that of
their Families. Thus, during the time of Conference of Peace, the Prince of
Conde, who desired to reunite them to himself, and not to let slip so
seasonable a conjuncture, sent his Confident Monsieur di Mousay to complement
them.

The Duchess of Longueville conferred long with Mousay upon the point of
Reconciliation, and bid him assure the Prince, that she would carry her self to
his satisfaction when Peace should be concluded.

After these Treaties, though Conty had made his peace with the Court without
Beaufort or the Coadjutor; yet when they had discovered their discontents, they
forbore not to do all they could to make Conty stick to them.

He and the Duchess his Sister were well inclined thereunto, being otherwise
unwilling to lose the fruit of their Declaration, and that of the Duke of
Longueville in favor of the Parisians; which consisted in mitigating the
peoples hatred of Conde, thinking, that thereby she might become more necessary
to the Court, and more considerable with her Brother, who till then had not too
great an esteem for her.

Some told Conde, that the Court being in the posture it was in, the true way
to get advantage on both sides, would be to let the Prince of Conty head the
Frondeurs; yet he who then scorned the Frondeurs, and who hatred Beaufort
particularly, by reason of the great esteem the Parisians had of him, resolved
absolutely to severe Conty from their Interests, and by little and little to
destroy that Faction; which being dispersed, he might afwards more easily pull
down the Cardinal, or make him comply totally with him.

The occasion of the Archbishopric of Liege, which at this time was
presented, confirmed him in this opinion; believing, that if he could procure
that dignity for his Brother, he might establish his House the better. The
Canons were divided, many whereof had recourse for protection to France,
against the Elector of Culen, who would have his Brother chosen Coadjutor. That
they might engage the King of France in their Interests, they offered to choose
the Prince of Conty, who fed his Brother with these hopes, to make him abandon
Paris, and to bring him to Compeigne, where the Court then was, and where he
acquainted the Cardinal with his design: he who received the testimony of his
confidence, whilst the War of Paris lasted, could not but assist him; but
considering afterward, that it was not good to embroyl France in the affairs
of Germany, and against the House of Bavaria, between whom there was good
intelligence held, seemed to proceed so reservedly in the affairs necessary to
effect this design, that the mean while the Elector making his Agreement, all
the Princes hopes vanished; which was thought to be one of the reasons of his
complaints, and his beginning to distrust the Cardinal.

These designs proving vain, Conty and Longueville reconciled themselves to
the Coadjutor, and appeared outwardly to be good friends, though jealousies
remained inwardly between them; for Conty could not depend upon any one.

The Duke of Bullion seemed somewhat distasted at these Negotiations between
the Parliament and Court, and their hopes in Paris being revived by the drawing
down of the Spaniards Flemish Army, he thought it strange that his concernments
should be given over. He therefore moved the Prince of Conty and the Duchess
of Longueville not to make the Agreement; but to go with their Troops into
Normandy, and being assisted by the Spaniards, to continue the War there,
hoping hereby to effect his designs, and to make the Court grant his
pretensions.

This Proposal being liked by the other Princes, they thought to fall upon it;
but it was laid aside, as well for the difficulty which would be found in
executing it, as for that Bullion made his peace otherwise, by the Prince of
Conde's means, with whom he had still had good intelligence. But the Duke of
Longueville, not being put by virtue of this Treaty into possession of his
Towns, nor into his Government of Normandy, which was a new motive to him and
Conty, to put on any resolution, rather than to abandon the Dukes Interest; the
Abbot de la Riviere, by consent with Conde, made a particular Agreement be
propounded by Monsieur de Flamerin to the Prince of Conty, whereby the Duke was
to be re-possessed of all his Towns, and Conty should have the Government of
Danvilliers for his security, if he would yield the name of Cardinal to la
Riviere.

This Negotiation was managed and concluded by the Prince of Marsiliack, with
intention to let Longueville know that the Prince of Conty was cause of his
re-establishment, and thereby to join them closer together; as also to keep la
Riviere (who was then in great favor with the Duke of Orleans) steadfast to
Conty's Interest, who concurring in all things with his Sister Longueville,
intended so to establish themselves as they should not be defrauded of their
pretensions when the King should be of age.

Thus was the agreement made between the King and Parliament; whereupon the
Cardinal seeing the Courts condition bettered, declared that he would not now
yield unto any of the Propositions formerly pretended unto by the Spaniards,
since he saw himself in a condition of being able to withstand them, unless
some new Emergencies should disturb him.

The Pope's zeal, and the like of the Commonwealth of Venice to facilitate
Peace in all parts, made the Archbishop of Tarzo, who was Nuntio, and Pietro
Basadona the Venetian Ambassador in Spain, to provide against the Evils which
the affairs of Paris made them apprehend; wherefore they entreated his
Catholic Majesty to command his Plenipotentiaries, that notwithstanding the
novelties that were risen, they should not defer nor obstruct the making of
Peace. They obtained their desires, and the Catholic King ordered that the
Treaties should be drawn to an end, and yielded to all things that were fair
and honest.

The Nuntio Bagin and the Ambassador Morosini informed the King of France
immediately of this generous act, and gave notice to Count Pignoranda, that
Count Brienne had signified to them, that if he should think fit to return to
Munster, the Court of France would send a person of quality thither with
Plenipotentiary-power: That if he would not go thither himself, he should send
some other with sufficient power; and that at the same time others should be
dispatched away from the Court of France: And that if he himself should please
to come to any place upon the Frontier, the Cardinal's self would come thither,
and so a conclusion would sooner be made; it being still to be understood, that
nothing should be altered which was agreed upon at the meeting at Munster.

Pignoranda answered, He marvelled how the Regent had so suddenly altered
Maxims, varying from what Monsieur Vautort had both insinuated and expressed:
That this so great a change occasioned a just Scandal, since France not making
good what she (as he said) had promised but a few days before, the King of
Spain should be tied to grant those Articles which he had always held
unreasonable.

Upon the 24 th of April the Nuntio and Morosini answered this dispatch; and
though Pignoranda would not hear of any Treaty, they named Vervins, Noyon, or
Crespy to be the places of meeting. Adding, that all things might easily be
accommodated if the Count would speak with the Cardinal; yet they declared in
the close of the Letters, That the French intended to treat only upon the
points which were undecided; which the Spaniards did totally refuse, saying,
That the Kings Agents being gone from Munster without having concluded any
thing, the meeting and Treaty was consequently dissolved, so as all was to be
recommenced. That if France would agree to this, the King of Spain's Deputies
should go to any place that should be appointed within a Month or six Weeks;
for which time there should be Truce, which the Archduke should readily yield
unto; and that if the Cardinal would speak with the Count, he would send him
either alone, or accompanied by others, as he should be advertised.

The Nuntio and Morosini sought to promote the business, and sent Secretary
Lorenzo Paulucci to Brussels, to solicit what they were preparing in Writing.
Pignoranda was pleased hereat, as well in respect of them who sent the
Secretary, as for the Commission he brought; and the Spaniards giving out that
they had discovered during the short time of his abode there, that the French
had no mind to make Peace, Paulucci returned without doing any thing.

Soon after his return to Paris, the Mediators writ to Pignoranda and to the
Internuntio at Brussels three Letters, of the 29 th of May, the 27 th of June,
and 10 th of July, containing, that the French persisted in the proposed
Meeting, and in the desire of Peace, and propounded the building of a place of
Enterview upon the confines of the two Dominions, where the Meeting might be
had. And in the first Letter, which was written to the Internuntio, they
mentioned, that the French were fully resolved not to alter any thing that was
digested at Munster; intending to Treat only upon such points as remained
undecided. The Spaniard accepted of the Meeting propounded by the Cardinal, and
of the building of the place for enterview; and Pignoranda gave notice, that as
soon as this should be made, he would send Don Antonio Brun, who was the King
of Spain's Ambassador in Holland, and Plenipotentiary in the Treaty of Peace;
and that he himself would advance the next week after toward the Frontiers,
that he might be the readier to agree unto what the Cardinal should resolve
upon: and the place for the building of the place for enterview was appointed
to be between St. Quint^ins and Landrecie.

This readiness was commended by the Nuntio, and by Morosini; which they
witnessed by Letters from Compaignie: but whilst Pignoranda expected answer to
what he had written, the Cardinal sent Letters by a Trumpeter on the 26 th of
July, desiring him to send him word to what place he might send a Friend, to
whom they might reciprocally communicate their minds touching the principal
points of the Treaty: adding, that he thought it would be convenient he should
send a friend of his to him, to the end that it might be conceived by hearing
both parties, whether businesses were in such a forwardness, as that a speedy
conclusion might be hoped for; because if this were not done, he thought this
Meeting would be useless to the public, and troublesome to their own
particular selves: and that no time might be lost, he thought it would be good
to choose a place upon the Frontier which he should like best for the Meeting;
and that he should send him a Pass by Monsieur di Lyone, the Queens Secretary,
whom he had destined to that purpose.

The Cardinal did this, for that he found that Pignorand^ sought to engage him
in this Conference, not out of any desire he had to make Peace; but that he
might make the World believe afterward, that the Cardinal had broken the Treaty
of Peace for his own particular ends; and that he might thereby draw upon him
the Odium of the people, by showing him to be the occasion of all the War.

The Spaniards sent him a Pass for Lyone; and at the same time that Pignoranda
parted from Brussels, he sent an Express to the Hague, to acquaint the
Ambassador Brun with all this, who came with great speed to Cambrey on the 13th
of August, whither Pignoranda was come four days before.

Lyone had audience as soon as he came to Cambrey, whom Pignoranda asked, What
Propositions he had brought? Who answered, His Instructions were to know what
the King of Spain' s Pretensions were, touching the points undecided at
Munster. Pignoranda found then that his design was discovered, and said, They
were not to talk any more of the Treaty of Munster, for that the Civil War of
France had altered the face of Affairs, and that they were to begin the Treaty
again. Lyone replied, That agreement was made between the King and the
Parliament of Paris: That all was quieted.

After a long Dispute, Pignoranda demanded, That France would abandon the
Interests of the King of Portugal, and likewise Catalonia: That he would
repossess Duke Charles of Lorain, and restore the Spanish Towns that were
taken, and that then they would discourse upon other points.

Lion was hereat confused, and said, There was little signs that he desired
Peace, since four Kingdoms were demanded before the Treaty should begin: That
to abandon Portugal, and Catalonia, was to make the King of Spain Master of
them, for it was certain they could not defend themselves without the aid of
France: That no mention was to be made of Lorain; for that there was no Treaty
between the King of Spain and that Duke, whereby that Country was to be
restored to the Duke. He further added, That if he intended to end the Treaty,
he must not dream of the weak condition which he fancied to himself that France
was in, for that it was able to continue War yet twenty years longer, with the
like Vigor as at first; and that the Popes Nuntio, and Cavaliere Contarini,
who had been the Mediators at Munster, and were not now far off, might
interpose themselves with the like Authority, and might adjust that great Work,
if they were desired to undertake it. Which Pignoranda would not give way unto,
saying, That the King his Master must first write unto him about it. Whereupon
Lion asking, If those great Personages should return, and should undertake the
business, how he would receive them? Pignoranda replied, He would place them in
a great Hall, and would honor them as Agents of great Princes. Whereby he
discovered his design.

Whilst Affairs went not according to Pignoranda's liking, he exaggerated
mightily against the French, saying, Their only end was to cheat men with the
hopes of Peace, whilst they meant nothing less. He wrote again to the
Mediators, declaring, That since the French would not moderate their
Pretensions, nor come to any reason, they needed not discourse any more upon a
meeting; but that if they had a desire to treat in an usual way of Treaty
between Christian Princes, the King of Spain would not make a moments delay,
but would reassume the business; and he desired them to get him a Pass to
return to Spain.

In this interim Cavaliere Contarini came to the Low Countries: He visited the
Archduke, spoke with Pignoranda, sought to stickle in the differences; and
having founded the true sense of the Spanish Agents touching the Peace, he
found them seemingly very ready to treat; but that whilst, according to their
customs, they seemed to do this, they did the contrary. He passed from thence
to France, where he found the world well inclined, and the Queen very desirous
of Peace. But the Spaniards standing stiff to their Resolution to annul all
that had been done at Munster, and to begin the Treaty again; and the French
being resolved not to speak of any thing, but of what was left undecided, there
could no middle way of accommodation be found; so as all treating vanished into
smoke.

Wherefore the Cardinal expressed himself with much confidence to Contarini, and
acquainted him with the reasons why he would not go from any thing that had
been discust, and been brought to maturity at Munster. One whereof was, That
since the whole weight of the Government lay upon him, and that the King had
trusted him with all the concernments of the Crown, he thought it not fit to
give advantage to Foreigners, and to bereave those of the Nation thereof, whom
it was better to fasten together, though upon some disadvantage, than to
disunite them with advantage to the Enemy: and the rather, for that he knew he
could not miss of a good and glorious Peace with Spain, when France should be
all of a Piece. The other, for that the Spaniards at the same time when they
treated with him of Peace at St. Germains, and when they complained he was
backward in yielding to some Articles, making the Parliament and the People
believe that by Arnolfini the Cardinal made large offers to make Peace upon any
terms with Spain, to the end that they might bend their Forces against the
Parisians: that it was far from truth that he did so, to revenge himself upon
the Kings Subjects, whose Love and Union he did by all means endeavor;
assuring himself, that at last they would know his right intentions, and his
Rivals cunning; whilst all good Frenchmen would contribute toward breaking
the Plots of the Kingdoms Enemies, and make them yield to the just Proposals
made by his Christian Majesty.

But if these Reasons made the French the more resolute to stick to their first
Resolves, other causes persuaded the Spaniards not to budge from their second
pretensions: For their Cause was much strengthened by the Peace with Holland, by
the quiet condition of Naples, the success of the Enterprise of Cremona, and by
the Novelties that had happened in France. The Marquess of Caracene laying hold
of this so favorable conjuncture of time, sent Marquess Serra, in the
beginning of February, with 7000 fighting men against the French, who were
quartered in the Cremonese. He at the very first stormed the greater Cassal
upon the Poe, Boretto, and other neighboring Towns. Count Arese and Don
Francisco Sersales fell upon Pomponesco with another Body of men, wherein
Monsieur de la Visiere commanded with 300 French Foot, and forced them for want
of succor to yield the Town upon fair Conditions. Which Enterprise was
followed by the acquisition of a little Fort, built by the Enemy, between
Pomponesco and Viadana; the Defendants whereof yielded upon discretion to the
Enemy.

Count Galleazzo Trotti General of the Horse, drove away some Foot from
Gualtiery, a Palace between Bressel and Vastalla, and overran the Modenese
with no small prejudice and terror to the Country. And greater disorders would
have happened, had not the Duke wisely listened to an Agreement, which was
introduced by his Brother-in-law the Duke of Parma, and afterward concluded by
the two Marquisses Calcagnino and Gosfredi, since all succor from France was
vanished, which was the foundation whereupon the Duke declared himself.

The Conditions of this Peace were, That his Highness should dismiss all the
French Soldiers and Officers, and send them the nearest way into Provence:
That his Highness should be bound to observe the Agreement made the year 1634,
for the relief of the Millanese, upon promise that the Catholic King should do
the same to the Duke upon all occasions: That a new Garrison should be put into
Correggio, in like manner as was before: That the Rents which Don Mauritio di
Correggio did possess in that Territory, should be restored unto him, according
to the Agreement of the year 1634: That the Duke of Merandola should continue
under the Protection of the King of Spain, without any hindrance to be made by
Modena: That the Subjects of each side, who had in this War served against
their Master, should be restored to former favor: That the Prince Cardinal
D'Este Brother to his Highness should renounce the Protection of France, upon
assured promise to be abundantly recompensed for whatsoever he should loose
thereby.

This Peace being made, the Spaniards fell to greater and more conspicuous
Enterprises, before France could be in a condition to withstand them; and since
there was no place which did more incommodate Flanders than Ypre, seated
between the River of Lis and the Sea, backed by Gravetin and Dunkirk; the Count
of Fuenseldagne sat down before it with the Spanish Army on the 12th of April,
fearing no good success: for he was to make and guard a Line of Circonvallation
of five French leagues in compass, to keep off the Sallies of a great many
Defendants, who were very well fortified without, and in a perfect condition of
defense.

The little, but strong Town of St. Venant, near Air, did with its Garrison
much molest the adjacent parts; wherefore Fuensaldagne, when he had put all
things in good order before Ypre, passed over the Lis with part of his Army,
set upon it, and within six days brought it to Capitulation, which was no
little help to the other Enterprise; and then returned to the Camp before Ypre;
and the Archduke advanced to Commigne.

Count Beauveau, Lieutenant to Count Palvau, who was then absent, commanded in
the Town with about 2000 Foot and 200 Horse, who defended themselves so
valiantly, as it became the Archduke to re-enforce his Army, and to go himself
to the Camp with the Forces which he had with him, and to cause General
Lamboy's men to come thither also, resolving to take it before the French could
relieve it.

On the 6th of May, two days after his arrival, he made Don Gaspero Bonefaccio,
the Marquess of Sfondrato, and Signior Stopullara, assault all the
Counterscarps, which were taken not without mortality on both sides; and forced
the Defendants within eight days after to beat a Call, and to surrender the
Town upon honorable terms.

Ypre being thus taken, and St. Venant lost, the Spaniards thought they had
done enough, and for the present attempted nothing else; for their Forces were
much lessened, and the French were much increased.

The Spaniards thought to reap no less advantage in Catalonia, by the same
troubles in Paris; for there wanted a Viceroy there, Mareshal Schomburg, who
commanded there, being returned to France. So mustering a good Army, commanded
by Don Iovan di Garay, they thought to carry Salsona and Cordona, Towns in the
midst of the Province, seated on the left side of the River Lobregate. These
places were very convenient for holding Intelligence with diverse of that
Province, and whereby they might facilitate the taking of Flix and Mirauet,
Towns which were fortified and Garrisoned by the French and Catalonians, seated
between Lerida and Tortosa, beyond the River Ebra.

The Catalonians, who remained still at the Devotion of the King of France,
hearing by their Agent Doctor Siviglia, that the King was gone from Paris, and
of the Troubles there, dispatched away a Messenger, by whom they offered to
abandon their own Country, and to come and assist his Majesty if it were
needful. The Messenger was staid three Leagues from Paris by a party of the
Prince's, had his Letters taken from him, which were read in the Parliament, to
their no little shame; who saw thereby, that a foreign and far-distant Nation
offered to do that, which the Kings natural Subjects refused.

Here my Author enters upon the Relation of our late Troubles of England, which
were so damned and unparalled Rebellious, as I, who, I praise my God, never
contributed any thing thereunto by action, do wish with all my Soul, that they
were for ever buried in Oblivion, and am resolved never to write any thing that
may recall them into memory: wherefore I must crave my Author's pardon if I
trace him not therein; save only in what he says by way of short Character of
our Blessed and Barbarously-murthered King Charles the first, in these
following words: An unparalleled goodness was observed in him, and so free a
Soul, as his Ruin was by many attributed more to this than to any thing else.
He was in all the actions of Conscience infinitely pure. He feared God greatly,
was given to Spirituality, and made himself known to understand, and to be
capable of all Knowledge. He was mild in Commanding, free in Treating,
generous in his Favors, in his punishments Merciful; and to wind up much in
short, which might be said of his Conditions, His Life was a Compendium of
Moral Virtues, and the true Idaea whereunto every Prince (set his Religion
aside) would be proud to conform himself.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The THIRD BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The continued Iealousies between the Court and Parliament of Paris are
rebated. The Siege and Succor of Cambray. The King goes from St. Germains to
Compeigne. The Duke of Vendome returns to France. Treaties of Marriage between
the Duke Mercoeur and Mademoiselle Marcini Niece to the Cardinal; which caused
much envy in many Princes and Ladies of the Court. The original of the
distastes between the Prince of Conde and the Cardinal. The King returns to
Paris. The proceedings of Duke Beaufort, and of the Frondeurs: Their Ends,
Designs, and Interests. Troubles arise in Provence. The Insurrection and War
of Bourdeaux. Divisions and Factions in the Court of France. Liege surprised.
Castro in Italy taken. Those of Parma are routed in the Bolognese. The falling
from favor of Marquess Gaufredi, Favorite to the Duke of Parma. The Emperor
marries the Princess of Mantua: And Duke Carlo marries the Arch-Dutchess of
Inspruch. The Spaniards attempts against Ceva in Piedmont, together with what
happened in those parts.

TThe War of Paris being thus ended, Peace consequently ensued; contrary to the
intention of the Frondeurs, who were declared Enemies to all quiet: and it was
wrought by the means of the first President, and of other well-minded Citizens,
who resolved to have Peace upon any terms, and not to expect greater necessity,
nor vain hopes given by those who desired troubles: and though there was no
mention made of the Cardinal in the Articles, yet all the Decrees of the King
and of the Parliament being annulled, he by consequence remained in Statu quo.
This was a blow by the by, and covered by those who would not give matter of
contestation to the Frondeurs, and it was winked at by the Princes: For though
they appeared to be sincere in their actions in the beginning of the War, yet
Interests altering afterward, all except Duke Beaufort began to order their
particular affairs apart by Treaty with the Queen; so as the people presently
conceived they held private intelligence with the Queen; and that they designed
to get Money of the City, and to regain favor at Court. The Duke d'Elboeufe
was one of these, who got nothing in this War but scorn and hatred. But the
Prince of Conde got much more hatred, who was held to be the Author of the
Siege, and of all the misfortunes.

When Peace was made, Beaufort invited Duke Longueville to continue Friendship
with him, and to join with him in making head against the Court; but
Longueville being a wise Prince, laughed at him, and would not listen to his
Proposals, nor would he by any means busy himself any more in Troubles.
Beaufort tarried still for all this in Paris, being inamored of the peoples
applause; and went not to St. Germains to reverence their Majesty's, under
pretense that he would not see the Cardinal, as did the other Generals, who
visiting the King and Queen, complied with the Cardinal.

In the Conference of Peace held at St. Germains, the Abbot de la Riviere
renewed the Proposition of Marriage between Duke Mercoeur, and Mancini the
Cardinal's Niece; the Duke of Orleans and Prince of Conde would move it
themselves to Mercoeur. And because by the Treaty of Paris, it was propounded
that the Duke of Vandosme, instead of being Governor of Britany, should be
made Lord High-Admiral, which place was taken from him by the late King; the
Queen, who was not well pleased with that Family, desired Mercoeur to accept
the Place, thinking thus to satisfy him, and to revenge her self of the rest.
Orleans and Conde were of the same mind, being glad to see Vandosme and
Beaufort humbled; and they did what they could to persuade Mercoeur to it: but
he thinking it unfit to accept of what did of right belong unto his Father,
refused it, unless it might be with the Duke his Father's good will.

The Queen was endued with the place of Admiralty, after the death of the Duke
of Brets, and enjoyed all the Emoluments thereof; and yet she was content to
forego them, so as the Marriage between the Cardinal's Niece and Duke Mercoeur
might take effect. She therefore excluded the Duke of Vandosme, and his Son
Beaufort, out of the favor of the Prince of Conde; but Mercoeur being constant
to his Father's Interests, who being reconciled unto the Queen, was restored to
his Estate in France, and was with great submission brought to Court, it was
not hard for him to overcome the Contrasts of Fortune. Vandosme (though he
showed the contrary) did inwardly rejoice to see his second Son Beaufort in
such favor with the Parisians; for he thereby grew more considerable at Court,
where the Cardinal's Friends continuing to show the necessity of keeping this
Family in obedience to the King, they considered that the Marriage of Mercoeur,
and his Father's satisfaction, happening at the same time, they should both have
won the good Will of those Princes, and have fastened the Cardinal better.
Vandosme and Mercoeur were well pleased with these Proposals, whilst by
alliance with the chief Minister of State, they might raise up their House,
which was in a low condition. The Cardinal on the contrary knowing what bad
effects come usually of Marriages made for Interest, and not for Affection,
seemed to be far from exposing himself to more Persecution and Envy, which do
usually accompany rising Fortunes; but being finally overcome by the reiterated
Reasons alleged by his Friends, and being much more convinced by the necessity
of getting a considerable support in the Kingdom, and that he might win
Beaufort from the troublesome thoughts that were insinuated into him by the
Frondeurs, which might cause more disorders, he suffered the Treaty to proceed.

But the Duke of Bullion and Count Chavigni infused Jealousies of this into the
Prince's mind, moved thereunto principally out of self-interest; for Bullion
thought that by raising a contrary party in Court, he might make himself
necessary, and manage his return to the possession of Sedan the better. And
Chavigny being displeased to see himself totally excluded from Government,
hoped, that if the Prince should reassume the government of Affairs, he might
come to his former condition. He therefore durst not at first meddle in
dividing the Royal Family, nor oppose the Prince to the Cardinal: But Conde
being very sensible of his own Interests, he told him afterward, That nothing
could be denied to his deserts; and that he might easily obtain the Admiralty,
if he would desire it: That he had reason to pretend thereunto, since he was
possessed of the estate of his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Bresse, and ought
therefore to inherit that, as well as his other Possessions; and that he might
reap great advantage by obliging many in the distributing of Places at Sea, and
by the Commands of the Fleet. Wherefore the Prince was easily persuaded, being
like those Plants which being shined upon by the Sun, grow strong and lively,
and when the Sun sets, fade and languish; for sometime approving, and sometime
disapproving the design, he seemed not to assent thereunto: And yet he made it
be known under hand by Monsieur Mazarolles, a follower of his, That he could be
content the Admiralty were conferred upon him. Nor was it only the Duke of
Bullion, and Count Chavigny, who sought to interrupt this Marriage; but
President Peraut, Superintendant of the Prince his house, and who had been his
ancient Servant, failed not to inform him of what he thought fit.

The Prince, who had the honor of Arms and the desire of Glory added to the
greatness of his Birth, approving of such Councels, grew full of jealousies and
suspicions, which lessened the friendship and confidence which he seemed
formerly to have in the Cardinal, and occasioned the disagreements which
ensued: for seeing that Paris had been by his means reduced to Reason, and
knowing how the people were minded toward the Cardinal, he designed to assume
unto himself all Regal Power, and to make himself sole Arbitrator of all
things. He therefore carried himself Imperiously at Court, making small account
even of the Queen; and thought wholly to abolish the Frondeurs, to the end that
their Heads being quelled and dispersed, they should not be able to oppose him:
but as the strength of a weak Twig joined to many others, gives not way to a
great piece of Wood; all the Prince's Cunning, and his Partakers Wits, seemed
to aim at nothing but at keeping men's minds and interests divided: And the
Frondeurs studying also how to keep Conde divided from the Court, did all they
could to keep Beaufort, who was then little less than Idolatrized in Paris,
from fastening to the Cardinal; insinuating unto him, that to keep himself in
the esteem which he was in, he must appear an irreconcilable Enemy not only to
the Queen and Cardinal, but even to his Father and Brother, as he beyond all
expectation did.

Conde was also troubled to hear that the Cardinal treated touching the having
of the Government of Picardy from the Duke d'Elboeufe, who was Governor
thereof; which notwithstanding did not ensue, for that the Price was not agreed
upon, and for that it was not considerable without the particular Government of
the City and Citadel of Amiens, which were held by the Duke Chaunes; as also of
Peronne, which was in the possession of the Marquess d'Ochencourt, of whom the
Court had then some jealousies for having received the Duchess of Chevereux
into that Fort, when she returned from Flanders during the War, without the
Kings permission.

By reason of two Accidents which casually ensued, Ochencourt grew so afraid,
as made him get into favor with the Cardinal, and become his partial friend.
And thus it was: As some of the King's Guards went to the Frontiers of Flanders
to join with some other Troops of the King's; though they had no order to touch
upon Peronne, yet being desirous to go thither, the Marchioness his Wife was
jealous, shut the Gates upon them, refused them entrance, and sent word to her
Husband, who commanded the Army upon the Frontiers as Lieutenant General; and a
Gentleman of the Cardinals coming thither at the same time, whom he suspected
was come to make him Prisoner, he forsook his Command, and went to Peronne.
Which case the Cardinal commiserating, and Oquincourt not daring to come near
him, the Cardinal chose a place to Oquincourt's liking, to speak with him; and
clearing him of his jealousy, Oquincourt was so obliged to the Cardinal, as he
contracted great confidence with him, and was ever afterward his intimate
friend.

The Court kept thus for a while at St. Germains, intimating their intention of
coming thither, whilst all things were in a peaceful condition. But War happening
afterward in Flanders, by the Spaniards falling in upon St. Venant and Ypres,
it went to Compeigne; and though this was a necessary remove, the seditious
people forbore not to whisper against the Cardinal, who the more they murmured
against him, the more did he endeavor to keep up the Kings splendour and
dignity; which caused the turbulent Commonalty of Paris to publish defamatory
Libels against the Kings Agents, to make all men think that the Court intended
not their quiet; which made the Duke of Orleans go to Paris about the beginning
of June, to certify that City of their Majesty's real intentions; which he
did, to the great satisfaction of all that were well minded. And hereupon the
Provost of Merchants, the Sheriffs, Counselors, Colonels, and the rest who
make up the Common Council, meeting together, resolved to issue out
Inquisitions against the Authors of the said Libels, and against those that
printed or published them. They also thanked his Highness for his good
affection, and beseeched him to use his power in bringing the King to Paris,
which would be the true means of dissipating all the fluctuations of that
wavering people: to which purpose they deputed some to be sent to his Majesty,
to represent this their so general desire. The care of the universal Government
was not for all this given over; but the War with Spain being reassumed, the
King was in a condition of raising an Army of 25000 good veterane Soldiers;
which it being questioned whither they should go, some propounded the falling
upon Doway in Flanders, others upon Avennes in Hainault, and others propounded
other Enterprises. But the Cardinal being assured that there were not above 600
Foot in Cambray, was of opinion that they should fall upon that place, which
was then in the Spaniards possession; which was not any part of the
Low Countries, but was in the late War with Flanders taken by the French, and
was given by the King to Marshal Baligny, who possessed it as Sovereign thereof
for some years, till Count Fuentes recovered it. By which example, it was said
that the Cardinal hoped to be endowed with it, when it should be taken; or at
least to be made Governor of the City and Citadel. Wherefore it was thought he
betook himself thereunto out of self-Interest. The Prince of Conde was invited
to this so considerable business; but he, being then at his Government of
Burgundy, refused the employment, blamed the resolution, interposed many
difficulties; which were all thought excuses to cloak his aversion to assist
the Cardinal in his fortune: And at his return to Paris, he spoke against the
Marriage between Mercoeur and Mancini, had often conference with the Dukes of
Nemours and Beaufort, was visited by the Presidents and chief Counselors of
the Parliament, and began to swallow that Maxim, That much mischief must be
done to receive much good. He blamed the Court for rewarding injuries, and
neglecting good turns, as in the case of Vandosme's Family; and began to
slacken his adherence to the Court, and his confiding in the Cardinal, which
till then he had cultivated. He blamed him for aspiring to the absolute
Government, and gave him signs that he could not approve of his company in
Council, having found him an hindrance to his secret ends: wherefore to render
him hateful to the people, he strove to make him be believed the Author of all
the violences; that he endeavored to raise jealousies between the Queen and
him; that in stead of defending him with the Frondeurs. The Merits of this
Prince, who had deserved so well of the Court, mixed with other representations
whether true or false, caused such jealousies, even in those who were most
affectionate to the King's service, as use to usher in highest hatreds. So as
the Cardinal, that he might sweeten him, studied to keep this first agitation
from breaking further forth: and though the Prince did not undertake the
business of Cambray, yet he altered not his former design; but in lieu of the
Prince, employed Prince Harcourt therein, and sent all the Kings Forces, which
were come from several parts, to that affair; which as they crossed the River
Some, were found to be more than were believed; all of them experienced men,
and well in order. And whilst they encamped sometimes in one place, sometimes
in another, to conceal their true design from the Spaniards, Count Palvan,
with 4000 Soldiers gathered together in the Maritime parts of Flanders, began
to scowre the Campagnia, as well to secure the Towns which were held by the
French, as to draw some of the Enemies Forces thither, and so to weaken their
Army: toward which the Archduke marched from Brussels to join the whole Army
together; which was for the most part come then from Doway, Valenciennes, and
Lisle.

Whilst the Spaniards were a while in this uncertainty, the French about the
end of June sat down before Cambray, with much wonder to both parties; as well
in regard of the greatness of the City, which had in it both a Castle and a
Citadel, as for the difficulty of the Enterprise. But the Spaniards appeared to
have been so careless of the Town, by reason of their undervaluing the French
Forces after the troubles of Paris, as all men thought that so important a City
absolutely lost: especially the Governor Count Garce, a Spaniard, being then
absent, who at the first news thereof came thither in a Country-fellows
disguise. The French began to make the Line; which because it was to be of a
great circuit, could not be dug with such diligence as was requisite.

Cambray is one of the greatest Cities, and of most importance, which the
Spaniards have in those parts, distant only three Leagues from the Frontiers
of Picardy. It lies on the right hand of the River Schelde, five Leagues below
the rise thereof; which therefore is not there very broad. The way of Convoys
to the French Camp was very convenient, but somewhat long, they being to come
from St. Quintins, and Peronne, to Chastelette, a Fort not far from thence;
from whence they were brought to the Camp.

When the Spaniards heard of the Siege, and knew the danger the Town was in, by
reason of the small number of Defendants therein, they forthwith sent 150
Officers thither, who being discovered by the French, were for the most part
taken Prisoners; and the whole Spanish Army in a body marched toward Buchein,
a strong Castle upon the Schelde, three leagues below Cambray, to provide for
the safety thereof, which consisted in speed; for had they tarried till the
French had completed the Line, the succor would have been very difficult. The
Governor, who knew the Enemies Works, which were as yet open on two or three
sides, writ to Count Fuenseldagne, That the City was in danger to be lost,
unless it were speedily relieved: and mentioned the way to do it, which was, to
march straight forward with the body of the Army toward the Fortifications,
feigning to fall upon one Quarter, and to send 2000 Foot to another Quarter
which was not yet entrenched; so as the one or the other of them might easily
enter where they were least looked for. This Letter was intercepted by the
French; and being decifer'd, was sent to Count Harcourt, that he might so order
his Affairs, as to disappoint the Enemies.

The Spaniards assaulted the Quarters: The French thought assuredly either to
take, or to cut in pieces the 2000 men that came to relieve the Town; but
notwithstanding they got in, no man knew how, nor no man withstanding them.
Some would have it, that it was by the negligence of an Officer, who quitted a
Barricado to run to hear a noise that was made in another part; but be it what
you will, it happened so unexpectedly, as all were amazed at it, yea, even the
Spaniards themselves. The French imputed it to the Germans, who as strangers
might perchance have been favorable to the Enemy. But the common Opinion was,
That it happened by a very great Mist that fell then, and by the negligence of an
Officer that guarded the Barricado. Harcourt hereupon raised the Camp, to the
great discontent of the Court; for it was thought his Forces were such, as he
might have taken it, although the relief was entered. He retreated to Cambresi;
whereat the Archduke being very much joy'd, as having saved a place of such
importance, he sent the Marquess Sfondrato with 6000 men toward the Washes of
Flanders, to observe Palvan's proceedings; propounding nothing to himself
during that Campagnia, but how to keep the French from making more attempts.
Thus the Armies kept for some days near one another, wanting many necessaries.

The King and Court kept still at Compeigne, and were the more displeased with
this accident, for that they saw the Frondeurs and other, Malcontents of
Paris rejoiced thereat, as if they had thereby received a great Victory; being
so blinded with hatred, as the French were seen to rejoice at their own ruin,
left good success might have increased the Cardinal's Reputation. Beaufort and
the Coadjutor, and others who envied his fortune, gave out, That he was the
cause why the King did not return to Paris; rendering him thereby hateful to the
Inhabitants, who got much by the Courts being at Paris: and so highly were they
incensed against those that were of the Royal Party, as in scorn the Frondeurs
called them Maza^inians.

Two things did much trouble the Court and the Cardinal, to whom, as chief
Director, all both good and bad success were attributed; so as he resolved to
go himself to the Camp, upon pretense to treat of general Peace with the
Spanish Plenipotentiary Pignoranda, who was to that purpose to be at
Valenciennes, as was agreed upon by the Pope's Nuntio and the Venetian
Ambassador. On the 22 of July he went to Chasteau-Cambrey, where the King's
Army lay, and was accompanied by the Dukes Vandosm and Mercoeur, the Mareshal
Villeroy, and P^essis Prasin, together with d^ier^ others of the Court: He was
received in the Camp with all applause due to his Eminency.

Where he had diverse consultations with the prime men whom he admitted to the
Treaty; and inviting them frequently, encouraged them to show their Worth and
Valor. Then causing the Army to be mustered, he presented them with
considerable Donatives, particularly the Dutch Commanders; declaring, That he
never had the least suspicion that Cambray was relieved through any miscarriage
of theirs; and that the King was of the same opinion, from whom he brought
Letters to General Ohem, wherein his Majesty expressed his opinion of their
innocence: and by these and other civilities endeavored to sweeten them, who
for the imputation falsely laid upon them, threatened to forsake the Service, as
being freemen, and Foreigners; and did win upon their affections, for all the
French could do to their prejudice. And there being nothing that makes
Soldiers willinger to hazard their Lives, than to show them a means how to
make amends for their sufferings, he moved that they should march into the
Island of St. Armand; (a rich and plentiful Country, seated between the Rivers
Scheld and Scarpe) Which being agreed upon, the French marched into that
fruitful Island, and entered into the midst of it without any opposition, (for
their coming was unexpected) and pillaged whatsoever they pleased, to the as
great confusion of the Inhabitants, as grief of the Spaniards, who were
generally blamed by all Flanders for their inadvertency therein. The Archduke
went thither, to see whether the Enemy were to be fought with or no, and driven
from thence; and took up his Quarters there, where the Scarpe falls into the
Scheld, to keep the French from advancing further. And since his Army could not
fight the French, being fewer in number, he by the advantage of situation
defended the Passes, and sent for Soldiers from Flanders, and from all the
neighboring Provinces, to increase his Army. The French quartered in this
opulent Country for above two Months, running up and down without doing any
thing; till finding it needful to possess themselves of some place behind
them, whereby they might facilitate the bringing of necessaries to the Camp,
and keep their Cavalry without any trouble in the Enemy's Country; Count
Harcourt rose on the 7 th of August from the Abbey of Denaim, where he was
encamped after the Spaniards had retreated to Valenciennes, and went to Arleux,
between Doway and Bocheim, which is a small tract of Ground Islanded by the
River Scarpe, and by the Rivolets of Sluice and Sally, five Leagues from Arras,
where he staid some days, as well to hinder the Spaniards from bringing
Provisions to their Camp from Doway, Cambray, Bocheim, and other places, as to
get Victuals for his Army. And not long after parting from thence, he encamped
within sight of Valenciennes, and went himself in person with 1500 Horse, and
2000 Commanded Foot, to assault the Town of Conde, situated in a place where
it is not overlooked any where; having a no contemptible Castle, which is
watered by the Rivers Escaut and Aisne. Count Broglio had the charge of
assaulting the Town given him; which he did with incredible speed, and lodged
suddenly upon the Counterscarp of the Town, and forced the Enemy quickly to
surrender it; Colonel Grondes marching out of it on the 24 th of August, with
500 Foot, and 50 Horse, which were Convoyed by Monsieur Beauvais to
Valenciennes. Upon this advice the Archduke advanced to Morteigne; but hearing
that that place was lost, went near Tourney, summoning together all the
scattered Soldiery, and the Country-Militia, to keep the French from making
further progress, who marched even within sight of Brussels, though not without
the inconveniency of want of Victuals, which were to be brought from afar off,
the Convoy whereof being encountered near Quesnoy by 1000 Foot, and 2000 Horse,
commanded by Colonel Bruch; they after a lusty Skirmish passed happily on, the
Spaniards being somewhat indamaged, and pursued even to the Ditch of Quisnoy,
losing 80 men; and the French losing not above ten, and Monsieur de Sassey who
was taken Prisoner.

The Cardinal returned to Compeigne, before the Army went into that Island, and
found the Prince of Conde come thither; who pressed that the King might return to
Paris; wherein he was seconded by the Duke of Orleans.

The Court removed from Compeigne to Paris, with such general applause and
satisfaction, as it might be rather said to be a glorious Triumph, than an
usual arrival. Then the Articles of Marriage were treated of between Mancini
and Duke Mercoeur, wherein the reversion of the Admiralty was promised him,
after his Father the Duke of Vendosme's death: but when all this was upon
concluding, the Prince of Conde's jealousies marred all. The Match between the
Duke of Candale Eldest Son to the Duke of Espernon, and the Cardinal's other
Niece the Countess Martinozzi, was also treated of, and agreed by all parties
interested; but not effected, for reasons which you shall hereafter hear.

The more the Kings Authority did increase in Paris, the more did that of the
Frondeurs decrease; who notwithstanding ceased not to be Enemies to the
Cardinal: and all men observed Beaufort's proceedings, who for his Reputation,
and to maintain himself Head of the people, would appear to be faithful to his
party, by going to visit their Majesty's at the Court, without visiting the
Cardinal, glorying to be the only man in the Kingdom who made head against
him. But though he was admitted by the King, the Queen, to show that she could
not tolerate the little esteem that was put upon her in the prime Minister of
State, seemed not well pleased with his Visits; whereat he, in a distasteful
manner, flung out of the Room, saying aloud in a scornful manner, That he would
return thither no more, since he was so badly received. And though the Cardinal
applied himself to moderate the unquiet Spirit of this Prince, who by the
peoples adherence might cause new Convulsions, to which purpose he made great
proffers to his Parents the Duke and Duchess of Vendosme; yet all proved vain:
for, as it was said, the Prince of Conde did underhand endeavor to keep them
at odds, that the Court being weakened by a contrary Faction, he might thereby
the more increase his Authority, and govern in the Council as he lifted. And
Beaufort by this means got an opinion amongst the people of being undaunted.

But whilst by often frequenting the House of Monbason as he passed to and fro
from the Court, during his abode in L'Hostelle de Vendosme, he exposed himself
to the will of the Kings Guards, being told of what hazard he ran, he changed
his Lodging, and lodged in the Street of Pr^velles near St. Eustace, and nearer
to la Hostelle de Monbasan; whereby he showed his distrust of the Court the
more. Now because since the Decree of the 2 d of March, the Parliament was not
called for public affairs, whereat the Court was well pleased, the Frondeurs
being backed by the Malcontents, promised to make both that and all the
supreme Chambers meet, at the usual Audience of St. Martins; and though it was
agreed upon by Articles, that the Chambers should not meet without express
leave from the King, yet they said these were unsufferable errors; and
complained much that the Cardinal had replaced Monsieur d'Emery in his former
place of Superintendant of the Finances: but they were not aware that this was
done merely by Conde's means, who having won much favor at Court, after the
War of Paris, saw it necessary to have the Superintendant of the Finances his
Friend; so as contrary to the opinion of all men, and contrary to the
Cardinal's pleasure, he would have him restored to his Place, declaring, That
none was so fit for it as Emery; which made Conde's action the more suspected,
and more vigilantly observed. But Emery continued not long in the place; for
being seized on by Sickness, he died soon after, and the Mareshal Milleray
succeeded him: and though Conde was he who was to be blamed for the replacing
of Emery, yet he turned the fault so cunningly upon the Cardinal, as all men
attributed it to the Prime State-Officer; which made the Court and
Court-Officers to be hated by the people, who hoped that being fomented by him,
they might facilitate what they had agreed upon. But whilst things went thus at
Court, the Emergencies which arose in other Provinces were no less remarkable;
which will occasion us to look a little backwards.

Amongst several ways found out to raise Moneys, the Court had resolved to
introduce Semistry, which is an addition of as many Officers as were before, to
the end that they might not exercise their places as before for the whole year,
but by turns, from six months to six months; whereby not only much Moneys
might be raised by the sale of Places, but the exorbitant authority of
Counselors was thereby moderated. Orders being issued forth for the putting
the Semistry in practice in Provence, as it was in Normandy, the Count ^ Alets,
Governor of Provence, undertook the work; and without acquainting the Court
what Novelties it might occasion, caused the Kings Commands to be published,
and gave order for the sale of the new Places; wherein some of his Domestics
interessing themselves, negotiating their own advantage with the Purchasers,
considerable Commotions arose; whereof one was, That one called Lughet, that he
might make way for others, was one of the first that bought one of the said
Semistry; which did so anger the Counselors, as he was not only looked upon
as a new Companion or Fellow-brother, but as an Enemy to his Country, and e're
long was unhumanely treated: for as he was one night at Supper with his
Friends, certain people came in Masked, and slew him, whereat the Governor was
so scandalized, as he caused several that were thought accomplices, to be
imprisoned, that the Malefactor might be found out! which not being done, (for
those that were guilty were escaped) he banished those from the City whom he
suspected most, and particularly those who had most opposed the new Edict in
the Parliament; who withdrew to their Country-houses; many of them going to
Carpentras, a City in the County of Avignon; who though they were asunder, held
such Corr^spondency with their Friends who remained in Aix, the Metropolis of
Provence, and with other Friends in the Country, insomuch as a considerable
number being assembled together, the Count grew jealous, who being unprovided
of Soldiers, and wanting part of his Regiment who were embarked in the ^leet
which went to Naples, thought himself not able to withstand the contrary Party,
if they should attempt any thing. So as he treated of Accommodation, which was
concluded by suspending the new Semistry, and with leave for those that were
banished to return home; whereat those Counselors were so puffed up, as they
made a numerous Faction against the Governor, which entrenched upon his
Authority, punished his Adherents, and did in open manner withstand the usual
form of choosing Consuls; whereat the Court being displeased, the Queen was
often acquainted therewith, and wished to consider what inconveniences might
ensue, unless speedy remedy were taken. But the King's Council having then
their hands full of the Troubles of Paris, and growing apprehensive of the
Action of many Lords, they put him in hopes, saying, That when the Affairs of
Paris should be settled, they would send him sufficient Forces to punish the
Peccant; and wished him wisely to dissemble.

But the Count being impatient, instead of concealing this Advertisement, did
participate it to some others, whom he thought his Friends; the knowledge
whereof coming to the contrary Faction, distrusts increased, and means used to
cancel the fault, was by running into a greater contumacy: So as the Parliament
of Aix following the Example of that of Paris, grew licentious; and as the
Parisians had detracted from the Cardinal's Administration, representing to the
King the necessity of pleasing his people, by taking all Employment from him,
and driving him out of his Kingdom; so did the Provincials pretend to the
removal of their Governor; to which purpose they sent unto the Court,
threatening, That in case of denial or delay, they would no longer obey him.

He on the contrary pretended to sustain himself by the power of his Friends,
and of the Nobility; and seeking rather to revenge than to secure himself,
drove all that he suspected out of Aix. And because Monsieur de la Tour, who
was Friend to one Beaureville, the Advocate-General of the Parliament, did stir
up Sedition more than the rest, he caused him to be imprisoned, threatening to
make him an Example. But the people, as a Torrent which swells by the concourse
of several Rivulets, took this for Violence, and for a private Revenge; and
upon pretense that upon the 18th of January a Soldier of the Guard had wounded
a Servant of a Member of Parliament, took up Arms, and filled the whole City
with Sedition, insomuch as had it not been for the Archbishop of Arles, and
the President Seguiran, who by their Credit and Authority moderated the Uproar,
somewhat of fatal might have happened: yet the people were not pacified, though
for the present they laid down Arms; for their jealousies increasing, as
novelties multiplied, two days after, on St. Sebastians day, which is usually
celebrated in a little Church without the Gate, by the procession of many
people, a Country-fellow cried out, That the King's Party would shut the Gates
of the City as soon as the Procession was gone out. Whereupon grew so great a
confusion, as that the Governor's Palace being begirt and besieged by a
numerous rout of armed men, they reduced him to such straights, as to escape so
eminent a danger, he was forced to treat, and to yield that he and all his men
would go out of the City, as he did; whereby the Parliament was freed from the
fear of the Soldiers, and of the Governor. Whereupon a Decree was suddenly
made for abolishing the Semestry, for joining with the Parliament of Paris, for
the recalling of Consuls, for restitution of the places taken from the Baron de
Brass and from Monsieur Siguiram; and finally, for the observing those Orders
only, which should be from that time given by the Count di Garces, the King's
Lieutenant in that Province: To whom they were content to submit, that they
might make it appear they had done all this not to forgo their obedience to the
King, but only that they might not be subject to the violence and private
passions of their Governor; with all which they acquainted the Court, and made
excuses suitable to their Delinquencie.

The Count d'Allets, being much troubled at this Affont, betook himself to
provide all things necessary to chastise those who had so far forgone their
Duties. He got together about 5000 Foot, and 150 Horse, besides 600 Volunteers
of Provence and Languedock. He took Chasteau Regnande, Borba, la Roque,
Maxsarques, St. Pole, and other Towns which had declared for the Parliament,
and were of no great consideration, not being in any posture of defense; and he
encamped before the very City of Aix, which is seated upon the River Are,
greatly peopled; but begirt only with a bare Wall, and Towers after the ancient
manner: from whence 200 men sallying out, they were all taken and cut in
pieces, and they would have proceeded farther, had not a Gentleman come at the
very time, who brought Pardon and Peace subscribed by the King. Whereupon the
next day Arms were laid down on all sides, and the Kings Soldiers were sent
some into Piedmont, some into Catalonia.

But though Peace was made in Provence, War was kindled in Guienne between the
Duke of Espernon the Governour-General, and the Parliament and City of
Bourdeaux; whereof to understand the occasion, we must make here a short
digression.

By the example of the Commotions of Paris, a Faction was formed by certain
Counselors of Parliament in Bourdeaux; who by conversing with the Wife of
Councellor Mirat, and with some other Women who met together in her house,
began, like the Frondeurs of Paris, to pry into businesses not competent to
their Callings, which was to meddle only in Civil and Criminal affairs, and
not to busy themselves with State Affairs, which belongs only to the King's
Privy Council. Mirate was a crafty man, of quick and unquiet thoughts, and
reputed very wise; he was held to be the chief of all the rest; amongst whom
was President Pichon a Brother of his, Monsieur Feyarde, Monsieur d'Alem, and
diverse other turbulent and ambitious Spirits. These were assisted by Advocate
Constanse, and by Monsieur di Fontenelle. At the first risings against the Duke
of Espernon, this Faction was fomented by Monsieur de la Vie, who was
Advocate-General; a proud pretender, who intending to justle out the first
President Bernet, that he might have his place, whereby he might wrestle with
Espernon's Authority, whom he loved not, made use of the troubles of Paris,
which made men lay aside all respect, and made it lawful to infuse jealousies
into the aforesaid Counselors, and others of unquiet Spirits, such as were
Messieurs Blanck, Mouesin, Remont, Espagnet, and chiefly the President Dasis.
Their design being to enhaunce their pretended Authority under the Name of
Parliament, that they might govern the City; they began to declaim against the
Duke of Espernon, terming him Proud, Avaritious, Violent, and of contrary ends
to those which belonged to a wise Statesman: they laid to his charge that he
sent Corn out of the Country, under pretense of uniting the Frontiers, but
indeed to make Merchandise of it: That he opress'd the people, and threatened
them. They declared, that what they did was for the ease of the Country: they
insinuated into the people, that Espernon intended to lay two Crowns upon every
Tun of Wine, from which the King had exempted them: That he sought to disarm
them, so to make them more pliable to his Will: That to that purpose he had
begun to draw the Canon out by night from the Castle of Ha, and to bring them
into the Castle Trombette, from whence he might batter the City. By these
conceits they won upon the people, who listening after whispers, the Duke was
invited to the Assembly, to provide by his presence for things necessary, and
to send the Kings Forces (which lay about the City) ten Leagues off. But the
Duke, who knew the designs were different from what they appeared to be, that
he might not be enforced to any thing contrary to the Kings Authority, or being
unwilling to be unhandsomely dealt with, thought not good to come thither, but
retired to his house at Cadigliack. The soberest of the Parliament got the rest
to abstain from all Sedition, and sent two Counselors, Salamon and du Vall, to
him; who whilst they prevailed with the Duke to send the Troops ten Leagues
from Bourdeaux, whereby all things were quieted, the impatient and indiscreet
people took the Palace of Ha; whereat the Duke being highly scandalized, he
presently demanded the restitution thereof from the Citizens and Parliament:
but they denying to do it, fell from their intention of depositing it into the
hands of the Magistrates of the City, by reason of a Letter which they received
at the same time from the Parliament of Paris, which was full of fair Promises;
and by the Duke's denial to desist from fortifying Liborne, which he did, by
reason of a rising of the people in the Town. Thus their displeasures grew
greater, and President Dasis sent for some of the most seditions into the
public Hall, who abused some of the good Inhabitants, and drove them out of
the City; among which, Secretary Clavo and Monsieur di Duboy; and then they
declared themselves more openly, and took up Arms under pretense of defending
the Country; and a Council of War was chosen, wherein the first President was
obliged to assist, together with some Counselors.

The first thing this Council of War did, was to send word to the
Country People thereabouts, willing them to take up Arms; which they did, and
presently took the Castle of Varyes near Libourn; which was immediately after
Besieged, and retaken, together with the destruction of the place, and of all
those in it, by the Camp-master Marshal Marine's men. Moreover, two Frigates,
three small Vessels, and 12 Brigantines were armed by them; they took four
Brigades of Foot into pay, and several Troops of Horse; and to supply expenses,
they made use of the public Moneys, imposed Taxes, and did whatsoever was
necessary for maintaining the War. The Duke armed also, but sought to appease
the Bourdelois rather by fair means than by soul; and though the two of his
Letters which he wrote to the Parliament, and two which he wrote to the
Commonalty of Bourdeaux, were but unhandsomely answered; yet he seeming not to
take notice of it, offered that if they would forbear fortifying Libourn, his
Forces should not approach Bourdeaux; and that he would get the King to take
away their Grievances, and to give all just satisfaction. But all was refused,
and the Trumpet which brought news that the Peace of Paris was concluded, was
threatened to be hanged.

And immediately Monsieur de la Vie was sent to Court, to make it be believed
that the Bourdelois were the Kings most faithful and obedient servants, but
Enemies to their Governor, who had treated them ill, and been too haughty in
his Government. They then made the Marquess of Chamberet, an old and hardy
Soldier, Commander of their Troops; they took the Castle of Lormont, and put
Forces thereinto. Two of Crequy's Horse-Troops were cut in pieces by the
Peasants; and the Country People of those parts were so resolute in rebellion,
as some of them being besieged by Monsieur di Marin in the Church of Labbones,
they refused to yield, and chose rather to perish by fire.

Then the Parliament of Bourdeaux writ to the Parliament of Toulouse, inviting
it to join with them, and to keep the Forces of Languedock from falling down
into Guienne: And the Vicount Virlada, in the name of the first President, and
of other the King's good Servants, went to Toulouse by the approbation of the
Duke of Candale, who was son to the Duke of Espernon, who was for Peace, and
propounded to that Assembly, That it would be an honorable and commendable
action for the Parliament of Languedock to be Arbitrator of the difference of
the Bourdelois. Which advice being embraced by those of Toulouse, they
forthwith named Messieurs di Carminada, di Fresars, di Carlineas, together with
the Advocate-General Marmiesse, to interpose in the business, and to negotiate
an Agreement: Which Espernon approving of, he sent Monsieur de la Barche to
pass all due Complements, and entered cordially into the Treaty of Agreement;
to assist whom, came the Count d'Argensonne with Orders from the Court to use
all means to mollify the exasperated Spirits of both the sides, to reduce the
Parliament to its Duty, and to make the Duke of Espernon contented with what
the present conjuncture of time would allow: but in effect, not to do any thing
to the Dukes prejudice, nor without his consent; for the Court was well enough
pleased with the courage which he had shown in the Kings service.

In the beginning of April, Argensonne went with the Count his eldest Son from
Cadilliack to Espernon-house, which made the Burdelois suspect him, as the Duke
would have done, had he gone first to Bordeaux. Argenson was received with much
demonstration of confidence by the Duke, and told him, That the whole business
consisted in three points; in relieving the Castle of Trombette, in reducing
the Parliament and People to their obedience, and the third (which he thought
would make much for obtaining the second) in building the Citadel of Libourne:
Which were the three things from whence all the disorders of Guienne did
proceed. From thence Argenson went to Bourdeaux, where, after having been
received with much respect, he propounded to them the victualling of the Castle
of Trombette; wherein many difficulties were met with, which by his
dextrousness were at last overcome; and the Parliament consented thereunto,
though it were much opposed by the seditious sort, and particularly by du Salt
the Advocate-General, who notwithstanding his great age, and the place which he
held, appeared always one of those who did most oppose the King's service. And
here it is observable, that whereas in the Parliament of Paris the younger sort
were most contumacious, in this of Bourdeaux the elder were most cross, and did
by their Rhetoric work upon the younger; who by joining with them, occasioned
that disorder which had almost made the whole Assembly rebellious; for there
were but few that kept within the bounds of Duty: and though Bernet the first
President was the King's good Subject, yet was he of so weak parts, as he was
not able to oppose the seditious, fearing continually to be assassinated.

When the Frondeurs saw they could not impede the Parliaments resolution of
victualling the Castle of Trombette, they seduced the people to hinder the
effecting of it: which occasioned some delay; wherefore Argenson, who feared
the Castle might be in some straights, writ to the Governor Monsieur di
Haultemonte, to know what condition the Castle was in; and being answered that
it could hold out yet for twenty days, he immediately sent his Son to inform
the Duke thereof, who was preparing to relieve it by force, though he had but
two Brigadoes of Foot, and about 1000 Horse, with some Provencial Gentlemen,
and without any one Piece of Artillery. Thus was he already gone from
Cadilliack, and come to Castres. The Count met the Duke upon his March, and
gave him an account of the Castle, and that the Parliament had given way to the
victualling of it; whereupon the Count promised to stay one whole day, to see
whether they would do it or no: And the Count returned that night to Bourdeaux,
and caused 200 Sacks of Meal be brought to be put into the Castle. As soon as
he was come, some commotion arose amongst the people, which by Monsieur Pichon
was appeased. The Count went to find out his Father, and acquainted him with
what Espernon had promised; he went to the Parliament to solicit what they
had promised; he told them of the Dukes march, and spoke with so much reason,
as they promised again what they had done formerly; but met with the same
difficulties in the execution of it. The March caused great complaints, the
Frondeurs were wild, a number of people ran to the Archbishop's Palace,
crying out, That they were betrayed, That whilst Argenson was negotiating in
Parliament, Espernon ransackt the Country.

Young Argenson was in great danger, being begirt by the people who exclaimed;
but by giving them good words, he appeased them: and though some Musket Shot
had been made at his Chamber-window, over the Archbishop's Gate; he made no
words of it, to keep from exasperating them: the Duke advanced the mean while
to Gradigan, to relieve the Castle by force; but being advertised by Argenson,
that the Parliament had promised to convey Corn into the Castle the next day,
he said he would tarry one day longer at Gradigan; and then he found he had
been too hasty in his March; for he was within two Leagues of the City, and his
neighborhood had discomposed all things: and it being found in the Council of
War that be had not Forces enough to effect what he had designed, it was
resolved, to salve the reputation of the Kings Forces, that old Argenson, who
was come to Gradigan to the Duke, should return to Bourdeaux, and promise the
Parliament that the Forces should be led up higher into the Country, if they
would renew their promise that the Corn should be carried in, as it was by
Argenson's mediation; for the Corn was delivered to Haultmont, the Duke
retreated to Cadillack, and the Forces marched toward Again. Argenson staid in
Bourdeaux to negotiate other affairs, and his Son went to acquaint the Duke
therewith; so as whilst things were in a fair way of agreement, the Duke of
Candale, who had been always with his Father, and who did by no means like
these Wars, went to Court; and Affairs would have been adjusted, had it not
been for a new Emergency.

A little unfinished Fort which Espernon caused to be erected at Libourn, was
the occasion of these Commotions: For when the Duke retreated to Again, he
caused two pieces of Artillery to be put into that small Fort, or Redoubt, some
Powder and Morter-pieces. When this was known at Bourdeaux, the City fell into
a great disorder, the Parliament and people exclaimed that this was a new trick
of Espernon's, who had not kept his promise, and the Kings party ran hazard of
their Lives. Count Argenson was then at Cadillack, whither the Parliament writ
unto him, acquainting him how the Duke had broken his promise, by not leaving
things in the condition they ought to be. Of this the chief President writ
particularly to him, and entreated him to come to the City and to appease the
peopple: Whereupon the Count, who was not purposed to return, did
notwithstanding prepare to return, and to take his Son with him, to Bourdeaux.

At his entrance the people showed him their discontents, and broke out into a
thousand Contumelies and Imprecations against Espernon, saying, They had been
abused in their giving way to the Victualling of the Castle of Trombette, which
otherwise could not have held out above three days; and that Agreements had
been directly broken. Whence Argenson perceived the commotion of that City to
grow greater than ever. The Archbishop, who was of the Family of Bethume,
endeavored as much as he could to appease them; but the peoples hatred to the
Duke was such, and their desires of revenge so great, as nothing could pacify
them. The Frondeurs could not endure that Argenson should live in the
Archbishops Palace, but thought to keep him and his Son as Hostages till the
works about Libourn should be slighted; but not being able to make them
Prisoners publicly, they made them be told by some of their Friends, That they
were not safe in the Archbishops Palace, and that the wisest among them could
not secure them against the rage of the people: That therefore they thought
their best course would be to retire to the Castle or Palace of Ha, where they
might be safer. Argenson quickly found their design, and answered, That though
he apprehended nothing where he was, yet he was ready to obey the Parliament,
and to go whither they listed. So he and his Son were carried to the Castle of
Ha, whereof the Counselor Espagnote, who was one of the chiefest of the
Seditious, was Governor: as soon as they were entered, the Guards were doubled;
and the next day, orders were given, that they should not be suffered to go
out. The people were grown so tumultuous, as their Rulers could no longer
govern them; for some 6000 of them came to the Castle-gate, crying out, That
Argenson was a Traitor, a false man: That he together with Espernon intended to
ruin them; and that they must kill them. The Parliament being acquainted with
this Uproar, sent the chief President together with diverse other Counselors,
to the Castle of Ha, to prevent inconveniences; but as they passed along the
streets, they were railed upon, and had had stones thrown at them, had not some
that were of power amongst them, kept them from further outrage. But the prime
President was so frighted, as when he came into the Castle, he could not speak.
They soon told the Count, That all was lost, unless he took order that the
Fortifications about Libourn might be demolished: But Argenson told them, He
was not Commander of the Province, nor Governor of Libourn. So their Request
was frustrated.

The first President said, That an Order might appease the disorder; and that
time would advise what was best to be done next. The Order was resolved upon,
but the difficulty lay in who should carry it. Some of the boldest Counselors
said, That they themselves would go with it; but they were told, They might be
detained. Wherefore they all concluded, that Argenson should tarry in the
Castle, but that he should send his Son; who because he could not safely pass
through that crowd of people, Marquess Chamberet, General of the Troops, came
himself to the Castle-gate to guard him to a Bark which was prepared for him.
And when this was resolved, the Father was no longer suffered to speak in
private with his Son; so as all he could whisper unto him as he embraced him at
his going away, was to wish him not to return to Bourdeaux, though by his
Letters he was desired to do so. When he was come to Libourn, the Governor
refused to obey Argenson's order; wherefore it being to come from the Duke of
Espernon, the Count went in haste to Again, to dispose the Duke thereunto; but
he first advertised his Father and the first President of all he did.

The disorder grew this mean while so great in Bourdeaux, and the clamor of
the people was such, as not expecting answer, they resolved to go themselves to
demolish those Fortifications. Argenson was all this while shut up in the
Castle of Ha; but he did so well represent to the Deputies of Parliament, who
went daily to visit him, what injury the City did her self, by imprisoning one
whom the King had sent to pacify the Province, as at last fearing that the
Court might deal in the like manner with their Deputies who were at Court, they
were advised to give him his liberty. He promised them to go forth with to
Espernon, hoping undoubtedly to obtain his request, for the resolution whereof
he desired only three days; they promised him not to innovate any thing in
that mean while. Upon these terms he came forth of the City, under the conduct
of the aforesaid Chamberet.

This mean while the Count his Son was gone to the Duke, whom he had prepared
to free his Father, and to give order for the demolition of the Fortifications
about Libourn; which just as he was ready to do, Argenson came himself, and
what was already resolved of was done; so as Argenson was partly minded to
return to Bourdeaux to acquaint the Burdelois with this good news. But news
came the next morning, that about 7000 of those factious people were gone out
to besiege Libourn; which made the Duke alter his resolution, and to dream of
nothing but upon opposing the fury of the people. The Duke embarked his
Soldiers at Reole, and went himself along with them; many Gentlemen flocked
presently to him, and without more ado, those Forces, which did not in all
amout to 2000 men, quartered within two leagues of Libourn, intending to fall
upon the Camp of the Burdelois the next day.

Libourn is about a mile in compass, of a square form, environed with Walls,
and ancient Towers without any Platforms, seated upon an Angle made by the
rivers Durdone and Isel, which meet at one side of the Town toward Fronsack;
the Campaguia is plain and plough'd up: The Burdelois had not yet time to
entrench themselves, nor was there any order in their Camp. The General
Chamberet was old, not much verst in leading any Foot, and much less in what
belonged to a General: His people were undisciplined. On the contrary, the
King's men, though they were far short in number, yet were all expert
Soldiers; conducted by Warlike Officers, whereof the Count de Marin was the
first Camp-Mareshal; all the rest who accompanied Espernon, were such as had
for the most part been in the War. The posture of the besieging Camp being
discovered by petty parties of Horse, small Skirmishes happened, which grew
greater afterward on the Dukes side. Count Serres, with Crequy's Gavalry, and
Count Marin with the Foot of the Guienne Brigadoes, fell furiously on the
Enemies, Quarters, who did so ill defend themselves, as they were immediately
routed. All sought how to save themselves; and so great was the astonishment,
as many of them perished in the Water, as they strove to save themselves by
Swimming. The Kings men made what havoc they pleased, whilst they could follow
the Fugitives: Marquess Chamberet was be alone, who with some other of his
friends, behaved himself as a man of Honor; but he was slain, as was likewise
Monsieur d' Andre, Serjeant-Major of the Army: Some of the Counselors of
Parliament were taken Prisoners: The number of the dead was about 2000; all the
Baggage, Cannon, and two Frigates were lost. Monsieur Martinet, Governor of the
Town, sallied forth at the same time with most of the Garrison, and killed many
of the Enemy. The Bourdelois had above 7000 men, and all the Bells of the
neighboring Villages rung out to call in men to their assistance, who came
from all parts. Espernon was very proud of this action; he entered Libourn, and
lay therein, quartering his men in the neighboring Villages. Count Argenson
tarried in the upper Country, to expect the issue of this action; which when he
knew, he went to the Duke to advise of what was to be done; but he found him so
exasperated against the Bourdelois, as it was impossible to bring him to any
moderate resolution: He dreamed of nothing but of chastising the Bourdelois,
and thought the Court would have sent him Forces to that purpose; he passed
over the River, and advanced to Castres, and accompanied by the same Gentry
that had served him at Libourn, hasted toward Bourdeaux. The mean while the
Archbishop, with the Deputies of the Commons, who had kept to the King's
service, entered into Treaty; that the Duke might besure to be welcome to the
Citizens, if he would come into the City. The Parliament would have no part
herein, but declared they would never have to do with their Enemy Espernon: yet
it was thought that if once the people were satisfied, means would be found to
appease the Parliament, the hope whereof made him comply with the City's offer.

The Duke advanced with his Army to Graves, two Leagues from Bourdeaux; the
Archbishop and Deputies came to meet him, and acquainted him with the reasons
which made the Citizens and People go out against Libourn; and desired him to
do what was sitting, and not to be the occasion of such ruins as civil Discord
brings with it. The Duke replied, That Subjects could have no reason to disobey
their Sovereign's Decrees: That they should treat according to their duty,
dismiss their Soldiers, demolish Fortifications, disarm their Vessels, and be
content to live quietly as before. The Deputies answered, That the City would
obey, and that they desired him to enter the City; Which the Duke said he
would, if they would disarm their Men, and beat down their Barricadoes. The
Treaty being concluded, it was carried into the Town by Viscount Virlada, and
the Duke was told that the next day he should find the Gates open for him and
all his retinue, the Soldiers excepted, the Barricadoes down, the Militia
disbanded, their General dismiss, their Vessels unarmed: all which was done;
but the Dukes Harbengers found the Gate St. Julian shut upon them, and
Barricado'd; but the Duke entered by that of Diaux, accompanied by his
Domestics, by some Officers, and by about 400 Gentlemen: And presently
Monsieur d' Espagnet, who was of power amongst the people, was sent to appease
those that were up, and to demolish the Barricadoes. The Duke was visited by
all the Corporations of the City, but not by the Parliament; because the Treaty
was (as they alleged) only with the City, and not with them; who were the
more incensed, for that the Duke did not conceal his anger against them. The
first President with some of the Wiser sort went to visit him, who with the
like respect went to return their Visit. He went afterward to the public
Palace, where he spoke handsomely of the late disorders, and promised the City
to intercede with the King for their indemnity; adding, that he would not tarry
long there, but that he would send his Forces higher up into the Country, to
the end that the City might be free of the inconveniency of their neighborhood.

Affairs seemed to be thus quieted, and in truth they were all so astonished
with the Blow received at Libourn, as had they governed themselves well; there
was great hopes they might have been reduced to reason; but then the Duke must
have tarried longer in Bourdeaux: for his too speedy return to Again, afforded
not time to the Parliament to grow more mild. Espernon dreamed of nothing but
revenge, whereof he cannot be excused; for from thence proceeded a great part
of the disorders wherewith Guienne has been so long afflicted. It is true that
the Parliament was always wanting in their duty, and did therefore deserve
punishment; but moderation must have been used therein, which might have
appeased those turbulent Spirits. The Duke went from Bourdeaux with firm
intention to punish the Parliament, he went to Gadilliack, from whence he
acquainted the Court with what had past: He desired the King to pardon the
People, but not the Parliament: Young Argenson carried this Dispatch to the
Court, which was then at Amiens: At the first the Council stuck upon forbidding
the Parliament, which did much prejudice the business; for they must either
have put on a speedy resolution, so not to afford them leisure to make new
Plots, or after long delay, have forborne execution. If the interdiction had
presently followed, whilst the people were well disposed to Peace, the
Parliament would have been necessitated to obey: But time altered the face of
affairs; and when they were resolved to do it, they could not. The Court went
from Amiens to Compeigne, which was another occasion of delay. Argenson told
them, that if the interdiction should be speedily made, it might be easily
effected; but if deferred, the business would take another parley: But whether
it were that they were negligent, or that the Court had other business at that
time, six Weeks passed without taking any expedient: so as that wound not being
healed, but contracting continually ill humors, by the turbulent suggestion of
the Parliament, the Bourdelois fell into new and more rash contempts. The first
President was excluded the Council, and the Councellor Solomon was driven out
of the City. The People were forbidden to receive Pardon from the King, and the
Giurati to desire it; imprinting in the People, that what was presented to them
as a remedy, was a pestiferous Poison; and that to accept of Pardon, was to
confess a fault. The Expeditions were sent to the Duke, and the way of putting
them in execution referred to him: but he, who was wholly set upon Revenge, fell
upon the most violent remedies. Monsieur de Coming, Lieutenant of the Queens
Guards, was sent with two Vssiere alla catena d' oro. Ushers with Gold Chains
to Bourdeaux, with the Inhibition; and Espernon himself went thither, who at
first was well received. But when, they found that Coming was come to thunder
out the Inhibition, whereat the Parliament was much troubled, by reason of the
bad consequence which the mark of such a fault brings with it, they would have
shut the Door upon him as he entered into the Hall, but some of his Guards made
a noise, and kept them from doing it; which incensed those that were present:
the most seditious cried, To Arms, to Arms; some Barricado'd the avenues of the
Streets which led to the Palace with Garts loaded with Dirt; others would have
shut up the Gate Salimieres, which is near the Palace, and by which succor
might be brought from the Castle Trombette; but the Dukes men being aware
thereof, stood in the midst of the Gate, and kept up the Portcullices which the
Seditious would have let down; which afforded convenience for 150 men to enter,
who were sent by the Governor of the Castle to oppose the peoples fury. The
mean while, the Duke, who with Count Argenson, Monsieur de Coming, and a
great many Gentlemen, was in the Palace-Hall, was told that the Tumult
increased; which made him retire, left he might be environed by the Crowd. He
returned to his house Pay-paulin, where he staid the rest of that day: He
thought to have come the next day to the Palace; but President Pontac
advertised him that the Seditious intended to set Puy-paulin on fire, and
counseled him to retire, left he might expose his person to the fury of an
enraged people. This advice was embraced, and instead of going to the
Parliament, he went from Bourdeaux with the Nobless which accompanied him, and
with his Guards and Domestics. He was no sooner gone out of the Gate, but the
people got upon the Wall, shot at him, threw Stones, and cursed him: He marched
speedily toward Cadilliack, and went from thence to Again, to expect Orders
from Court. The peoples fury being somewhat appeased after this venting of
their rage, Monsieur de Coming endeavoring still to reconcile the Duke unto
the Parliament, went to Porter, four leagues from Bourdeaux, to confer with the
Deputies of Parliament; but to no purpose. Many of the chief Inhabitants went
from the City; the Guirato Barriere, as he was going was slain, but by whom no
man knew. Constance, Pontack, Boutrin, and Duglas, who were all Frondeurs, were
made Giurati.

When the news of this Insurrection came to Court, together with all that had
happened besides, all means were used to allay the Rancour; and diverse good
Orders being made, President Gouges, the Counselors Mirat, Monion, and La
vie, who were all four Deputies of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and had been
detained at Senlis by order from the King, were set free; and Mirat was sent
back with advantageous Proposals to the Parliament, whilst they should keep
their obedience. For it was said, That Garonette, who held secret Intelligence
with Duke Beaufort and the Coadjutor, well-wishers to the Bourdelois, offered
to make Marquess Savebeus General. This Savebeus was a Gentleman of Perigord,
who being advanced in Espernon's Court, had by his favor married the Daughter
and Heir of Pierre Rusier de Limosin, a very rich man, who had declared for the
Duke of Orleans against the late King, at Momorancy his first stirring. He was
afterward Lieutenant General to the Duke of Parma in Italy; and not being
content with his Fortune, he fished in troubled Waters. The Cardinal was after
told, That since all Remedies that had been hitherto applied to this Malady had
failed, and that all had proceeded from the Duke of Espernon's presence in
Guienne, who was there generally hated, the cause must be removed, to remove
the effect. But it was not thought convenient to remove Espernon then, because
that another being to be sent thither, it might be that the Prince of Conde
might desire to be the man; so as the Burdelois affection toward Conde might
prove more prejudicial to the King's Authority, than their hate to Espernon: as
also, that it was more easy ( Espernon being powerful in Friends and
Territories in Guienne) to reduce the Burdelois to their obedience by his
means, than to seem to fear a rash and indiscreet people, by sending a new
Governor: and that therefore, by Maxims of good Government, it was better to
hazard the whole, than to loose a part willingly with hazard of the rest. The
King had a thought to go thither himself in person, or at least to send the
Duke of Orleans to Bourdeaux, where all things tended toward War; and Galleys
being armed by the Burdelois, began to scour those Waters in hostile manner,
having taken Monsieur de Meart, the Duke of Espernon's Superintendant,
Prisoners, and Counselor Blank, in their Country-houses, who were brought
with much ignominy to Bourdeaux; wherefore Espernon, who was come to Bourg to
have a care of that place, commanded Monsieur de Piles to advance with some
Companies of the Guienne Brigado to Ports; and garrisoned all the neighboring
places with Soldiers which came to him from Again, Mont-Alban, and elsewhere,
and acquainted the Court with all these proceedings. And because Haultmont,
Governor of the Castle of Trombette, had seized on some Beeves as they were
driven underneath the Walls, for that the City had denied him some Victuals
which he had desired; this served for a pretense to the Burdelois to break with
the said Governor; the Citizens making diverse shot against the said Castle,
and making all the Soldiers that were in the City Prisoners. Wherefore
Haultmont made all his Artillery play; but the Castle being seated low, the
Bullets grazed only against the tops of the houses, causing neither prejudice
nor fear. Therefore Savebeus was of opinion that it should be besieged: To
provide against the which, Monsieur de Mentrese advanced with some of the
King's Vessels into the Goromne, and four Ships were forthwith armed by the
City; with which, together with some other Vessels of War, Monsieur Thibaut
fell down the stream to encounter the Royalists. Meautrix his Vessel as it
advanced to give battle stuck against ground; so as going into a little Bark,
he flew the Pilot, and set fire on the Ship. The Burdelois this mean while drew
forth some Cannon to play upon the Castle; wherein the Parliament was not
wanting to give assistance, and imposed a great sum of Money upon all the
richest Citizens. Advocate Roche did, together with some others, compose one
Counsel of War consisting of six, and another of four, for the Maritime
affairs; they took diverse Troops into pay under Monsieur d' Espagnet, who was
the Enginier, and began to besiege the Castle, wherein there were but 200 men
in Garrison: They set upon it on three sides; and to keep it from being
relieved, the Marquess of Savebeus and Marquess Lusignan advanced with many
Squadrons to the Burrow of Pondesack, fortified and put Garrisons into all the
Churches and little Towns about Bourdeaux; and fortified the Island St. George,
which is a tract of ground lying between the branches of Garonine. Moreover,
all that were absent were summoned under great penalties to return unto the
City: which many of them did; and the houses of such as did not return, were
plundered, and all their Goods were sold by the Candle. Espernon endeavored to
relieve the Castle by Water, and appeared with his Forces on the opposite
shore; but was forced to give over the Enterprise. Wherefore the Defendants
having manfully defended themselves from the latter end of August, till the
midst of October; their Victuals failing them, the Water being corrupted, all
their Defenses and Tower beaten down, and the Garrison being reduced to bare to
men, despairing of Relief, they were forced to capitulate, and went out on the
18th of October: the Enemy entered, sacked the Castle; the Duke of Espernon's
Movables, which were worth 50000 l. Sterling, were brought into the
Marketplace, and sold for 8000 l. the Cannon which was in the Castle, were
brought in great triumph to the public Hall of the City. Counselor Fayard
with Ivy and Vine-leaves upon his head, like a Batchanatian, bestrid one of
the greatest Pieces, and with Flaggons of Wine in his hands powered out Wine to
the licentious Rabble that followed him; inviting them all to cry out, Vive le
Burdelois, Vive le Parliament: Upon which was fastened a Writing in applause of
the Enterprise, and exhorting them to accept of the Title of Majesty. This was
composed to little purpose, and to the scandal of all good men, by one Gage a
Priest, a Chieftain of the Seditious, and who by base flattery sought for a
reward.

During this Siege, the Deputies of Bourdeaux protested to the Queen, That the
Parliament intended mischief to none but to their bitter Enemy Espernon; and
that in all things else they were the King's faithful and obedient Subjects.

The Court, which desired to wipe off the rust of Scorn and Hatred (which could
not be done but by using sometimes simulation, sometimes rigor) at the same
time that they sent Orders to certain of the Soldiery of Guienne to advance,
sent Mareshal Plessis Pralin to reassume the Treaty of Peace, and to give all
reasonable satisfaction to the people and Parliament.

When the Marshal came to Guienne, he forbore going either to Cadillack, or
Bourdeaux; so to keep from giving suspicion to either party: but went to
Lormont, and began to negotiate as a third person between the Parliament and
Duke; he was complemented by the Deputies of the Parliament and of the City: at
first he endeavored to impede the continuation of the Siege; and when the
surrender was made, to hinder the demolishing of the Castle Trombette: he was
answered by Sault, who was the Advocate-General, That they would have no Peace
but War, till the King were of years, unless Espernon were removed from that
Government, in whom they neither would nor could confide. And a certain
Artificer, who was more brazen-faced than the rest, upbraided him, saying, he
was another Argenson, as much as to say, one that would deceive them: For
Argenson had in his negotiating cunningly maintained the honor and Interest of
the King.

Vie returned to Paris, to acquaint the Court with what had past, having
instead of serving the King, done the clean contrary; for he underhand
counseled the Inhabitants to dismantle the Castle, and to continue their
former resolutions, to the end that the Court having Foreign Wars upon their
Backs, and civil garboyls at home, might not be able to adhere so tenaciously
as it seemed to do to her Rights in that Province: For that favorable
conjunctures of times were not to be let slip by Subjects who were desirous of
Liberty; tracing the Court in her accustomed ways, which was to seem always to
desire that which she did utterly abhor; and to observe any thing but what was
promised, when it might be prejudicial, and when the occasion which drew on the
promise is vanished.

The same Vie treated with the Prince of Conde, and wished him to undertake the
protection of the Frondeurs of Bourdeaux, who would be ready to sacrifice their
Lives and Livelihoods in his service. The Prince seemed to be pleased with this
Invitation, and told him he was very well addicted to those he spoke of: But at
the same time he answered those who entreated him in the name of the Duke of
Candale, not to declare against his Family; that if he and his Father Espernon
would join with him, he would bring the Bourdelois wholly over to Espernon, and
would secure him in that Government. Candale refused the Proposal, and would
not forgo his obedience to his King: Which being known in Bourdeaux, by a
Letter written to Espernon by Monsieur de Theuenin his Agent in Paris; the
Wisest amongst them found that the Prince did but mock them: But the Bourdelois
were so overborn with Passion, as their own danger could not make them be
aware; and therefore, not minding the Proposal, though it tended to their
satisfaction, with pride misbecoming Subjects, they marched with 4000 Foot, and
800 Horse into the field; and on St. Martins day they took Pondesack, and
plundered the Church, whereinto the Country People had brought their Movables;
they violated Women, and fired Houses. The Castle was defended, two days, but
was then surrendered. Their design was to do the like to Cadilliack, which
they sat down before; but the place being well defended by eight Companies of
Guienne Brigade, and by five other Companies which came from Rion a
neighboring Town, they quitted the attempt.

They then turned toward Pregnack, and from thence played with their Artillery
upon Langon, which they took by assault, and plundered: 200 of Marine's Foot,
who guarded the Castle, which was weak, and after having defended it four
days, for want of Powder parlied, just when Monsieur Marine was come to Bazaz,
two Leagues off, with Forces to relieve it. The surrender of the City Marcare
followed the loss of Langon; and the Parliamentarians overrunning the Country
even to Gironde, the Marquis Savebeus staid there to refresh his men, whereby
he afforded Espernon (who was advanced to St. Basil) time to put Monsieur di
Biron with a sufficient Garrison into Reole; which spoiled the Bourdelois
design, who hearing that at the time Count Dognon was entered the River with
eight Frigates, a good number of Galleys, several Feluccaes, some Fire-barks,
and other provisions, and with a great many men, so as the Kings Forces were
increased; they left Garrisons in the Towns they had taken, and returned
hastily to Bourdeaux.

Whereupon the Duke of Espernon, having suddenly retaken St. Macaire, Langon,
and Pondesack, with 6000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, fell upon Bastide, but did no
good therein; for, it being seated on the other side of the River, just over
against the City, and guarded by Marquess Theobon by a great Garrison which was
ever and anon reinforced by many Soldiers brought from the Fleet; he met with
so stout defense, as he was forced to give over the attempt with the loss of
some Foot, and of Monsieur Scormans Captain of Marine's Brigade.

Count d'Ognon having taken up his station at Lormont, was there assaulted by
Savebeuse with 300 Citizens, led on by Girat a Captain of the City, not without
danger of losing the men he had landed, and the Cannon, had not the Bourdelois
(who were confused at Girat's being wounded) lost time in giving the assault,
affording the Count convenience to re-embarque his men. The Bourdelois fell
upon his Vessels, but with small good to the Parliamentarians, who having sent
ten Fireships twice against the Kings men, their Vessels took fire before they
came to the Kings ships. By these chances, which were contrary to the
expectation of the Bourdelois, the Kings men being recruited by several
re-enforcements; and on the contrary, the Bourdelois much discouraged, the
Bourdelois began to be more calm, and instead of Revenge, to wish an Agreement.
Wherefore the Mediators reassumed the Treaty, and by Monsieur d' Alluimat's
coming to Bourdeaux, who was sent from Court with Articles agreed upon between
the parties concerned, and Marshal de Plessis, the Agreement was concluded. The
substance whereof was, That the Castle Trombette should be demolished till the
King should be of years: That the City should be eased of the Imposition laid
upon it of two Crowns upon every Tun of Wine that went out, and of a certain
proportion of Taxes: That the Troops should be sent farther off, and the
Consuls of every City and Province might send their Appeals to the Parliament
without their Governors knowledge. No speech was had of what had past between
the Parliament and Espernon. The Count condescended to all that the Bourdelois
demanded, so as under pretense of Grievances, new commotions might not arise;
nor that the people should be exasperated by rigor, against which the Kings
Council would use no violent remedies.

But though these Fluctuations were in part thus calmed amongst the people, yet
were not the Frondeurs quieted, nor their Ambition, who in the public Storms
thirsted after private advancements. Monsieur de la Morte de las was sent by
the Marquisses of Lusignan and Savebeuse to the Court of Spain, to implore aid
from the Court of Spain; who were received graciously by the Favorite Don
Lewis de Hara; who to soment, these disorders, resolved to dispatch away the
Baron Batteville, then Governor of Guipuscoa: He embarked at St. Sebastian,
and being come to Bourdeaux five days after the Peace was concluded, he
notwithstanding appeared in the Assembly, and had public and private
Conferences with some of the Parliament, which would never consent to agree
with Espernon, nor that the exiled Counselors should be readmitted to their
former conditions: nay, whilst Monsieur Villamonte propounded means to agree
all parties fairly, they threatened to throw him into the River; and one of his
men was assassinated by some indiscreet Citizens, which increased the rashness
of the rest; his Coach being cut in pieces, and he had been made Prisoner as he
returned to Again, where he spoke with Espernon, had he not (being advertised by
a Friend of his) gone by the way of Libourn. The Parliament raised a great sum
of Money to pay the debt which they had contracted during the War; which being
repugnant to the Kings Authority, the aforesaid Vie, and Advocate Constante, as
they came from Bourdeaux to the Court, the Marquess Chasteauneuse reproached
them for it. But they not withstanding got favorable answers, as shall be said
hereafter, and which had been abundantly advantageous for them, had not the
Frondeurs, who were impatient of their good fortune, preferred a rash War,
before Peace granted them with such indulgency.

Before we enter upon the relation of the Troubles which happened in the year
1649, we will relate the Divisions and Factions of the Court, which arising
from a weak and almost unknown beginning, grew to such a height as passed all
due convenience.

The first Faction was that of the Queen-Mother's, or rather of Cardinal
Mazarine's; for the Court minded nothing but how to uphold this StateMinister
of an uncorrupted Loyalty, totally bent to maintain the Kings Authority against
the too great power of the Princes of the Blood, and of others, which is
suspicious in an absolute Empire, such as is that of France. The end of these
was to keep the Duke of Espernon in the Government of Guienne, intending to
keep those Subjects in obedience, and to stave off all Novelties which might
arise from another Governor, whom they might affect, and who might depend upon
them. It was thought to be a lesser evil to fall into a troublesome War, than
to abandon the King's Authority to the Will of a proud and contumatious people,
and for their pleasure to turn away that faithful Officer. To foment the
Provencialists underhand, and to insist in not having the Count of Alets any
longer for their Governor, as being too near a kin to Conde, to the end that
by bereaving him of that leaning-stock, his power might be the less: To keep
the Duke of Orleans still in good correspondency with the Regent, and jealous
of Conde's greatness, by the means of the Abbot della Riviere, who was promised
to be made Cardinal: To seek out all means to moderate the Duke of Beaufort's
anger by the Duchess of Monbason's means, winning her over by promise of
Honor and Advantage; to the end that by recovering him into his duty, they
might do the like to the Parisians, by whom he was seconded: To cross the
Parliaments pernicious designs: To balance Conde his vast thoughts: To cool
their heat who were set upon Interest and Ambition; and finally, to maintain
Regal Authority, and to win time till the King came of years, whereby all their
pretenses who were desirous to better their Fortunes were rendered plausible.

The second Faction was that of the Duke of Orleans, which was chiefly guided
by the Abbot della Riviere, in whom he did totally confide, though he were
hated by the Duchess Margueret his Wife, and by Madamoselle. Their ends were
to unite themselves to the Queen, hoping to marry Madamoselle to the King, as
they were held in hope by the Court; as well as was the Duchess, who intended
that the King should marry her eldest Daughter. And the Dukes Family being
Rival to that of Conde, they endeavored to lessen the Credit and Crandezza
thereof. This contrariety proceeded in part from the jealousies which use to be
between great Ladies, as were those of the Family of Orleans, and those of
Conde's and Longueville's Family. And to these Factions did several Princesses
and Ladies of great Quality, and many highly qualified Lords adhere.

The third Faction was that of the Prince of Conde, Prince of Conty, and of the
Duke and Duchess of Longueville; whose ends were so to fortify themselves
with Governments of Provinces, and strong Towns, during the Kings yet two years
remaining Minority, as that when the King should be become of years, they might
be able of themselves to resist and withstand any opposition which might be
made against them. It is known that the Grandezza of the Princes of the Blood
has always been suspected by the absolute and independent Dominion of a
Monarch; as had been observed in the times of the precedent Kings by the
imprisonment of almost all the Princes of Conde, and lately under the
Administration of Cardinal Richlieu; who, during the time of his supreme
Authority, became Arbitrator of the Lives and deaths of the most conspicuous
men of the Kingdom. To this was added their being able to keep Cardinal
Mazarine from establishing himself in his Employment by Marriage and
Governments; and though he should be still in the Administration, to keep him
low and weak, as well because that no other French Subject of haughty thoughts
might succeed him, as that wanting a considerable Leaning-stock, he might be
the more exposed to depend totally on them.

The fourth Faction was that of the Frondeurs, whereof the Duke of Beaufort,
and the Coadjutor, were the chief Heads: and it was fomented by the Duchess of
Chevereux, and the Duchess of Monbason; by diverse Presidents and Counselors
of Parliament, and by almost all the people of Paris. Their design was to
lessen the Cardinals Authority, to increase their own, and to make their
Faction powerful. The Coadjutor was in high hopes hereof, being thereunto
persuaded by the example of his Progenitors, who had had the administration in
the Regency of other Queens who had been Forreiners; which not being to be done
whilst the Cardinal was at the Helm, they sought out pretenses how to color
their calumnies wherewith they aspersed him, and flattered the people with
hopes of bettering their condition: the Parliament and people proceeding by
these means, infused distrust into the Parisians, comforted those of Bourdeaux,
and seeking how to disorder affairs, resolved to put all things into confusion;
so as the King being bound to dismiss the Cardinal, they might effect their
intents.

Not to omit touching upon what the Forces of these four Factions were: That of
the Cardinal was fortified by the Kings Authority, by the obedience of all the
Provinces of the Kingdom, except those that were governed by Princes of the
adverse party; by all the Veterane Troops, by all the strong holds, by the
Officers of the Crown, by all the Courtiers and Nobless of the Crown, who
reverence nothing but the name of King.

The Duke of Orleans party aimed at nothing but at the Grandezza of the Abbot
de la Riviere, who being named by the King to be a Cardinal at the first
election of Cardinals, did nothing but caress the Court and Cardinal, to keep
them from altering their minds. And though the Court intended him not that
honor, left the Duke of Orleans might have a Favorite of equal dignity with
the Queens Favorite, yet it proceeded dexterously, to gain the advantage of
Time. The Abbot not diving into the depth of the business, pressed the Queen
continually to use all convenient means at Rome for his preferment; but he was
not aware that the Instrument he made use of was that which wounded him; for
the more the Court of France did desire this honor for la Riviere, the Pope
did the more retard this promotion, to avoid giving this satisfaction to
Cardinal Mazarine, with whose Interest he thought it did comply, that the Abbot
might be decored with that dignity, without which his concernments would be
ruined: For the Pope was not very well disposed toward the Cardinal, for
reasons that shall be said in their proper place. Yet the Pope had not refuse'd
to nominate him, and the Abbot received visits in L'Hostelle d'Orleans, where
he lived, from the Pope's Nuntio, with great applause and approbation, as if he
had already been made Cardinal. And though many said that this was done by
Mazarine's cunning, and not with the Queens intention; yet as men are easily
lulled asleep with Songs which please them, the Abbot wanted the Courts
wariness; for being free from all suspicion, he was so well persuaded of
himself, as he believed that if there were any thing in hand at Court
prejudicial to him, it would be found out by the Cavalier de la Been, and by
others his friends which he kept at Rome as Agents to the Duke his Patron, to
solicit this his Promotion.

This nomination of Cardinalship succeeded in the year 1648, and it was
effected by the Queen, being withstood much by the Court. When the King was
returned to Paris, Conde's Family having prevailed with Conty to become an
Ecclesiastic, they pretended to the name given to la Riviere for Conty; were
it either that he did really desire that dignity, or that by abandoning that
pretension he might get some greater advantage.

Upon the hearing of this, the Abbot employed the Duke of Orleans to the
getting of what was promised him, and made him withdraw to Limours; threatening,
that if they failed him, he would go into Languedock. The Queen was much
troubled hereat, and was forced to persuade the Princes to yield to the said
pretension; showing them, that Conty being a Prince of the Blood, it made but
little for his reputation to be made a Cardinal at the King's nomination, as
was usual to the Subjects of France: but that it ought to be done for his
extraordinary Merit, and for his Birth. So as Conde being willing to satisfy
the Queen, and yet not to lose his right to the Cardinalship, it was agreed
upon between them, that her Majesty should write to the Pope, and desire
Conty's promotion as Extraordinary; which if the Pope should deny, then Conty
should be nominated for Cardinal instead of la Riviere; and that the Queen
should declare, that when a Prince of the Blood should pretend to such a
dignity, all others were to give way. The difference being thus adjusted, the
Duke of Orleans returned to Paris, where not long after the Abbot was made a
State-Minister, and was upon all occasions caressed by the Cardinal, and by
Conde.

The third Faction, which was Conde's, was only to establish himself upon
sound foundations, seeking only some pretensions to effect it: He was
Governour-General of Berry, and of the City and great Tower of Bourges the
Metropolis of that Province. He had therein many Feefarms and Vassals, besides
the strong Castle of Montrond, which was well provided, and well Garrisoned by
him. He was likewise Governour-General of Burgundy, and of the Castle of Dijon
the Metropolis thereof, situated upon the River Ousche, wherein he had also
many Fee-farms and Vassals; besides the Town of Belgarde, (with the Title of
the Dukedom) sufficiently Garrisoned, upon the River Sone. He was Governor of
Verdune, and of St. Ione de l' Aune, places of importance for situation, but
meanly Garrisoned; and he treated by leave from the Queen, to make himself
Governor of the important Town and Castle of Ausone, as you go from Dijon to
Dole. He also had the Government of Steney, and Clermont, strong and
considerable places. He was Governour-General of Compeigne, and had newly
obtained from the Queen the Government of Danvilliere a noble Town in
Luxemburg, lately before won by the French, wherein Monsieur di Rochefaucault,
Brother to Prince Marsilliack (who was Governor of Poictou) was Governor. His
Sisters Husband the Duke of Longueville was Governour-General of Normandy, and
particularly of the City and Castle of Caen, and of the City and Castle of
Diepe, a considerable Sea-Haven; and he had therein also many FeeFarms and
Vassals. The Marquess of Beveron, who was a great friend of his, was Governor
of the old Town of Roan; and his Couzin Count Mattignon Governor of Granville,
and of Cherburg, both Sea-Havens; and these were the two Lieutenant-Generals of
the same Province: he pressed continually for the Government of Pout d'Arck upon
the Seine, two Leagues from Roan: Marshal de Brese, Conde's Father-in-law, was
Governour-General of Anjou, and of the Castles and City of Angiers, the
Metropolis thereof; and of Saumeur. The Count d' Alets, Conde's Kinsman, was
Governor of Provence; who kept in Arms in that Province against his Enemies;
and being by the Inhabitants made Master of Toulon, he kept his Regiment of
Foot in Garrison there, after Monsieur di Garniere's death, and behaved himself
as Governor.

This was the strength of the third Faction, to the which many great Lords and
Gentlemen of the Kingdom did adhere, who were friends to these Princes; and who
did publicly aver, that they did it merely to moderate the Cardinal's
greatness, upon whom they laid all fowls. And to make himself yet stronger,
Conde, though he had not first consented to the Marriage of Duke Mercoeur with
Madamoselle Mancint, yet by means of such as were friends to them both, he made
the Duke of Vendosme be told, that he was a Prince of such Birth and Morit, as
he might justly pretend to be Admiral, without consenting that his Son should
marry the Cardinal's Niece; and that if he would gainsay it; and join with his
Interests, he would carry affairs so, as that he should be Admiral; and that he
being one who loved the Honor of the Princes of France, he was unwilling that
the house of Vendosme should match so far beneath it self. He spoke hereof
without any manner of respect, though it were a question whether he did it out
of ill will to the Cardinal, or to prejudice the Duke of Vendosme, with whom it
was known he was not upon good terms. It was also thought that he endeavored
to slave off Candale from considing in Mazarine: but the Court being already
too much engaged with his Father the Duke of Espernon, who was kept by the
Cardinal in the Government of Guienne, for the reasons aforesaid, he could not
effect his desire. So as considering that the Countess of Martinozza's Marriage
could not be effected without restoring Espernon to Bourdeaux, he publicly
opposed it, fomenting the Parliament, the Inhabitants and chief men of the
City, to insist upon his removal. In the Kings Council he did publicly defend
the Bourdelois, condemning Espernons violent proceedings; with Words likelier
to foment Discord than to make Peace. And to hinder that the Government of
Provence might not fall upon some one too pleasing to the Court, he defended
his Kinsman the Count of Aletz against the Parliament and City of Aix, not
only by express Letters, and by particular Promises, but in
State-Consultations, and with threats against the Deputies of that Province,
who complained continually against their Governor.

Finally, the more to hinder Mercoeur's Marriage, and to bereave Vendosme of
the hope of being Admiral, he made Marshal Breze demand the Admiralty, as
Father to the Duke of Breze, who had been slain in the Kings service; supposing
that Vendosme would not condescend to that Alliance without the said Charge:
and he moreover wrought it so, that his Father-in-law, the said Marshal, sold
the Government of Anjou to the Duke of Rohan, Chabot, who was his great friend.

As for the fourth Faction of the Frondeurs, they seemed to mind nothing but
the Cardinal's Ruin, either by making him be banished the Kingdom, or by
making him be seditiously slain by the people; by which they thought to advance
their private fortunes.

Duke Beaufort was resolved to keep in favor with the people, with whom he did
publicly contend against the Court. And the Frondeurs endeavored to draw more
Citizens and others over to their party, knowing themselves to be of themselves
too weak to contend against the other Factions. The Coadjutor, who thought
himself fit for any employment, how great soever, and longed to get into
employment, and to get the dignity of Cardinal, did so wisely carry his
affairs, as, though he was a great Confident of Duke Beaufort's, and the chief
counselor of his party; yet he sought privately how to fall in sometimes with
the Cardinal, sometimes with the Prince of Conde; that so if he might be able
to pull down one of them by means of the other, he might easily afterward
effect his end, which was to destroy them both, and to become sole Arbitrator
of all things himself. The Cardinal, who cunningly penetrated into the depth
hereof, defended himself dexterously from these the Coadjutor's seigned
semblances; who growing sorry for it, sought for protection to Conde, that they
might both join in extirpating the Cardinal; which if it should succeed, it
would not be hard for him to overthrow Conde, who was to this purpose
extraordinarily reverenced by the chief Frondeurs; especially after his return
to Paris from Compeigne: and truly he might be said then to have Fortune by the
Forelock. For had he embraced this opportunity, he would have become very
powerful, by adding the Authority of the Frondeurs and that of the Parliament
of Paris to that Renown which he had already gotten. But were it either that he
feared he might make way for others to compass their ends, or that being of a
noble and generous mind be hated cozenage and double dealing, he would not go
so far about, but governed himself according as occasions did arise, to attain
to what conduced most to his ends.

Some malign Star seemed to have influence every where; for after Tumults had
been raised in many parts of Europe, they came to France, and afterward to the
City of Liege. The Troubles which arose there were occasioned by the Citizens
denying to pay the 60000 Crowns which fell to their share in the Peace which
was concluded the year before, by their not admitting of the Coadjutor, being
sent by the Elector of Culen, under whose jurisdiction Liege was; and for that
it was discovered those Citizens had a design to choose the Prince of Conty for
their Coadjutor.

Wherefore the Elector finding it now a fitting time to reduce that City to its
devoire, whilst it was divided; he sent General Spor thither with 6000 men, who
entering those Territories in Hostile manner, the Ligeois and those those that
confined upon them took up Arms, obliging the Elector's men to War; which began
by their falling upon Fleron, a Village about a League from Liege, which was
presently stormed and burnt. Iuppole, another great neighboring Village, made
stout resistance; for being fortified, and defended by many Citizens who
marched out with Monsieur Hannet, they manfully withstood two Assaults; but not
being able to withstand the third, it was also taken and fired, with the death
of Hannet, and of as many as were in it. Then the Electorals encamped in the
Monastery of the Carthusians, not far from the City. They burnt Amerceny;
planted their Cannon before Corvillion, a little Town which commanded it; took
the Cloisters of St. Giles, and placing their men in Battle-aray, began to
batter the Walls, though the Besieged, being a Warlike people, did with great
and frequent Salleys endeavor to keep the Enemy aloof. Here was Colonel Arar
slain, who was of great experience, and much beloved by the Soldiers: many
other of the best Inhabitants were slain here likewise. The Electorals were
still sollicitous in advancing the Siege, fearing left the Hollanders might
come in to the relief. They set upon the Abbey of St. Lorence, which was
fortified by the Ligeois, and guarded by 300 men; but were repulsed with much
loss both then, as also a second time; but being wearied out by many reiterated
Assaults, and by the death of many of them, and not being relieved by the City,
the Abbey was taken by Storm the same day, all the Soldiers were slain, the
Abbot and all the Monks were taken prisoners, as held to have holden
intelligence with the Besieged. The Citizens being hereby as much terrified and
dejected, as they at first appeared stout and courageous; and being much more
cast down by the disagreement of many amongst themselves, who held private
intelligence with the Enemy; they demanded a suspension of Arms for six days,
which was granted them but for 24 hours, a sufficient time to treat of and
conclude such a business: In which time one of the Burgomasters, and some
others who sided with the Elector, opened the Bridge-gate privately, and let in
the Baron of Linden Governor of Huy, with 4000 armed Men, who were placed in
several parts of the City, not meeting with any opposition, save a little in
St. Mark's place, where the most seditious amongst the people made a Head: But
being quickly overcome, and their Captain slain, they soon run some one way,
some another; so as the Electorals made sure the City, took Burgomaster Hennet
Prisoner, who was Brother to him that was slain whilst he defended the
aforesaid Village, made the Regiments of Spor and Goltequer enter the City, by
which they became absolute Masters thereof. And thus did this Insurrection end,
with the Imprisonment of Burgomaster Bartlet, to the great glory and advantage
of the Elector. The aforesaid Prisoners were condemned to die, as chief Authors
of the Tumult; but Bartlet ransomed his life at a great sum of Money. Hennet
and two other of his Companions had their Heads struck off; and the City was
sinned, to keep from being Sacked. The Elector came thither afterward; and to
keep them from the like Rebellion, he took all the Chains from the Streets, and
gave order for the building of two Citadels: And thus did this War end.

At the same time that these things happened in these parts, new Broils were
heard of in Italy; for Pope Innocent being resolved to force the Duke of Parma
to pay the Creditors of Monti Farnest, which he was not able to do, by reason
of the great expense the Duke his Father had been at in the late Wars; in
January this year some Commissaries of the Apostolic Chamber were sent to
Borghetto, a Town in the State of Castro, and carried with them four Companies
of Soldiers, to put the Sentence in execution which was made against the said
Duke in behalf of the Duchess of Nerula; who being withstood by the people of
Parma, and made to return without doing any thing, such distastes grew
thereupon, as did by degrees increase, and were much increased by the
assassinate which was committed on the Bishop of Castro as he went to his own
residence, though it happened against the Duke's will; for hereupon open War
broke forth: Duke Ranuccio did what he could to stave it off; and the Pope
declaring that his design was only to gather in the approaching Crop, to
satisfy the Montesti therewith, the Duke professed much respect and reverence
to his Holiness; listening to all Proposals of Agreement, being as desirous
thereof, as the way was easy, if the Declarations which came from Rome had
been (as those of Parma said) as sincere in effect, as they were in appearance:
for since it was civil Interest that was treated on, they thought the Pope
might not make it criminal; and that instead of spending his Men and his Money
against a Prince who was obsequious to the Holy Church, he might with more
glory have employed them against the Enemies of Christ and of the Catholic
Faith. The Duke offered to disburse as much money as the pretended Harvest
would come to; and did at the same time desire his Holiness, that touching the
lapsed Fruits, if it should be found that he were liable to the payment
thereof, they should be added to the whole sum; which he promised to pay,
together with Interest, within the space of twelve years. To these Proposals
the Pope answered sometimes in one manner, sometimes in another: and though he
gave out that he had given order to the great Duke's Ambassador to pretend
only to such payments as were due whilst the State of Castro was in possession
of the Family of the Fernesses; It was at last resolved, that the Duke should
be bound to make payment for the whole time, though the Apostolic Chamber had
possessed the State during the late War. Whilst these Treaties were on foot,
and that the Pope declared he intended not to take Castro, not to suffer any
Hostility to be done in the State, his Forces were no sooner entered thereinto,
but they did the quite contrary; they fate down before Castro, commanded by the
Counts David Vidman, and Girollimo Gabriele. The Duke being loath to lose it,
and finding that the Great Duke's Negotiation, nor that of Cardinal Albernots,
and of the Marquess Caracene in the name of his Catholic Majesty did no good,
raised some Forces in the Territories of Parma and Piacenza, and resolved to go
to the relief thereof: the same Gaufredi and Count Francisco Baiardo led on his
Forces; who advancing by the way of Vastalla, and Mirandola, toward the River
Lens in the Bullonese, with no little terror to those Inhabitants; they were
met by the Church-Army commanded by Marquess Matthei, accompanied by the
Marquess Villa, and the Marquess Tassoni; and coming together on the 13 th of
August, near the Town St. Pietro in Cassal, those of Parma were routed after
five hours fight, and Gaufredi was forced with little honor to return to the
Territory of Parma with the remainder of his worsted Army: whereat the Duke was
highly offended, especially for that he had heard that Gaufredi had abused the
Duke's Name upon many occasions; and that amongst other things, he had put the
Bishop of Castro to death; he made him be imprisoned in the Castle of Piacenza,
where Process being made against him, and he being convinced of inexcusable
Faults, he was in public view beheaded.

Gaufredi was Son to a Physician of a little Town in Provence called Ciutal;
and being by his Wit gotten to be Secretary to Duke Edward, he got to have the
whole power in the Court; and in this his greatness, giving distaste to the
Duchess and chief Lords of the State, he drew upon him that envy which usually
attends so violent a Fortune as was his; and instead of altering his
haughtiness with the death of his Master, he still grew prouder under the Duke
his Son, whom he did totally govern, in despite of his Mother, and of the great
ones of the Court: and confiding in this his prosperity, he fancied to be a
General, though he had never been a Soldier; and to go with these
well-appointed Forces to frighten Rome, as the Duke of Bourbon had done. But at
his first encounter with the Church-forces, he ruined that Enterprise and his
Fortune; being dazzled with the splendour of that Ambition, which always, when
unaccompanied with the luster of Birth, proves dark and cloudy.

Sauson Arsinelli Governor of Castro, who till then had defended the Town
valiantly, despairing of Relief by reason of this unfortunate encounter,
parlied on the first of September, and surrendered the Town upon as honorable
and advantageous terms, as in like cases are given to men of Honor: He
delivered up the Town and State into the Popes hands, whose Garrison entered
thereinto; and his Holiness became Master thereof without any more ado.

And though by this Surrender all Hostility should have ceased, yet the
differences between the parties pretending was not so quickly hushed: For the
Pope being resolved that the Duke should not only pay and discharge the
Fernesan Debts, but that he should be further proceeded against, for having
made opposition by way of Arms; they did still continue. At last, all the
Spanish Agents, together with the Great Duke, being become Mediators, and being
desirous to oblige the said Duke, left he might desperately throw himself into
the hands of the French, the Agreement was made by their means; the State of
Castro remaining in the Pope's power till the said Principal should be
satisfied by the Duke; which was not without some prejudice to the esteem which
France was then in in Italy, since the Princes thereof were forced to have
recourse to Spain, whose reputation the greater it grew, the more did that of
the French lessen, who were not less prejudiced by Duke Charles of Mantua his
joining in straighter alliance with the House of Austria, whilst thereby he
left depending upon France, as he had till then done, and in all reason ought
still to do. But not foreseeing such an inconveniency, were it either out of
unadvisedness, or that he thought to keep the Duke in awe by the Town of
Cassal, or that there were not therein then any Marraigeable Princesses; for
Madamoselle d'Orleans had no mind thereunto, as being unwilling to marry into
Italy, where she might not enjoy that Liberty and Freedom which is allowed in
France; the Duke might do what he pleased. Wherefore he married with Donna
Isabella Clara of Austria, Arch-Dutchess of Inspruch, in June this present
year; which made a straight tie afterward between these two Houses. For the
Emperor Ferdinando being a Widower, and being to marry the third time, he
pitched upon the Sister of the said Duke of M^ntua, whom he married the next
year, 1650. Both which Brides as they passed to their Husbands, went through
the State of Venice, where they were entertained throughout all that Dukedom
with such Splendour and Magnificence, as the Commonwealth is accustomed to do
upon like occasions.

A Match was formerly treated of between the Emperor and Madamoselle
d'Orleans, who had a great desire to be either Empress or Queen; not thinking
that her Princely Endowments ought to match beneath her birth. Monsieur di
Mondevergne was sent upon this occasion to Caesar's Court, whose Negotiation
failing, Monsieur di Saugeon was sent thither in the year 1649, under pretense
of visiting her Brother Francis Duke of Lorain, who was then at the Emperors
Court, where he tarried some months, and had many Conferences with Count
Trautmendorp, making chiefly use of the Lantgrave of Hessen, and of the
Jesuits, with whom he used all means to effect it, first with Caesar, and
afterward with the King of Hungary; but the Spaniards marred all, with whose
Interests the Marriage did not comply.

Whilst affairs went thus here, the Spanish Fleet, which being commanded by
General Pimento, failed from Naples toward Catalonia, on the end of August came
before Oneglia upon the Coast of the Ligustick Sea, between Monaco and Finale,
belonging to the Duke of Savoy; where landing some Soldiers, they drew near
the Town, and forced the astonished Inhabitants, who wanted Garrisons and
Fortifications, to receive in a Spanish Garrison. Upon news whereof, the
Spaniards, who were already in the field upon the confines of Alessandrino,
parted suddenly from Montegrosso, intending to make some attempt upon Alba, a
City in Montferrate. But some Soldiers being put thereinto by Monsieur St.
One, and by Count Verua; they returned toward Ceva, and assaulted the Castle;
which being valiantly defended by Count Alexander Bogerello Governor of the
Town, and by Count Mauritio Santi who commanded the Fort, they were withstood,
and at last forced for want of Victuals to retreat by night; and on the 15 th
of the said month were fallen upon in the Rear by some French Troops, who show
some of them.

The loss of Oneglia troubled the Savoyards, by reason of the disturbance which
it caused unto all the neighboring parts. Wherefore Marquess St. Damiano
Governor of Villa Franca, and Marquess Omberto Governor of Mondoni, knowing
that there were but 400 Soldiers in it, came before it with certain Forces
which they had drawn out of their own Garrisons, and out of the neighboring
parts, and recovered the Town. The Governor retreated to the Castle, where
wanting necessary Provisions, he was forced to surrender by the diligence of
these Gentlemen: the Spaniards designs were thus interrupted; who got much
advantage in Catalonia by reason of the troubles in France.

The necessity grew still greater in Catalonia, by reason of a general Famine
that was there; and civil Discords were augmented in France; wherefore the
Spaniards had hopes to make full acquisition of that Province. To which
purpose, having given forth order for new Levies in the State of Milain,
Kingdom of Naples, Germany, and Flanders, they also rigged out a Fleet at Sea.
As soon as they had mustered an Army of 7000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, commanded by
General John di Garay, Lieutenant General Tuttaville, and by the Duke
d'Albuquerke General of the Horse, with 17 pieces of Cannon, and requisite.
Ammunition; they marched about the end of September to Ionneda near las
Borgias; from thence to Splaga in Calno; it not being known whether they meant
to march toward Cervera, or to fall down into the Valley of Tarragona; which
made Count Marsin, who was General of the French in Catalonia, equally to
fortify all the Frontiers, to keep them from being attempted by the Enemy; who
after having tarried two days at Splaga, fell upon and took Monblank, and took
80 Foot of Fabrick's Brigade Prisoners; which made the French advance suddenly
to Sarcall, with 1500 Foot drawn cut of the Garrisons of Cervera, Arbecca, and
Ballaguer, and with all the French and Catalonian Horse, advancing afterward
to Pira, half an hours march from the Spanish Camp; with intention either to
hinder, or to protract their passing into the Vale of Aragon, by the Hill of
Cabra, as they seemed willing to do; and here there passed many Skirmishes
between the Horse, which were advanced. But the French not being in a condition
to keep at Pira, they retreated to Rochefort: Whereupon the Spaniards falling
down without any hindrance into the Valley of Taragona, they on the third of
October assaulted Constantine, and in three days took it, though it were
stoutly defended by the Garrison; and at the same time they fell also upon
Salo, which is seated upon the Seaside, and took it by assault, wherein almost
all the Defendants were slain, and the rest were taken Prisoners, together with
the Governor Monsieur Benjamin, who was Wounded in six places. From thence the
Spanish Army marched toward Les Panades, seeming to have a design upon
Barcellona; which Marsin suspecting, he sent 800 Horse thitherward, commanded
by Monsieur di Nestiere, together, with the Foot-Brigadoes of Champagnia,
Auvergne, and Montpallion, and 200 Switzers, giving order that they should be
in readiness, and that when they should see the Spaniards were ready to fall
upon that City, they should go in to recruit it. Garay advanced without any
opposition; and his Army being strong, and well provided of all things, he set
upon and took Serges, four Leagues from Barcellona: and he might easily have
effected his intent upon Barcellona, had it not been for the vigilance of Don
Iusippe Marguerite Governor of that place, and of Monsieur di Mark Bishop of
Caserans, who discovered the intelligence which the Spaniards held in that
City, for which above 200 persons were put out of it. And all other things were
diligently provided for, particularly the Fortifications of Mongovich, and
Guards of the Maritime parts, where there was most suspicion, whilst the
Spanish Navy was upon those Coasts, upon pretense of carrying the Queen from
Genoua to Finale. Servera, Camarassa, Braedes, Falset, and other Towns of the
Valley of Arum were likewise fortified: and moreover, in 15 days space above
4000 Country People were armed; who were all Friends to France, and bitter
Enemies to the Spaniards.

General Marsin sent the Marquis of Fara afterward with four Regiments of Horse
to quarter at Villa Franca two Leagues distant from Sirges, that he might there
observe the proceedings of the Enemy, with orders notwithstanding to retreat if
they should make toward him; which the Duke of Albuquerk did with most of the
Catholic Horse: whereupon the said Marquis got to Horse betimes, and without
confusion retreated to Martorel, after having been charged by the Spaniards; in
which Bickering all the French Commanders did signalize themselves, and in
particular Viscount Larbusle, who together with diverse other Officers and
Soldiers were Wounded. Duke Albuquerke did also behave himself valiantly,
having his Horse killed under him; and Don Gaspero de la Cueva and three other
Captains were slain near him.

Don Iuseppe Marguerite had in this interim conveyed diverse Writings into the
Enemies Camp, containing promise of Pasport and Moneys to all that would
withdraw from the Spanish service; so as after the last encounter the Enemies
ran so fast away, (for their sufferings were great) as their Army was much
diminished.

Marsin quartered afterward near St. Andrea; and thinking that the Spaniards
might go into the Panades, to get new intelligence again in Barcelona; and not
finding himself strong enough to fight them, nor to force them to remove, he
resolved to effect it by a powerful diversion in the Kingdom of Valenza.
Wherefore he sent Don Iusippe d' Ardene into those parts with 3000 fighting
men, who entering without any opposition, overran a great part of the Country;
which General Garay understanding, he suddenly embarked 3000 men for Vineros;
and leaving his Baggage and Artillery at Taragona, he drew the Garrisons out of
Montblank and Sirges, and marched himself toward Villabodin, and from thence
into the parts of Lerida, being pursued by the French, who did somewhat
prejudice his Rear by reason of his slow march; and peradventure he might have
fared worse, had not D'Ardena been far off with his Forces, who brought nothing
with him into Catalonia by his overrunning the Kingdom of Valenza, but that
contagious Disease, which did afterward ruin almost that whole Principality.

This years Campagnia being thus ended in Catalonia, whilst all were in their
Winter Quarters, and whilst the French studied no less to surprise Taragona,
than did the Spaniards Barcelona; Iusippe Arbose a Notary of Taragona,
advertised Marsin that there were not above 400 Soldiers in Garrison in that
City; that he the said Arbose had above 80 Catalonians who were his Friends
there, who when the French should possess themselves of a Gate, they would take
up Arms against the Garrison.

He therefore went from Barcellona, seeming as if he went to view his Quarters
near Villa Franca, five miles distant from Taragona, and carried with him 800
Foot, and some Horse; and marching by night, came before the Town on St.
Ierom's Hermitage side, upon a Hill within Musket Shot of the City, by which
advantage he sheltered his Foot and Horse. He advanced 500 Horse to a high
place which was sheltered by the same Hill, to hearten those that were to
possess the Gate; toward which the said Arbose, one Catalonian, and five
French marched in Country-habits, with ten Mules loaded with Meal, as
Provisions which were usually carried into the Town; which the Sentinel who was
upon the Wall perceiving, he gave the accustomed Sign, whereby they were
permitted to the first and second Portcullices; but as they were to enter the
third, and that seven Soldiers that were of the Guard would have opened the
Great Gate, the Sentinel observing that some of those supposed Country People
did not answer well in the Catalonian Tongue, cried out that they were French;
yet he would advance and possess himself of the Wicket: but the Guard coming in
when they heard the moise, they were forced to retreat, and slew the Sentinel
with a Pistol-shot: Those who were privately advanced to assist these men,
hearing the Pistol go off, which was the Sign given for them to advance, they
did so; but were slain or stopped by the Spaniards, and had their Mules taken.
And Marsin, hearing the sinister chance, retreated to Barcellona on the 15 th
of January, throughout which whole City it was noised that the Enterprise had
taken; as certainly it would have done, had they taken Catalonians instead of
the French.

THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. 1650.
The FOVRTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The Prince of Conde declares himself dissatisfied with Cardinal Mazarine,
joins with the Frondeurs; then repents, and makes his Peace again. The
discontented party endeavor to raise seditions in Paris. A Musket is
discharged at Councellor Jolly. An Assassinate against Conde is suspected,
whereof the Frondeurs are accused: The Prince resents it, and endeavors to
have the persons guilty punished, accusing the Duke of Beaufort and Coadjutor
as the Principals: They endeavor to excuse themselves, and remove his
jealousies, but in vain; whereupon they join with the adverse party. The
Marriage between the Duke of Richlieu and the Marchioness of Pons is concluded,
at which the Court is much dissatisfied. The Dutchesses of Cheveuse and
Anguillon being highly offended with the Prince of Conde as the principal Agent
therein, plot his Ruin. New Commotions arise in Paris, and the Princes of
Conde, Conty, and Duke of Longueville are Imprisoned. The Abbot de la Riviere
loses the Duke of Orleans his favor. Diverse Noblemen declare for the Princes.
Count Marsin is Imprisoned in Catalonia. There follow many changes of
Governors, and the Chancellor falls into the disfavour of the Court. The King
goes into Normandy, and from thence to Burgundy. Some Towns in Berry, by the
Count D'Aignon his means, put themselves under the Kings obedience. Belgarde is
taken by the Royalists. The Duchess of Longueville retires into Flanders,
Thence to Stenay, and, together with Marshal Turenne, concludes a League with
the Spaniards. The Princess of Conde is received at Bourdeaux; and that
Parliament declares for the Princes. The King makes preparation for his going
to Guienne, and the War against Bourdeaux is renewed. The Duke of Orleans
demands to have the Imprisoned Princes brought to the Bastile: He is pacified,
and there happens diverse accidents in Paris. The War in Catalonia continues,
and the Spaniards make great preparations for fomenting the Civil War in France.

AMidst these so many various Interests and pretenses of the differing parties,
there happened a new and unexpected Accident, which had like to have turned
topsie-turvy, not the Court only, but also the whole Kingdom of France; in
regard the Prince of Conde pretending that the Cardinal at the Conference
touching the Peace at Paris, had promised the Government of Pont de L' Arche
unto his Brother-in-law the Duke of Longueville, and he denying it, was so
highly incensed and disquieted, that he declared, He was resolved to come no
more at Court whilst the Cardinal was Minister of State, or in the Kingdom:
Which occasioned so great a confusion, as the like has hardly been at any
time. Great was the concourse of the Cavalry, Gentry, and persons of all sorts,
to Conde's house; who according to his wonted custom speaking publicly and
passionately against the Cardinal, protested, He would never more have
friendship with him: which Expressions, together with his other Carriage,
gained him the favor of the common people, who were possessed with sinister
opinions, and greedily desirous of new things; and also purchased for him the
good Wishes of the Parliamentarians, to whom divisions in the Royal Family were
welcome; so as he found himself presently in a condition of being able to make
good his pretensions, and to disorder and overthrow the whole frame of the
Government.

The Frondeurs were the only persons who made no application to him, although
the Quarrel were against their greatest Enemy; because having before desired to
gain him unto their party, he had (as you have heard) refused them. The Prince
being a little surprised at it, had recourse unto his Sister Longueville, to
the end she by her credit with the Faction, might prevail with them to make
application to him. This she readily undertook, and wrought so, as the Duke of
Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all the principal Heads of the Party, came to
visit ^and make offer of their service to him, they being very sensible of the
advantage might thereby accrue unto them, in being able, when joined with him,
to overthrow the Cardinal; which of themselves they were not able to perform,
and therefore entered into a Confederacy with him, having in appearance only
the same intentions, but in truth desiring to make use of his authority in
compassing their own particular designs, which were to banish the Cardinal,
and restore the Marquess of Chasteau Neuf unto the Ministry.

Conde found nothing of difficulty in making a total Union with them, hoping he
might by theirs and his own Forces render himself sole Master at Court, and
disposer of all Affairs in France; only this jealousy remained, that he might
change the Cardinal for Chasteau Neuf his Enemy, which was a thing he no way
liked; and therefore he caused Beaufort to be sounded by the Duchess his
Sister, that he might understand whether Beaufort intended to come with him
against the Cardinal without reserve, and to persuade him that after the
Cardinal's expulsion, he would continue to espouse his Interests against all
his Enemies. The Duchess endeavored to perform this, but in vain; because he
declared frankly he intended to engage no farther in their Union, but only for
the Cardinals expulsion; and the Coadjutor expressed himself also to the same
purpose. The Prince begun then to be sensible of the Frondeurs drift, which was
to make use of his Authority for removing of Mazarine; and then instead of
leaving him the power, to deprive him also totally thereof; and by the
re-establishing of Chasteau Neuf, to draw the sole direction of all matters to
themselves. The Cardinal was grieved the Prince should for so slight a matter
become his Enemy; and professed, that rather than he should be the occasion of
Troubles in the Kingdom, he would renounce all his Fortunes there, and quit his
Charge: He refused the Visits and Applications of many persons who made tender
of themselves; and finally, he declared publicly, That although the Queen
should be willing to uphold him against the Prince, and desire his stay in
France, yet he would disobey her in that particular, as being more desirous of
the Kingdoms quiet, than his own advancement.

In this confusion, there wanted not some persons of Quality who interposed for
an Accommodation, grounding themselves upon their knowledge of the Prince's
temper; who the more furious and violent he was at first, was by so much the
more easily pacified with submissions and respectful carriage toward him; and
they were the rather persuaded of it, because they knew his generous mind would
not endure the extravagant and undecent pretensions of that party. The Duke of
Orleans, and Abbot de la Reviere (who desired not the Cardinal's destruction,
fearing they should thereby increase the Prince of Conde's power, and make the
Frondeurs and Parliament more bold and insolent) contributed their endeavors
hereunto, so as the first heats being passed over, the Treaties for an
Accommodation were resumed; and as the Prince's mind grew calmer, the
Cardinals Friends gained more and more upon him in their Treaties for an
Accommodation of the differences between them.

They represented to him, That if Mazarine went away, 'twas necessary to find
some other person in his room; the Queen, the Duke of Orleans, and even the
Prince himself, being unable to undergo that perpetual vigilance, labor and
care, which was necessary for the discharge of that Employment; and in that
case there were no persons could be thought on, but the Marquess of Chasteau
Neuf, or Count of Chavigny, both ancient and well-experienced Ministers of
State. Whereof the later, though acceptable to Conde, would never be admitted
by the Queen, who was to allow the person chosen, he having been a creature of
the Cardinal Richlieu, and one who had joined with him in the persecution of
her: and Chasteau Neuf liked by the Queen, would never be endured by Conde, as
an ancient Enemy to his Family, and one who in the Parliament of Tolouse had
been a principal person, and acted as Keeper of the Seal, at the death of Duke
Montmorancy his Mothers Brother. To these considerations, wherewith the Prince
was even convinced, was added this, That he foresaw, in case these two should
be excluded, a third person was probably to be made choice of, who would be
much more harsh and violent: This was the Coadjutor. And unto all this was
further urged, That the Duke de Roan gave the Prince hopes Pont de l' Arche
should be granted to Longueville: That the dignity of Constable and a good sum
of ready Money should be granted to himself. And in fine, they let him see,
that if by joining with the Frondeurs he should banish the Cardinal, the Duke
of Beaufort, as Head of that party, would have all the applause and favor of
the people; and his authority in Paris, by such a Rival, would be much eclipsed
and weakened; and that 'twere therefore better to agree with the Cardinal, from
whom a better satisfaction was to be expected, than from any other.

These Reasons were very well approved of by the Prince, who was no friend to
Beaufort, or any other that might stand in competition with him, for that
Reputation which the nature of his actions had acquired unto him: whereupon
advising with his greatest confidents, he considered that the Frondeurs were
willing to join with him, not out of any desire they had to second his
designs, but that they might by his means compass their own; and therefore
took a resolution to agree with the Cardinal; which he thought he might then do
without loss of Reputation, considering he was in this contest got to be Head
of that party, as well as of all others that depended on him. This was executed
with much speed, and upon very advantageous conditions; the Government of Pont
de l' Arche being thereupon granted to Longueville, and the Cardinal assuring
him, he would proceed no farther in the Treaty of Marriage between the Duke of
Mercoeur and his Niece.

Such was the end of this difference; the Cardinal kept his Station, the
Frondeurs were deluded, the Parliament confounded, and all other the
discontented parties were much unsatisfied, especially to see so great a change
in less than eight days, without the least notice given of it to any one of
those many persons of Quality, who had upon this occasion declared for him;
whereupon the general hatred, which was in a manner laid aside, was kindled
against Conde much more violently than before, and especially in those, who
having thought the difference between him and the Cardinal would continue, had
been too forward in the declaring of themselves; and being now discovered and
abused, railed against Conde, taxing him to be a person, who minding only his
own ambitious designs, had no value for his friends, nor consideration of the
services which they had done him. But above all, Beaufort and the Coadjutor
were most implacably his Enemies, they having fancied to themselves great
matters by his assistance, and the rather, because the Prince said publicly,
That he would rather suffer four Mazarines to be Ministers of State, than one
Chasteau Neuf; professing, That he had been in much trouble those few days he
had been with them, their inclinations being so diametrically opposite to his.

The Frondeurs, and all others being thus disappointed of their hopes of
banishing the Cardinal, that which followed was, first, the small respect which
Conde seemed to bear toward the Queen, and the first Minister of State;
believing the shows of reliance upon him from them, were true, not counterfeit.
Secondly, the great dissimulation which the Cardinal used toward him. And
thirdly, (which was most of all) the Curses which were generally made against
Conde, for keeping in a Minister of State who was generally hated by all
persons; and many thereupon presaged the time was drawing on, which might be
seasonable to Imprison him, as heretofore his Father had been, in the Bastile,
upon the like conjuncture of affairs, by the Marquess d' Ancre; and there was
none but thought the Cardinal capable of those Maxims, by which great persons
are taught to take such courses, as that a Subject who has been able once to
dispose of all things at his pleasure, should not be continued in such
Authority and Power. This came to be the general discourse, so as in all places
there was nothing so much spoken of, as of the Princes being clapped up; though
there were diverse persons who said it was not to be thought the Cardinal
(during the Kings Minority) would dare to attempt such a thing against a Prince
of his quality, because nothing of that kind could be effected without the
knowledge and consent of the Duke of Orleans, who was President of the Council:
and Conde had the Abbot de la Riviere for his Confident; who proud of such an
Honor from so great a Prince, assured him that his Royal Highness resolved
nothing, and much less of affairs of such importance, without consulting first
with him; and therefore he assured him he would not fail upon any such occasion
to give him notice.

The Cardinal in the mean time was particularly informed of all the Prince's
actions, and studied nothing more than some convenient opportunity to interrupt
his bold designs; and the great difficulties which appeared in the performance
of it, rendered him much more fixed in the resolution he had taken to perform
it. He considered on the one side the desperateness of the attempt, and the
extremity of ruin which would fall upon him if the Prince (who was extremely
jealous of every thing) should come to have the least suspicion that he had any
thought against him: And on the other side, how ignominious his management of
the State would be, if the Authority of the King his Master should, during that
time, be impaired and lessened by the Prince. And in this perplexity he
resolved that dissimulation was the true Sugar he was to use, wherewith to
sweeten all his Actions. In order hereunto, he caused presently all his said
Nieces to be removed from Court, and shut up in a Monastery of Nuns in the
Fauxbourgh of St. Germains, and declared publicly, that his intentious never
had been to marry his Nieces in France, for those ends which he was charged
withal; and therefore he was very glad to give over the thought thereof, his
only drift being to unite the Royal Family against those who endeavored to
raise Dissentions amongst them. This gave a stop to those Discourses which his
Enemies had formerly made against him in Paris upon that occasion; But his true
end therein, was to put them in a place of safety; so as in ease he should be
forced upon any occasion to retire, these Ladies might not be exposed unto the
insolences of an unruly people, as foreseeing all those artifices which the
malice of his Enemies made use of to procure his Ruin.

These passages very much troubled the Leading Men of the Frondeurs, and all
the other Malcontents, who saw their party decaying daily by the Residence of
the Court (which eclipsed all other Authority) in Paris, and by the agreement
between the Prince and Cardinal; and therefore they resolved, by some
extraordinary and sudden attempt, to put things unto a hazard before the
peoples minds were wholly quieted; and thereupon to take such resolutions as
time and the condition of Affairs should suggest to them.

The Parliament had not in this mean time met since the first of April because
all things being quieted by the Peace lately concluded, there had been no
occasion for their meeting. The Great Chamber had ended several differences
between the Partisans and their under-Farmers, who refused to pay their Rents,
although it were the order both of the King and Parliament that they should do
it. In pursuance hereof, the Partisans had caused several of the under-Farmers
to be Imprisoned in the Townhouse, where they had been restrained for several
days. And upon this occasion, the Partisans, to procure payment of their Money,
met several times, and in great numbers, in the Townhouse; which caused some
discourse amongst the people, who were very much inclined to Tumults and
Sedition. The Chamber de Vacance (upon the motion of the Procurator-General his
Substitute) prohibited all kind of Meetings, upon any occasion whatsoever,
without order from the Magistrate. The Partisans thought themselves injured by
this Order, and presently chose several Deputies, persons of quality, (as
Counselors, and Advocates, and Temporal Citizens, amongst which were the
President Charton, the Councellor Jolly, the Advocate Portait, Monsieur de
Constunes a Burgess of Paris, and others) who had Commission to endeavor the
ending of this matter without noise or tumult, and to solicit the payment of
the Rents as they grow due, according to the Instructions given them; but the
Great Chamber forthwith prohibited this Deputation, and ratified the Decree
made by the Chamber de Vacance against all Meetings either in the Townhouse or
elsewhere: On the other side, the Chamber de Requests being moved by the new
chosen Deputies, met and confirmed their Commission, declaring that the same
could not be made void by any other Authority but that of the Parliament; and
the same day some of the Lords meant to give an account thereof to the first
President, who having sent for the Provost des Merchands, the Escheuns and
Co^suls of the City; there appeared also the Deputies of the Chamber,
accompanied with above ^00 Partisans, civil persons, who with much earnestness
desired to receive the effect of the King's Declaration, and the Decrees of
Parliament made in their favor, and that the Deputies they had chosen might be
confirmed. The first President satisfied them with the promise to move it the
next day in the Great Chamber; but the President de Coigneux, who endeavored
to make them sensible that this affair was to be treated with more moderation,
gave great offense, and many cried they would, notwithstanding the Decree to
the contrary, have a meeting the next Monday in the Townhouse; which tending
unto an open Sedition, the Archers were commanded to seize upon the principal
Authors of the Commotion, amongst which they laid hold on de Constunes as a
leading man; whereof the Duke of Beaufort complained unto the Duke of Orleans:
and on the Monday there was a Meeting of many of the Partisans, they being
invited thereunto by Printed Billets which were set up at the corners of the
Streets all over Paris; 'twas there resolved that a Petition should be
presented to the Parliament, for punishment of those by whom de Constunes had
been imprisoned, and that in the mean time the Partisans should be taken into
the Parliaments protection. The Great Chamber ordered the Petition should be
showed unto the Procurator General, and endeavored by all means to appease the
troubles; but those who designed troubles, that they might compass their intent
of bringing things into confusion, upon the 11 th of December, as Counselor
Jolly passed through the Barnardins Street, there came up to the Coach a single
Horseman, who shot a Pistol into it that missed him, but raced the Skin off
from his Arm; whereupon he turned his Horse, and fled away without being known.
This accident made a great noise in Paris, and all his friends made complaints
of it to the Lords of the Great Chamber; but the President Charton, who dwelt
hard by, and whom Jolly intended then to visit, upon the first noise of the
fact went to the Louvre, and demanded Justice, complaining that the intent was
not to assassinate Jolly, but him, and required Justice: and there began the
sitting of the Great Chamber, and that of the Tornella ceased. The first
President assembled all the Parliament, and direction was by them given to the
Procurator-General to make enquiry touching the fact, and that all persons who
could give any information concerning it should come in: the Lords de Champront
and Domalt two of the Counselors were deputed to visit Jolly, and to receive
all informations should be brought. Ch^r^on was taken into protection, and the
Counselor Brussel voted that the City Gates should be shut up, and Guards put
there; but it was carried in the Negative.

During this Assembly of the Lords, the Marquess de Bellaye, who was a Kinsman
to the Duke of Beaufort, and of the Duchess of Cheveus, endeavored to stir up
the people, that he might, during the troubles, advance his own factious
designs; and being in the great Hall, began to call upon the Burgesses to shut
up their Shops, take Arms, and provide for their own safeties, telling them, It
was now fit to speak plainly, quit any farther dissimulation, and provide for
their own safeties. He told them, the Regiment of Guards was drawing together
with orders to assassinate Beaufort, and several other Counselors of the
Parliament: That they had begun with de Constunes for having spoken for the
public good. From thence he went unto the Marketplace with eight others in
his company, where they all used the same discourse; and from thence went to
Nostre Dame unto the Coadjutor to give him an account of the Action. He seemed
in public to reprehend them for this action; but the report is, that in
private he encouraged them to proceed, being himself willing to come abroad if
he could thereby have brought the people to a Rising; being heard to say in the
Court of his own house, What Cruelty is this? what farther security can we now
have? But he went not abroad, by reason of the uncertainty of the matter, being
loath to declare himself publicly in so scandalous an Affair. From thence
Bollay went to Broussel's house, who told him, That he was too furious: And
from thence he went unto the Street de Marmoselles, without being able to raise
the people any where; many telling him, That if he had any particular Quarrel
of his own, he should revenge it himself, without seeking to engage the City in
it.

This Marquess being of a Noble Family, was much troubled with the smalness of
his Fortune; and having gained some Reputation in the late Rising at Paris,
desired nothing more than some new Troubles, which he hoped might be an
advantage to him.

The Queen being advertised of all these Passages, called presently a Council,
to advise whether she should go to hear Mass at the Church of Nostre Dame, as
she was used to do on Saturdays: But being advertised, whilst the matter was in
debate, that all was quiet, she went thither as formerly, accompanied by the
Prince of Conde, and all the Grandees about the Court. At her return she found
there the Provost des Marchands, and the Eschevins, who came to assure her of
the Towns-mens Loyalty. But the Frondeurs having failed in this their mornings
attempt, resolved for their own security to raise another Tumult the same
evening: And to that purpose assembled in a Piazza that borders upon Pont neus,
as being a great thorough Inn, and the shortest way from the Palais-Royal to
the Prince of Conde's house in the Rue St. Germains. The Inhabitants
thereabouts being troubled to see a Meeting at so unseasonable an hour, sent to
know what was the intent of this Meeting, and by whose order it was done? But
answer was returned, That it concerned not them to know; and they were not to
give them an account of it. Some more curious, not satisfied herewith, pressed
to know who they were: And in this contest a Musket was discharged; which made
the Dwellers thereabouts take Arms, and caused the Cavaliers to retire
themselves over Pont neuf; whereupon all things were quiet.

The news hereof being brought to the Count Servient, he forthwith gave account
of it unto the Queen and Cardinal, and also to the Prince, who being then at
Court, and upon the first knowledge of it was returning home, had he not been
stayed by her Majesty and the Cardinal, who represented to him that those
persons could have no other design in meeting there, but against him, and
therefore desired him that he would by no means hazard his person. The Prince
was at last persuaded by them, and went to lodge for that night at his Stewards
house; but to be satisfied touching the matter, sent home his Coach,
accompanied with some of his Servants and retinue: When they came near Pont
Neus, two Horsemen came up with the Coach, but not finding him there, went to
that of the Count Duras which followed, and discharged several shot into it,
one of which killed a Lackey that was in it. This made the Prince (who had
designed the destruction of the Frondeurs Faction, that the Heads thereof might
not be made use of by the Court to frame a party in opposition to him) readily
lay hold on this occasion for the doing of it, by taking this Assassinate to
have been intended against him. The Cardinal (who looked on this conjuncture as
favorable to the design he had of making an immortal hatred between the
Prince and the Frondeurs) laid hold on the occasion, which he managed very
dexterously, by making the Prince sensible that all this was a Plot of the Duke
of Beaufort, and the Coadjutor, to take away his life, because by his agreement
with the Court he had given a stop to their designs: mean while there having
been great talk touching the matter attempted by Bollaye, the Duke of Beaufort
brought him unto the Marshal Grammont's House, where the Prince supped, to
justify himself from having had any ill intentions against his person. The
Prince answered, he knew not whom to suspect, but could not see Bollaye, since
he had endeavored to make a rising among the people, whereby he had incurred
his Majesty's displeasure. Beaufort answered, that he was well assured Bollaye
had not the least ill thought toward his Highness; for which he would be a
pledge for him, and if he should appear in the least guilty, would be the first
man to punish him. The Prince thanked him; and the Marshal having desired him
to stay Supper, he dismissed Bollaye, and sat down with them.

The Signior de Bovillon la Mark Captain of the Guard of Switzers, and
Bollaye's Father-in-law, besought the Queen to pardon the action by him done
the Saturday before; but her Majesty told him, it was a matter of high
consequence, and that therefore she must not stop the course of Justice. The
Duke of Orleans returned to Paris the same day, having been sent for by the
Queen, to consult touching some fit means to quiet the disturbances begun, and
to assist the Parliament in punishing such as upon examination should appear
guilty. As soon as the Duke came to Court, there was a private Council held;
and the next morning a Letter was sent to the Parliament, giving them orders to
make enquiry and proceed against those who had endeavored to raise Storms in
Paris, and to assassinate Jolly; concluding with words full of confidence of
their zeal and affection unto his Majesty's service, and the public Peace and
quiet of the Kingdom.

Next day the Parliament met, and thither came the Duke of Orleans, accompanied
with the Prince, the Dukes of Vendosme, Elboeuse, Mercoeur, Bovillon, and
several others, where his Majesty's Letter being presented by Monsieur Saints,
was ordered to be read, and registered. The Duke of Orleans thereupon made a
handsome discourse touching the present juncture of affairs; but the Prince was
silent, though 'twas reported he intended to enter his complaint in Parliament.
The City-Colonels and Captains were all summoned to the Townhouse, and
commanded not to take Arms, or chain the Streets, without express order from
the City-Council, upon a report which was spread, that the discontented party
intended a second rising. The Parliament ordered the restraint of Bollay, of
the Advocate Germain, of the Provost de L'Argent, and of Anean a WineMerchant;
and then the Prince made his own complaint, and demanded Justice for the
assassinate designed against him. Her Majesty the same day sent for several of
the principal Citizens, and assured them, that the King her Son was very much
satisfied with the proof he had now of their Loyalty and Affection toward his
service, notwithstanding the great endeavors used by some factious spirits to
raise Commotions. And it was really a great satisfaction to the Court, who
thought that Paris would upon the least provocation have risen against them, to
find, that on the contrary the Parisians were very Loyal and affectionate unto
his Majesty; and that if the contrary had at any time appeared, 'twas brought
about by the false practices of some few seditious persons, who were Enemies to
the public Peace.

The Parliament adjourned then for six days, that those who were to make
enquiries might have time to do it; during which Monsieur de Jolly (upon what
occasion it was not known) presented a Petition to the Great Chamber, setting
forth that the Assassinate attempted against him being a private action, was no
matter of State, nor had any connection with their crime, who endeavored to
raise Sedition in Paris; and therefore prayed that his Cause might not be
judged in Parliament, but left to be determined in the ordinary Court appointed
for the trial of those Cases; and that he might have leave to proceed there
against those who were guilty, and their Accomplices; adding, that he had now
gotten some light touching the matter, and hoped, in case he were left at
liberty to proceed freely therein, to make a full discovery thereof. Upon this
Petition it was ordered that he should give in his Charge in Parliament, and
that the Great Chamber should have the hearing of it.

Upon the 20 th of December, all the Chambers being met, there appeared the
Duke of Orleans attended by the Princes of Conde and Conty, the Dukes of
Beaufort, Retz, Bresac, and Luynes, the Coadjutor, and other Counselors of
Honor, above 20 in number.

This Meeting, and two others, which were held upon the 22 th and 24 th of the
same Month, were spent in contests touching the persons who were to be Judges;
exceptions being taken against all those who were parties, either as persons
against whom the Assassinate was intended, or as favorers of the design of
doing it; amongst which, the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor were pointed
at, so as after several disputes touching that matter, the Assembly broke up
without agreeing any thing, and was adjourned till the Wednesday after the
Holy Days.

But the Prince was so positively resolved to pursue the resolution he had
taken to destroy the Faction of the Frondeurs, that 'twas an easy matter for
the Court to gain him with the show of being troubled at the attempt against
him, and render him a mortal Enemy unto the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor,
and the whole Faction of the Frondeurs; who being rendered desperate by this
persecution against them for their Lives and Honors, joined with the Cardinal,
as hereafter shall be showed; and Conde by that means became a prey unto the
Court, to be disposed of by them according to their Wills and pleasure.

Great were the Rumors and Discourses then at Paris, because the Court having
this opportunity (though they embraced it not) to destroy the Frondeurs, the
Queen her self commanded all the Cavaliers, Officers, and others of the Kings
Guards, to accompany and serve the Prince as he went to the Parliament or
elsewhere; which was done as well to gain Conde by this respect, as also to
increase the jealousies between him and the Frondeurs, by such demonstrations
of distrust toward them. On the other side, many Gentlemen and Citizens of
Quality agreed together to accompany the Duke of Beaufort; by which means
Conde, who was of an impatient nature, was much more enraged against him; so as
it was a strange thing, that considering the prejudice each party had against
the other, the great diversity of Rumors and Reports that were amongst them,
and the number of armed Men, some disaster did not happen amongst them: but in
this the good nature of the French is to be praised, who after their first
Passion is over, love peace and quietness.

It was certainly a great affront unto Beaufort and the Coadjutor, to be
suspected as guilty of this Assassinate, there being nothing which does so
nearly touch men of Honor, as those Crimes that reflect upon their reputation;
and therefore the more the Prince seemed to give credit unto that opinion, so
much the greater was their hatred to him. But such was the authority he
arrogated to himself, and so great a contempt had he for all the Court, that
without considering the injury he did unto his Majesty's Authority, he fell
upon another action, which drew upon him the general censure of all persons,
and was the ruin of his Fortune. The Duke of Bichlieu, one of the richest
persons of the Kingdom, Nephew and Heir unto the Cardinal of that name, was
Suitor to the Princess Chevereux, a young Lady rarely qualified, both for her
Birth, and gifts of Nature, and only Heir unto the Family. The Duchess of
Aiguillon Aunt to Richlieu treated this Marriage, with the consent of the Duke
and Duchess who were the Father and Mother to the young Lady. But she
expressing a dislike toward him, the matter was kept in suspense, to the great
trouble and affliction of Richlieu: Who making his complaints thereof one day
unto the Marchioness of Pons, a Widow, Daughter to the Baron de Virier, under
whose care the Duchess d' Aiguillon his Aunt had put him, he being as yet a
Youth not above 18 years of age; the Marchioness advised and comforted the Duke
in this affair: but being troubled for his Passion, she chanced to fall into
discourse thereof one day with the Duchess of Longueville her great Confident,
who being desirous to advance her friend, suggested to her, that 'twere much
the best way for her to marry him her self; that she should not let slip so
favorable an occasion of becoming Duchess of Richlieu, and one of the most
rich and greatest Ladies of the Kingdom. The Marchioness being thus persuaded
to embarque in this affair, wanted not Beauty and other attractives to win upon
the tenderness and unexperience of the young Duke, who knowing himself to be
under his Aunts care and tuition, so as he had not the free disposition of his
own person, had thereupon recourse to the said Duchess of Longueville,
beseeching her to be an Instrument for the effecting of this Marriage: which
the Duchess, who had a great kindness for the Marchioness of Pons, willingly
undertook, and desired the Princes her Brothers to engage themselves in the
upholding of it. The Prince of Conde suddenly embraced this motion, and
resolved to effect it without acquainting the Court with it; because he knew
that if the treaty were discovered, it would be hindered by the Duchess his
Aunt: and although he was sensible he should thereby disoblige the Families of
Chevereux and Aiguillon, yet he resolved to proceed in it upon these
considerations: First, To oblige thereby and make a friendship with the Dukes
of Richlieu. Secondly, To be revenged of the Duchess of Aiguillon, with whom
he had some differences touching the Duke of Breze his inheritance. And
Thirdly, To gain thereby an admittance into Havre de Grace, the Duke being
Governor of that place of importance; but with this clause inserted by the
late King into his Letters Patents, that the Duchess his Aunt should have the
absolute command there till he attained the age of five and twenty years.

All things therefore touching this matter being agreed, they went privately
unto the Castle of Tria in Normandy, which belongs to the Duke of Longueville,
and is distant from Paris about 16 Leagues upon the way to Havre, where in the
Prince of Conde's presence the Marriage was celebrated on the 26 th of
December; and the next day the Duke and his Spouse went to Havre, where he was
received into the Citadel by Monsieur de St. Maur, who was Lieutenant-Governour
there to the Duchess of Aiguillon, and her Kinsman; but knew nothing of this
matter: so as the Duke and his new Bride were Masters there, the Soldiers
submitting to his Commands out of the respect they bore him.

The Princes of Conde and Conty, from Tria gave an account of the Marriage unto
the Queen; and the Duchess of Longueville writ to excuse her self unto the
Cardinal, concluding her Letter with this, That she could not believe he would
second the Duchess of Aiguillon's Caprichio's against a business which was
acted by the advice and consent of her whole Family. The Cardinal told Priolo
who brought the Letter, that having not been called to Council; he could not
meddle with the matter, nor hinder the course of Justice; but was in truth much
troubled in his mind at these extravagant proceedings, as well perceiving they
tended only to the setting up of an Authority which he assumed unto himself of
giving Laws unto all others; and though he thought it did not much import him
whether the Duke Richlieu did marry that or any other Lady, it seemed
notwithstanding a very shameful thing, and tending to the great dishonor of
his Ministry, that a Prince of the Blood should dare publicly to justify an
action of that nature; and therefore resolved to find out some expedient for
redress thereof. But forasmuch as it is necessary for those who have the
conduct of great affairs, to seem ignorant of many things that they see
clearly, he took no notice thereof, spoke of it as a Jest, and so concealed
his resentments of the matter, as none at all took any notice of them. He
discoursed with Priolo for some time of things indifferent, and dismissed him
without the least suspicion of that which at first (being a discreet person) he
had apprehended.

This news being divulged, gave particular occasion for all the Court to take
notice of the Princes confidence, and intention to assume all matters to
himself; because thereby he not only undertook to dispose of the Marriage of
the greatest Subjects of the Kingdom with so much inequality in respect of
their conditions, but also for the jealousy they had of some design of his
upon Havre de Grace, either for himself or his Brother the Duke of Langueville,
or at least that Richlieu, being Governor by his Wife, would be won over to
his party, together with this Fort; which by reason of its situation being
just upon the mouth of the River of Sei^ne, where it disgorges it self into the
Ocean, is a place of huge importance.

These discourses and Apprehensions made the Duchess of Aiguillon's
complaints, for the injury done to the Family of Richlieu, to be much listened
unto and resented. This great Lady was Niece unto the famous Cardinal of that
name; and being of a great spirit, and endowed with a most exquisite Beauty,
and all other perfections both of Mind and Body, thought it a great affront
that any other should underhand strike up a Marriage for her Nephew, she having
provided for him so advantageous a party, as was the Princess of Chevereux. And
the Duke's Mother, being also sensible thereof, highly resented this proceeding
of Conde and the Duchess of Longueville; and being intimately acquainted with
the Coadjutor, knew so well how to make use of this conjuncture, that upon
several meetings with the principal of the Frondeurs, they agreed with her to
join with the Cardinal, and stand for him, in case he would break with the
Prince; and then it was that the Cardinal considering the great prejudice his
Majesty's Authority would suffer by giving way to the pretenses of a Prince who
was so ambitious and greedy of Power and Command, resolved to give a stop to
his designs, and at the same time to steer such a course as might hinder all
other endeavors of that kind for the future, by the depressing of those
Factions that are dangerous unto the Government, especially when it is engaged
in a War against another powerful Prince or State; to effect which, he thought
the best way was to unite the Frondeurs to the Court, and oppose them unto the
Prince, as a curb to his proceedings. This affair was for many days very
secretly managed, eight persons only being privy to it: That is, on the
Frondeurs part, the Duchess of Chevereux, the Coadjutor, the Marquess of
Noirsmonstere, and the Signior de Lighe: On the Court-party, the King, the
Queen, the Cardinal, and Monsieur de Lion, who was the only person whom they
thought fit to trust with a matter of that importance to the Crown. The
Coadjutor in a Soldiers habit, together with Noirsmonstere, for many Evenings
together came to the Countess of Lud's house, from whence Monsieur de Lion
brought them in a Coach to the Palace Royal, where in a private appartment the
Cardinal met, and conferred with them. The Cardinal was well inclined to grant
them whatsoever the Frondeurs desired, for reconciling of them to the Court;
but would not consent to have the Prince imprisoned, foreseeing that if this
were done, the Frondeurs would grow strangely high, and think to have the sole
management of all affairs: he measured matters with a right Compass, and found
'twas necessary to soment the difference between the Factions, so as neither of
them growing too powerful, the Court might reap that benefit which a third
person has whilst two are struggling, till his Majesty coming to age, and
finding them both weakened, might at his pleasure overcome and destroy them
both. The Queen was also of the same opinion, saying, that in case that were
done, the Frondeurs would be more dangerous, and have higher pretentions than
the Prince.

Those who observed these Noble persons going in the night unto the Countesses
House, thought it was about some Love-business, the Countess having a Daughter
that was incomparably Beautiful: and this was in particular Beaufort's opinion,
who had no knowledge of this Treaty; it being not thought fit to communicate
the same to him, for fear he should reveal it to the Duchess of Monbason; and
in truth he knew nothing of the matter until about two hours before the
execution of it, at which time he was acquainted therewith, that he might keep
the common People of the City quiet. The Duchess d'Aiguillon in this mean time
commenced her Suit in Parliament for the avoiding of this Marriage, as being an
apparent Rape, and pressed to have it declared such. And as for Havre de Grace,
she besought the Queen to take some fitting course about it, who accordingly
dispatched Monsieur Bar, who had been Captain of the Cardinal Richlieu his
Guards, with Letters from his Majesty; but the Prince of Conde having given
notice thereof unto the Duke of Richlieu, he was denied entrance thereinto, to
the great trouble of the Court, who thereupon resolved to proceed very
cautiously and with great reservation in all their business; as on the other
side the Prince took occasion thereby to show his confidence, and scorn of all
that party which did oppose him.

The Duke of Longueville having had no hand in this Marriage, was very angry at
his Wife, as also with her Brother the Prince of Conde, and complained
publicly, that his Wife should without his knowledge engage her self in such a
business, so prejudicial to his Reputation, and so injurious to others; and
that without acquainting him therewith, she had made use of his House for the
Marriage, and of his Guards as a Convoy for the married couple to Havre de
Grace. He went also to excuse himself unto the Cardinal, assuring him that he
knew nothing of it. The Cardinal accepted of his excuse, it being reasonable so
to do, and drolling with him, said, My Lord Duke, this Marriage was like that
of Arlechin the Player, who having the Bride in his house, and a Feast ready,
knew not that he was to be married. The Cardinal knew well this matter would
make a strangeness between him and Conde, and resolved therefore not to
imprison him, but to engage him in the Court-party; and what was after done to
the contrary, was for reasons which shall hereafter be related.

The conjuncture of Affairs at this time seemed favorable to the Court, and to
afford them an opportunity to free themselves from the oppression of the Prince
of Conde, who treated all men with contempt; and taking to himself the whole
Authority, threatened all persons that seemed any way to oppose him. They were
persuaded to imprison him, by many important considerations: the Examples of
his Grandfather, and Great Grandfather, both Princes of Conde, who were
imprisoned during the Regencies of Queens who were Forrainers; the general
hatred the Prince by his insolent carriage had contracted; the just pretext of
the great danger to the Government by the excessive greatness of a person, who
being resolved to sway the Council as he pleased, was used to Hector all that
did oppose him, and threaten to retire from Court, and set up for himself; the
particular affronts he had offered to the Queen, and his insolent carriage
toward the first Minister of State, and the rest of the King's Servants.

But the difficulty of imprisoning a Prince, who was grown so powerful,
consisted not so much in the seizing of his person, as in being able to make it
good, considering the condition of Paris, and the four Factions at Court; which
kept the Cardinal in great suspense, though he were daily much pressed unto it
by the Duchess of Cheuveuse. All the Queens Faction was entirely for him: that
of the Duke of Orleans had been gained to him by the Duchess of Cheuveuse, by
the apprehensions she gave unto his Highness of Conde's Greatness, and the
suspicion he had of the Abbot della Riviere his being secretly a Pensioner to
him; besides other great promises made him by the Queen. As for the Faction of
the Frondeurs, the Treaties with them were long and dubious, as being on the
one side grounded upon the mortal hatred which the Duke of Beaufort had
publicly professed against the Cardinal, and the loss of Reputation he was
like to incur by contracting a friendship with him; so as 'twas probable he
might thereby loose his Credit with the Parisians, and so be scorned and laid
aside by all parties: And on the other side, being eagerly prosecuted by Conde,
and upheld by the Court, that they might more easily ruin them both, there was
a necessity not only for him, but also for the Coadjutor, the President
Charton, and Monsieur de Brussels, who were the Heads of the Frondeurs, either
to join with Conde or the Court, to come off the danger which hung upon them,
of being thought Accomplices in the attempt against Conde, to make friendship
either with him or with the Cardinal: And therefore, although Conde seemed to
be very much animated against them, yet the Coadjutor prudently weighing all
circumstances, and being sensible that the ruin of the Prince of Conde would
consequently draw along with it that of their own party, it being much more
feasible to ruin Conde when they had removed the Cardinal by joining with him,
than to carry all things at Court after they had, by joining with the Cardinal,
destroyed Conde; He therefore thought it fit to make an application to him,
before they joined with Mazarine: and to this purpose, he, together with
Beaufort and the rest, by means of some persons of Quality, their Friends, made
all the Promises, Submissions, and Protestations possible unto the Prince, to
oblige him unto an Union with him, and to take upon them the Protection of
them; representing to him, that being Head of the Frondeurs, would be a great
increase unto his power, and secure him against all attempts that could be made
unto his prejudice. They also made great protestations of their innocence,
assuring him, The Crime imputed to them was but only an invention of the
Court, to foment a difference between them, that they might with the more ease
ruin both parties. But the Prince refusing to accept of any satisfaction,
answered with much contempt and fierceness, That if they desired his
friendship, the Coadjutor and the Duke of Beaufort should do well to leave the
Kingdom, and he would then consider of the matter. So as the Frondeurs seeing
the Prince so violently bent against them, resolved at last to join with the
Court-party, to protect themselves against those mischiefs, which otherwise
seemed unavoidable. The Treaties therefore were continued with them, which for
the better concealing of the matter were secretly performed; and therein,
amongst other things, it was by the Coadjutor's means agreed, That in regard
the Duke Mercoeur had Estate enough by being Eldest Son and Heir unto the house
of Vendosme, and that the Duke Beaufort his young Brother was poor, that
therefore he should have the Place of Admiral, and the 20000 Ducats pension
which belonged to it, according to the Agreement with the Duke of Vendosme;
besides which, there was 3000 Doublons by way of advance delivered to him; in
lieu whereof the Heads of the Frondeurs Faction undertook to keep the people
quiet, and that the Parisians should not rise, or make disturbance upon any
occasion whatsoever.

The Factions of the Duke of Orleans and the Frondeurs being thus joined with
that of the Court against the Prince of Conde and his party, it was an easy
matter for the Duke of Beaufort to ingratiate himself with the Duke of Orleans,
who had a great affection for him, as being his Nephew, and assured him, of his
favor and protection; the Duke of Beaufort promising his faithful and
perpetual service, which they did for their common Interest. The Duke of
Orleans thinking it very necessary to be supported by the Valor and Credit of
Beaufort against the Court, in case there were occasion upon the depressing of
Conde; and Beaufort thought himself, by the Duke of Orleans his protection,
much more secure against the Plots and Traps laid (as he said) to circumvent
him by the Cardinal, with whom he was resolved he would by no means contract a
Friendship. In this secret Treaty the Marquess of Bollay's return was agreed
unto, and a promise made, that as soon as Conde was Imprisoned, he should be
declared innocent in Paris, he being fled in a disguise to Flanders, not
without danger, as being very narrowly searched after, for what he had done the
11 th day of December before in the Morning.

But notwithstanding all these Treaties and Agreements, the Commotions and
Stirs at Paris still continued, by reason of the Impeachments which were
furiously prosecuted by the Prince of Conde, and seemed to be supported by the
Queens Authority, being carried on by Mole the first President of Parliament, a
great friend to Conde against the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the
other Heads of the Frondeurs, with an intention to make use of this opportunity
for destroying the whole party; and because Beaufort was upon this occasion
always accompanied with a great suit of Friends and Citizens, for his defense
and safety, the Prince did therefore also fortify himself with a numerous
attendance of Friends and Gentlemen of several Provinces, that were his
Confidents; some of which were maintained by him, and the rest came as
Volunteers upon their own expenses; so as there was hardly any thing to be seen
in Paris but Officers of the Army, and other Cavaliers, who professed they were
come thither to serve the Prince: and certainly had not Conde's Imprisonment
(which soon after happened) given a stop unto the matter, great store of Blood
must have been spilt, considering the obstinacy of both parties; Conde being
resolved to drive the Duke of Beaufort out of Paris, and therefore pressed to
have the Witnesses examined, that the Impeachment might be drawn up; but the
Duke of Orleans, who had now quitted the Prince, was privately joined with the
Court, by several excuses which he made for his not being able to attend the
Parliament, delayed the matter so, as nothing could be resolved,
notwithstanding the Prince his earnest Solicitations for a dispatch: and the
Counselor Broussel, who was by Conde thought to be a person of great virtue,
being involved with the rest in the charge of the intended Assassinate, he sent
to the first President to blot his name out of the Impeachment, as being fully
satisfied that he was innocent: but this, though several times desired by the
Prince, was not performed, because the first President was no great friend unto
Broussel, and was besides a creature to the Court, and acting nothing but by
their direction.

About this time (though no ground appeared for it) there was much talk of the
Princes being to be committed, such rumors being sometimes the forewarnings of
the Divine Providence which watches over us; but he relying upon the Abbot de
la Riviere, who had assured him that he would advertise him as soon as he had
notice of any such intention against him; and taking it for granted that
neither: the Duke of Orleans would conceal such a resolution from his
Favorite, nor the Cardinal dare to attempt it of himself without the Dukes
concurrence, slighted the matter; to which he was the more encouraged by the
extraordinary court and observance the Cardinal used toward him, his Brother
Conty, and the Duke of Longueville; which made him say, the Cardinal had never
been so much his friend as then he was. And besides, Conde confided much in
Monsieur de Tilliere the Secretary of State, a person of great Wit and
Understanding, who was most faithful to her Majesty, and expressing a great
friendship toward the Prince, rendered him totally secure; to as about four
days before his Imprisonment, the Prince, having a hint given that there was
something privately in hand against him, went to the Secretary, and with great
confidence asked him, if any such thing were; and being assured by him that he
had heard nothing of it, rested entirely satisfied and secure thereby, not
considering that La Tilliere was by the duty of his place obliged not to
disclose secrets of that kind, had he known it. But notwithstanding the
Princes of Conde and Conty, and the Duke of Longueville, had agreed amongst
themselves not to be all at Court together, and therefore only one of them
went to Council at a time, that if any accident should happen to one of them,
the other two might with their countenance and party be assistant to him; and
the Cardinal on the other side bent all his endeavors to this, that he might
have them all at Court together, because out of that place there was no
possibility of arresting any of them.

The 18 th day of January being come, the Council had notice given them to
appear at four a clock in the Afternoon; and it was given out that they were
there to consider touching Costumes, who was Citizen of Paris, a very seditious
person, and one who was accused of having had a hand in the attempt against the
Prince; and forasmuch as the Examinations of the Prisoners brought from several
other parts to Paris, made no direct proof of any such design, 'twas desired
Costunes should be taken into custody, upon whose Examination it was believed
the whole matter might be discovered, and such as were indeed guilty of the
Fact might be convicted. The Queen and Cardinal were not wanting on their parts
to persuade the Prince to a belief of this, by all shows of a sincere affection
to, and correspondence with his Interest; and to this purpose told him, They
were informed Castures lay concealed in a house near the Horsemarket, behind
the Palais Cardinal; and that 'twas therefore fit to seize him presently: but
to prevent all stir or rising of the people, who were much inclined to the
Frondeurs, and Enemies unto the Prince and Cardinal, it would be well to have
the King's Troop of Guards mounted, and disposed in such places as might be
most convenient for that purpose. And the Cardinal pretending that in case he
gave the Orders, it would make the matter to be more suspected, desired the
Prince to give command that the Troop should take Horse, and be disposed in
such places as he thought fit. Whereupon the Prince himself, by Monsieur de
Lion, sent Orders to the Marshal Schaubargh for the doing of it, which was
accordingly performed; and so far was he blinded by his Passion, that without
ever reflecting upon the Artifices of the Court, he did himself by this means
contribute toward his own imprisonment.

The Prince of Conde was not only desired to be at this Council, but the
Prince of Conty and Duke of Longueville were also there, upon the occasion
hereafter mentioned; and the Duke of Orleans having by the Queens consent
excused himself from coming thither, that he might, being abroad, be the better
able to act any thing that might be necessary toward completing the design
in hand, Conde was much disgusted at it, as believing the Duke had an intention
to decline his Interest; but he took order that the Abbot della Riviere should
assist there in his stead.

And because you have before heard that there was no design of arresting the
Duke of Longueville, together with the Prince of Conde, it is necessary to let
you know how that resolution was altered, by acquainting you with this
following digression.

The Duke of Longueville being (as you have heard) offended at Richlieu's
marriage, promised the Queen and the Cardinal that he would absolutely espouse
their Interests, and the service of his Majesty, against all persons
whatsoever, not excepting the Prince of Conde himself; who having got some
inkling of this Agreement, went the next day unto the Duke, and shutting
himself up alone with him in a Closet, wrought so upon him by his persuasions
(wherein he was most excellently dextrous) that he drew from the Duke a promise
like to that he had before made to the Queen, and an assurance that he would
never forsake, but live and die with the Prince, without any expectation or
reservation whatsoever. The Prince was wonderfully satisfied with this
Agreement; and being apt to communicate his thoughts, acquainted the Duke of
Rohan Chabot therewith, who discovered the whole matter to the Cardinal; and he
thereupon resolved to imprison Longueville, together with the Prince, as a
person who did not in his actions deal so sincerely with the Court as he
professed. The Duke was by some friends advertised that the Cardinal had gotten
notice of what had passed between him and the Prince, and thereupon went to
excuse himself, professing. That he was induced unto it by the assurance the
Prince gave him of his being strictly united with the Queen, and with his
Emmence. The Cardinal seemed to be very well satisfied (though he was not) with
the excuse, and fell to treat of other matters, which were the Duke's
particular Concerns, as, To have him declared to be the person who at the
King's Coronation was to have place next to the Princes of the Blood, To assist
him in reviving his pretensions to the Principality of Orange, To procure a
License for him to buy the Place of Colonel-general of the Swissers from the
Marshal Schombergh, and to increase the Garrisons he had at Diepe, Caen, and
Pont de l' Arche in Normandy; by which overtures and hopes the Duke parted from
him extremely satisfied, never considering that those extraordinary Caresses
were but like Siren's Songs to lull him in security, that he might the more
easily fall into the Trap they had set for him.

After this resolution taken to imprison the Prince, the Queen began to make
more Court unto him than formerly: She would several times ask his advice in
matters that occurred, and approve of it. The Duke of Orleans went to the
Parliament to demand Justice against those who had endeavored to assassinate
him. The Cardinal besought him that he would continue to protect him as he had
done during the Siege of Paris. Of the Prince of Conty there was no Speech, he
being but a young man, and unexperienced in Affairs, though he were a person of
great Wit and Courage; so as all that could be objected against him was, that
he was Brother to Conde, and being a Prince of the Blood, might be the Head of
a Faction, which might be raised to disturb the Government; and therefore it
was only upon reason of State that he was put into the number.

The 18th day of January, in the morning, Priolo, who was employed by the Duke
of Longueville in all his Concerns, and managed his Interests at Court with the
Queen, went to wait upon the Cardinal, who contrary unto his usual custom,
spoke much in praise of Longueville, and seemed to be much satisfied with him;
whereas before, he was used to complain to Priolo of the Duke's strangeness to
him, and the little care he seemed to have of seconding any Proposition made
for the advantage, of his Nephew or Nieces. Whilst the Cardinal was
entertaining Priolo, with this Discourse, the Prince of Conde entered the Room,
at a corner of which Monsieur de Lion was writing upon a Table which stood by
the Fireside, several things touching the Prince's imprisonment, which that
evening was to be executed. The Prince entering, spoke to the Cardinal, saying,
Go on with your discourse to Priolo, whilst I go talk with Monsieur de Lion:
and coming to him, asked him, Well Sir, what new? He without being any way
moved, or showing any disturbance, hiding the Papers under his Cloak, with a
smiling countenance answered, I ought to ask that question from your Highness.
The Cardinal afterward dismissing Priolo, told him, It would be well the Duke
would come that day to Council, because there would be something treated
touching the general Peace, and the swearing of the Marquess D'Eghetot, Son to
the Marquess de Beveron, Lieutenant Governor of Normandy.

Priolo being dispatched, went to Chaliot, which is a place distant from Paris
about half a league, where the Duke then was; and being a person of a clear
judgment, and great experience in Affairs, persuaded him the contrary to what
the Cardinal had spoken, telling him, It was not sit for him to go to Council,
for that he saw some Clouds rising, which seemed to threaten a Storm toward
the Prince of Conde. He added, That the Prince de Marsillac (who knew much of
the Court) had bid him tell the Duke, he should remember the Agreement they had
made, not to be all of them at Court together, especially at a time when they
had some suspicion of the Duke of Orleans, and of the Abbot della Riviere. The
Duke replied, Those were but suspicions without ground; and that he would be
there to serve the Marquess Beveron, who was then with him to desire that
favor. Whereupon they went into the Coach, the Duke, Beveron, the President de
Thou, and Priolo; and coming to Paris, the Duke went to his house, and sent
Priolo to the Cardinal, to know from him whether the Council met: his Eminence
seeing Priolo come thither at that time, was much troubled, fearing the
business had been discovered; and therefore, keeping him at a distance, sent to
know his business; and hearing it, ordered him to tell the Duke the Council
would assuredly fit: Priolo accordingly let the Duke know it, but added, That
he found the Cardinal much discomposed, and that without doubt some great
matter was in hand that Evening. The Duke answered, That he was resolved to go,
whatever was in doing. To which Priolo replied, His Highness might do what he
pleased, but that he thought himself obliged in duty to to advise him not to go
thither.

The Prince of Marsilliack, who had observed the different kind of proceeding
used by the Duke of Orleans in the Process touching the Assassinate; when the
Prince of Conty told him that they had gained the Abbot de la Riviere if he had
not lost his credit with his Patron, answered, that he thought 'twas so; and
that therefore there was no security at Court either for him or for his
Brother: and the same thing was also apprehended by the Marquess de Moussay
upon this occasion: the day before the Imprisonment, a Captain of a Quarter in
the City having told him, that being in the Gallery at Court, the Secretary La
Tilliere came and asked him whether he thought the People would be pleased in
case his Majesty should do some extraordinary matter to recover his Authority.
To which the Captain answered, That in case they did not go about to arrest the
Duke Beaufort, he thought they would be pleased with all that should be done:
whereupon he guessed that they had some design against the Princes, and
promised to advertise the Princes of it; but they denied to have heard any
thing from him to that purpose.

The Palace was excellently fitted for the execution of this design, not only
by its manner of building, but also by the placing and disposing of the Queens
Guards in order to it. At the top of the great Hall on the left hand is the
Queens apartment, and on the right was the Kings great apartment, where his
Majesty and the Court was. The Queen gave out that she was something
indisposed, and therefore the first Door of the Hall, and those of all the
other Chambers and Cabinets, were kept shut, and not opened to any but those
who belonged to the Council; and the Cardinal kept himself private in a Room
adjoining to the Council Chamger. As the Counselors came in, they went into
the little Gallery belonging to the Council Chamger, being between the Great
Room and the Queens back-rooms; and all their Servants were forced to stay
either upon the Stairs, or in the out-Gourts of the Palace.

But the Cardinal, who was resolved not to be present at the action himself,
and was not willing that the Abbot de la Riviere should be there, sent for him
into his Room, upon pretense of having something to confer with him about;
where he kept him till it was over. As for the Queen, she was dressed, and lay
upon the Bed in a withdrawing Room, where being visited by the Prince of
Conde's Mother, she pretended to be sick, and presently dismissed her. This
same Princess that very day had the two Princes her Sons, and the Duchess of
Longueville her Daughter, at Dinner with her; and after Dinner advised the
Prince of Conde to be careful of himself, for that the Court intended to play
him some trick. He, who thought all as open-hearted as himself, and could not
be persuaded that the Cardinal durst attempt any thing against him, answered,
That he was well enough assured of the Court, but that the Duke of Orleans
failed him at the solicitation of the Abbot de la Riviere his Favorite: and
saying this, he turned unto the Prince of Conty, and told him he desired to
have him along with him that day to Council, to mortify La Riviere, who had
pretended to be in all things ruled by Conty. But the Abbot was innocent of all
the Duke of Orleans his Plots, and was at that time out of favor with him.

The Princes of Conde and Conty being come to Court, the Duke of Longueville
was there also presently after them; and coming up the great Stairs which was
at the entrance into the Hall, the Door was suddenly clapped to, and all those
shut out who did attend him: at which time the Duke began to suspect what after
followed, and called to mind the good and faithful advice he had received from
Priolo: they went all three together to wait upon the Queen, who being upon her
Bed, and seeming to be somewhat ill, they presently retired out of her Chamber;
and being then all together mocking and jeasting at each other in the Anti
Camera, before they went into the Gallery before the Council Chamger, the Queen
(who was something disturbed with the apprehension of what was to be done)
prayed the King (who was alone with her in the Chamber) to go softly to the
Chamber Door, and shut the same against them. At last the Princes and Duke came
into the Gallery where all the Council and Ministers of State were, excepting
only the Cardinal, who calling to Monsieur de Cominges Lieutenant of the
Queens Guard, told him 'twas time to execute what her Majesty had commanded; he
thereupon gave notice of it to Monsieur Guitault his Uncle on the Father's
side, a Captain of the Guard, who forthwith ordered Monsieur Croissy Alferes of
his Troop to arrest the Duke of Longueville, and Monsieur de Cominges to
attacque the Prince of Conty, at the same time as he should seize upon the
Prince of Conde. They therefore coming into the Gallery, Guitaust addressed
himself to the Prince of Conde, and told him, That he was troubled at the
Orders he had received from the King and Queen, to secure his person, but that
his Highness knew his part was to obey his Majesty's Commands. The Prince
either believing, or desiring it should be thought he believed it was a Jest,
turning to the rest of the Counselors there present, said, Here is a pretty
trick, Guitault says he has a Commission to arrest me, Guitault replied,
Indeed I have an order so to do: Whereupon the Prince, shrugging up his
Shoulders, answered Why what have I done? Have I not always served the King and
Queen unto the utmost of my power?

Cominges and Croissy said the same thing unto the Prince of Conty and the Duke
of Longueville, in presence of the Chancellor, who was desired by Conde to go
and tell the Queen, that he humbly begged the favor from her that he might
speak a word unto her; which he did, that by that means he might draw near unto
a Window, from whence he might call upon some of his followers to endeavor the
rescue of him: the Chancellor readily performed his request, but returned with
this answer, That she was reposing her self upon the Bed, and that he could not
be admitted to speak with her. He also prayed Count Servient to tell the
Cardinal that he would willingly have spoken with him, to assure him he was his
Servant, as he had many times before, and very lately also assured him.
Servient went; but returning, found that Monsieur Guitault had before carried
away the Prince; for twenty of the Guard being commanded into the Gallery, the
Officers carried the Princes and Longueville down the back-stairs into the
Garden, which is divided by a Wall from the CourtYard of the Palace; all the
Doors and Passages being exceeding well guarded by the Soldiers; and the
Stairs, the King's Apartment, and the Courts at the Louvre, being full of
persons of Honor, Cavaliers, and others who were friends unto the Princes.
It Is a wonder how silently this matter was carried, all things being
wonderfully well ordered for preventing of the mischief which must have
necessarily happened, had it been known; to the well doing whereof the back
Private Stairs did much contribute, down which they carried the Princes into
the Garden, and through the little Door which opens upon the Cardinal
Mazarine's Palace, where one Squadron of the Guards is always posted: The
Princes were there put into a Coach with six Horses, which going out at the
Port, Richlieu with only Sixteen Troopers for their Guard, which were
commanded by the Count Miossan, carried them privately cross the streets that
go to Mount Marter, St. Denis, and St. Anthony, along a very bad and myery way,
where the Coach broke, and forced them to stay full two hours e're it was
mended, brought them at last to the Castle of St. Vincennes, where they were
put into the Dungeon, which is a great Tower divided from the rest of the
Castle by a Ditch and Wall. The news thereof was presently sent by Guitault
with all diligence to Paris. Whilst the Princes were thus carrying away, a
Messenger was sent unto the President Perault (who was Steward or Major Domo to
the Prince of Conde, a great Confident of his, and one who under him had got a
large Estate) to let him know the Prince desired he would come to him to the
Palace. Perault said, He wondered the Prince had not sent one of his own
Servants for him: But without saying more, went presently; and passing over
Pont Neus, was arrested by Monsieur de Guiet, and carried Prisoner to his
house, where he was kept two days, and then carried to the Castle St.
Vincennes, and his house searched to see what Papers they could find, and the
Lieutenant Civil was ordered to take an Inventory of them.

Upon the first report of this news, all the Lackeys, Servants, Coachmen, and
others who waited for them at the Court-gates, ran about like Mad men, some
here, some there; and the same did the Noblemen, Cavaliers, and others of their
Friends and Kindred; so as upon the noise made in the streets, and the running
up and down with Links and Torches (it being then far in the night) the people
were extremely frighted; and presently suspecting that the Duke of Beaufort was
imprisoned, (which by some of the Prince's friends was given out) many of them
took Arms, and began to rise; but they were presently quieted when they saw
Beaufort, who took horse to hinder the Prince's party (who began to draw
together about L' Hostel de Conde) from doing any thing: and certainly if those
of Conde's party had followed after them, instead of going to condole with the
Princess of Conde, they might easily have rescued them, they being guarded
only with sixteen Troopers, who by the breaking of the Coach were forced to
stay a long time, as you have heard, upon the way, er'e they could get unto the
Castle.

The Frondeurs were so well pleased with this Arrest, that many of them made
Bonfires, and diverse others sung Ballads, and Rhymes, whereby they and their
actions were censured: and whereas it always happens that few are friends to
those in misery, there now appeared many who made it their business to censure
the Princes, and their actions, who were before thought very much devoted to
their service.

Orders were at the same time given for arresting the Prince de Marsillac, and
Count de Moussay; but they suspecting it, retired out of the way, and escaped:
and now, as in a Lottery, where the loss of one man is another gain, so this
misfortune of the Princes, was the reason of great good hap unto some others.
The Marquess de Ranzau, who, as we have before told you, had been a Prisoner in
the same Castle for about a year, was about this time released; Messieurs de
Charost, de Chadenier, and de Geunes, being all three Captains of the Guard,
who had in July before been banished the Court; and put out of their Commands,
were now restored; and the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, Broussel, and
Chartou, were all of them quitted by the Parliament from the imputation which
lay against them; who thereupon waited on their Majesty's and the Cardinal, to
return thanks. A Judgment was also given in favor of Monsieur Jolly, and
others: And his Majesty gave a general Amnesty for all who were engaged in the
Broyl that happened on the 11th of December before.

The City of Paris (where the Princes were much hated) being thus satisfied by
their imprisonment, the Cardinal began to be of better courage, and to apply
himself more closely unto the Functions of his Ministry: and to the end more
notice might be taken of the good Correspondence between him and the Duke
Beaufort, by whose means he had quieted the rising of the people, and removed
the prejudice they had against him, as thinking him an Enemy unto the Duke; He
went to give him a Visit at his house au Rue de Provelles, which was in the
midst of the City; but the Duke received more prejudice than advantage by that
Visit, because they took occasion thereupon to murmur, and give out, That he
was grown a Mazarinist. Notwithstanding which, the Frondeurs after the Princes
imprisonment, became united both in Friendship and interest with Mazarine; and
that continued until the Coadjutor, for attaining his own private ends,
enterprized that Novelty, whereof in the sequel of the ensuing discourse you
shall have notice.

Presently after this, Monsieur de la Ferte Imbaul was sent with several Troops
unto Nivers, and Commissions were given out for the government of several
Provinces: That of Burgundy was given to the Duke Vendosme, Normandy to the
Court Harecourt, Compeigne to the Marshal de L'Hostel, and Berry to the Count
de Sant Aignon.

The Government of the Provinces and Fortifications in France, are always given
for life, and are never vacant, but by the death or voluntary cession of the
party entrusted; which is always done by a public Instrument with his
Majesty's consent. Now these cessions being required from the Princes, who were
imprisoned in his Majesty's name, they all three refused to make them; and
therefore the Commissions to those persons of Quality, were made only by way
of provision for the time being, because the Governments were not void: but
when a Governor is found guilty of Treason, his Command ceases, though he be
living, the Condemnation being accounted a civil Death. There was besides an
Exempt de Guard sent to the Duke de Richlieu in Havre de Grace, to give up that
Fort into his Majesty's hands: The Duke refused to speak with the Exempt, and
seemed unwilling to obey the Order; whereupon the Court endeavored to gain it
from him by a Treaty; and to that purpose, a Pass was granted unto the Duchess
his Wife, that she might come to Court and treat about it. And because the
Ladies in the Court of France are very considerable, by reason of the great
regard is had unto their Rank and Quality, the Duchess having made an
Agreement, returned to Roan, where the Marriage between her and her Lord being
confirmed, the Tambouret (which is a privilege granted to the Dutchesses and
Peers of France to sit in the Queens presence) and other Recompenses being
allowed in lieu thereof, she agreed that her Husband should quit the place;
which he did, and Monsieur de St. Maur was put into it by order from their
Majesty's: Monsieur de Montigny also gave up the Castle of Diepe, and that
Command was by his Majesty conferred upon the Marquess du Plessis Belliere; and
his Government of La Basse was bestowed upon Comte Broglia, a person of great
valor, and wonderfully affectionate unto the service of his Majesty. The
Castle of Caen, taken from Monsieur de la Croiset Lieutenant-Governour to the
Duke de Longueville, was given to the Count de Quince: In Pont de L' Arche
Monsieur de Beaumont, who had been formerly Governor there, was resetled, the
same being taken from Monsieur de Chambois; and Monsieur de Goville, a Mareshal
de Camp, was placed Governor in the Fortresses of Charbourg and Granville.

At this same time the Count de Sant Aignon, who had made his entry into
Bourges, the principal Town of Berry, wrought so by his Authority and obliging
carriage on the affections of the Inhabitants, that he not only gained them,
but induced them also to take Arms for him, and join with 300 Gentlemen that he
brought with him. The great Tower of that City, which serves for a Castle, was
kept by Monsieur de Grasset, who had been placed there by the Prince of Conde's
Father. Aignon thought it not sit to be in a City where the Castle was
disobedient to the King, and therefore made a Speech in the Townhouse unto the
Citizens, so efficacious and full of vigor, that he persuaded them not only
to undertake the Enterprise, but also to be sharers in the Glory of it. He
therefore presently sent to Grasset to yield the Castle; which he (upon the
confidence he had in the strength of his Garrison, and the Fortifications about
it) refusing to perform, the Count putting himself in the head of those
Gentlemen he had with him, and seconded by two Bodies of the Inhabitants which
were drawn up, made so fierce an Assault upon the Ramparts, that Grasset,
forsaken by his men, who were terrified with so unlook'd-for an attempt,
rendered the place upon Composition in less than an hours time after it was
attacqued.

This good success was seconded by the surprise of the Castle of Clermont in
Lorain, by means of an intelligence which the Marquess Ferte Senneterre,
Governor of that Province, had with two Sergeants of the Garrison; and the
Kings Forces took possession of it on the 27 th day of January. And the
Fortress of Danvillers (which was commanded by the Prince of Marsilliack his
Brother, as has been said) returned unto the Kings obedience, the Garrison
rising against him by the persuasion of Captain Bocherelle, who imprisoned
their Governor, and gave up the place; in the doing whereof, he was not more
commended for his Loyalty, than the Governor was blamed for his great
indiscretion, in not foreseeing of the danger, and changing some of the
Officers of that Garrison when he took the resolution to change his party. The
Duke of Vendosme coming to Dijon in Burgundy, removed the Garrison and
Governor out of the Castle there, putting into it other Soldiers, under the
command of Monsieur de Conetty, taking security from the Inhabitants for their
fidelity, as he did also from those of St. Iean de Losne, and of Verdune, by
means of some Commissioners whom they sent to him. This was the more resented
by Conde, because he believed those people would show their affections to his
Family, by the close espousing of his Interests on this occasion. And this was
thought to be the cause that he never after had any kindness for the
Burgundians, and when he was released declined the coming into that Province.

The next care of the Court was to regulate the affairs of Roan and Normandy,
where Count Harcourt was placed to prevent any rising of the Friends, or Party
of the Duke of Longueville; the Garrison and Governor of the Old Palace were
removed thence, and 100 French Soldiers placed there under the command of
Monsieur de Montroit Fourville: The Count Harcourt took the ordinary Oath of
Fidelity, as Governour-General of the Province, before Monsieur D' s second
President of the Parliament there; and Monsieur de Montenay a Councellor of
Parliament, appointed principal Captain of the City by the Parliament,
voluntarily quitted his command, to take away all occasion of suspicion from
the Court, he being a very intimate friend of the Duke's; and Monsieur de
Sallet had his command.

And because the same day the King went to Roan, the Council of State published
a Declaration, whereby the Duke de Bovillon, the Prince de Marsilliack, and the
Marshals de Breze and de Turenne were commanded within the space of 14 days to
come to Court; and that in case of failer, they should incur the crime of Lease
Majeste, and be prosecuted as Rebels to the State; this Declaration was
verified by the Parliament of Paris, by whom the Duke of Beaufort, the
Coadjutor, Broussel, and Charion, were the same day declared innocent of the
crime whereof they were accused. His Majesty returned after upon the 22 th of
February, having quieted all Normandy without any blow struck, and changed the
Governors in the strong Holds there without stir, excepting only in Pont de
L' Arche, where Monsieur de Chambois being Governor, refused at first to
submit, upon pretense of some thousands of Crowns which he alleged to be due
unto him; but the matter was afterward adjusted by a composition.

Presently after this, his Majesty sent Monsieur de Villiere of the Family de
Phillippeaux, Secretary of State, a person of excellent parts, to require the
Seals from the Chancellor Seguier, and restored them presently to the Marquess
de Chasteau Neuf, at the instance of the Frondeurs, who did very earnestly
desire it, they having been 17 years before taken from him by Cardinal
Richlieu, for the intelligence he had held with the Duchess of Chevereux in
opposition to him.

The Court resolved to take away the Seals from the Chancellor, and restore
them to Chasteau Neuf, because there was a necessity to satisfy the Frondeurs,
who were very earnest for it; and though Seguier were a very able person, and
truly faithful to his Majesty's Interests, (for which cause he had a great
esteem from the Parliament) yet the Council thought it necessary to sacrifice
him for the satisfaction of those Malcontents, to avoid the ill consequences
which otherwise their jealousies and complaints might have occasioned. The
Court was also very desirous to have settled all things in Burgundy, as they had
done before in Normandy; and to that purpose, upon the fifth of March, the
King, the Queen, and Duke of Anjou; attended by the Cardinal, the Dukes of
Ioyeuse, and Les Diguieres, the Marshals de Gramont, Plessis Pralin, and
Villeroy, and many Lords and persons of quality, marched thither by the way of
Melun and Monteraux; and the 24 th day of the same Month the Cardinal came to
St. Iean de Love, whither he caused the Troops, drawn together in the
neighboring places, to advance, under the command of the Duke of Vendosme,
notwithstanding the great Rains, to attacque Seuvre, which the Prince of Conde
had late before caused to be called by the name of Belle Guard.

This place was kept by 500 Foot, and 400 Horse, commanded by the Count
Tavanes, and Monsieur de St. Muand, the Duke of Vendosme, together with the
Count de Palau, the Lieutenant General, and the Count de Navailes, and Monsieur
Plessis Besansson, Marshals de Camp; and one part of the Army took up their
Quarters at Champblanc, and the Marquess d'Vxelles Major General, and the
Marquesses de Chatelluau, and Roncelvoles, with the rest of the Army, quartered
at St. George, where they began presently to make their Approaches with about
1200 Pioneers brought from the neighboring Towns; it being not thought
necessary to fortify their Camp, by reason that Marshal Turenne was far off,
and had no reason to suspect that any such thing should be attempted; but
principally because he was to pass diverse Rivers, and leave several Garrisons
of the King's at his back, in case he should have a desire to relieve them. The
besieged made what provision they could for their defense; and suspecting the
Inhabitants to be inclined to the King, took away their Arms, and set Guards
upon them. His Majesty being at this time in Burgundy not far from the Camp,
and being moved by a curiosity natural to his Martial inclination, and a desire
to hasten the taking of the place, came to St. Iean de Losne overnight, and
the next morning into the Camp, to view the several Posts; and the besieged
being summoned to yield by Monsieur Tivoliere Lieutenant to the Queens Guards,
he gave them notice of his Majesty's being in the Army, and commanded them not
to shoot whilst he was there: which was accordingly obeyed, as being a Respect
always used to be paid to the King's person. But his Majesty being gone, and
the Cardinal staying behind, they began to shoot again; and his Eminence was in
great danger by a shot, which killed one of his Servants that stood close by
him. The next day the besieged articled to deliver the place upon fair Quarter
(if they were not relieved before the 20th day) and a general Pardon for all
within the Town, the principal of which, were the Count Tavanes, Monsieur de
St. Mecaud, the Count de Coligny, and several others of the Princes friends.
The Cardinal having gained great honor by this Action, caused his Majesty to
return to Dijon, and from thence upon the 2d day of May to Paris.

Two days after his Majesty's coming thither, the old Princess of Conde (who,
during the King's absence, was come privately to Paris, with design to have
raised some Commotion in favor of her Sons and Son-in-law) was commanded to
retire out of Town unto Argeville, a house belonging to the President Perault;
and the Superintendance over the Admiralty was conferred upon the Duke
Beaufort, notwithstanding it had before been promised unto the Duke Mercoeur
his elder Brother.

Meantime the Duchess of Longueville, having staid some days at Roterdam, went
to Mastrick, where Don Gabriel de Toledo came in the Arch-Duke's name to
complement her, and to propose a Treaty with his Highness; which the Duchess
refused to enter into, until she had first spoken with Monsieur de Turenne, who
expected her in Stenay. Don Gabriel being satisfied with this Answer, resolved
to wait upon her thither. When she came within two days journey of the place,
Turenne came to meet her, with all the Troops and Officers he had with him, and
brought her into the Town, with the general applause of all. Presently after
her coming, she and Turenne began a Treaty with the Archduke; and upon the
30th of April following, they concluded an Agreement with him, upon the terms
hereafter mentioned. That they should unitetheir Forces under the Protection of
his Catholic Majesty, and should employ them for the attaining of two things;
that is, for the obtaining a just, equal and sincere Peace between the two
Crowns, and for procuring the release of the Princes from their Imprisonment:
That they would not lay down Arms till both those ends were first obtained; his
Catholic Majesty promising, that he would not consent unto a Peace with
France, but upon that condition, unless the Princes were first released by
other means. And in case the Princes before any general Peace should be
released, they should notwithstanding be bound to employ their Forces to compel
the French to such a Peace. The King of Spain should pay 200000 Crowns unto the
Duchess and Turenne, whereof 100000 should be paid fifteen days after the
signing of the Articles, and 100000 more within a month after; all which moneys
were to be employed in raising Forces for the Public Cause. Unto the Duchess
and Turenne, for maintenance of their Troops, and for their own subsistence,
should be paid 40000 Crowns monthly from the subscription of the Articles; and
60000 Crowns more yearly, to be paid at three payments, for their own expenses.

There should also be added by the Catholic King 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse,
with all Ammunition necessary for the whole Army, which were to be commanded by
Turenne, and march into France for the enforcing of those two things from the
Cardinal. The Duchess and Marshal should put the Spaniard into possession of
all strong Towns and places which they held, except the Citadel of Stenay, into
which his Majesty might put what men he pleased, to keep them in depositum,
till the delivery of the Princes, and conclusion of the Peace; at which time
they were to be restored unto the Princes, his Majesty being permitted to take
away his Cannon and Ammunition out of them as in such Cases is usual. The
Places in France which should be taken upon the Frontiers, should be also kept
by the Spaniard, till the Peace between the two Crowns: but those within the
Country should be kept by the Princes. All the said Moneys, excepting only the
60000 Crowns designed for the particular Expenses of the Duchess and Turenne,
were to be paid according to the Orders of Turenne, and of the Controler or
Pagador- general; who was to be appointed in that Army by the King of Spain.
The 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, should be commanded by a Spaniard, who was
notwithstanding to receive Orders from Turenne: The said 5000 men were to live
in France, and be paid by the Spaniard; only the Princes were obliged to find
them Ammunition-bread, whilst they were in France, unless they were in
Quarters, or sat down to besiege a Town within Eight leagues of Flanders: in
which Case the said Ammunition-bread was to be provided by his Majesty; and a
Confirmation of the Agreement was to be procured from Spain, within three
months from the Subscription of the Treaty.

The League between Longueville, Turenne, and the Spaniard, being thus
concluded, the Duke of Bovillon, who was then in Turenne, and the Prince
Marsilliac, who was at his own house, began to cast about, and consider how
they might be assistant to them; and because of themselves, wanting both Men
and Money, they could do nothing, they resolved to engage Bourdeaux, upon
pretense of getting the Duke of Espernon to be removed from that Government, as
those people desired, and had been at Court to have it done. In this mean time
Monsieur Todias, one of the Prince of Conde's Gentlemen, had been several times
to confer, sometimes with the Duke de Rochefaucault, and sometimes with the
Duke de St. Simon, who was Governor of the most important Fort of Blaye,
situate upon the mouth of the Garonne, where it disgorges it self into the
Sea; and it was proposed, that a Conference should be between those two Dukes
and the Dukes of Bovillon, and de la Force, at which, two Counselors of
Bourdeaux were also to intervene. The design was to have the Duke d' A^guien
only Son to the Prince of Conde, to be received into that City: ^or which
purpose Gourville went to the Princess his Mother, who was then at Chantilly,
to propose it to her; which she at first could not consent unto, but gave two
thousand Ducatoons which she had received unto Gourville; and with that small
sum of Money they gave beginning to so great a War. Monsieur Todias went from
Blaye to the Duke Rochefaucault, to appoint the day and place for the meeting;
but two hours after his coming, a Gentleman was sent from the Duke San Simon,
who in his name prayed to be excused, if he did not proceed in that affair,
because having found that they intended to break with the Court, and set up a
party against it, he was resolved not to engage therein, it being contrary to
the duty of a good Subject, and the gratitude he owed unto the King, by whose
Father he had been so highly advanced and trusted: as to the single persons of
the Princess, and Duke d' Auguien, he would be ready to receive them into
Blaye, in case they were resolved to continue there quietly, without
endeavoring to make any alteration in the Government. The Dukes de Bovillon
and Rochefaucault saw themselves then totally deserted: the Marshal de Breze,
who was a Kinsman to Conde, being late before dead, and the Duke de la Forie
irresolute, and not willing to proceed further; but being unwilling to quit the
Kingdom without doing something that was considerable, they besought the
Princess to let them have the Duke d' Anguien, as well to make use of his
presence in Bourdeaux for the encouragement of the Inhabitants, as also that he
might not be exposed to danger, being the only person of the house of Conde
who was at liberty. The Duchess of Chastillon, Widow to the before mentioned
Duke, who was killed at the taking of Charenton, and Monsieur Lenet, assured
Gourville that they would obtain this from the Princess very suddenly: and the
Duke de Rochefaucault, who had no strong place in his Government of Poic^on,
nor any Troops of Soldiers under his command, was notwithstanding the first
that took up Arms in favor of the Imprisoned Princes.

The Commander in Sau^ur, whereof the Government had been assigned to Monsieur
de Cominges, delayed the rendering of it, and sent unto the Duke of
Rochefaucault, offering him to be of his party, in case he would bring Forces
thither to defend it. This place was of great importance for the Interest of
the Princes; but Rochefaucault could not then bring any Forces together, but
such as depended upon his own particular credit, and that of his Friends: He
therefore made use of the occasion (being to Inter his Father) to draw together
some of the Nobility, and others of his Country, to the number of about 2000
Horse, and between 600 and 700 Foot, with which he marched toward Saumur,
which was then invested by the Kings Troops; and although he came before the
expiration of that time until which Monsieur Dumont the Governor had promised
to defend it, yet he found the Articles agreed upon, so as he was forced to
return home; where notwithstanding he could not long continue, because the
Marshal de Milleray Governor of Britany marched against him with all his
Forces; and he not having any strong place unto which he might retire, went
into Turenne, after he had posted 400 men in Montrond, and there joined with
the Duke de Bovillon, who having great store of acquaintance in Bourdeaux, sent
Monsieur d' Anglade his Secretary thither, who was a person though young, yet
very able, and full of Spirit, who knew so well how to demean himself, as in a
short time he raised a very great and powerful Faction in the Parliament
against the Court.

The Duke of Bovillon used also another Artifice to ^ull the Duke of Espernon
asleep, which was, to assure him that he would interpose nothing against his
Government: to which purpose he frequently sent Monsieur de Champagae to give
him the assurance of it; and in the mean time Monsieur de Savagnac was sent to
bring away the Princess and the Duke de Auguien, who had resolved privately to
leave Montrond. Bovillon and Rochefaucault with 300 Gentlemen raised in the
Marquisate of Sillery, marched into Au^ergne to meet the Princess, and
conducted her into the Vicounty of Turenne, where they made a halt for eight
days, took Brivola, and broke the Prince To^^so of Savoy his Troop of Gen d'
Arms, whom they encountered near that Country.

This delay, which was necessary for disposing those of Bourdeaux to receive
them, afforded the Cavalier dela Valette, who was watchful, and had taken care
to inform himself of what their designs tended unto, (and who had at last got
notice of what they intended) to march out against them with 600 Horse, and
1200 Foot, with which he posted himself at Font de Terrason, to hinder their
passage; but the Dukes passed above it, making a semblance that they would with
the assistance of Monsieur de La For^e seize upon Bergerac; the fear whereof
made La Valette quit his post to oppose them, where he found the Duke of
Espernon. In this mean time Bovillon with his party passed to Liment,
Rochefort, and Linde, Castles belonging to him; and conducting the Princess
along the River Dordoyne, as he passed by Limeul, sent out a Squadron that fell
upon and took Valette's Baggage. But the Duke d'Espernon coming up, pursued the
Dukes, who with some difficulty saved themselves with all their Forces in
Courtras; there making a halt, they sent the Princess before them, and
endeavoring to cast a Bridge over the River Iald, for passing off their
Troops, they were opposed by the Kings Forces commanded by La Valette, who
suspected they had a design to surprise Libourn, by means of some intelligence
within the Town.

The Princess continuing her Journey, came without any other stop to Bourdeaux,
where the Inhabitants at her first coming shut the Gates, refusing to admit
her; but this refusal caused so great a heat and dispute between the Nobility
and the Common people, that for preventing a Commotion, they resolved to admit
her, and the Duke of Anguien her Son, with their Domestic Servants, into the
Town; refusing entrance unto Bovillon and Rochefaucault, who declared to those
of Bourdeaux, that they intended not to engage in any thing against his
Majesty, having no other intention but to secure the person of the young Prince
against the unjust violence of Mazarine; and that they had a confidence in
them, and hoped they would not quit the protection of a Prince who was
imprisoned for no other cause, but for the kindness and respect he had showed
unto their City, which he had endeavored to right against the injuries offered
unto them by the Fury and Injustice of the Duke of Espernon.

The same night that the Princes remonstrated these things unto the Citizens
and People, they crossed the River, and went to quarter in the Suburbs there,
where they staid three days; during which, they were visited by the principal
persons of the City, whom they endeavored to gain, by several kinds of
applications made unto them. Monsieur Lenet, who was a great Servant and
Confident of the Prince of Conde, and a person of great Wit and Judgment,
being with some few others admitted into the City with the Princess, began to
make some Pactions and Parties, and had gained some Men, and several Women, who
are not only easily perswadible themselves, but are also fit Instruments to
persuade others; so as the Princes growing daily more and more in vogue, and
the Court being de^^ied there, the Dukes one night came into the City upon
pretense of visiting the Princess; and seeing that no notice was taken of their
being there, they staid, and each of them presented a Request unto the
Parliament, desiring their Protection for six Weeks only, within which time
they promised to justify themselves and their proceedings to his Majesty.

The Forces they had brought with them were quartered near the City; but they
durst not propose the undertaking of a War to those of Bourdeaux, that being a
nice point, not to be mentioned but with great caution and dexterity. And in
regard the undertaking of a War without money, was an extravagance like to that
of going to Sea without Oars or Tackle, the Duke of Bovillon, who was a person
of great Valor and Wisdom, considered that to engage in a War, having no other
foundation to rely on but the people (who the more furious, are generally so
much the more sickle and unconstant) were a great imprudence; and that 'twas
therefore fit to rely on some surer basis, by craving the assistance of some
Prince that might be able by his Forces to give a balance to the Christian
King. In order thereunto, they dispatched into Spain Monsieur de Baz who
depended altogether on the Duke, and Monsieur de Mazarolles who was a Creature
of the Prince of Conde, with charge that they should endeavor to engage the
Catholic King to assist them with Ships and Money; and at the same time sent
Gourville to the Duchess of Longueville and the Marshal Turenne, to give them
notice that they should use their interest with the Archduke and Spanish
Ministers in Flanders, to promote their Proposition in the Court of Spain, and
to persuade them not to neglect the making use of a conjuncture so advantageous
to the Interests of Spain.

Gourville was in his journey taken within a quarter of a league of Steuay, by
a party of the King's Horse, and brought to Sedan; but not being known, he was
by the Duchess of Longueville freed upon the ordinary Ransom, and in few days
after, sent back into Guienne, with the Orders agreed upon touching the
management of a War on those two sides of France: And the Princess, the Dukes
of Bovillon, Rochefaucault, Lenet, and others of their party in Bourdeaux,
continuing their Negotiations there, the Parliament at Bourdeaux resolved
finally to take the Princes under their protection, and continue the War
against the Duke of Espernon.

For carrying on of this, the Duke of Anguien was declared Generalissimo, the
Dukes of Bovillon and Rochefaucault Generals under him, and the Marquisses of
Sauebeuf and of Lusignan their Lieutenants; and the Marquess of Silleny, being
of the Family of Brullart, and a Kinsman to the Duke of Rochefaucault, was sent
after the former into Spain, with the news of this Declaration; who found in
the Court of Spain as great a readiness to entertain a Correspondence with the
Princess, as the Duchess of Longueville had met withal in Flanders. The
Spaniards well knew, that a Civil War kept up in France, was a powerful remedy
to cure their own inward distempers, and therefore applied all their study and
endeavor to foment it; and Don Giuseppe Osorio was thereupon presently sent by
the King of Spain unto the Princess and the Generals, with Money and Provisions
fit for the carrying on of the War: so as from that time, new Levies, and all
other necessary Preparations, were publicly made for the encouragement of the
people, and complying with the ambition of the discontented party; the
Spaniards having thereby compassed their ends, and raised a flame in Guienne
and Champaigne, which are two of the principal Provinces of France.

The Cardinal knowing of what importance it was to hinder the increase of this
mischief, which, if neglected, was like to prove so fatal unto France, thought
there was no delay to be used in it, nor any time to be afforded for letting it
take further root; and therefore proposed, That the Duke of Orleans should
undertake a Journey unto Bourdeaux, as the most proper means to reduce that
City, whilst the King should, at the same time, by his presence, quell the
Disorders raised by the Spaniards on the side of Flanders: but his Royal
Highness having refused to undertake that charge, either upon the uncertainty
of the success, or being dissuaded from it by the Frondeurs, who suspecting
that the King, if he should quell the Bourdelois, and prove victorious in
Flanders, might re-establish his Authority, were fearful they should then be
punished according to the greatness of their demerits. The matter therefore
coming again to be debated in the Council, the Cardinal represented at large
the importance of it, and declared his opinion, that although the Enemies Army
lay encamped upon the Frontiers of Picardy, and notwithstanding the ticklish
condition of Paris, and that in Flanders they began to stir afresh, and
notwithstanding the danger his Majesty might incur in his health by the fatigue
of such a Journey, and the great heats in that Province; yet his Majesty was
rather to go in person thither, than that the motions in that Province, being
one of the greatest and most famous in the Kingdom, should be neglected. The
Council being persuaded by his Reasons, it was accordingly resolved by the Duke
of Orleans and all the rest; and thereupon, that they might loose no time,
notice was given of it to the Duke of Espernon, that he might be careful to
draw together what Force he was able; as also to the Marshal of Milleray, who
was then with some Troops in Poictou, that they should come and draw toward
Bourdeaux with their men, that so when his Majesty should come into the
Province, they might presently fall upon action.

In pursuance of this Order, the Duke of Espernon drew what Forces he could
together, and went to Again a p^incipal Town in Guienne, situated about eight
hundred paces from the Garonne, which heretofore ran by the Walls thereof;
during whose absence, Monsieur de la Valette, who, as you have already heard,
was by the retreat of the Dukes left Master of the Field, having in vain
endeavored to pursue them, upon his return home seized by surprise the Island
of St. George, kept by some unexperienced Citizens, and placed a Garrison
therein, leaving Monsieur de Canoles a Lieutenant Colonel to command them.

This Island lies about three Leagues above the City of Bourdeaux in the
Garonne, not much inhabited; but the possessing thereof hindered the Commerce,
which by that great and Navigable River those of Bourdeaux held with the
neighboring Provinces; and this happened upon the 22th day of May, at which time
the Island was seized, and the Inhabitants thereof plundered. Those of
Bourdeaux finding that by the reception they had given to the Princess of Conde
and other the Enemies to the Court, they had incurred his Majesty's
displeasure, and drawn a War upon themselves, the event whereof was uncertain,
but the miseries they were to suffer by it most assured, began to make
preparation for defense of their City; they shut up several Gates that were not
necessary, placed Guards upon all the Avenues, and made some Outworks, but
those weak, and not defencible, because the Supplies of Money from Spain were
not paid in that proportion as was agreed, or if sent from thence, were applied
to private uses. The Dukes of Bovillon and Rochefaucault, and Monsieur Lenet
the Prince of Conde's Agent, made Levies of about 3000 Foot, and between 6 and
700 Horse; and shortly after, with a good number of Citizens and Soldiers
marched out of Bourdeaux, to fight Monsieur de la Valette, who was quartered at
Chastillon upon the Dordoyne; and finding him too well fortified to be
attacqued, they marched into Medoc, where they surprised Chastelnau, a Town
four Leagues from Bourdeaux; and had advanced farther, if the Duke of Espernon
and the Marshal Milleray had not by their marching up, and joining with La
Valette, stopped their further proceeding, and enforced them to retreat to
Blanchefort. Espernon upon the 26 th of June drew toward Medor, and engaged
the Enemies Forces commanded by Monsieur de Chambou, a Mareshal de Camp, in a
fierce Skirmish, which ended with equal loss on both sides; those of Bourdeaux
retreating in good order to the City, which gave such an Alarm there, as they
suddenly took Arms, and about 4000 men under command of the Dukes of Bovillon
and Rochefaucault, sallying out, fell so briskly on the Kings Forces, as they
enforced them to retire over the River Iala, with the loss of about 50 Officers
and Soldiers; and of the Citizens were about 25 Soldiers, and Monsieur de St.
Brixlalerimont killed, and de Guitault and de la Rosiere wounded. And because
the Island of St. George was a Pass of huge importance to Bourdeaux, the Dukes
considering the great forwardness of the Citizens and Country adjacent, took a
resolution to endeavor the recovery of it; and in order thereunto, sent
Monsieur de Rochelaura, and Monsieur de la Motte, with 400 choice Foot, and
some Companies of the Citizens armed, upon the enterprise, which they happily
performed, falling upon them suddenly, so as they were constained to retire
into a Church and a Mill, where being attacqued, they were forced to yield
themselves Prisoners of War; there being about thirty Soldiers killed, and 100
taken, amongst whom was Monsieur de Cavoles the Governor; those of Bourdeaux
being thereby freed of a Thorn which sorely troubled them, and leaving to the
Royalists only the sense of their miscarriage, in neglecting to fortify a
Post of that advantage when they had seized it. Espernon's Forces having
repassed the Iala, took up their quarters in the Town of Mecau, which they
plundered; and marching into the Medor, recovered Castlenau, the Garrison
surrendering upon good conditions: from hence they passed into the Grane, a
most plentiful Country full of little Hills, on which are produced all sorts of
Fruit, and great quantity of Grapes, whereof are made the best Wines in all
those parts, which are therefore bought up by the English, Hollanders, and
other Nations, to so great an advantage of the Owners and of his Majesty, that
the sum of 150000 Doublons is said to be yearly paid only for the custom of it.

The King's resolution to go for Guienne being divulged, the Duke of Orleans
(though he had before approved the Counsel) and the Frondeurs showed to be
dissatisfied therewith, giving out Reports, That 'twas a thing advised by the
Cardinal, only for his own particular designs. They said, He was to marry his
Niece the Countess Martinozzi with the Duke of Candale, and settle the Duke of
Espernon his Father in that Government: That from thence he designed to go for
Languedock, and solemnise the Marriage of Mancini with the Duke Mercoeur in
Toulouse; turn out the Count de Alez from that Government, and get the same
unto himself. With these false Reports they endeavored to poison the people,
and raise sinister opinions in them, contrary unto the truth of the Fact; it
being most certain, that both the King and his Council were willing, and had
desired the Duke of Orleans to make that Voyage. The Duke of Beaufort, the
Coadjutor, and the Parliament, seemed also to be troubled at his Majesty's
going; and taking this for a fixed Maxim, That they were not to suffer those
of Bourdeaux to be overcome and punished, because 'twould be a great addition
unto his Majesty's power; which by that means would become much more absolute,
and would be also a great increase to the Cardinal's Reputation in managing the
Affairs of State. They therefore took from thence an occasion to make a second
Rupture between the Cardinal and the Frondeurs: The Duke of Beaufort, and those
of his party, said, 'Twas not reasonable that the imprisoned Princes should be
in the Courts power, because they having had the greatest share in the
imprisoning of them; and having by that means incurred their hatred, and desire
of revenge, It was but just and reasonable, that they should also have a hand
in their deliverance whenever they were released, and their share in the
thanks should be due for it. This seemed to proceed from the jealousy they
had, left the Prince of Conde, being released by the Cardinal, should in
acknowledgement of that Obligation, side with him against them. But the truth
was, the Frondeurs had themselves a great desire to join with the Prince of
Conde; and a Marriage being proposed to be between the Princess of Chevereux
and the Prince of Conty, to unite together against the Cardinal.

The Parliament of Bourdeaux having in this mean time got notice that the Court
was highly incensed against them for having entertained the Princess of Conde
with her Son, and for other declarations they had made in favor of the
Princes; and had resolved to punish them for having acted therein contrary unto
their duties, and the trust reposed in them; and being sensible that of
themselves they were not able to beat off the Storm was falling upon them,
resolved to try if they could awake that Spirit in the Parliament of Paris,
which seemed to be at present quieted, and laid asleep; and resolved therefore
on the 18th of June to send Monsieur de Voysin to them with a Letter and
Instructions; which because it contains the Reasons upon which they seemed to
justify their proceedings, is here inserted. IT is now near two years since
this Province, and in particular the City of Bourdeaux, lay under all the
injuries and persecution imaginable: You have been pleased, my Lords, to
publish unto the world how sensible you were of our afflictions: at such time
as having eased the City of Paris, and obtained a Declaration from his Majesty
for confirmation of their Rights and Privileges, you were also pleased to
contribute your assistance to this Province, as a Member of the Kingdom which
continued still under affliction; so as we must acknowledge that the resentment
you were pleased to express of our injuries, was the great motive which induced
his Majesty to grant us that Peace, whereof we have hitherto enjoyed no other
benefit save the name only, it being broken and denied unto us, contrary to
the knowledge and gracious intentions of his Majesty, by him that has for his
own private ends raised and fomented a War against his Fellow-Citizens, and the
Metropolis of his own Government. And although we have not ceased humbly to
represent and make known our grievances from time to time, it has been to so
little purpose, that it seemed they intended by continuing him over us, who is
the cause of all our misery, to deprive us of all hope ever to be released or
quitted of it. This being our condition, some few days since the Princess of
Conde with the Duke of Anguien her Son came hither without any other company
but their Afflictions and grief for the Imprisonment of the Prince her Husband,
contrary unto the purport and effect of the late Declaration, and desiring our
protection for the security of their Lives and Persons. Her Sex, the Age of her
Son, and their Quality, might justly challenge from us not only Justice, but
Compassion also; and yet we resolved, according to the duty and obedience we
owe his Majesty, not to interest our selves in the matter, but only to receive
them into the City during his Majesty's good pleasure, and humbly to beseech
him that he will refer the judgment of the Princes unto competent Judges, with
such Instructions as he held to be most for the advantage of his service, and
the quiet of this Province, which is now going to be the Theater, where several
Tragedies are to be acted, by reason of the many Factions risen upon the
publishing of that so famous Declaration which your Zeal and Care of the
public benefit of France procured to be made in the year 1648, and for the
overthrowing of that which his Majesty had been graciously pleased to declare
in favor of this Province, where we have seen les Intendants des Finances to
return, and notwithstanding all their fair pretenses, to exercise most
barbarous cruelties, where Monsieur de Foul has been seen by his presidial
Sentence to adjudge whole Towns and Parishes to be burned down, and to condemn
the Inhabitants some to be hanged, some to the Galleys, and others to
banishment, without distinction of Age, or Sex, for not having paid what the
covetousness of the Partisans would extort from them, making their disability
pass for a Crime, and executing those inhumane Sentences by force of Arms, and
without any other form of Iustree. We are therefore in hope, that as the said
Declarations, and the Peace, which was the consequence of them, were obtained
by your Intercession, you will also employ your selves to obtain for us the
effects of them; and that you will make use of your interest with his Majesty
in such manner, that by your Intercession there may be a stop given to those
clamours and oppressions, under which this Province groans, and which may
probably occasion the ruin of the State by the destruction of this Province,
which is one of the most considerable parts of France, and is now upon the
point of being torn in pieces by his Majesty's Subjects the Inhabitants
thereof, and other strangers, who are desirous to make use of this conjuncture
of affairs, to the destruction of the Monarchy. This is the subject of our
present application to you upon occasion of the Princess her coming hither,
whereof we hold it our duty to advertise you by a member of our own, unto whom
we humbly pray you to give credit: And that you will believe we are your most
humble Servants and Brothers.



Monsieur Voysin, who was the Person entrusted with the Letter, coming to
Paris, desired audience from the Parliament, who met the 4 th of July to
register the Letter from his Majesty under his Seal, whereby he left the Duke
of Orleans his Lieutenant General there during his absence: the Parliament,
before they admitted him, or received the Letter from those of Bourdeaux,
thought it fit to adjourn till the next day, and in the mean time to beseech
his Royal Highness, that he would be present at reading of the Letter, and the
discourse which Voysin was to make upon it. The Duke readily consented, and
came accompanied with the Duke Beaufort, the Marshal de l'Hospital, and the
Coadjutor: The question being then put whether they should receive this Deputy,
after a long debate to was resolved in the affirmative; wereupon being called
in he presented his Letters of Credence, and that directed to the Parliament,
and made a long discourse, wherein he represented what he thought most
conducing to the advantage of his Country, inveighing particularly against the
actions of the Duke d'Espernon, and those of Monsieur de Foul Master of the
Requests, who had a while before been sent an Interdant de la Justice in
Lamousin, according to the Agreements in the Treaty of Peace, made in pursuance
of the Declaration dated the 28 th of October 1648, and touching the
Imprisonment of the Princes, but it being then late, the Court was adjourned
till the next day, at which time the Duke of Orleans was also present. The
first President there gave an account of the Note passed for admitting the
Deputy sent by the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and that the motive they had for
desiring his Royal Highness presence at the doing of it, was, that they might
by his assistance be able to resolve something worthy the reputation of that
high Court, and convenient to be put in practice, having regard unto the
present posture of affairs as they then stood. The Duke told them, That he
desired the Parliament should know, his Majesty had late before sent for the
Duke of Espernon to Court; and that by Letters of a fresher date he had
seconded that command: That their Majesty's went into Guienne with a resolution
to deal graciously with his people, and redress their Grievances: That he was
resolved not to be rigorous against the Parliament, as being satisfied that if
they had in any thing transgressed their duty, they were forced unto it: That
he was resolved to pardon all that should submit unto him; such only excepted
as should be found to have held intelligence with the Spaniard, against whom
Process should be made before competent Judges to be appointed for the Trial of
them. The Parliament then adjourned till the next day; at which time, upon
debate touching the resolution to be taken in that affair, it was resolved,
that the words spoken by the Duke touching Espernon should be entered upon
Record: That the Deputy sent by those of Bourdeaux should give a Copy of his
Deputation in Writing, which together with the Letters from those of Bourdeaux,
should be sent unto their Majesty's by Messengers from them, who should have
orders humbly to beseech the King and Queen that they would be graciously
pleased to condescend unto the Petitions and Complaints of the Bourdelois, and
restore Peace and quiet unto the afflicted Province. It was also resolved, that
the business of Foul should be examined, and that he should be proceeded
against upon the Informations given that he had been guilty of much Violence
and Extortion in the execution of his Commission. The President Bailleul was
ordered to go to Court with these Instructions, who was to be attended by one
Councellor out of every Chamber, and two out of the Grand Chamber; these were
the Messieurs Meusnier, St. Tot, Canaye, Camus, Pon Casse, Bitrult, and the
Counts Montanglau, Mangis, and Martmean, who set forward upon the 8 th of July
toward the Court.

There were in France at the same time several Counselors sent from the
several Cantons of the Switzers, to solicit on the behalf of their several
Countries the payment due by the King unto the Forces of that Nation under his
pay, the same amounting to a very considerable sum; upon occasion whereof, many
of the Commanders and Soldiers, being discontented, had in several places laid
down Arms, and declared that they would serve no longer unless they were paid
all their Arrears, and secured of their Pay as it should grow due for the time
to come. This affair was a matter of great consequence in that conjuncture of
time, and was also very carefully considered by his Majesty's Council, who were
sensible that 'twas a thing of huge importance not to disoblige these Forces,
which being well paid, do serve truly and faithfully on all occasions. And the
Marquess of Chasteau Neuf Keeper of the Seal, Monsieur de Longue Treasurer, and
Monsieur de Tillier Secretary of State, were therefore appointed to treat and
agree with them; who after several Meetings and Treaties had between them, at
last upon the 20 th day of June came to the conclusions following.

First, That they should be forthwith paid in ready money 40000 Doublons, and
60000 more at three days of payment; the first at the end of July then next
following; the second upon the last of September; and the last Payment to be
made on the last day of December the same year, together with 1000 Doublons
more for the Interest of those Sums; For the Payment whereof, his Majesty was
to deposite some Jewels as a pledge for the securing of those Payments.

Besides which, his Majesty was to pay in five years following the sum of
250000 Doublons more, by 50000 Doublons at each Payment. The first to begin
upon the first of January 1651, and that the sum of 66000 Doublons more should
be paid in the year 1656. all which said Payments should be secured by
assignations to be made upon the Kings: Revenues of Lions, Valentia, and those
of Paris; for which the Farmers of those places were to give security.

As to the payment of the Colonels, Captains, and Soldiers that should be in
his Majesty's service, there should be a Fond established, and 15000 Doublons
paid monthly until all was satisfied.

This Agreement was signed by both parties, Registered and Verified by the
Parliament in solemn form; with which the Cantons were all satisfied, and the
Deputies returned home highly contented with the Honors and Favors his
Majesty had been pleased to bestow upon them, declaring that they would
continue to serve him faithfully with their Lives and Fortunes upon all
occasions.

The end of the Fourth Book.
THE HISTORY OF FRANCE The FIFTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The King and Court Return from Champagne to Paris; The Spaniards raise their
Siege from before Guien, a Journey to Guise is proposed, and resolved upon. The
Frondeurs are apprehensive thereof, and Mutiny again against Mazarine;
commotion in Bordeaux at the news that the King is marching that way. The
Princess of Conde incourageth the Burdelois, who therefore join with the
Princes, and prepare to make Resistance: something of action insues, and soon
after agreement is made. The Kings entry into Bordeaux, who within a few days
parts from theme and comes to Fontenbleau. The Spaniards besiege, and take
Piombino, and Portolongone in Italy, and make themselves Masters of La Capella,
and of Rethel in Flanders. The Princes are carried from the Castle of St.
Vincennes to that of Marcoussi. The Archduke moves a general peace with the
Duke of Orleans; his ends, and Artifice. Mazarine goes to the Army in
Champagne; Marishall Plessis Pralin, takes Rethell, gives Battle to General
Turenne, Routs him. The Spaniards take Flix, Mirauet, and Tortosa in Catalonia.
The Princes liberty is proposed by the Duke of Orleans, and by the Frondeurs;
Many Treaties are had, and many disorders arise thereupon.

THE Court being returned from Champagne to Paris, it was not hard for the
Cardinal to free himself from being Pressed to Transport the Princes into the
Bastile, as well out of his great affection which he bore unto the King and
Queen, as by the instigation of the Princes Friends, and Kindred; who
apprehended Conde's life, if he should fall into the hands of the Frondeurs;
and especially of such, as being full of Malice and Revenge, made them not a
little afraid: knowing very well, that all of them being fully bent to effect
their desire; which was to strengthen their Faction the most they could, either
by totally annihilating the Prince, or by winning him wholly over, so to
destroy afterward, either by his assistance, or without his obstacle, the
Cardinals Authority; which made them press the Queen, that the Princes persons
might be secured rather in the Bastile than elsewhere.

News came this mean while, that the Spaniards had raised their Siege from
before Guise, whereat the King's Ministers did not a little rejoice, seeing
their advice had succeeded so well. Wherefore the courage of the Cardinals
Enviers failing, who saw him grow daily stronger and stronger; The Duke of
Orleans took occasion thereupon, (being eg'd on by the Coadjutors) to join the
rather with the Frondeurs; so to counterpoize that greatness which did not a
little vex him: They therefore by common consent resolve to hold up their
Authority, especially in Paris; wherefore the time of choosing the Provost of
Merchants (a place of concernment, especially then when the City was divided
into Factions) being now at hand, they gave out, that for the following years
they would have Monsieur La Feure have that Office, who was a Counselor of
Parliament, and in whom they did much confide: to the end that being joined in
interest with the Inhabitants, they might the more freely dispose of the
Counsel of the City; so as they press the Cardinal now no longer in a fair
becoming way, but told him boldly that they would be gratified in that person.
And the Duchess of Chevereux, the Duchess of Monbazon, and Duke Beaufort,
told him freely, that if he would have them esteem him their Friend, he must by
no means refuse it. The Cardinal was much troubled at this, he complained much
of the Frondeurs boldness, which setting aside the respect they ought unto the
King, they durst so sawcily meddle with that which did not belong unto them:
but as in a great storm a wary Pilot strikes the main yard, and takes down the
Masts to keep the Vessel from being exposed to the injury of the winds; so the
Cardinal, the weak condition of States being considered in the Minority of
Princes, to keep from breaking with those who persuaded him to clap up the
Princes, was content to give them satisfaction, suffering Feure to be chosen,
whom the Frondeurs pretending to make use of as partial to them, and as an
instrument to work their ends; so the Cardinal by his innate attractiveness,
and assisted by Fortune, which commonly favors him that can sooth her up, knew
so well how to handle La Feure, as at last he prevailed with him upon the
weightiest concernments. The Cardinal thinking by the Spaniards raising their
Siege from before Guise, that they were weaker than indeed they were, and
consequently less to be feared, was the more minded to make the Journey to
Guienne, to suppress the designs of the Burdelois, hoping to reduce that City
to obedience within a few days. But the more successful he fancied his designs,
the Frondeurs jealousies grew the greater; wherefore they studied all means
possible, whereby they might either totally ruin him, or make him more pliable
to their wills. So as keeping still close together, they gave out that they
would never tolerate the suppression of Bordeaux, nor yet the Marriages, nor
his establishment in France; and by the way of friendship they made it be
insinuated into him, that he should not do well to suffer the King to go from
Paris, and leave affairs in the condition they were in. But the Cardinal
professing that his main end was to restore the King to his Regal Splendour and
Authority, which was not a little obscured by the disobedience, and exorbitant
pretentions of Subjects, he minded not the Frondeur's threats; but defending
himself on the one side from the Treachery of his Enemies, and fencing himself
on the other side from the infidelity of his Friends; he by his wit and
simulation rendered all prejudicial attempts vain.

But for that the Frondeurs pretention to divert the King from his Journey to
Guienne, which was intended to suppress the Burdelois, tasted of insufferable
boldness and petulancy; and that being no good pretense whereupon to raise
novelties, it would have wanted the general applause, to gild over the
indecency thereof, they made use of a palliated zeal to the public good, as if
they desiring the general peace, found no obstacle but the Cardinal, who did in
several manners divert it; though when he arrested the Princes, he promised to
conclude it, and thereby to put an end unto the peoples miseries, and these
affections were so zealously carried on by Beaufort, and his Adherents, as if
the Cardinal had had the disposal of his Enemies will, and as if the Spaniards
were to have given way to whatsoever should be demanded by the French.
Whereupon the Parisians were more exasperated, and people murmured in all
places, not being aware of the art wherewith affairs were masked, nor of the
cheat which was put upon them, whilst the Cardinal wisely knew that to have
peace, the Kingdom must be in a condition of continuing War, and not to
discompose Treaties by civil discords: it not being to be doubted, but that the
Spaniards would have cooled in their desire of agreement, and would have
heightened their pretentions the more by how much they should see France
involved in intestine troubles. Thus by degrees they began to color over the
breach, which they were resolved to make; Beaufort coveting popular applause,
desired a breach, knowing that the best way to become powerful with the simple
people, was to seem to hate what they hated; he therefore used all means to be
accounted an Enemy to the Cardinal, and this the rather for that by reason of
the visit which was made him (as has been said) he began to grow less in the
opinion of the Parisians; people ran not after him, as they had wont to do,
when he past through the Streets, and many of the Licentious people would call
him a Mazzarinian: so as it became him to think upon new ways to regain their
good will, and to remove the opinion, that it was not the public interest, but
his own private concerns which made him close with the late Revolutions.

The Journey to Guienne being upon these Reasons resolved upon, the Duke of
Orleans remained chief Governor in Paris, assisted by the Marshal de L'
Hospitale the Marquis of Chasteau-neufe, and by Monsieur de Tillier Secretary
of State. The King and Queen, the Duke of Anjou, the Cardinal, with the whole
Court and all the Agents of Foreign Princes, went from Paris on the 4 th of
July, toward Guienne; and some speech of peace between the Two Crowns being
renewed, the glory whereof was desired by the Cardinal, he desired the Venetian
Ambassador Michiele Morosini to follow the Court, that he might make use of his
Mediation, if the Adversaries should incline to agreement. This news coming to
Bordeaux, the Citizens thereof were much troubled; many public and secret
meetings were had to find out what best expedient was to be had. Some were for
humbling themselves, and for submitting to the King, rather than to expect
force, and to dismiss the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochfaucolt, to the end that
they might expect some good by Clemency.

What can we expect (said one that was of that mind) but that the King being
made more certain of our contumacy by our resistance, shall for ever shut his
ears against any subjection that we can offer? that being berest of all the
Prerogatives that this noble City has ever enjoyed, we be forced to receive
such hard Laws, as are usually put upon the Conquered by the Conqueror? Why do
we carry our selves so proudly against our King, who passing by all the
injuries that we have done him, has never shown himself loath to pardon us?
there is no doubt but that the Duke of Espernoun, exceeding the bound of
convenience, has injured us in many things; but these are miseries common to
all states, which have not their Masters ear. And upon this occasion, who knows
not that more good may be had by humbly acquainting our Sovereign with our
grievances, than by having recourse to violent means, which are always hurtful
when accompanied with want of respect to the Sovereign; by what forces shall we
oppose the whole Kingdom, which attributing not only her losses, but the
retarding of her Victories to our persidiousness, will be upon our backs to
vindicate the injuries of their betrayed Country, and the outrages done to
Majesty? if commerce cease, if Traffic fail, what helps can you expect from an
afflicted City which hates the Authors of her miseries? you will not therefore
look to do any thing of your selves, will you perhaps hope for good from
foreign forces? say I pray with what heart shall we see the Spaniards within
our Walls, who from their very Cradles hate our Nation? who having been so
often beaten by us, wish nothing more then to make themselves whole by our
losses? for my part (said he) I cannot think that the Heavens mean us so much
mischief, as to blind us thus. But if our sins shall pull down such mischiefs
upon us; may the Heavens be propitious to me in shutting up mine eyes in an
everlasting sleep, that I may never see Garomne swollen with our blood, or hear
my Country, as flourishing as any other in all France, groan under unevitable
slavery and ignominy, to the eternal testimony of her contumacy, when her King
stood in most need of her.

The pathetick commiseration of this pious and prudent Citizen, had well nigh
prevailed to persuade the Assembly to humble themselves unto the King; but, for
that Offices are vendible in France, which makes them be usually conferred upon
those who are the most wealthy, though perhaps upon those who are most
ambitious and incapable; it was strongly opposed, particularly by those that
were of riper years; for the young men were more moderate. Moreover the name of
Conde was almost adored in that City, nor was his Wives being present there of
small moment, in making the Citizens well minded toward him, by reason of her
rare indowments both of mind and body: she encouraged those to stand upon
defense, who hating the present Government, did unwillingly hear such
discourses as tended to surrendering; which as they presumed, would make
Espernoun's Government more cruel than before, wherefore one of the Graver sort
did with much vehemence exaggerate the grievances which he pretended to receive
daily from the said Espernoun, which were not to be remedied but by the change
of Government: for the Duke, working (as they thought) according to the
dictates of the Cardinal, it might be conceived their sufferings would have no
end save by obliging the Court by resistance, to give the Province such
satisfaction as was pretended unto.

Have we (said he) past the Rubicon, and shall we not stand to our Arms? what
good have we received by our modest complaints made to the King, that he would
be pleased to moderate, I will not say Espernoun's Government, but his Reign,
who was born to be the ruin of this Country? nothing; but the more
consolidating him in his Tyranny, and the making him the bolder to destroy us;
nor can he do otherwise, whose hopes being grounded upon alliance with
Mazarine, we can expect nothing but that growing daily more furious he shall
prejudice us more by his indiscreet Government, then whole Armies would do. It
is not we alone, said he, who are in these miseries, nor are we only they who
are compelled to have recourse to Arms, to keep back force, the commotion is
Universal throughout the Kingdom. Paris, the place wherein our Kings reside,
finding that it is not justice nor honesty which now prevails, but the
Favorites pleasure, betakes her self to those means, which are those alone,
that are left her to defend her self against the wrongs which she receives; and
shall we fear to be overcome? All other Provinces encouraged by our example,
will betake themselves with us to seek out remedies for those evils which do
now disquiet the Kingdom. The Spaniards, if we shall have need of them, will
not fail to assist us, without hopes of getting footing in these parts, where
they know they can take no root; they will be satisfied in diverting in some
fort the King's Forces, which may perhaps bring on the general peace, which is
as much desired by all the World, as it is kept of by the King's Ministers of
State, and we being the promoters of this good shall purchase praise, whereas
by idely looking on, to our shame, we shall at last like Cowards bewail our
misfortunes, to the eternal Infamy of this warlike Province.

The Parliament had hardly well ended their discoursing hereupon, when the
Princess of Conde accompanied by other Princes and Gentlemen of that party
appeared; who renewing by new exaggerations the commotion before awakened in
those Counselors, and inciting the mutinous people to adhere to their fury,
obtained so much, as they joined yet more straightly in Union with the Princess,
and gave fitting orders for War, declaring still, that they would be good
Frenchmen, and faithful Subjects to the King. They did not notwithstanding
send any Embassy to the King, but sent Monsieur Voysin with Letters to the
Parliament of Paris, and to Monsieur Guionet their Deputy in Ordinary,
acquainting him with their Resolution, whereunto they were compelled by
insupportable grievances, quite contrary to that famous Declaration of the Year
1648. whereof the Parliament of Paris having been the Author, they desired
them to interpose in procuring ease to the threatening ruin of that Province.
They reduced their grievances to Three heads, their being oppressed by their
Governor, whom they therefore desired might be removed: the contriving of the
King's Declarations, and Will, concerning the Imprisonment of the Princes; and
the extortions, and violences used by the Financiers, and that they might not
be opposed by such as adhered to the King, and who complained of these
proceedings, they drove them all out of the City, calling them Mazzarinians,
and bad Frenchmen; they secured the Princess of Conde, and the Duke of
Anghienne, and all their dependants, that they might live securely under the
protection of the King and Parliament. They made have to arm themselves, that
they might keep the River open, they renewed their decrees of Union between all
the Corporations, and Officers of the Chamber of Edict, and charged
Commissaries appointed to that purpose to proceed incessantly in execution of
the decree against such as were suspected.

Not long after this decree, Marack a servant of the Queens, came to the
Parliament with Letters from the King, dated the 22. of July, and he was bidden
not to stay at Poictiers, but to go strait on to Bordeaux, to cross the
proceedings of the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochefaucolt against the King's
Service. These Letters were accompanied by others, from the Secretary of State;
Monsieur de Vrtiere, directed to the Procurator General, wherein he acquainted
him with the King's Journey to Guien, to the end that the Parliament might
appoint Commissioners to meet his Majesty, and render due and usual respects.

When these Letters were delivered to the Parliament, they resolved to make an
humble Remonstrance in writing to his Majesty; that the Cardinals coming near
Bordeaux, who was an Enemy to that City, and a favourer of Espernoun, might
cause diffidence, and despair in the exasperated people. But that his Majesty
should not doubt of the Parliaments sincere fidelity, and it was also resolved
that the Procurator General should answer Vrtiere, that the Cardinal was the
occasion why they durst not send Deputies to their Majesty's, to assure them of
the Cities entire Loyalty, and unalterable obedience, and all these were
delivered to the same Marack.

The Cardinal finding that it would be a long and difficult business to make
the Burdelois not adhere to the interest of the Princes and that if they should
fight, the Victory must be very bloody; and being desirous that the Subjects
might be reduced to obedience, with as little shedding of blood as was
possible, he did again endeavor an agreement before he entered the Province,
which he gave in charge to Monsieur de Lavie, who took upon him to write to
Monsieur Mirat, chief Counselor of the Parliament of Bordeaux, desiring him
that he would come himself in person to Roquedetau, that they might confer
touching the propositions to be sent to the Parliament: the invitation was
embraced, and Mirat being come to the place of conference, Lavie told him that
the King was willing to listen Graciously to the Remonstrances of Parliament,
and to the Princess of Conde's entreaties touching the Princes liberties, and
that he hoped to get a Gracious answer from their Majesty's within 15 days, if
that the Dukes of Bulloin, and Rochfaucolt would withdraw, and that the City
would lay down Arms: it not being fit that the King should set the Princes at
liberty, whilst his Subjects were in Arms. Miratz engaged himself in the names
of the abovesaid Dukes, that they should speedily retire to their own houses,
and should quit the Kingdom, if the Queen should so command them, so as the
Princes might be set free; and thus the conference ended. Yet the same Dukes
endeavored still to unite themselves more firmly to the Burdelois; and to get
speedy succor from Spain, which declared it would assist them, but would first
see the Parliament declare it self more openly, which occasioning some
difficulty, it was so handled, as some of the more seditious sort made the
meaner sort of people Mutiny, besieging the public Palace, so to force the
Parliament to make the pretended Declaration, which they did, but much against
the will of the Assembly, who were about to accept of the King's proposal.
Giurato Pontack went with a great Squadron of armed Inhabitants to assist the
Parliamentarians, and by the death of 3 or 4 of the most seditious freed them;
whereupon the Princess of Conde went to the Parliament, and excusing her self,
said she knew not of it. Osorio, to encourage the Counselors, caused some
chests or Patacoons, covered over with doubloans to be brought, which made a
sumptuous show, that all appearing to be Gold, the public might hope for
assistance, and particular men for profit. Things being thus established, it was
thought fit to send Osorio out of Bordeaux, so not to make the Court party more
Jealous: and to let the Princes do what they should please upon this occasion;
and so to cover over the loathsomness of that disobedience which was deeply
rooted in the hearts of ill minded men.

The Duke de St. Simon, Governor of Blaye went at this time to pay his
respects to the King, and to assure him of his Loyalty. The Count d' Ognon, of
the Family of Faucot, Lieutenant of the Governments of Rochell, of the Islands
of Oleron, and whereof the said Ognon, after the death of Marshall de Breze had
made himself almost an independent Master, would not go to Court, feigning
himself to have the Gout, thinking to stand looking on, and to advantage his
interests according to the conjuncture of times, either by absolutely
establishing himself in the close of affairs, in those Governments; or by
becoming necessary to the Court, oblige their Majesty's to make him Duke, and
Peer, and Marshall of France, which he very much longed to be. The Cardinal was
aware of his designs, but did dissemble, seeming to believe otherwise than he
did; and thinking it better to leave him quiet there, than by seeming to
distrust him, to put him upon some headlong Resolution; especially since he
seemed rather inclined to follow the Princes party, than to be Loyal to the
King.

His Majesty being advanced to Sibour, the Parliament of Bordeaux sent
President Pichon, with some other prime Counselors to him, who being brought
into his presence, in few words told him that nothing better became a puissant
Prince, than Clemency; which was the bait which did captivate hearts, and
establish Scepters; who by their Birthright were acknowledged to be the
Sovereigns of State, and by their mildness became masters of men. That the
Parliament hoped for these favors, which had always kept within the bounds of
duty, nor had ever any other aim but the service and glory of his Majesty,
through whose goodness they hoped to see that fatal Tree eradicated, which
brings war and confusion with it wheresoever it comes.

The Court was no ways satisfied with this complement, which was specious in
appearance, but unaccompanied by effects; for the Burdelois continued
disobedient, and still strove to bring over the people of other Provinces to
join with the Parliament, together with their secret intelligence still held by
the Princess of Conde with the Court of Spain, wherein their chiefest hopes
lay; and they strove particularly to keep correspondency with the Parliament of
Paris. From whence they were still encouraged by express Letters, Offers, and
Messengers, saying they would serve them; as also did Duke Beaufort, the
Coadjutor, and the Frondeurs; still endeavoring to seduce the people against
the Cardinal; yet the aforesaid Deputies were civilly heard, and answered with
like civil words. Monsieur de l' Vrliere being appointed to treat with them,
and to produce such proposals as should be thought convenient. They also tried
the Loyalty of the Parliament of Tolouse, to interess it with that of Bordeaux.
But, those of Tolouse proceeding maturely in their resolves, and not caring
much whether the Cardinal, or any other were the director of Government, would
not join with them, especially since their City not being Fortified, and lying
in the Center of the Province, it would upon all occasions be subject to the
evils of War. But in regard of the public good they mediated with his Majesty
that he would grant the Burdelois desire, by favoring them with the removal of
the Duke of Espernoun from that Government.

Whilst affairs went thus, Marshal Millerey, who was ordered to go into those
parts, with such Forces as he had got together in the Neighboring Provinces,
about the end of July, entered into that Tract of ground which lies between
Garomne and Dordone, called the Country between the Two Seas; and assaulted the
Castle of Vaires; there was a Burrow beneath it, intrencht by the Burdelois,
and guarded by 300 Foot, Commanded by Monsieur Richon, a Citizen of Bordeaux,
who did defend it Valiantly, till the 3. of August; but was afterward overcome
through intelligence, which was held by Marshal Biron, Camp-master, with a
Captain that was a kin to him that commanded the Castle. Here was Richon made
Prisoner, and being brought to Sibour, was by the Court hanged for a Rebel:
notwithstanding means used to the contrary by the said Marquis Biron, and at
last by Madamosella de Orleans, who had her request granted, though too late,
for sentence was executed before the pardon came. In this interim the form of
Agreement was drawn up on the Courts part by Vrtiere, and made known to the
Deputies of Bordeaux, the effect whereof was, that the King was come into
Guien, to show his goodness to Bordeaux by a general act of Amnesty or
Oblivion, and was therefore to be received in like manner, as Kings were
usually received in the Towns of their Dominion, that the Dukes of Boullion,
and Rochefaucolt were to be sent out of the City, as being declared by the
Parliaments of France guilty of High Treason, as chief inciters of all the
disorders; and that things should be put into their former condition. But just
as it was hoped that this would take happy effect; the news of Richon's death
discomposed all, and did so incense the people, as they ran up and down the
Streets crying Justice and Revenge, but no peace. Wherefore the Duke of
Boullion, who had diverse Prisoners in his hands, which were taken in the
recovery of the Island of St. George, on the 6 th. of August, caused Monsieur
de Caroles to be hanged.

The Marshal Millerey being gone from about Vaires, encamped at Creon three
Leagues from Bordeaux. The Knight of Vallette, Lieutenant General under
Espernoun, commanding all those Forces in chief, in the Dukes absence,
undertook to recover the Island of St. George; but as he advanced too forward
to discover the Enemy, he was shot by an Harquebuse on the Thigh, whereof he
dyed at Cadilliack, four days after the Court came to Libourn, to the great
grief of as many as knew him: he was a Gentleman of much Generosity, and very
faithful to the King, he had served the Commonwealth of Venice long in Italy,
and it was he who entering Paris when it was besieged, threw diverse Papers
amongst the People, wherein he exhorted them to expel the Frondeurs, and to
submit unto the King, for which he was imprisoned, and hazarded his life. Count
Palaw was by the King put in his place; and Island being stoutly defended by
Monsieur De la Motta Delas, the Kings men were forced to tarry there some days
longer than they had thought, waiting for their Canon, which made much for the
Burdelois, for if this important place had been lost, the City had been reduced
to great straits, and want of many things, wherefore it stood the King's men
much upon to perfect this enterprise, who did therefore plant some great pieces
of Canon upon the hill of Cambes, wherewith playing incessantly upon the Fort,
and making several assaults, they forced it to surrender, which redounded much
to the prejudice of the City, which was not far off. So as thinking how to
defend 'this place, they caused some Baracadoes to be made at Sansurino, which
were furnished with Soldiers of Fortune, to keep the Inhabitants from going
out. There was also a Fort with four little Bulwarks at Bastida, a place beyond
the City, over against the City. The Port of Dicoux was fenced by a woeful half
Moon made of Marle without a Ditch, some other armed Vessels were put into the
Water.

Affairs passing thus in Cuien, during the Kings absence from Paris, the Court
being engaged in Arms before Bordeaux, could not supply the needs of all Parts,
States, and Cities, which required defense; wherefore the Spaniards took the
advantage of the present conjuncture of times, being well informed by Count de
Ognate, Viceroy of Naples, who knew very well how much it concerned his King to
bereave the French of Piombino, and Portolongone, which were receptacles for
the Enemies Fleets, to the prejudice of that Kingdom, and therefore resolved
not to let slip that opportunity which was now offered by the troubles of
France. He prepared all things sitting, and betook himself to that expedition,
which was approved of by many Princes of Italy, and also by some Foreign
Princes; for these Harbors were become receptacles for French Pirates, which
troubled Navigation, not distinguishing Friends from Enemies, to the great
hindrance of Traffic; Nor did the Court of France remedy this, as well because
it was not good for her to disgust a number of men well experienced in
conducting Fleets at Sea; as also that they pleaded a Law in their defense,
which was confirmed by the States General in the time of Francis the first,
permitting the reprisal of all Vessels which carried Merchandise of any
whatsoever sort, belonging to the Subjects of any Prince with whom France was
in War. The Viceroy having mustred 6000-Foot 800 Horse, and being accompanied
by many Gentlemen and Titulado's imbarqued on the 10 th of June, seconded by
Don John of Austria, who as the Kings Son had the chief Command; one part of
the Forces imbarqued in the Island of Elbe; one part with Count Connersano, who
upon this occasion was made General of the Horse, encamped before Piombino; and
Cannon was planted at one and the same time, against both these places; they
began to dig Trenches, that they might hasten the Conquest before succor could
be sent from France; which being impossible to be done in those Domestic Wars,
he had of himself provided for the Defense of Portalongone; and orders were
sent to Provence, that all possible means might be used to send some relief
thither. But nothing being to be done without money and experienced Commanders,
the orders availed nothing. The French Agents who were in Rome foreseeing these
difficulties, thought good to interest the Pope, and the great Duke; but all
their reasons could not prevail with these Princes, who prohibited their
Subjects to assist either party.

Count Conversano did this mean while straiten Piombino being recruited by Don
John de Austria, with 1000. Foot, and having driven the French out of the Town,
he betook himself to oppugn the Castle, which was constantly defended by the
besieged, who were encouraged by the Arrival of Seignior Valperga, a
Piamontese, well experienced in the Military Mystery, who was come into
Provence, hoping assuredly to relieve it. But the place not being able to hold
out longer by reason of the situation, which was so weak as it was not to be
fortified; the Governor parlied on the Eighteenth of July, by virtue of which
capitulation the French and Swissers being to go out, Valperga was detained as
an Italian, and not comprehended in the Articles; the place being Garrisoned,
Conuersano went with all his Forces to strengthen the Viceroy before Longone;
whither 500. Foot were come, sent by the Marquess of Caracena Governor of
Millan; and Skirmishes past daily between both parties. But whilst Cavalliere
Poll was providing a Vessel in Thouloen to attempt Relief, Cardinal Mazarine
gave order to Monsieur Lauriere, the Lieutenant of a French Gally, to arm it
suddenly, and that taking in 100. of the Queens Guard, he might endeavor
succouring the place. Lauriere, who was very valiant, but not over good at
ordering affairs, instead of going the nearest way to Monte Christo, from
whence (the Winds having kept the Spanish Galleys aloof from that Haven) he
might have effected his design, he wheeled about by the Coast of Corsica, and
came late to the aforesaid Island; which the Spaniards being aware of, they
sent Ianettino de Oria, General of the Neapolitan Squadron, to find him out,
with two good Galleys; which Lauriere perceiving, he got underneath la Bastia a
City upon the Strand of Corsica, and craving protection of the Governor Iouan
Bernardo Veneroso, obtained it, and de Oria was wished by the same Vencroso, to
bear respect to the Commonwealth of Genua, which stood neutral, giving order
that in case he should assault Lauriere, the Canon should play in his defense:
But Lauriere not daring to tarry on that shore, where there was no Haven,
unarmed his Gally, and made to land, whereof de Oria being aware about the
Evening, and seeming as if he would return toward Elba, he caused three pots
of Artificial fire to be put into a little Boat with only three men in it, who
seigned to go to land, but dexterously accosting the Gally, threw the
fireworks into her, which burned all that was above water, which the Corsicks
perceiving, the whole City was put in Arms, and the Governor did what he could
to chastise the Transgressors; but the Boat got away, the Commonwealth was much
displeased at this action of de Oria's, who being a Subject of theirs, they
called him to account for it, and for his contumacy condemned him to perpetual
Banishment.

The mean while, on the 28 th. of July, the Spaniards fiercely assaulted the
Tenaglia, and the half moon, which they took, by which loss the Defendants were
totally deprived of Water; and Monsieur de Novalliack Governor of the Town,
hearing that the Gally was lost, and that there was little hope of any other
succor, parlied on the first of August, to surrender upon fair conditions of
War, if he were not relieved by the 16 th. of the said month, the news whereof
he speedily sent into Provence, that the Commanders of those parts might have
sent Relief, which might have come time enough, had it been in readiness. But
the Forces being imployd in Guienne, it was impossible to apply due Remedies to
the affairs of Italy; So the time being expired, the agreement was made: And
thus the Spaniards recovered a Fort which was not likely to have been so
unfortunately taken.

The Spaniards began also to cheer up in Flanders, being encouraged by
Marishall Turenne, and by the weakness of the French Army, which was much
lessened by drawing out the best Troops to march toward Bordeaux, and by the
Kings being gone from those parts with the sinews of the Soldiery; wherefore on
the 21. of July, the Spanish Army came before La Capelle, to get an entrance
into Champagne by the acquisition of that place; and in 3. days they perfected
the line. The Archduke came also thither to encourage his men the more; and on
the 27. the Battery began, so as Plessis Pralin, wanting Forces sufficient to
relieve it, and the Governor thereof Monsieur Roquepine being badly provided
of defense; he parlied on the 2d. of August, and marched out with Arms, and
Baggage, to the great confusion of all the Inhabitants upon those Frontiers, as
well for fear that Wars might happen, as for the indiscretion of the Soldiers
that were their Friends, who wanting pay, made Plunder lawful. The Spaniards
being so luckily gotten into that Fort, General Turenne did continually solicit
them to get farther into Champagne, and prevailed with the Archduke to give
4000. of his own Army commanded by Count Fusendaglia, to facilitate the taking
of Rethel, a great Town upon the River Aisne, by means whereof the Spanish Army
did not only secure it self from the French Army, but from the fear of wanting
Victuals, by reason of the fruitfulness of that Country. They fell furiously
upon it and took it within two days, there being none but Inhabitants in it,
who did at first resolve to article, so to keep from being plundered. He at the
same time took Chasteau Porcienne, two Leagues off upon the same River; put a
strong Garrison into it, and fortified it.

Marishall Plessis Pralin being much troubled at this the Enemies good success;
and seeing that by reason of the weakness of his Forces he could only mind
defending the greatest and most important Cities, came to Rheims, to encourage
those terrified, and tottering Citizens, with his presence, and to shelter his
Army in that City, the Metropolis of all Champagne; Marishall d' Ertee went to
Laon, whereof he was Governor.

But the Spanish Army being strongly recruited grew bold, and hoped to make
further acquisitions; yet not being able to make the Inhabitants of Rheims
waver, by reason of their hopes of the Kings Army which was encamped near them,
and out of their Loyalty to the King, the Archduke advanced, and took
Newcastle, Pontevera, and Basochies, where they took up the Generals Quarters.
The Count of Fusendaglia, advanced to Breme, four Leagues from Soisouns, and
quartered there. The Spaniards took also Fimes and Fer, two little Towns weakly
walled about, and marching as far as Marne, booties were continually taken to
the terror of the Whole Country, and in this march Marquis de Hoihencourt, who
defended some passes with his Troops, was fought, routed, and pursued even to
the Gates of Soisouns, and narrowly escaped falling into the Enemies hands,
whose Scouts came to within ten Leagues of Paris; where fear increased
mightily, by the flight of many Country people, who brought what they had into
that City. Many of the Citizens, and people, were rather glad, than sorry for
these disasters, as were also the Parliament, and Frondeurs, who solicited the
Duke of Orleans, that by his Authority, assisted by the Frondeurs, and
Parisians, he would take the imprisoned Princes from out of the hands of
Monsieur de Bar, thinking that the Princes being to acknowledge this as an Act
of theirs they might be bound to depend always upon him, and that thereby the
misdeserts of the Frondeurs might be concealed, who having had a hand in their
imprisonments, assisted now to their freedoms. They did not care much for the
advancement made by the Spaniards, nor for the Countries destruction, nor for
any other disorder to the prejudice of the Crown; Thus the whole affair of the
Parisians, Frondeurs, and of the Court, was reduced to the imprisonment of the
Princes; But Monsieur de Tillier, who was left by the King with the Duke of
Orleans, did so strongly oppose the Frondeurs design; as the Spaniards being
advanced so near Paris, as that they might assault Vincennes, and make
themselves masters of the Princes persons, he prevailed with the Duke that they
might be removed to beyond the Rivers of Seen, and Marne, and put into the
Castle of Marcussi; where they might be kept till the Court should return from
Guienne; and that then it might be resolved whither they should be sent, to the
satisfaction both of the King and Duke. They spoke also of carrying them to
Haure de Grace, but Tillier durst not be too forward therein, least they might
have been taken from them by the way, as they might easily be.

But things went otherwise in Berry, for the Queens Regiments of Horse, and
those of Bougy, being come to Count de St. Aignan, he went in August near to
Montronde, where he continued for a month, still defying the Garrison, though
it were more numerous than his men, but as he returned to his Camp with but
only 30. Horse, he fell into an Ambuscado of the Enemies, who shot at him with
Muskets, and Pistols, wherewith he was wounded in the hand, and had his face
burnt; yet throwing himself fiercely amongst the Enemy, he forced them to fly,
without loss of any one of his men, and having slain some of the Enemy with his
own hands, he returned to his Quarters; and was no sooner healed, but being
advertised by Cavalliere Barada, that a party of the Enemies were in the Castle
of Garghelissa, he presently got on Horseback, accompanied by 300. of those of
Tsouldon, and set upon Garghelissa, where the Enemy wanting all things,
particularly water, they yielded the 2d. day, Eighteen Officers remaining
Prisoners, and above 150. common Soldiers.

A Trumpet came in the interim to Paris on the beginning of September, with
Letters sent from the Archduke, to the Duke of Orleans; wherein boasting of his
good intentions to a general place, he invited him to accept of the offer. The
Duke listened to what the Trumpeter said, and he being also desirous of peace,
sent the Baron of Verderonne, Gentleman of his Bedchamber with a gracious
answer, showing a reciprocal good will; which was not altogether well approved
by all men, as misbecoming the respect due to the King, without whose consent
no treaty ought to have been held with the Enemy: and the Duke after this
having sent a Messenger to Court, to crave leave that he might apply himself to
the Treaty, the King's servants observed that he had engaged himself further
than he ought to have done. Yet to keep from irritating the people more, who
already complained that no means was used to make peace; and also not to
distaste the Duke totally, Commission was sent him to Treat, but with some
others joined with him. It was thought that these projects of the Spaniards
tended to two ends: the one to increase the peoples hatred yet more against the
Cardinal; the other to win the good will of the people, who were oppressed with
continual grievances, and by insolences of War. And in earnest by this cunning
things were reduced to that condition, as the Archdukes name was publicly
cried up in Paris, and he, as well as the Spaniards were said to have deserved
well of the Parisians; nay singing Songs and eucomiums in praise of the
Archduke, they called him a good Frondeur. But the Archduke knew not how to
make use of the Parisians applause, as he ought to have done; for having so far
engaged himself in the aforesaid offers, and his after proceedings not
corresponding with his beginning, it was thought he did not mean sincerely, and
that he did not really desire peace, so much as he seemed to do. On the other
side, the Duke of Orleans imbarqued therein, incited by vain glory, thinking to
win the peoples applause by so good a work; he sent Messengers continually to
Court, the Officers whereof spying into the Spaniards deep designs, laughed at
the vanity of the business, which being built in the Air, vanished soon away in
smoke. The Count de Avaux knowing how much his power in Court was lessened, and
thinking how to regain it, grew in love with these Treaties; and intending to
be the guider thereof, so to win credit with the people, he went with the
Pope's Nuntio to Soisouns, to confer with the Spanish Commissioners; but he
found none there for the Archduke, as was appointed: nay Don Gabrielle di
Tolledo at his return to Paris, said that Orders were first to be expected from
Spain, contradicting plainly what the Archduke had said, who affirmed that he
was Plenipotentiary to conclude all things. But the Prince of Conde's Friends
finding that the Parisians were pleased with nothing more than with this
whisper of peace, framed some Libels in the name of Marishal Turenne, though he
knew nothing of it; and on the 4 th. of September they were found fastened upon
all the Corners of the Streets, and the people ran to read them with such
delight, as the Duke of Orleans striving to have them pulled down, the people
did oppose it with so much heat, as two men were upon that occasion killed. The
Contents of these Libels were verbatim as follows: The Marishal of TURENNE to
the good Citizens of PARIS.
IF Cardinal Mazarine, who is the disturber of public Tranquillity, had not
refused to make the most advantageous peace three years since, that France
could desire, the Kingdom would not have been troubled with so many commotions
as has cost it so much blood and Treasure; and you should not now grieve to
see the fire which is preparing to consume so many fair Provinces; unless you
extinguish it. The Archduke, who might justly make advantage of the disorders
of France, and of the Confusion whereinto it is put by the wickedness of some
particular men, who prefer their own particular interest before the peace of
Christendom, comes to your Gates to offer you that peace, which till now the
Cardinal Mazarine has hindered. This design appears to me to be so generous and
so good for the public, as it is fitting to follow it. Friends! you are
invited to receive it, he himself presents you with it, it now depends upon
you. Lassure you the intentions of this Prince are sincere; his offering to
Treat with his Royal Highness, and with the Parliament, the moderation which he
will use during the whole course of this Negotiation, will justify to all
Europe his intentions to make it peaceful; he tells you that the disloyalty of
Cardinal Mazarine, which is better known by strangers, than by you, has made
his Catholic Majesty resolve not to accept of any proposals made by him, but
to make use of his absence to Treat thereof with the Duke of Orleans, and with
the Parliament of Paris, who are bound to be accountable to the King, and to
the State, of the public conduct of affairs, and of the disorders which the
continuance of War will occasion.

It is you that must solicit your false Tribunes, who are become Mazarine's
Pensioners, and Protectors, who have long laughed at you, who have sometimes
excited you, sometimes allured, sometimes cooled you, sometimes held you back,
(according to their Capricioes and different progress of their ambitions) from
preferring the public interest, and the general good to the welfare of this
Statesman, whom afterward, when he has paid them for their friendship, they
exalt unto the Heavens, notwithstanding the continuance of this War.

The Archduke comes with a spirit of peace, intending to facilitate the
conclusion of a Treaty so necessary for the two Crowns; but he protests, that
as he will leave nothing undone to effect so noble, and so glorious a design to
Christendom, so he will employ the Army which he commands, to revenge his
Catholic Majesty, in case these just and reasonable conditions, to which he
submits himself, shall be refused; and will allow of whatsoever the
licentiousness of a lawful and necessary War will permit, to punish your
obdurateness.

People, do you second these good intentions, demand peace boldly; this is the
means to reunite the Royal Family, and to free your selves of your Enemy
Cardinal Mazarine, and from the combustions, ruins, and desolations, which you
see are preparing, and from all the evils whereunto the Cardinals bad guidance,
his ignorance, insufficiency, and malice does continually expose the state, and
all the King's Subjects.



This writing made a great noise, and was greedily swallowed down by the
people, incapable of the artificial imposture to render the Cardinals
administration of Government generally more odious. This was therefore one of
the chief motives which made the Duke of Orleans apply himself to the
Spaniard's proposals, so to pacify the Parisians, who were much incensed by
reason of the assured hopes they had to have peace in this present conjuncture
of time.

The Duke of Orleans, and the Frondeurs did this mean while go about to destroy
the Courts designs against Bordeaux; least if that Town should be lost, and
that thereby the King's Forces should cease being diverted in those parts, the
Kings concernments should prosper better in all other things, to the
destruction of their ends, and the establishing the credit which he had won.
And truly the Kingdom was then in a sad condition; for the very Nations, who
were obliged to concur to the greatness thereof, were those who diverted its
glory, and wrought all its disturbance. Wherefore the Frondeurs finding that
the Burdelois were not of themselves able to defend themselves against all the
Kings party, and that they were therefore liable to an irreparable loss, they
imployd all their industry, and did what they could to assist them; they cried
out that that Journey was destructive to France, whilst the Spanish Forces
proceeded on in Italy, Catalonia, and in Flanders to the prejudice of the Crown
of France. The Parliament sent President Balieule, and seven other Counselors
to desire his Majesty that he would appease these commotions; the King answered
that all convenient means had been used to reduce the Burdelois to their duty.
Who instead of corresponding to his Princely clemency, had made small account
of it, hanging up a Prisoner of War, contrary to all custom; and giving other
aparent signs that they had no thoughts of peace; and thus the Commissioners
were dismissed, and returned to Paris. But the Parliament not satisfied with this
answer, resolved to send Messieurs de Meusnier, and Biraut again to the Court
with the same desires, whither they went on the 8 th. of September, together
with the President de Gourges, and some other Counselors, who were come from
Bordeaux to Paris: and to these the Duke of Orleans added Monsieur de Coudrey
Monpensiere, to be assistant to them. When Coudrey was come to Libourn, he sent
a Trumpet to Bordeaux to acquaint them with his coming, but the Letter being
only superscribed Aux Messieurs, and the Parliament thinking that the
superscription should have been Aux nos Messieurs, four days were spent in the
dispute thereof, at last Coudrey being come into the City, he presented the
Assembly with the Duke his masters Letters; together with two Records of the
Parliament of Paris, touching the conditions of peace, which the Duke his
master had drawn up. Whereupon the Parliament being to consult, and the ten
days contained in the agreement being well nigh expired; they told Coudrey,
that it became them not to begin, till from the day that the Parliament knew
the Dukes intentions, by the Letter which they had writ unto him; that then the
Letter being of great importance, it should be participated to all the
Corporations of the City, and to the parties interessed, and they desired him
to make this time be agreed upon, and that in the interim all Hostility might
cease, and that the passage upon the River might be open. The Cardinal showed
Coudrey the Original proposals of the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochfaucolt, and
of Fontenella Guirato de Bordeaux, with those of the Spanish Agents, which were
intercepted by Monsieur Landa Basco, late Sergeant Major of Bordeaux, who
afterward became obedient to the King, by the persuasion of Vicount Virlada.
The said Landa got the Original of these Letters, and of the answers from
Spain, wherein he faithfully observed the Cardinals Orders; and though the
Original of these proposals was carried to the Parliament of Paris, for the
Letters were in Ciphers: those Gentlemen took occasion to throw them away
without perusing them, but did notwithstanding applaud the Spaniard's offers,
and desire of peace, to make their actions grateful to the people by this
specious name, though they knew there was no reality in it, for the Enemy
would have appeared to have been unwise, in condescending to a peace in a time
when War was to be very advantageous to them, by increasing dissension in
France, which was the only object of their thoughts. But the Court reflecting
upon these proceedings, prejudicial to the Kings Dignity, for that the
Parliament of Paris, had nothing to do to meddle with what did not belong unto
it, would lose no time about it, having means by force to expedite all
differences; and therefore resolved to pursue the business, which being brought
to an end, paid every one in the moneys which they deserved. Thus on the 23 th.
of August did Marishal Millerey with all his Forces appear upon the mountain of
Cenon, within a quarter of a league off Bastida, and encamped upon the side of
Fenilats, and Cenon; and went with 1700. Foot to discover Bastida, resolving to
do as he should see occasion. But finding it well fortified, and in condition
of being continually releived by water, he returned to his former station; and
the Cardinal being desirous to hasten affairs before further troubles arose in
Paris, he made his men pass over the River near Cambes, and approached with
them near Bordeaux. The Inhabitants being resolved to defend the Town,
fortified the Suburbs of St. Surine, the Women, Children, and the Religious
people laboring continually thereupon. And for that the whole confidence of
the Burdelois lay on this Suburbs, the King's Counsel resolved to expugn it.
The Marquesses of St. Magrine, and of Rochelaure, were appointed to fall upon
the Barracado upon the head of the street Coderan, which was defended by Duke
Rochefaucolt with 400. Soldiers, assisted by Count Colignie, by the Cavalliers
de la Riviere, by Todias, and Boves, both of them being Camp-Masters, by two
Brothers of Carbonieres, and by Monsieur Meuvile. Count Paluau advanced with
other Troops to assault the other part of the Suburbs called the Carthusians,
situated upon the River, and so to pass to the Palace Calliano to cut the
Enemy from retreating from the Suburbs, the Church whereof was in part
fortified, and defended by the Duke of Boullion, with about 200. of the
Inhabitants, 60. Volunteers on Horseback, led on by Count Briola, and with some
other Soldiers of the Prince of Conde's, and of Rochefaucolt's guard, commanded
by Roche, and Baron; and another Barracado upon the way to the Carthusians was
guarded by the Count de Meille with Counti's Regiment. The assault being thus
ordered by Marishal Millerey, he ordered the Marquesses of Rochelaure, and of
St. Magrine, to go with their men to a certain Cross, above the said Church;
but they losing the sight of this Cross, and falling upon an other nearer the
Suburbs, they were set upon by the Duke of Boullion, and a skirmish immediately
ensued. The Marishal not having as yet given all requisite orders, nor disposed
of all the Soldiers as he intended, sent to Rochelaure, and St. Magrine,
willing them to retreat immediately; but the Soldiers being already engaged fell
confusedly upon Rochefaucolt's Barracado, which was stoutly defended for a
while, till some more of the Kings men came in by another way, assaulted them
on the back, and overcame them; Monsieur Menville being slain, and Boves,
Carboniers, and Todias, together with diverse other Officers and Soldiers taken:
and Duke Rochefaucolt ran great hazard of being either slain or taken himself;
wherefore the Princes forsook the Suburbs, and retreated to the City. Count de
Paluau not being yet come, who was ordered to place himself with his men
between the Suburbs and the City, to keep the Enemy from retreating.

Thus was the Suburbs taken by the King's men; and the action was remarkable
for the forwardness and generosity of the Combatants on both sides. But it was
more bloody on the assailants side, for a great many Soldiers and Officers were
taken. Choupes, and Marin, both of them Camp-masters, Genlis and Riberpre,
Captains of the King's Guards were wounded. The honor of this Day belonged to
Marishal Millerey, and to the Marquesses of Rochelaure and St. Magrine, who
commanded the Forces that day, and ordered the assault; and such was the
Burdelois terror and confusion, as had the Kings men then advanced, the
Enemies affirm they had assuredly taken the half moon, which was almost already
abandoned.

The City was much troubled at this loss; the rather, for that the Soldiers who
were within the walls, did not satisfy the Inhabitants expectation. The Dukes
of Boullion, and Rochefaucolt fired the Suburbs in several places, and several
Houses near the City, before they retreated; so as Millerey quartered some of
his men the next morning in the Houses that were unburnt.

On the 7 th. of September, two Batteries were made against Port Dolphine, but
without effect: for it was platform'd presently, and another Battery was made
to make a breach between the Gate de Diaux, and the Tower Trombette. But the
Burdelois being very diligent to repair the ruins made by the Artillery,
fallied out the next day, being the 9 th. of September, against the Barracadoes
of Croix de Spine, and at the same time another Troop assaulted the Trenches of
Palace Galliane; in both which sallies the besieged received some prejudice.
The same day the Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, went out with a great
many Soldiers and Gentlemen against the quarter du Croix de la Spine, which
they stormed, though the Kings men resisted stoutly, and firing it retreated,
being pursued by the besieged, who were come thither, and in that heat
assaulted the half moon Port Diaux, which was valiantly defended by the
Burdelois, who beat back two fierce assaults, slaying above 100. of the Kings
Foot, and diverse Officers of the Guienne Regiment. The Cardinal was much
disquieted, for the business required expedition, and seeing how hard it was to
get the half moon, he confided more in Count Paluau, than in any other, who was
to command the next day: he ordered him to expugn it with all his might; which
he attempted on the 10 th. of September, orderly, with extraordinary violence.
But Rochefaucolt came in with the Prince of Conde's Guard, and made it good
thrice, forcing the Kings men to retreat, with much loss to Navaile's Regiment,
whereof some Officers were taken: The Cardinal finding now how hard it was to
overcome the obstinate valor of the Defendants, went to the King to Burg; and
Millerey despairing of success on that side, went further off, to batter the
City Wall, but still unsuccessfully.

But the Burdelois were much troubled to see no succor come from Spain, as
they were made daily to believe; and the King had but six Vessels to oppose
them, if they had come; wherefore the Cardinal moved a conference, which was
well accepted; with intention notwithstanding on the besiegeds side, to bear
the business yet a little longer on, if they could, still expecting relief from
the Spaniards, which the Burdelois would have made use of, though peace had
been made; so resolute they were, that the Cardinal, nor Duke of Espernoun,
should never boast of having brought them to their beck. The Parliament and
City sent their Commissioners to Burg, without any in the name of the Princess,
or Generals; and to keep the Citizens from making any final agreement, the
Princess made Messengers sometimes appear as if they had come from Spain, with
assured hopes of succor: and though the Court endeavored to raise jealousies
between the Dukes of Boullion and Rochefaucolt, yet could they never make any
impression of distrust, for each of them was sufficiently assured of one
another for the common concernment that was between them; nor was there ever a
party more united than that of Bordeaux, where every one strove to do his
utmost; nor was there during the whole Siege any falling out between any
particulars, save between Count Colligni, and the Marquesses, who was wounded,
and dyed two days after.

A new Battery was made in the base Court of Buriera, to play upon that part of
the Wall which joins the Archbishops Garden to la Toure delle Strage, against
which Wall they played furiously for three days together, and began to make a
considerable breach therein: though it were continually repaired by the
Defendants. And doubtlesly if the City had been assaulted at first in that
place, so many men would not have been lost, and the Court might have had its
ends sooner; wherefore the Cardinal considering that by the prolongation of
this Siege, no good might peradventure be done upon Bordeaux, and much mischief
might fall out in Paris, where there were very great commotions. And on the
other side the Parliament of Bordeaux finding their Foot destroyed by continual
action, and the aid from Spain come but slowly on, they resolved to embrace
peace, to which they were invited.

The Princess of Conde, and the Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, were
therefore persuaded to send one for each of them along with the Parliament
Commissioners, but they declaring that their whole concernment lay in the
Princes their liberties, and knowing it unseasonable to Treat thereof now,
referred themselves to the Parliament, whom they desired to have a care of their
interests, and of the rest that were engaged in this business. Thus the Treaty
of peace advancing, and no relief appearing from Spain, the Burdelois bethought
themselves of setting some treaty on Foot; and the Cardinal (being willing to
admit of any reasonable desires) gave way that the Duke of Candalle might send
a Pasport to Gouruille by another name for him to go to Bourg. Whither being
come, he offered in the names of the Princess of Conde, and of the two Dukes of
Boullion and of Rochefaucolt, all the security that the Cardinal could desire:
nay they went so far, as the very Generals themselves offered to become
Prisoners for six months, to assure him the more of their real intentions. They
also propounded a marriage between the Prince of County, and a niece of the
Cardinals; and though the Burdelois had an unspeakable aversion to the Duke of
Espernoun, who by that Treaty was to be removed from that Government; yet they
offered to beg him upon their knees for their Governor, provided that the King
would grant the Princes their liberty. But the Court could never be brought to
declare it self in this; for it had engaged its word to the Duke of Orleans, to
do nothing without his knowledge: Affairs being upon these terms, the Treaties
of peace commenced with the Commissioners of Bordeaux, assisted by those of
Paris, who were come purposely to Burg; and after several conferences, it was
resolved that conformable to the proposals made by the Duke of Orleans,
Articles should be made, as they were, without the knowledge of the Princess of
Conde, or of the Dukes of Boullion, or Rochefaucolt.

These Articles consisted of a general Amnesty granted by the King to all the
Inhabitants of Bordeaux, to all the Generals, Captains, and Soldiers that
served in that City; that the Princess of Conde might retire with the Duke of
Anguienne to one of his or her Houses in Anjou, where she might live, and enjoy
all her Estate, and that of the Prince her Husbands securely; she being to
renounce in writing, which was to be delivered into the Kings hands, all
Leagues and confederacies made by her, as well within as without the Kingdom;
and that in performance thereof, she should give order for the ceasing of all
hostility made or ordered in her name, or in the name of the Prince her
Husband, in his Towns of Berry, Turen, and in other parts on this side the
River Loire, and to withdraw Garrisons from diverse Towns possessed by them, which
should be put into the Kings obediens. And that she the Princess might go to
Montrond, upon condition that she would reduce that Garrison to bare 200. Foot,
and 60. Horse, to be paid from the time forward by the King out of the Revenues
of that Province, provided that she put in necessary caution, that the Militia
of that nor of any other Towns should make no outrodes, nor commit any
Hostility against the Subjects of those Provinces, and all of them might enjoy
the present act of Amnesty: by virtue whereof all Prisoners of War, on both
sides should be set at liberty; that when this Declaration should be published,
all were to lay down Arms; and that all the Soldiers in Bordeaux, and in all
the Towns confederate therewith, should be cashiered, and have Pasports, and
Safe-conducts given them; that all decrees, and orders made, as well by the
Parliament of Bordeaux against the Duke of Espernoun, as by him against the
Parliament, upon the occasion of the present commotions should be void and
null; and all things should be put into the same condition as they were before
the War: that the better to facilitate the performance of this present Treaty,
and to content the City of Bordeaux, and all Guienne; the King would remove the
Duke of Espernoun from the Government, and send them another Governor.

The Princess, and Dukes being advertised, that the agreement was made without
them, sent Monsieur Figean to be present at the Treaty, and to subscribe the
Capitulation in their names. The agreement being published, on the 2 d. of
October, and all Hostility ceasing, the Princess of Conde, the Dukes of Anguien
Boullion, and Rochefaucolt, together with a great many Gentlemen went the next
day from Bordeaux, toward Contras; and within half a League were casually met
by Marishal Millerey, in one of the Vessels of the Fleet, and by diverse other
Vessels of Monsieur Mautrick who saluted the Princess with all their Artillery;
and the Marishal accosting her, asked her, whether she would pass under the
Windows of their Royal Majesty's, and not come out of her Barque to kiss their
hands. To which (being so advised by the Dukes) she answered, that she would
willingly go do her duty, and upon her knees beg her Husbands liberty, if she
thought her doing so might be acceptable. The Marishal presently dispatched away
a Boat to tell the King that the Princess was coming to pay her respect to
their Majesty's; who soon sent Duke Danuille with many Coaches to meet her; and
when she was come to Court, she was lodged in Millerey's house, and was
complemented there in the name of the King, Queen and of all the Court; though
the Marishals invitation was not well liked, since no good could come by this
visit, and that it might rather cause (as indeed it did) Jealousy and
Suspicion in the Duke of Orleans, that the Cardinal meant to set the Princes at
liberty without his consent or knowledge. The Princess afterward visited their
Majesty's, and complements being past, with bended knee, and pouring forth
abundance of Tears, she humbly begged her Husbands liberty, using such
passionate, and affectionate Speeches, as did not only move their Majesty's,
but all the standers by, which when Madamoselle heard of, believing that at
that meeting the freedom of the Princes was concluded, without searching
further into the truth; she dispatched away a Messenger to the Duke her Father,
at which news he was much troubled, as was also all the Frondeurs; but hearing
afterward that the Princess had got nothing but hopes, they were pacified. The
Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, did also press the Cardinal in private
to the same effect, intending either to obtain the Princes their liberty from
the King, or to make a breach between the Cardinal and the Duke of Orleans;
they told him that the Princes would be the more obliged to him, when they
should see their liberty proceeded merely from his affection, and not enforced;
that it would redound much to his glory throughout all Europe, when it should
be seen that it lay in his power, to restrain, and also to reestablish the
Prince in his greatness. That the demeanure of the Frondeurs might make him
know that their designs were first to ruin the Princes, to the end that they
might afterward more easily pull down him the Cardinal; or else by giving them
their liberty, engage them to join in his, and the Queens ruin; that the War
was ended in Guienne, but that the desire of re-kindling it would never end in
the Kingdom, as long as the Princes were imprisoned; that this was plotted in
all parts, and that the thoughts of the Parliament of Paris, and of others,
aimed all at this: and that finally they themselves would not deny, but that
all their endeavors should tend to the same end, as those who were bound to
prefer this before all other interests.

This discourse wrought the effect which the Duke desired; it wrought upon the
Cardinal, and did infuse such jealousy into the Frondeurs, and Duke of
Orleans, as it made the Duke resolve to reunite himself with them, and again to
endeavor the Cardinals destruction. The Queen, nor the Cardinal were neither
of them well pleased with Madamoselle; for having always thought her well
affected to the Court, she upon this occasion appeared otherwise.

But this agreement did disturb other affairs; for the hatred of the Parisians,
and the authority of the Duke of Orleans, and Beaufort, and of their adherents
did thereby increase the more against the Cardinal, whom they told, that
howsoever they would have the Court return speedily to Paris, and that the
journey to Tolouse, and Provence should be put off to another time, which was
intended, that the States General might be held there, and to raise moneys,
which they wanted much, to provide for the occurrences of the Kingdom, and
particularly of Catalonia, and for payment of the Servants of the Court, who
had not received any moneys of a long time, the Cardinal was minded that the
King should go to Languedock and Provence, before his return to Paris; for
besides that the People should thereby see the Kings Person, which wins upon
the peoples love; there was some need of his Majesty's presence in those
Provinces, as well to hold the States General in Languedock, as to quiet the
differences in Provence between the Count de Ales, who was Governor of that
Country, and the Parliament; but the Cardinal being told that for certain the
Duke of Orleans did extremely desire the King should return to Paris, to take
order for affairs there, and to provide for the safe custody of the Princes,
who were not thought to be safe enough in the Castle of Mercousy, he resolved
to return to Paris, where the Frondeurs grew daily more desirous to deprive him
of the glory which he might have gotten with apeasing the uproars of Provence.

On the 5 th. of October the King, Queen, and the whole Court, entered into
Bordeaux, with above 4000. what Horse, what Foot, which were brought in, not so
much for the Kings safety, as for his Grandezza, whereat the Frondeurs were so
terrified, as many of them sought to hide themselves. The Burdelois appeared
mightily pleased with the King coming; they lodged the King, Queen, Cardinal,
and Duke of Aniou in the Archbishops Palace; Madamoselle d' Orleance in
President Pontacks stately Palace, and the Cardinals neeces were lodged in the
Doyen. The Court tarried ten days in Bordeaux, and being solicited by the Duke
of Orleans to return to Paris, it marched thitherward.

The Court being come to Orleans, instead of going straight to Paris, went to
Fountainbleau, to take order for securing the Princes; who on the 15 th. of
November were removed from the Castle of Mercousy, and were conveyed to Haure
de Grace, conducted by Count Harcourt, with 400. Horse, and as many Foot; and
after Eleven days march, they were shut up there, being still under the Guard
of Monsieur de Bar, and of those whom he confided in. After which the Queen was
not afraid to return to Paris, since the Prisoners were gone so far from
thence, and that they were now at her disposal. The Frondeurs were much
troubled thereat; who with all the other Malcontents ceased not to exclaim
against the Duke of Orleans, that he had deluded them, that the Cardinal did
not desire the general peace, nor the peoples ease, but aimed only at his own
private ends; wherefore they altered their minds, and began to commiserate the
Princes, not so much for their imprisonment, as for the danger of their lives;
so as the Princess their Mother, and all their Kindred and adherents began
again to plot their freedom; and though by the death of this Lady, who died on
the 2 d. of December, it was thought the servour thereof would abate, yet it
proved otherwise, and it turned rather to the advantage than to the prejudice
of the imprisoned Princes; for the Duchess of Orleans, and Madamoselle
inclined more to the Princes party; their envy, and hatred ceasing, which they
bore for her too great Fasto, and Intonatura.

There were two means to be used for getting the Princes liberty; the one by
closing with the Cardinal, the other by joining with the Frondeurs; the
Princesses would not by any means abase themselves so far as to receive help
from the Frondeurs, they rather inclined to lean toward the Cardinal, and to
agree with him. But since the Court cared not much for the Frondeurs, now that
the Princes were secured, and did mind nothing but aggrandizing the Kings
Authority, it was not judged fit, to trust too much to Conde's sickle nature,
and that it would be better to expect a while; so as the Princesses finding
that their Husbands were not likely to get their freedom, at least for some
time by the Cardinals means, they had recourse to the Duke of Orleans, and to
the Frondeurs, and the Treaties were very privately begun by the Princess
Palatine, who in the managing of this Affair behaved her self very discreetly,
for spinning on the time of Treaty as long as she could with the Frondeurs, she
was persuaded she might bring them over to the Queen, and Cardinals party. She
therefore negotiated this with the Court equally affectionately, and with equal
Dexterity: showing them how much more worthy they would be of commendation, by
obliging the Princes to eternal gratitude, by an act of singular clemency, and
confidence; and that by persisting to be rigorous they would afford the
Frondeurs occasion to merit this from the Princes, and consequently to increase
their pretentions, with evident danger, that being so strongly backed they might
make way for more pernicious consequences; but all this did nothing with the
Cardinal, who thought he could not now confide any longer, and held it
dangerous to bring the Princes back to the Court, during the Kings Minority; so
the Palatiness was forced to advance the Treaty with the Frondeurs.

The Duchess of Cheuereux, with many others entered likewise into this new
confederacy against the Cardinal under a public pretense, but with private
ends; and they strove to show their Majesty's, how necessary it was for them to
return to Paris; but the Cardinal strongly opposed this, showing how dangerous
it might prove to the Kings power, and how unsafe to the Court, to put
themselves into the peoples hands, and into a faction, which having broken all
the bonds of Duty, they might expect all bold attempts from them, and he
moreover made it known, that the Kingdoms peace consisting in the imprisonment
of those that might subvert it, this maxim was constantly to be insisted upon,
without fearing the Duke of Orleans, or the Frondeurs, who could do little, or
nothing out of Paris, without having the imprisoned Princes at the head of an
Army, and without the joining of the other parts of the Kingdom, which being
all very obedient, were of themselves able to curb Paris, if it should attempt
any novelty.

But the Queen being persuaded by the Duchess of Orleans, and by the Duchess
of Cheuereux, who negotiated as a friend and confident between the parties,
resolved at last to do against the Cardinal's Counsel, and to return to Paris;
from whence all the mischief ensued which befell the Court afterward.

And the Kings concernments were no less prejudiced in Catalonia, Italy, and in
Flanders, than in France. For the Commanders in Flanders being but ilfavourdly
paid, were forced to give way to Military licentiousness in those Towns which
were wont to be civilly dealt with; which caused them to complain bitterly,
being indiscreetly plundered by the Horse of Flix. And though process were made
against Monsieur Santa Colomba Marin, Governor of Catalonia, by the pressing
of the Country people; yet nothing being able to refrain their licentiousness,
the Catalonians resolved to acknowledge him no longer for their Commander, but
to deny him those contributions, which they were forced to pay him, to preserve
themselves from Military insolence, grounding themselves upon the agreement
made with the King of France, that none but those of the Nation, and not any
French should be made Governors of any Towns there.

But Duke Mercure not being satisfied with this reason, resolved to force them
to obedience; sent Colonel Baltazar thither with 1000. Soldiers, part Horse,
part Foot, wherewith entering Mora, a great Town upon the Ebro, he plunderd it,
using great extortions, and did the like in many other Neighboring Towns;
which made the people take up Arms, and besieged the French in the said Towns
of Mora; so as the Viceroy finding violent means hurtful, he sent Don Giuseppe
Margherite thither, one who was in good credit with them, to reorder affairs
with his presence.

He marched thitherward, not without danger of being slain, for by intelligence
held by the Baily of Vilboda, (who feigned to be his friend) an Ambuscado was
laid for him in certain narrow ways through which he was necessarily to pass,
which was to give the sign when the Enemy was to advance. But Margherite
advancing so fast, as he had not time to give the sign, the Enemy moved not,
but suffered him to advance on to Falset, a chief Town of those parts, where by
his credit he accommodated differences, promising the Country people that the
French should go out of their Towns, and that the Garrison of Flix should not
injure them; and having satisfied them all, he went to Mora, drove out
Baltazar; whereof Marquess Borry, who commanded the Spanish Forces in chief,
being advertised, he laid another Ambuscado for him, as he returned from Flix
to Mora, near Composina, but Baltazar being overseen in Wine he went by water
instead of going by land, whereby the Spaniards were deluded, and his
drunkenness was Margherite's safety.

Borry staying afterward with his men in those parts for seven or eight days,
he made the Catalonians be assaulted by an Ambuscado, conducted by the
aforesaid Baily of Vilboda, and by Lewis Magrinate, an Inhabitant of Falset,
but the Castilians came off with the worst, for about 40. of them were slain,
and as many taken Prisoners, and the rest saved themselves by the Mountain.
Margherite being afterward sent for by the Viceroy, came to Santa Colomba,
where the Viceroy was with the Marquesses of Marsilly, and Marinuilla; and
went from thence to Barcellona; but before he went from thence, a Council of
War was held, wherein it was resolved to divide those Forces into the most
considerable places, as well to reinforce those places, as to spare the Country
from quartering; but this was not affected; for news being brought, that a body
of Spaniards was entered by Granadiglia (a Country lying between Flix, and
Lerida) the Viceroy would fight them; but failed in his designs, for the
Spaniards were seasonably retreated, and Falset being at the same time
revolted, the Viceroy was forced to come before it with 3000. Combatants, and
with the Artillery drawn out of Flix; wherewith he forced those Country people,
and 200. Spaniards who were come from Taragona, to yield upon usual conditions
of War, and with general pardon to those that rose. Here were the Regiments of
Mount Paullion, La Motta, and Baltazar quartered under this man's Command; who
pretending afterward that the Citizens went about to revolt again, made the
Town be plundered, with so much terror to the other Neighboring Towns, as the
Spaniards were thereby invited to besiege Flix, which they took.

Duke Mercure endeavored to relieve Flix, and came to Compossina, where it was
resolved to fall upon the Spanish Camp, and get into their Trenches. He
therefore came within sight of the Enemy; but finding them too well provided,
he suffered that Town to fall into their hands; Mercure having been encamped
four days, and suffering much for want of Bread, for all the Corn that was in
the Neighboring Villages was brought into Mirauet; he went from thence to
Tineza, where he routed 50. Spaniards that were quartered in Reux, and slew the
Baily of Villebay, and from thence fell into the valley of Taragona, a fruitful
Country, where the French tarried two months, doing nothing, wherefore the
Spaniards making use of the Enemies negligence, went speedily to take in
Mirauet, upon the same River of Ebro, half a days march from Flix, toward
Tortosa wherein there was a Garrison of 500. Foot. At the first onset Dolerier,
Governor of the Town was slain, and within eight days the Town was taken. By
reason of these fortunate proceedings, Marquess Mortara went to before Tortosa,
where Seignior Launage Gringenier Commanded, and Monsieur de Chaison, as the
Kings Lieutenant (a brave Soldier, and well beloved by those people) with about
1500. Soldiers, and though the Spaniards were then so strongly recruited, as
that they had 8000. fighting men, and that the Citizens, and Country people
stood for the most part for Spain; yet not being able to do any good by
storming, as at first they endeavored they resolved upon a Siege, wherewith in
six weeks space they reduced it. Duke Mercure knowing the importancy of the
place, strove to relieve it, and writ to Don Guiseppe Margherite, to send him
Victuals from Barcellona: Margherite forthwith hired four Merchants Ships which
were in the Haven at Barcellona, and fraughting them with great store of
Cattle, he sent them to the French Camp in the plains of Taragona. And whilst
the said Munition was unloding at Cambrils, where the Viceroy was, seven
Spanish Galleys, Commanded by Duke Alberkirque, fell upon them, and after a
long fight, and with loss of some few men, made himself master of the four
Vessels; so as the Duke wanting means to make his attempt, the City
capitulated, and surrendered; after which losses, Duke Mercure, though recruited
with 1000. Foot from Barcellona, and with as many from Provence; seeing the
Spaniards were retreated to their Winter quarters, and that he had had but ill
success in that employment, he also retired with his Army to their quarters,
and with leave returned to France; leaving the Marquess of St. Magrin, to
Command the Forces.

The Archduke making use also in Flanders of the French being engaged in Guien,
went to Rethel, where was great store of Corn and other provisions, and
consulting what enterprise he were best to fall upon, the Count Grandpre, of
the Family of Ioyence, and who was then a great favorite of the Prince of
Conde, propounded the taking of Moson upon the Mose, which had been his
Government, and he prevailed that it should be attackt with 4000. Spaniards
under Don Stephano di Gammarra, and with 2000. French, of Longueville, and
Turen's Troops, who passing over the Mosa on the 4 th. of October began the
expugnation; but they found greater resistance than they expected; yet being
loath to give over a work of such importance, the Count of Fuenseldagna came
before it also with other Spanish Forces. The Archduke with part of the Horse
retreated to Brussels, leaving Don John delli Ponti, a Neapolitan, Governor of
Rethel; he hastened the business before Marishal Plessis Pralin should be able
to relieve it. And though the Defendants, out of hope of being relieved, and
for fear of being ill treated by Granpre, did stoutly defend it, yet not being
able to resist so many reiterated assaults, they yielded on the Eleventh of
November; the French Garrison marched out, and the Spaniards entered; who not
thinking it fit to give the Government thereof to Granpre by reason of his
instability; nor yet to deny it him, left he might be displeased, they took a
middle way, which was to declare him Governor thereof, but not put him in
possession, pretending need of him in the Camp; and promised never to make
peace with France, till he were readmitted thereinto; which the Spaniards did,
that they might be free masters of that Town, which was of such importance to
their affairs, least Granpre might be won over by the Cardinal, whose Maxim it
was, rather to sweeten his particular Enemies by fair means, than to ruin them
by rigor.

After this, Turen went over the Mose to Olesy, and quartered between that
River, and the Aisne, that he might enlarge his quarters in more commodious and
plentiful places, and to refresh his Army, which was much weakened, and wearied
with this Siege: since he could not persuade the Count of Fuenseldagna to stay
with his men between those two Rivers, as he had wisely advised. Wherefore the
Cardinal finding that he should have done but little, if after having subdued
Normandy, Burgundy, and Guienne, he should not also have freed Champagne from
the Enemy, he resolved to go himself in person to the Army, and to drive the
Spaniards, and Turens Troops from Rethel, and the other Neighboring Towns,
having to this purpose reinforced the Kings Camp with part of the Forces
brought from Guien, and with other taken into pay by the Prince Taranto, some
to the Duke of Tremaglia in Poicton, and by the Marquess of Aligre, and others
in Auuergne, he doubted not but to have the glory of driving the Enemy out of
the Country.

The Cardinal parted from Paris about the end of November in great Pomp;
leaving the Parliament, and the Frondeurs much mortified, to see that to the
power of Government he had, the Command of the Army was added. When he was come
to Reimes with an Army of 12000. choice veteran Soldiers, the recovery of
Rethel was resolved on by a Council of War, toward which the Army marched on
Friday the ninth of December, Commanded by General Plessis Pralin, and by
Messieurs Villaquiere, and Oquincourt, Lieutenants General; the next day they
took the Suburbs, and began to play upon the Gate, and passing over the Bridge,
assaulted the Town, from whence they were at first valiantly repulst by Iouan
delli Ponti, a Neapolitan, who Commanded within the Town with 1200. Foot, and
200. Horse. But at the second assault, those that were within knowing that they
could not defend those imperfect Walls, they capitulated on the 13 th. day;
though it was but a false Alarm on that side, given by only two Regiments, the
Kings Army being all on the other side the River; This happened just when
General Turen was come with his Army as far as Tagni, to relieve the Town,
which he did not doubt to do; for the French Camp having no line about it, and
being divided in several quarters on both sides of the River; he would have
made them rise, or would have entered the Kings quarter by the intervall. Turen
moved this, for if the Town should be lost, his quarters would have been
straightened, and he could not have maintained himself long, but all his men would
have been ruined this winter; for the Spaniard would not suffer him to quarter
in Flanders, where the Archdukes Forces were already quartered; who for the
expense, and in consideration of the time of Year, would not tarry there, but
declared that he left the care of that place to Turen; who was more concerned
in the preservation of that place than the Spaniards, they being content to
keep Moson, la Capelle, and Catellet, into all which they put good Garrisons,
for that they afforded good convenience upon any occasion to enter into
Champagne, Picardy, and into the Bowels of France, and the Kings Army could not
be reinforced save only with 2500. Horse from Lorrain, conducted by Monsieur
Fouges a Savoyard, and by Count Ligneuille; and with 2500. Walloon and Lorrain
Foot, Commanded by Don Stephano Gammara a Spaniard; which being joined to 2000.
German Horse lately raised, the whole Army consisted of 5500. Horse, 4000.
Foot, and six field pieces. Turen hearing by some Prisoners that were taken,
that the Town had capitulated, and fearing to be fallen upon by the Victorious
Army, faced about, and marching all night, went to lodge in Vallatadi Eurg,
near the River Aisne. Then Marishal Plessis Pralin, though he had not as yet
possession of the Town, called a Council of War to advise of what was to be
done, before he would adventure to give Battle: where it was considered, that
the Spaniards chief design being to drive Turen's Army into the French
quarters, so to ease the Towns of Flanders, it would be a masters part to
disturb their design, and to drive them also from Chasteau Porcienne; which
would redound much to the prejudice of the Enemy, their ends being thereby
broken, for which they had taken, and fortified those Towns, to effect which it
was thought there was but two means; the one to oppose them with the Army all
the Winter, by which trouble and sufferings their own Army would either be
destroyed, or so lessened, as that the next Spring they should not be able to
make head against the Enemy: the other to come to a general action of Arms,
before the French Forces should be diminished, and before Turen should have
recruited his, as he easily might do by the neighborhood of the Spaniards: or
leaving both these to betake themselves to a third means, which was to go to
their winter quarters, which would be as bad, if not worse than to lose a
Battle, for thereby Turen would obtain his intent; all these reasons being
weighed by common consent, all pitched upon the resolution of fighting as soon
as might be. Plessis Pralin, solicited the Governor of Rethel, therefore to
end the Capitulation by the next day break, and at the same time when the
Garrison began to march out, he hastened his march after the Enemy, that he
might overtake him, and engage him to fight. But being come to Geneuille, he
was told by a party of Horse which came then unto him, that the Enemy was
already so far advanced as it was impossible to reach him with his men, who
were already wearied with the Siege, and with their march; wherewith he
acquainted the Cardinal, who sent him word, that if he could do no otherwise,
he should retreat and that he would expect him at Dinner that day; but he was
advertised by the forerunners of another party of the quarters of Oquincourt,
and of Lieutenant General Le Rose, who were further advanced, that Turen had
haulted in the said valley of Burg; wherefore without sending to the Cardinal,
he hasted thither, being resolved to fight, and by Moonshine he came on the 15
th. of November before it was bright day to the valley of Smide; from whence the
Enemies Croats were just then gone, having heard news of the advancing of the
Kings men. Then General Turenne giving sign to his Troops by three several shot
of Cannon, that they might rank themselves in order, the Commanders were so
diligent, as the most of them were in Battlearray upon the tops of the
Mountains, before the Kings men could come up unto them, as they endeavored;
which when Plessis Pralin knew, finding how he had failed in his first design,
which was to have gotten between the Enemies quarters, and to have kept them
from joining, he betook himself to march with much diligence upon the parallel
line to the Enemy; and getting the upper hand with his right wing, on the part
where Turenn's left wing stood, intending to play upon it on the Flank, now
that they were weak, and that the Lorainers were not yet come up unto them, who
came not long after; but Turenne also hastening his march, both the Armies
marched in a parallel line for above a League, not far from one another, and
then came the Lorainers in, with whom Turenne finding himself able to resist
the Kings men, he stayed upon an advantageous situation, to put his Army in
Battle-array, and to put the business to the arbitrament of Fortune.

He drew out his men into only two lines, that his Front might be the larger
upon the top of the Hill, which extends it self into a large plain; and he
according to his custom, placed himself upon the left wing of the Horse,
assisted by Count Duras, by Baron Bouteuille, and by Messieurs de Beaunau, and
Montelieu, who were the prime Commanders. Monsieur Fuges, and Count Lignauile
Commanded the Lorainers, who ranked themselves on Turenn's left side. The right
was possessed by the five newly raised Regiments of the Germans conducted by
Monsieur Lanau. Don Stephano di Gammara, assisted the Walloon, and the Lorain
Foot; and the French were led on by Messieurs di Betbets, de Rosopere, and by
Count St. Quinten; whereof the first Commanded Turenn's Brigade, the 2 d. that
of the Crown, and the 3d. that of Stenay, on the head of which Battailions
stood Marquess Hocourt, of Omale, and Count Bossu a Fleming. The six field
pieces were placed on the Front of the Army, preceeded by the Forlorn hope who
were to give the first Skirmish; some Croats were to scour the Country, and to
Skirmish with the forwardest of the Enemy.

Marishal Plessis Pralin having discovered the valley which lay between the two
Armies, divided his Army, which consisted of 4000. Foot and 500. Horse, into
two Battailions also; the first whereof was led on by the Marishals self,
accompanied by Monsieur Maincamp, Monsieur Villaquiere, the Marquess d'
Oquincourt, and de la Rosa, all four Lieutenants General; by Count Plessis
Pralin Son to the General, by Count Nauailes Vicount Corvalle, Monsieur de St.
Gervies, and Monsieur Fleshenteyne; with whom were diverse other Officers, and
experienced Gentlemen. Messieurs de Valle, and de Pradell commanded the Foot,
which were divided into six Battailions, on the Front whereof were placed two
pieces of Canon. The 2 d. Battle contained five Battailions of Foot, part
French, part Dutch: led on by Messieurs Chaumontelle, la Susa d' Emeraut, la
Flotte Venciuille, and others, in the intervall between these two Squadrons of
Foot were two Squadrons of Prince Thomaso of Sauoy his Gens d'arms, some
Companies of the Generals, and of his Sons, and of my Lord Digby an Englishman.
Monsieur d' Invile, Marishal of the Camp had the care of the reserve of Horse
of this 2 d. line. The King's Army advancing in this order, General Turenne, to
keep the Foot from adjusting themselves between the intervals of Horse
Squadrons, as they began to do, advanced himself in person with his wonted
courage, and the Lorainers were so ready on the left hand as they gave leave
only to three Squadrons of the Enemies Horse to oppose them: for the Kings men
had regulated their first body on the right hand according to the number of
Turenn's Troops, which as yet had not the Lorainers joined to them, and
therefore finding this advantage, he furiously charged the Enemies line, who
with no less valor incounter'd them, so as without giving fire their Horses
heads shook one against another. Marishal Plessis Pralin being on the head of
the first Squadron on the right hand, thrust forward to encounter him, and at
the same time sent Cavaliere Barada to wish Marishal d' Hochencourt to fall
upon his Flanck; but the Enemy not having at all sustained the onset on that
side, d' Hochencourt could not make use of the advantage of his station; but
being advertised by Monsieur de Quay, Marishal of the Battle, that five of
Turenn's Squadrons marched a little lower to fall upon his Flank, he was forced
to quit his first design, and to fight these with the Queens Regiment and that
of Carlo Broglia, who put them to flight: Monsieur de Cosse who was to have
backed him on the head of the second Battle, seeing that d' Hochencourt had
escaped danger on that side, advanced with Vatimont, and Cimitiers Squadrons
against others which were led on by Count Ligneuille, who hasted to assault the
Dutch Troops of Lieutenant General Rosa, and routed them. But the conflict was
much hotter on the right wing, where Turen's left hand Squadrons, he himself
being with his Sword in hand on their head, fought egregiously, and charged the
Kings Horse home; amongst whom Count Plessis the Marishals Son, and many other
Gentlemen of note were at the very first onset slain, and the rest routed; but
with so much loss to Turenn's men, who (though victorious) were so much
lessened, and so confused, as they might almost be said to be routed, as well
as the others. In this dangerous emergency the Marishal General gave singular
proofs of his experience and valor; for encouraging those that gave back with
his own presence, and rallying those that were routed and fled, he ordered his
Adjutant Monsieur Lomenet, to make the Horse advance who were upon the Foots
Flank, and who not having yet fought, were fresh and entire: with these he
himself and Monsieur Manicamp, fomented by Prince Thomaso's Gensd' Arms, which
were led on by Cavaliere Vssinga gave furiously on upon the first line of the
Lorain Horse, which were disposed of in seven Squadrons; and finding them
already in disorder, and wearied with having fought till then against three
great French Squadrons, he burst in amongst them; in relief of whom came Count
Bossu, who with two Squadrons fell upon the French Foot, who wanted Horse to
back them, for Monsieur d' Inville after having charged with the reserve, was
fallen back. Here the fight began hotter than before; the Pikes opposing the fury
of the Horse with much undauntedness, and signal example; at last Monsieur de
Villaquier came in with the fresh and entire Battles of the second line, and
Turenne having but two Battles of the second line to oppose them, one of them
which was led on by a Dutch Commander, who was there slain, was routed. The
other being commanded by the Sergeant Major, made forward, and routed two of
the Kings Battles; and here the whole second line of the Lorrainers mixed with
the first, so as when the 2 d. line of the French Army, which was wholly
composed of Veteran Germans, came up in good order, it found them in great
confusion; Turenne who would have brought up the ranks of the first line to
charge, and then have fallen back into the second, had his Horse wounded under
him, so as he could move but slowly. Count Duras, Baron Bonteville, and
Messieurs de Beauneau, and Montilieu having routed those that withstood them,
marched up with the remainder of their Troops to the Cannons mouth, and broke
some Squadrons of the 2 d. French line. But this mean while whilst Monsieur
Lanau, who commanded the five Dutch Regiments in Turenne's right wing had his
Horse slain under him, and was himself taken Prisoner in the first charge
wherein he had some advantage; all his men were put to flight, which caused the
Kings men of the left wing to return to the right wing, where charging the
second fresh line of the Lorrainers they routted them utterly, so the field was
won, wherein Count Lignaville was taken Prisoner, and Mounsieur Fouges; who had
received two wounds, and Edward Prince Palatine, together with two other German
Colonels were slain.

General Turenne as he past between the Lorrain Squadrons, and his own Troops,
finding himself alone, for all his Gentlemen were mingled with the Enemy, and
his Horse being again twice wounded, was environed by some of the Kings men,
who asked him if he would have quarter, when Monsieur de Berge, Captain of his
Guard coming in, they defended themselves with unparalled courage, and throwing
two of the Enemies to the ground, they luckily got free from the rest, crying
out that they were the Kings Officers, and that those Dutch men would have
killed them. Thus they escaped out of the Field; and Turenne met with Monsieur
de Vaue, Sergeant Major of Beauveau's Regiment, who lent him a Horse wherewith
he saved himself: so as finding both the wings of his Army utterly routed; the
Foot presently threw down their Arms, and ran all, save Turenne's Brigado, who
refusing quarter, fell in with unheard of boldness into the midst of the Kings
Squadrons, where they were all either slain, or taken, after an hours fierce
conflict. Here was Haucourt taken Prisoner, who commanded two small bodies of
Horse, and Don Stephano de Gammara General of the Spanish Artillery, Count St.
Quinten, and Colonel Capion, and diverse other Officers and Soldiers were slain.
Thus the Kings men won the day, were masters of the Field, took 24. Ensigns,
all the Drums, and about 3500. Prisoners; and about 1800. were slain. General
Turenne, the Counts Bossu, and Reens, and some more Horse, retreated toward
Barledue, and from thence to Stenay, the rest who escaped the Victors fury,
dispersed themselves several ways.

Of the Kings Army there died upon the Field, beside Count Plessis Son to the
General, Aluimare, Vale, and Carualle, all of them Field Marishals, Sergeant
General Rosa, Colonel Beus, and the Vicount de L' Hospitale, besides many that
were wounded, about 480. Soldiers, and Officers of lesser account.

After this Victory the Garrison of 300. which was in Chasteau Porcien yielded
upon discretion to Camp Master Bougy, who during the Battle, was besieging it
with 1500 men; and all the other Garrisons under Turenne in the Towns beyond
the River Aisne did also surrender.

This Victory was accompanied by the taking of Barleduck which the Lorrainers
held; Viscerge, which was stoutly defended by Maileferd, a French Colonel; the
Town and Castle of Miracourt, which yielded upon discretion to Marishal Ferte
Senetre; who was he that took all these Towns, as also the Castle Gardia, with
the Garrisons of Vic and Mongenuick.

But the season being unfit for further proceedings, and rest being rather to
be thought upon for the Soldiers, than new enterprises, they were put into
their Winter quarters; the Cardinal being thus Victorious, no less by this
fortunate success, then by having secured the Princes this year in the Kings
name, taken the Towns from them which they possessed, succord La Guise, recovered
the Castle of Dijon, Belgarde, Danuilliers, Cleremont, St. John di L' Ansne,
Verdun, Caen, Diepe, secured Haure de Grace, and Roan, ended the commotions in
Guienne, reduced Bordeaux, and driven the Spaniards from Rethel, it is
impossible to relate what confusion they were in, who murmured against his
Government of affairs, and who were jealous of his actions. His Friends, who
according to the fashion of the Court, do flatter Fortune more than persons,
solicited him by their Letters to come and receive Triumph in Paris, telling
him that these happy successes had stopped all men's mouths, wherefore he returned
to Paris on the last of December, which occasioned the bad accident which
followed, as you shall hear, which he had shunned, had he tarried but one month
longer in the Army out of Paris. The Coadjutor after the Battle at Rethel,
being desired by his especial friend Monsieur di Militiere to mind his studies,
and not to meddle any more in factions, and in the intrigues of the Court,
where the Cardinal grew daily greater; answered that he would follow his
Counsel; but that he must first end two things; which were, to drive the
Cardinal out of Administration of Government, and to set the Princes at
liberty; and that then he would betake himself quietly to his book.

The Cardinal afterward thinking himself obliged to put some esteem upon those
who had signalized themselves in the late Battle, made the King bestow the
Marishal staff of France upon Villaquiere, who was afterward called Marishal
d' Aumount; upon la Ferte Imbault, called the Marishal d' Estampes; and upon
the Marquesses of Oquincourt, and of Ferte Senatre, the one Governor of
Peroun, the other of Lorrain. He gave the Government of La Fera, intending him
further honors, and he consolated all the rest with hopes and promises; he had
also promised Count Grance to make him Marishal of France; but the Duke of
Orleans, who growing jealous of the fame which the Cardinal had acquired by so
many conquests; and seeing that in the Election of the four Marishals there was
none chosen that depended upon him but Estampes, and that he could not get him
to have the first place in precedence, though he were the antientest servant,
opposed Grance his Election. So as the Cardinal not thinking it fit to
exasperate the Duke any longer, hoping to bring him over afterward upon better
reasons to his designs, he forbore conferring that honor upon Grance, who not
well contented with the denial of what his so long service had deserved,
retreated to his Government of Graveling, and by causing jealousies afterward
in the Court, he made Orleans suffer the intended honor to be conferred upon
him. Thus every one rejoicing at the Cardinals prosperity either really, or in
appearance, according as they shared therein; others were so full of fears, and
emulation as not governing themselves by what was just or reasonable, they fell
upon all destructive Resolutions.

The imprisoned Princes Friends who labored their freedom, when the Cardinal
was absent, finding how generally it was desired, got the Princess of Conde,
and Madamoselle de Longueville, to present each of them a Petition to the
Parliament, to move them to protect the Princes, and to interest them in their
dis-inprisonment. The Petition being delivered in the Princess of Conde's name
on the first of November by Monsieur Deslandes Payer a Councellor, it was read
the next day in the Parliament. After a Narrative of what had been done
touching the imprisonment of the Princes, it contained that in conformity to
the Laws of the Kingdom, and answerable to the Declaration of the 24 th. of
October, 1648. Process might be made and expedited against the Princes, and
that in the mean time they might be brought to Paris, and placed in the Lo^re
with such guards upon them as should be thought fit. The prime President said
it was a business which would suffer much discussion, and moved that it might
be put off till the next week, so it was put off till the next Wednesday: on
which day Monsieur Talon strove with a pithy Oration, to inform the Assembly
that the Declaration of the twenty eighth of October could not derogate from
the Regal Authority, the Kings Council being concerned in the Princes their
affairs: that therefore the said Petition should be transmitted to the Queen
Regent, desiring her to reflect upon it, and use therein her accustomed
goodness and clemency. Monsieur Crespine Dean of the Parliament presented the
other Petition of Madamoselle Longueville, which concerned the same business,
desiring that they might be placed in L' Hostell de Soissouns in Paris, where
she might render the Duke her Father the service and assistance to which she
was by birth and nature bound. This Petition was not well read, when Monsieur
de la Roche Captain of the Prince of Conde's Guard, came to the Parliament
door, demanding to be let in; for he had a Letter to present from the three
imprisoned Princes, which he was commanded to deliver to the whole Assembly;
when he came in, the Letter was read, which contained the same things as did
the Petitions presented by the two Ladies. The Letter was written by the Prince
of Conde's own hand, and subscribed by the other two, dated from Cudbouille the
19 th. of November, after that Teloune had replied, that the Letter, and the
supplications ought to be sent to the Queen, the Assembly rose, adjourning
their meeting till the next Friday. Then the Princes their Friends represented
to the Duke of Orleans how that it was a strange thing to keep the Princes of
the blood in Haure de Grace, an unwholesom place, situated in the Sea, where
they were continually in danger to die. To which he answered that they were
sent thither against his will, and that they ought to be removed from thence.
The Parliament meeting on Friday to resolve upon these supplications, Monsieur
de Saintote came with a Letter from the King, wherein he commanded the
Parliament not to resolve upon any thing, till they should know his will, this
was readily obeyed; to which purpose the first President, and one other
President, four Counselors of Le grande Chamber, and two of every Chamber of
Inquests, met the next morning. These Commissioners being brought into the
Queens Chamber, who for some indisposition of health kept her bed; her Majesty
told them that by reason of her being ill, she could not say much to them, but
made the Lord Keeper tell them that they should not meet any more upon any
whatsoever occasion, till she were better: for she was resolved as soon as she
should be well, to take order for all things, and to give them all
satisfaction. That as for the business of the Princes it was of high
consequence, and that before she could resolve any thing therein, she must
advise with her Council, and with the Duke of Orleans, which she could not now
do by reason of her sickness: when the Commissioners made this report to the
Assembly, they agreed all in putting off the business, but they differed in the
time; some would have it for eight days, some for four; but four days was
resolved upon. Monsieur Crespine moved that public prayers and procession
might be made for the Queens health: but was not seconded by above 10. or 12.
voices, all the rest being exasperated against her for upholding the Cardinal.
At the next meeting, the King sent them another Letter, charging them again,
not to meet as concerning the business of the Princes; for that his Majesty
would shortly take order therein. But the Assembly continued, and in contempt
of the Kings Commands began to treat of the Princes concernments, they read the
Petitions of the two Princesses, and the Princes Letter; several motions being
made, it was resolved to send Douyat, and Maynardau to desire the Duke of
Orleans to come to the Parliament, for Naiau said the business was such, as he
could not speak his opinion but in the Dukes presence. Thus the Assembly was
adjourned till the next day, as the Assembly rose a great noise ^as heard in
the outward Hall of the Palace made by diverse who were hired to do it, amongst
which one was so bold as to say, and swear to President Mesnies in an
outrageous manner, that they would have justice, and a fig for Mazerine, which
made the President return into the Chamber, fearing worse. The Duke of Orleans
answered to the desire made unto him by the two aforesaid, That he would not
come to the Assembly for that there was so great tumultuating; and that when he
should come, it should be to the cost of some body, who made it lawful to
publish that the Princes were removed from Marcousi to Haure de Grace, without
his consent; that knowing they would not meet without he were present, to treat
of affairs of such importance, he would not come to them; but let them do what
they would, nothing was to be done but to remit that business to the Queen, to
do what she pleased therein: and that it had never been heard that the
Parliament did meddle in any such affairs; That whereas it seemed strange unto
them that Monsieur di Bar should guard the Princes, let them consider that the
late Prince was guarded in the Castle of Vincennes by a Lieutenant of the
Navarre Regiment. Notwithstanding they continued to treat of the Princes, and
the aforesaid Dandales moved that a Remonstrance might be made both by word of
mouth, and in writing to the King, that Haure de Grace not being a sitting
Prison for Princes of the blood, nor la Bar of a sitting condition to be their
keeper, (it being a place belonging to the Guards of the Kings body) the
Princes might be removed to the Louvre, and be there guarded by the Kings
Officers. Crespin being of the Kings party, asked where the Parliaments
Artillery was to force Bar to let loose the Princes? and whether they had
50000. Ussieri or Sergeants to make an Army and besiege him in case he refused
to obey them. Thus the Assembly ended without concluding any thing, and
adjourned till the next day. When the Marishal de L' Hospital being in the
great Hall, and hearing himself called a Mazarinian, turned about and said
aloud; who is he that calls me a Mazarinian? one of the insolent people
replied, I am he that says so, but who are you that ask me? The Marishal wisely
said nothing, finding that they were people who desired nothing but to raise
Tumults. When the Assembly met again, the same Dislandes propounding what he
had done before, added, that if the Parliament should think good to fall upon
the Cardinals bad Administration of Government, he would lend his helping hand,
but that then the other Parliaments must be invited to cooperate jointly for
the good of the State, this being well liked by many, afforded occasion to many
to commence the discourse. Counselor Brussels, seconding Dislandes, added,
that all the Evils that had befaln France for the four last years, had
proceeded from the Cardinals bad guiding of affairs; he imputed unto him, that
he had appropriated unto himself almost all the Revenues of the King, that he
detained the pay of the Armies, and of the Fleets for his own use, which
occasioned the Soldiers plundering and extortions even to the Gates of Paris.
That it was a shame for France to tolerate a stranger so long, he then fell to
speak of the Prince of Conde, showing that in the Kings own Declaration he was
charged chiefly with being too ambitious of having the places of Government
bestowed upon his Friends; which if it were a fault in him, it might much more
be called guilt in the Cardinal, there not being any strong place whereof he
was not now absolute master; that his going to Rethel, was only to treat of
Charleville, and of Monte Olimpe, and alleging diverse other examples, and
reasons, concluded that in their Remonstrances, they must mention the Cardinal,
and declare unto the King in writing, the unless speedy remedy were taken, he
went about to undo the State. Champound, Refuge, Meusiner, Sevin, Coqueley and
others continued to inveigh mightily against the Cardinal; but nothing was
resolved upon, for the delight of backbiting spun out the time till it grew
late; nor was there any thing concluded the Monday following. For news coming
that the Battle of Rethel was won, the Chambers were invited to assist at Te
Deum, which was no pleasing news to many, for that it was altogether in praise
of the Cardinal; in whose behalf Malnerdeau Champre advancing, said, (that all
the good Fortune of France proceeded from the Cardinal, who was the cause of
obtaining that Victory, and of all the advantages gotten by the former
Champagnias.) He commended his Government, and joined in opinion with those
that were for the King. And for what concerned the Prince they were to be given
into the Cardinals custody, who would have a particular care of them, but he
was not listened unto. The Parliament met the following days, and the Coadjutor
discoursed vehemently against the disorders of the State, not naming any body;
he said that the Victory being gotten, and the Enemy being so reduced as they
could do nothing, they must think upon home affairs, and free the Kingdom from
the bad Administration of the Finances; but that all things could not be done
without setting the Princes at liberty, which was a point of State, and ought
to be done, though they should not prove innocent. Barine master of the
requests, Aisne, and other Counselors, continued still to blame the
Government; but President Viola was more passionate than all the rest, he
discoursed largely of the Princes affairs, he spoke of the Cardinal as of the
common Enemy. He quoted a place of Scripture, where it is said that Foreigners
ought not to be received into the Government of States; nor be acquainted with
public affairs; adding that all the Kings confederates did abandon him, by
reason of the bad satisfaction they received from the Favorite, when they were
to negotiate any thing. That the few Princes of Italy who were yet Friends to
France, were in doubt whether they should continue still so, or no, that
Catalonia which had cost the King above 60. Millions, was about to be lost.
That the English did threaten, that all France was full of fire; wherefore he
concluded for the Remonstrances. Blanmenill, and Gilbert showed examples ^out
of History, of what disorders had besaln States, which have been governed by
Foreigners; and how that all Princes that ever made use of them, have been
forced to abandon them, and to send them away; and here amongst other examples
he alleged the Declaration made by the late King Lewis the 13 th. when the
late Prince of Conde was set at liberty, after a long imprisonment occasioned
by the ambition of the Marquess de Ancere a Florentine. Gilbert remembering
violences committed by Ministers of State, against the chief Lords of the Land,
added that Favorites thought themselves out of credit, when they did not do
some Coupe de Maistre. That Cardinal Richelieu had begun it, and Mazarine had
continued it, as was to be seen in diverse Presidents, and Counselors, in
Messieurs de L' Hospital, Vitry, Barrillon, Duke Beaufort, Marishal Della
Motta, and lastly in Princes of the Royal Family. He did inculcate that evils
must be provided against by stout Resolutions of Parliament, which had always
upheld Regal Authority, though the Cardinal imputed all the disorders
thereunto. And here he called to mind that Henry the 4 th. said once to the
Duke of Savoy, that he acknowledged his Crown from the square Caps. Lottin said
hereupon, that it was no new thing for Parliaments to meddle in such affairs;
for that it was to be found in public Records, even to the years 1415. and
1417. that the Parliament had nominated Commissioners to make Remonstrances to
the King, touching the ill Government of the State; and that the Cardinal said
false in saying that the Parliament was an Enemy to the King, and Kingdom.
Vedaw condemning the Government of Foreigners, alleged an example, taken out
of what History I know not, of a Lake seated between certain Mountains,
whereinto if a stone were thrown, it would become Tempestuous: others spoke in
praise of the Princes, and were all for the Remonstrances: at last three or
four days being spent in such like discourses, in which time many Libels were
posted up on several corners of the Streets, tending to sedition; the first
President finding that the greatest part were for the Remonstrance, and that it
lay not in the wit of man to alter them, that he might not appear contrary to
the Princes to whom he was also a well wisher, was contented that an humble
supplication should be made to their Majesty's for the Princes liberties, to
which function he himself with some others of the Assembly were deputed, who
not having audience before the 22 th. of January, spoke as follows: Sir,
It is to be believed that your Majesty is informed of the present condition of
your Kingdom and of the late conquests, which have been such as they may be
said to be peculiar to your Crown; we have with grief seen the loss of so many
advantages, of so many Towns in Italy, and in Catalonia, which have cost so
much Blood and Treasure. The Enemy has been so bold as to set his Foot in
France, and to take Towns in sight of the French Army. Your Majesty has been
forced to go into many Provinces of this your Majesty's Kingdom, to quench a
fire which seemed to extend it self every where; your Majesty has been forced
to march into several Provinces of your Kingdom to quench a fire which seemed
to threaten a general Conslagration, the pains and troubles of which voyages
has prejudiced your Majesty's health, and (which is the greatest misfortune
can belong to us) has put your life into much danger: all men know that these
disorders have happened since the 18 th. of January, 1650 that fatal day
wherein two Princes of the blood were imprisoned, together with the Governors
of Normandy. Some thought by this to break the thread of all our disasters, and
to quiet France; but in lieu thereof it has widened all wounds. We very well
know that there are some secrets of State, which it is not lawful to pry into,
and that there are some mysteries which ought not to be soon made known; It
being sufficient that in time the truth shall be made known. This perhaps has
made us believe there were many strong, and valid reasons for this
Imprisonment, which in time might be discovered, had not the Letter which was
sent to the Parliament the next day decipherd the Aenigma, making us know the
innocence of the rather unfortunate than blamable Princes. We placed the
strength and welfare of this Kingdom in the Regency entrusted in our Virtuous
Queen, your Sacred Majesty's Mother, assisted by the Duke of Orleans, and by
the Prince of Conde: but as soon as this knot was loosened, all misfortunes
besell us. We had thought that the Authors of this Council might have altered
their minds, knowing that there is no way to keep off public ruin, but to
think upon the liberty of these Princes, and to restore unto France those
Champions who have kept her so long Victorious, and preserved her from all
foreign injuries; but though we have expected this with impatiency, as
necessary for the good and safety of this Dominion, we will boldly say it has
been in vain; the liberty of these Captives might make us know that our Enemies
were no longer able to advantage themselves by our disorders, and divisions.
But when we expected this good fortune, we were struck with astonishment, to
see them removed to another Prison, where their lives are in danger, yes I say
in danger; and I add, that they may well be kept from our eyes, but never from
the hearts of minds of true Frenchmen.

Madam, this is the effect of our humble Remonstrance, who ought to watch, that
the public may receive no prejudice; we have been long silent out of respect,
and had been so still, had it not been, that we might have been blamed for not
giving notice of the threatening disorders. But Sir, as this Assembly (if your
Majesty had extended your Authority too far, upon any particular Member of this
Parliament) had been obliged to have interceded for that Member, so ought it
much more do so for the Princes of the blood, who are children of the Royal
Family, the firmest upholders of Monarchy, and the most noble and honorable
Members of this Kingdom. So many Victories, so many Conquests, so many Services
done to the State, plead in their behalf; as if any thing might be feared from
their comportments, the apprehensions which are conceived might suffice, that
unless their misfortune have a speedy end, the stones which do enclose them,
will speak so loud, as the passers by, who shall hear them, will carry their
mournful complaints throughout all France, w^ll awaken the hearts of all true
Frenchmen, which will make such a noise, as it is to be feared, that from this
bold action, some inconvenience may result unto your Majesty's, in this so
great and pressing danger. We humbly beseech your Majesty, Madam, to find out
some convenient Remedies; and that you will give us leave with all dutiful
respect to say, that unless you provide speedily for it, the zeal, care and
fidelity, which we owe to the preservation of the State, and to the Kings
service, will force us to lay our hands to it, and to employ all our endeavors
to keep this Crown from falling. We have thought fit, Madam, to represent all
these considerations to your Majesty, and humbly to desire that you will set
these imprisoned Princes at liberty, to the end that they may be able to do
that faithful service to the State, as they have formerly done, and Sacrifice
the Remainder of their blood and lives to the glory of this Monarchy; further
beseeching your Majesty, that you will grant a place of safety to Madamoselle
de Longueville, where she may pay her piety to her Father.



This Resolution of Parliament, which was the first thing that was done in
favor of the Princes; did much encourage the Enemies of the Kingdom to further
their wished for intent, and being backed by the Assembly, they betook themselves
to endeavor rather the Cardinals ruin than the release of the imprisoned; for
though their projects were maskt over at first with the pretense of the Princes
liberty, (which was approved of by many, as what might impede greater
disorders) yet the Coadjutors secret meaning being by little and little, to
engage the Parliament and Duke of Orleans in the behalf of the Princes, and in
prejudice of the Cardinal, he did what he could to keep off the Cardinal, and
to bring the Princes to Paris, under the judicature of Parliament; because
unless the Cardinals expulsion had preceded, it might have impeded the Princes
freedom, or that if he had furthered it, he might have been upon such
conditions, as he might have been arbitrator of the Government of the Court,
and of the whole Kingdom, which was the groundwork of all his thoughts, as we
shall in all his actions observe; so as it may be conceived, that he had no
solid reason for his hatred against the Cardinal, but only the Cardinals glory
and fortune. The Queen, who proceeded very considerately in all her
Resolutions, and who endeavored nothing but the service of the King her Son,
sought to gain time, hoping at last to make the Duke of Orleans see with what
cunning the Coadjutor went about to abuse his natural goodness. She deferred
answering the Commissioners eight days, in which time she and her Counsel
having dived into the Parliaments design, she answered them, that the Assembly
had wont to advertise the King, when they meddled with any thing touching his
Authority, before they took any Resolution; that they had done so the year
1562. upon the Letters which were sent them by the late Prince of Conde. That
the late commotions were an example of this, when the Parliament would not
resolve any thing upon the Duke of Orlean's Letters, without knowing the Kings
pleasure first therein, that now they had altered their course, having resolved
upon the Petitions of the Princess of Conde, and of Madamoselle Longueville,
and undertaken to make a Remonstrance for the Princes liberty, not letting the
King know, that any such Petitions were presented them. That though this was a
business whereof the Parliament ought to take no cognizance, since it depended
soly upon the Kings Authority, and that it could not be granted but by his mere
goodness, regard being had to what was contained in his Letters sent to the
Parliament, and to all the Sovereign Assemblies, and received with applause by
the People; yet all this should not keep the King from giving the Princes their
liberty, which he was content they should have without delay, provided that the
Forces of Steney should cease, and that Marishal Turenne would lay down his
Arms; and to the end, that none that were of that party might have any pretense
to retard the doing so, the King offered pardon to all that had been, or were
yet of that party: to which purpose he would order Letters to be sent presently
to the Parliament, and that as soon as Arms should be laid down, the King would
free the imprisoned. Though some few, who had other designs in their head, were
not well pleased with this, yet the greatest part of the Parliament appeared
satisfied; and it was ordered, that some should be sent to the King to make the
keepers of the Seal expedite this Decree. But whilst affairs past thus between
the King and Parliament, we must not omit what was done at the same time on
behalf of the Princes. The Princess Palatine, and her friends, seeing a general
disposition to favor the Princes, and an extraordinary aversion to the
Cardinal, she continued the Treaty, which (as has been said) was begun, and at
last concluded it with the Duke of Nemeurs, who had both of them full power
from Conde. It was managed, and ended by Croisy, a Counselor of Parliament,
and subscribed by the Duke Beaufort, the Coadjutor, President Viola, Monsieur
Arnaude, and by Fosseuse; every one engaging for themselves.

The principal Articles contained an agreement, how to obtain the Princes
liberty, by the Parliament and peoples means. The Coadjutor insisted upon the
means, how to remove the Cardinal from about the King, and that the Princes
adherents should oblige themselves strictly thereunto; And though some of
Conde's Friends were for giving all satisfaction to the Cardinal, to interest
him in the Prince his liberty; yet all were not of that same opinion, least if
it should be discovered, that they should endeavor to pull down the Cardinal,
the Princes might be plunged into greater difficulties, either by hazarding
their lives, or by losing the hopes they had, of getting their liberty by
agreeing with the Cardinal, yet the Coadjutor insisting, that he would do
nothing but upon that condition, and promising to engage the Duke of Orleans
therein, they were forced to consent thereunto; and that the Cardinal might not
come to the knowledge of this, they resolved to keep it from Beaufort, left he
might communicate it to the Duchess of Monbason, and she to others; so as the
Treaty being carried by Croisy to the Princess Palatine to subscribe and read
it; the Coadjutor handled the business so, as that this Article was skipped in
reading, and that Beaufort did also subscribe it without perusal, but
pretending that the Original which was to remain with the Frondeurs, might be
delivered to him, and that the Transcript might remain with the Princess
Palatine, whereby they might meet with the same inconvenience, they resolved
without her knowledge to put them both into the hands of Blanmevell sealed up,
making him give his word never to give them out, but in the presence and by the
consent of the Coadjutor, and of the President Viola.

To this Treaty another was added some few days after, between the Duke of
Orleans, the Palatiness, and the Duke of Nemeurs, wherein they engaged
themselves to use all their power for the Princes liberty. And in the same
Treaty a marriage between the Duke of Anguien, eldest Son to the Prince of
Conde, and the Duchess of Alanson, second Daughter to Orleans, was concluded,
with obligation that the Prince should not change any of the Kings Council, nor
place any others therein without consent of the said Orleans, in it was also
confirmed the marriage between the Prince of Conty and the Duchess of
Chevereux; wherein there were some rubs put by Conde's friends, presaging what
the consequences might be. But the Coadjutor kept still firm, saying, this was
the only means to win the Duke of Orleans his favor, though it was known
afterward that he did not so passionately desire these marriages. After these
Treaties the Prince of Conde's Friends put forth a Declaration, wherein the
Prince promised to second the Duke of Orleans in making the Coadjutor Cardinal.
All these acts were by Croisy, and Camertine (intimate friends to the
Coadjutor) carried to the Duke of Orleans, who underwrit two copies without
reading them, nor knew he what the contents were more than what the Coadjutor
was pleased to acquaint him with. Without whose suggestion, doubtlesly Orleans
intended no ill to the Cardinal, nor would the Princes friends have demanded
more than the Prince his liberty, which when it should have been had, the
Parliament would not have pressed for keeping the Cardinal from Court. These
writings being afterward carried to the Princess Palatine, and to the Duke of
Nemeurs, to be subscribed by them, they agreed that they should remain with
Croisy, who was to deliver them to the Duke of Orleans, or to Conde, when he
should be at liberty.

Encouraged by these Treaties, the Frondeurs began to solicit the Princes
liberties; which made the Cardinal aware ere long of Orleans his alienation
from him, not so much out of any coolness that he found in him, as for the bad
speeches which many of his Court used concerning him; but he was not yet fully
informed of the secret plots that were a weaving against him; and it was
strange that so many days being spent in these Treaties, he got no perfect
notice of them, they were too far advanced before he perceived them; so as
after having imploi'd many persons in Messages, and Proposals, he at last
offered, in the presence of both King and Queen, to be reconciled; but this was
rather in appearance, than real, but though Orleans forbore not the Cardinals
Conversation, and Dined sometimes with him; yet after he had underwritten the
aforesaid Treaties, he could not so well dissemble, as not to discover his
inward mind. The Cardinal, who was not to be paralleled for wariness, finding
this, and knowing that there could be nothing but the ill impressions suggested
by the Frondeurs, and of his other Enemies, speaking thereof with the Queen in
her Chamber on the Twenty sixth of January at night, told her that her Majesty
must warily observe the proceedings of Parliament, where, it might be, there
were Fairfaxes, and Cromwells. The Duke who minded nothing but how to execute
the Coadjutors suggestions, thought the pretense fit to give fire to the Mine;
so as the Parliament being met on the first of February to think of the fittest
means how to get the Princes out of Prison, being persuaded that the Court did
not desire it, and that the Kings promise was only to gain time; the Coadjutor
being now sure to be assisted by Orleans, unmasked himself, and spoke more
freely than before; he showed how necessary it was to get the Princes liberty
as soon as might be; and that he had order from the Duke to assure them, that
this was his opinion, which he would employ all his power to effect. The
Counselors wondered much to hear this, for believing hitherto that the Duke
stood well with the Queen, they could not discern whence this alteration should
proceed. Beaufort ratified what the Coadjutor had said, and declared that he
was of the same mind; nothing was resolved upon that day, for the Members being
astonished at the novelty, adjourned till the next day: and the Coadjutor going
to acquaint Orleans how well the Parliament was pleased with what he had told
them in his name, made him the more inamored with their applause, and
established him more firmly in the Resolution which he had taken.

Monsieur Tillier going at that instant to know from the Duke whether what the
Coadjutor had said in Parliament was by his Highness permission or no, or done
barely by the Coadjutors self, answered somewhat angrily, that what the
Coadjutor had said, was done by his desire, and that he should always approve
of what he should say, or do. The whole Court was much surprised with this
answer, and made them resolve to send to Treat with the Princes touching their
liberty. The next day the Duke of Orleans, moved thereunto by the Coadjutor,
sent for the Lord Keeper, for Marishal Villeroy, and for the Secretary of State
Tillier, and bad them tell the Queen in his name, That he would never come to
Court, nor sit in Council as long as the Cardinal was there; and said further
to Villeroy That as Lieutenant General of the State, he assigned over the
keeping of the King's person unto him, which his head should be answerable for.
On Friday the third of February, having with yet greater energie, by order from
Orleans, repeated his opinion touching the Princes liberty, told the Assembly
how the Cardinal had told the Queen in presence of the King, that there were
Fairfaxes and Cromwells in the Parliament, and that it was to be feared that
their intentions were to suppress Regal Authority, according to the example of
England. That the Duke not able to tolerate so great a Calumny, had assured the
King that it was altogether false, and that there was none but faithful
servants to his Majesty, either in the Parliament or City, whereof he would
become surety both in general, and in particular; and that the Duke had told
the Cardinals self, that he was a wicked man, and worthy to be reprehended, for
instilling such ill opinions into a young King against his affectionate
Subjects, by whom his Majesty was generally loved; their hatred extending only
to the Cardinal, whom they knew to be the only cause of the Kingdoms ruin. And
that upon this the Duke had sent the day before for the aforesaid Lords, and
had wished them to tell the Queen that he would come no more to Court whilst the
Cardinal was there.

At the names of Cromwell and Fairfax they were all highly scandalized,
insomuch as three propositions were made against the Cardinal; the first, that
he should be made Prisoner; the second (and this was made by President Viola
(who was more incensed against him than all the rest) that he should be sent
for to the Parliament to give an account of his Administration, and for the
words which he had said to the dishonor of the French Nation. Here the first
President interrupted him, saying, he was too hasty; and after some contest
between him and Coulin, who spoke impertinently against the Cardinal, the third
proposal was made; which was, humbly to desire the Queen that he might be sent
from Court; the meanwhile, the Coadjutor's friends having divulged throughout
the City the aforesaid words spoken by the Cardinal of Cromwell and Fairfax;
the malcontents resented it, and said they were injured; for the French do not
only love, but even idolatrize their King; so as in a moment the whole City,
which was quiet before, grew mutinous, the people running up and down the
Streets, yea even in the Palace it self, crying out, Let the King live, and let
Mazarine dye.

The Queen sent the next day to the Duke of Orleans, to know whether he would
be content or no that she should come and visit him, and bring the Cardinal
along with her: who answered, Her life would not be safe amongst in incen'sd
people. The Queen replied, she would come alone without the Cardinal; he
answered, He feared the people would rise. Then the Duke sent to the Marishals
of France to forbid them to take orders from any one but himself, who was
Lieutenant General of the State, and of his Majesty's Armies; they answered,
That whilst the King was present, they were to depend upon the King, and upon
no other. He sent the same order to the Provost of Merchants, wishing him to
will the Colonels and Captains not to take up Arms without his Command; they
excused themselves with ambiguous words, and went presently to acquaint the
Queen therewith; who answered, They might not do ill to receive orders from the
Lieutenant General of the Crown, since she could not believe that he would
command any thing contrary to the Kings service; at the same time many of the
Nobility being assembled together in the Marquess of Vieville's House (who was
not over affectionate in his heart to the Cardinal) to think how to get
satisfaction from the Cardinal, for what he had said to their shame; he carried
them to L' Hostella d' Orleans, telling him, That if he pleased, he would frame
their assembly, to which the Duke, not dissenting, they had their first
meeting, and choosing the same Vieville, and the Marquess Lordis for their
Presidents, both which were desirous of novelty, that so they might be of some
consideration, and get advantage thereby, since as yet they were in no great
credit at Court.

The Coadjutor finding that the Parliament delaid the execution of the three
proposals against the Cardinal; and that the first President, with many of the
more moderate sort, sought to sweeten bitterness, and that suiting himself to
the most plausible opinion, he desired earnestly the Princes liberty; insisted
that they were to acknowledge it from the Queens goodness, who had already given
way thereunto; and had sent Marishal Gramont, Monsieur de Lion, and Monsieur
Goulas to treat with the Princes selves. And he persuaded Orleans to come to
the Parliament, and by his Authority to foment what was desired; the Duke
suffering himself to be persuaded by the Coadjutor, came to the public Palace
on the fourth of February, accompanied by the Dukes of Beaufort, Gioyuse, and
Rets, by the Coadjutor's self, and by all the great ones of Parliament: he told
them that he had given the Coadjutor order to acquaint the Assembly with what
the Cardinal had said to the King to their detraction; and with what his answer
was, both to the Queen and Cardinal; and how that in regard of such unworthy
speeches, he had sent word to her Majesty, that he would come neither to Court,
nor Council, so long as Mazarine was there; adding, That he was come to
Parliament, intending to join wholly with them, and to see all things performed
that they should Decree; that for above a month nothing had been spoken of in
the Privy Council, but private business, instead of taking order for the
Emergencies of State, or the Princes liberty; that the Cardinal would not have
them disimprisoned, though himself had solicited any time these three months.
He also declared that it was the Queens importunity that had made him consent
to their imprisonment, and that she was induced thereunto by the Cardinals
false suggestions. He made also a Narrative of what had been done since the
Princes imprisonment; blaming what had been done at Bordeaux by the Cardinal;
and that if he had consented thereunto, it was only that he might not displease
the Queen, to whom he had always professed much obsequiousness: but that
perceiving now, that instead of growing better, things grew worse, he was
resolved to go no more to Council as long as the Cardinal was there; that he
was come to the Assembly to acquaint them with thus much, and to be advised by
them, knowing that so he should not err.

This the Duke speaking so freely against the Cardinal, was applauded, not only
by those few that were his Enemies, but made deep impression in many others who
had altered their minds, since they had heard what the Coadjutor had related,
and which was afterward confirmed by Orleans.

The first President who was a good man, and of great experience, answered in
very respective terms to the Duke, and with much moderation, That he was
absolutely for the Princes liberty, but not by violence, nor by any other hand
than the Kings. Then entering upon the Dukes discontents, he said, That if they
arose from the Princes imprisonments, he might be sure they should be freed
from imprisonment; but if from the Cardinals greatness he was to make use of
his wisdom therein, for it was lawful for the King to make use of whose service
he pleased, and that if he thought himself injured by the Cardinal, if he would
declare his reason, there were means to satifie him without putting France into
confusion, here the Duke interrupted him; saying, That for what concerned the
Princes liberty, he the Duke ought to know more than he; but that he did not
believe him, for he had a tie in writing upon Bar, that he would never set them
at liberty without order from the Queen, and from him the Duke.

Whilst the Counselors were giving their Opinions, the Master of the
Ceremonies came to the Parliament with a Letter from the King, commanding them
to send Commissioners to him. Some were of opinion not to hear him; but the
Duke would not suffer any such contempt, they therefore resolved to continue
the Assembly, and in the interim to send the first President, and President
Bailleul, with twenty Counselors more, to receive his Majesty's commands. Then
came Count Brien, the first Secretary of State, who in the Queens name, desired
Orleans to come and assist in Council in the Court; assuring her self, that he
who had always born such affection to her Majesty, would not refuse her such a
favor. The Duke replied, he could not answer her there, but when he should be
returned to his own house, he would, as he did that very night; declaring, that
there could be no safety for him, whilst the Cardinal was there: when the
Commissioners came before her Majesty, the Lord Keeper acquainted them with the
reason why the King had sent for them; and at the same time he delivered a
writing containing what the Queen had to say to them, to the Secretary of State
Guinegaute, who read it. After which the first President said, that the
Assembly marvelled, why after the Parliaments Remonstrance, and after her
Majesty had past her word that the Princes should have their liberties, there
was so little sign thereof: to which the Queen answered that Marishal Grammont
was already gone to treat with them, and that she was content they should come
out, giving necessary precaution for the safety of the State: afterward
enlarging her self, and re assuming what had been read, she said, That all the
relations that had been made to the Parliament, were mere Calumnies, suggested
by the Coadjutor, who had told them falsehoods; that he pretended to too much,
and that he was of an unquiet spirit; that he infused pernicious Counsel into
the Duke of Orleans, because he was not chosen Cardinal, which he had been so
bold as to desire, threatening if otherwise, be would set fire on the four
quarters of the Kingdom. She afterward recounted what had past in Council the
Tuesday before between the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardinal; she complained of
the Duke having refused to let her come unto him, under pretense that the
people might commit some outrage upon her person; which consideration, she
said, should not at all have altered her Resolution, but on the contrary, if
she should have perceived the people begin to stir, she would have come out
into the Streets, being sure that her presence would suddenly have quieted all
disorders, for she very well knew what Reverence the Parisians bore to Royal
Personages: she added further, that such affairs as these should be carried on
mildly. That Marishal Grammont was already gone, and that therefore they needed
not have any more meetings about that; and she moreover told them, that the
King was growing out of his minority, and sufficiently informed, to distinguish
between those who were seditiously given, and those who were well affection'd
of which number, she said, they were, and that the King would one day remember
them for it, so she dismissed them. The Commissioenrs being returned to
Parliament, the first President related what the King had said, and made the
writing which was given him, be read, and which contained almost the same
thing; whereupon they began to consult, and there was difference of opinions.
But at last Orlean's Authority prevailing, the Frondeurs and tumultuous people
whereof the Hall was full, joined in a Resolution of beseeching the Queen, to
send a letter away speedily for the freedom of the Princes, and to send the
Cardinal from Court, grounding their pretense upon what the Duke had said, that
he would not go to the Council so long as the Cardinal was there. And they
further said, That since there was a necessity, that one of the two should
retire, it was fair and honest, that his Highness the Kings Uncle, and
Lieutenant General of the State, should tarry, and that the other who was a
Forrainer should be sent away; this being decreed in the Assembly, the first
President was sent to acquaint the Queen with it, and humbly to desire the
Princes liberty. Thus the Assembly ended, and Orleans returned to his own
house, attended on by many of the Gentry, and by a great number of the
Populacy. The next morning he sent for the Duke of Esperno^n, and for Marishal
Schomberg, and told them, That he being Lieutenant General of the Crown, they
were hereafter to come to him for orders touching their employments, the one
being Colonel of the French Infantry, the other of the Switzers, they both
answered, That they knew very well what became them to do, and the respect
which they were to bear him: but that whilst the King was present, they were
only to depend upon his Majesty; the same day the Queen sent for the Duchess
of Orleans, and for Madamoselle, and discoursed with them above two hours; but
no good came of this conference, for there were few who through either envy, or
emulation did not declame against the Cardinals greatness; neither had the
Duchess of Anguien's endeavors better success, who labored to take off
Orleans from the sinister impressions, which the Coadjutor had made in him, of
the Cardinal.

But though there was so great concourse of people about the Duke, yet the
Palace Royal was frequented by much Nobility and those of the greatest esteem,
who kept their due obedience to their Majesty's. Amongst which all the
Marishals of France, except de Estempes, Duke Mercure, who still was of the
Queens party, never waver'd from the friendship which he protest to the
Cardinal, and sent a challenge that very day to his Brother Beaufort, but
Marishal de Estre hindered their meeting.

Whilst things were in this posture, both sides studied how to win the peoples
affection, wherein the whole affair did consist; but they being born away by
the desire of Novelty, inclined rather to favor the malcontents, than the
Court, which made the Frondeurs join the more closely to the Princes, and to
the Duke of Orleans.

It will not be much from the purpose, upon this occasion, to say something
upon the Court interests, which consisted wholly in the Kings and Queens
Authority, and in the Forces of the Kingdom, which were firm in the same
Resolution with the Cardinal, never to set the Princes at liberty, till the
King being come to years of Majority, might be able to divert those Plots,
which they had framed in his minority, to the prejudice of his power, for now
they were in a safe place.

The Duke of Orleans, together with his Wife and Daughter, being joined to
Beaufort and the Frondeurs, solicited the Parliament, and the Parisians to
concur in freeing the Princes; to the end that the Cardinal's credit being
lost, their Authority might be the more considerable in the King's minority.
The Duchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutors aim was the same; She by reason
of the Marriage agreed upon between the Prince of County, and her only
Daughter; and the Coadjutor promising himself by this Alliance, that the
Duchess was to have with the Prince of Conde, to arrive at the Cardinals Cap;
since he had no such hopes from the Court. Thus Paris being wholly set by the
concurrance of so many Princes, and people of quality, upon pulling down the
Cardinal, nothing was seen in the Parliaments Palace, but the concourse of
people, and of Cavalliers, who publicly cried out for the Princes liberty, and
against the Cardinal. So as instead of seeing the Court quieted after the
favorable successes in Champagnia, and the peace of Guienne, it was on the
contrary become fuller of confusion: But the Cardinal not being aware of the
correspondency which the imprisoned Princes had with their adherents, was not
much troubled thereat, by reason of the assurance he received from La Bar, who
thought not to be deceived by his own people; for the Prince of Conde won one
of Bar's Servants, who was appointed to attend him, by whose means he received
Letters, corrupted the Guards, and had notice of all things by the means of
Physicians, and Chirurgions, which visited him: so as he sent, and received
advertisements without the knowledge of Bar, or of the Cardinal. Thus the
Duchess of Chevereux having made the Marriage sure, and the Coadjutor having
won the Duke of Orlean's favor, they kept him always firm to them; the
Duchess of Chevereux, and the Princess Palatine carried all things with great
dexterity, and secrecy; and amidst all the tumultuous meetings that were made
in January, the first President did great service, as well in the public
assembly, as in private discourse with their Majesty's, as Commissioners from
the Parliament, using his best endeavors for the Princes liberty. The Court
and Cardinal being thus undermined, saw they were obliged to give the Princes
their liberty; yet they failed not by means of many Princes, and others on whom
they relied, to handle the agreement so, as that they were to acknowledge their
Releasement merely from the Queen, and should be only bound to her, and join
with her, if they could but break the designs of the Coadjutor, and of others.
The Marquess Chastoneus, who for his venerable age was well thought of by both
sides, sent for the Prince his friends to him, as Viola, Vesnsond, Croisy,
Arnault and others, and in presence of Secretary Tillier proposed a particular
Treaty for the Princes liberty. Conde's friends listened willingly to this; for
they suspected that the Cardinal being gone, and when Orleans should be
Arbitrator at Court, he might still detain the Princes in Prison by the
Coadjutor's instigation, which they said was the Coadjutor's hidden design,
whilst the Cardinal was upon his journey to Haure de Grace, and whilst
Grammont, Lion, and Goulas negotiating with the Prince, did agree together,
that Conde should renounce all Leagues as well within, as without the Kingdom,
that he should not come into Claremont, Bellegrade, the Castle of Dijon, nor
the Tower of Burges till four years after his disimprisonment; that the King
should put a Garrison into Steney, that the Duke of Longueville should quit the
Government of Normandy, as being too near Paris; having another Government as
good given him. The Dukes of Nemeurs, and of Rochfaucolt, who were come to
Paris, subscribed the Treaty; and hound themselves to observe it, since Orleans
had not given them the Kings Letter till after they had signed it. The Queen
did this to further Lyon's Negotiation in Haure de Grace, who had order to
handle the business so, as that the King might receive no prejudice thereby:
and that it might appear to proceed merely from the Queens favor; but whilst
Monsieur Vrliere and others went to see this Treaty performed, the Cardinal set
them at liberty, so as their was no more speech thereof; and the Princes came
out of Prison, as you shall hear in the next Book.

THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. 1651
The SIXTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
Cardinal Mazarine parts unexpectedly from Paris, and goes to Haure de Grace.
The Parisians rise, and under pretense that the King and Queen might also go
out of Paris, they set Guards round about the Palace-Royal. The Princes are
dis-imprisoned, and return in glory to Paris. The Cardinal goes to Sedam, and
retires from thence to Burles in Germany. The Duchess of Longueville, and
Marishal Turenne are restored to Court. The Marriage between the Prince of
County and Madamoselle Chevereux is broken off; whereat the Duchess of
Chevereux is scandalized; and become an Enemy to Conde, who loses many
friends. Assemblies of Ecclesiastics, and of the Nobility ensue. They pretend
to call an Assembly of the States General and are dissolved, with promise from
the King that they shall be called another time. Marishal Chasteauneus is in
disgrace at Court, and the Seals are delivered to the first President of
Parliament. The Duke of Orleans, and the Frondeurs are troubled thereat; they
make the Queen reassume them, and deliver them to the Chancellor of the
Kingdom. The Prince takes new distasts at Court, and begins new troubles; at
the Cardinals return diverse proposals are made by both parties. Conde at
unawares retires from Paris, goes to St. Maure, pretends not to be safe at
Court, demands that some State Ministers be sent away, which is done; but is
not content for all this, he makes other pretentions; the Queen seeks all means
how to appease him, but in vain. He makes league with Spain; and by his
friends, and kindred is forced to make War; which he does unwillingly,
foretelling no good success. The Spaniards begirt Barcellona; and diverse
accidents happen in those parts.

THE Parliament being fomented by the Duke of Orleans, by the Frondeurs, and
Malcontents; and which was of more importance, being frightened at the rage of
the people, who ran in great numbers storming, to the public Palace, after
they had made humble Remonstrances to the Queen for the liberty of the Princes,
and for the removal of the Cardinal; it was questioned whom the Provost of
Merchants ought to obey, in case the people should take up Arms; and the
assembly seeming to give that Attribute to the Duke of Orleans, and the
commotions growing hotter, and hotter in the City, the Cardinal was in danger
of his life. Wherefore the Duchess of Chevereux, who did not build too much
upon Orleans his stability, and who desired that the Cardinal would yield, used
all possible means to make him be gone; showing the Queen sometimes how
necessary it was to satisfy Orleans, who being sweetened by this demonstration
of esteem put upon him, would be easily won over: sometimes saying, That if the
Cardinal would yield but for some few days, till such time as the Duke might be
brought back to Council, he would undoubtedly be appeased; and being a Prince
naturally well given, would by strong reasons be made to see how falsely he had
been informed; from whence he might be brought to alter his mind, wherein she
would be ready to cooperate, being as desirous of the Crowns good, as any
other whosoever; but the Counsel were of several opinions: and though there
were but few that did not inwardly desire the Cardinals fall: yet some were
absolutely against his departure, advising that 2000. Gentlemen of the Country
who were well affected to the Court, should enter Paris, make head against
Orleans, and drive him, and all the turbulent Spirits out of the City; who
wanting the presence of the imprisoned Princes, could expect but little from
any else, who wanted credit, and were not fit to govern War, as was Conde; and
some that were more affectionate to the Crown, said, That upon this occasion
they might follow Cromwell's example, who had reduced London, a great and
powerful City, for people and wealth, to entire obedience; by making the Army
advance into the Suburbs, and begirt the City again, as they had done the
preceding year. Plessis Pralin, de Eure, and the Father of Marishal Santerre
appeared more concerned for the Cardinals tarrying than all the rest; for they
said plainly, That they had rather see him in that condition, whom they by
experience had found to be cruelly demeaned, than others who peradventure were
more rigid, and had further pretenses. Count Servient Tillier, and Lion, were
true to the Cardinal, and contributed Counsels becoming the Kings service. But
those who naturally were given to love novelty, desired he might absent
himself, and these were more in number. Chasteneus, the Guard de Seaux
particularly, strove to show that there was no better expedient for the present
than the Cardinals absence, and that the effect must be removed by the removing
the cause: some others of the Cardinals Domestics, taking offense at the
strange proceeding of the Frondeurs, and Malcontents, said, That he was to
maintain himself by force, and to assuage the tumor before it did more
insistolize; these said, That the King was absolute Master; and that the
Subjects were to renounce, not to censure the Kings actions; that all the
strong holds, Soldiers, Subjects, and greatest part of the Nobles were for the
King. Wherefore they ought not to foregoe the Resolutions of suppressing of
some ambitious Spirits, who were encouraged only by the popular breath of
Paris, which being a populous City was subject to the fatality of wavering
according to the fury of the rabble rout. That the strength of the Duke of
Orleans, of the Frondeurs, Parliament, and people, lay only in their opinion of
the Courts weakness; which the more reservedly it proceeded against them, it
made them the prouder, and made one contumacious act a ladder whereby to climb
up to greater; so as to be feared, they must appear not to fear: that the
people seeing a Masculine resolution put on, would rather think of saving
themselves, than of precipitating themselves into a party which was not able to
sustain them. That the friends of the imprisoned Princes, fearing that their
lives might be endangered, would forbear those attempts which might force the
Court to use violence; that friends would be encouraged, and that it being in
the Kings power to bestow all places, and honors, the desire of merit would
prevail more with most men, than the unquiet party. That therefore they must be
no longer in resolving, for slow resolutions in such cases showed weakness, and
fear, which was the only reason of the rashness of the seditious; nor did they
forbear to say, that absolute power might be used upon the Parliament
Commissioners; yea even to life, if their associates should transgress the
bounds of duty. The Cardinal thought this advice was not to be contemned; and
had he accepted it, it might peradventure have done the deed, but the Cardinal,
though he wanted neither courage nor wit to have done it, answered that since
the business concerned only himself, he would not engage the Kings Authority in
his defense, against a Nation to which he intended glory and advantage, not
misery and troubles, being confident that the Duke of Orleans, the Parliament,
and people, would at last clearly discern the cunning of those that were
Enemies to quiet: and that when this cloud should be once over, the innocence
of his actions would in time appear more clearly, he therefore did only feel
the pulse of the Provost de Merchants, of the Sheriffs, Field-Officers, and
Colonels; and finding them readier to obey Orleans, than the King, he resolved
to yield to the Popular violence, believing that like an high going Sea, it
would grow calm when the winds should cease. Nor would he endeavor to carry
the King and Court out of Paris as well for that it would be very hard to do by
reason of the strict guards that were kept in all the Streets; as also that the
Court being gone, that powerful City would rest at the disposal of his Enemies,
which was the thing they would be at.

Being thus resolved to be gone, he acquainted the Queen with it; saying, That
if the Duke of Orleans, and the Parliament would be satisfied with this, things
would go well, the loss of his person not being to be considered, if thereby
the public peace might be purchased. But that if no good should accrue by his
absence, her Majesty might then believe there were some concealed plots against
her service; that she should therefore in such a case keep concealed, and
endeavor by all means to get the King out of Paris; and that she should not by
any means suffer her self to be persuaded to set the Princes at liberty; for
when he should be gone, and that pretenses should not thereby cease, they were
not to be set at liberty, unless upon such conditions, as that they should owe
the Obligation only to the King's goodness, and to no body besides. He caused a
Letter to be sent to La Bar, subscribed by the Queens own hand with order to
obey what she should command: and to set the Princes at liberty, if agreement
were made with them, or else to detain them, till they might in time be set
free with more safety; things being thus settled, he left the Abbate Vndedey
with the Queen, to have a care of what should occur; and in the Evening upon
the sixth of February, he called for Count Brienne, the first Secretary, and
acquainted him with his Resolution of being gone: recommending the Kings
interest unto him, whose Authority he said was several ways plotted against;
and without more ado went down stairs, got on Horse back, and accompanied by
only three, went by the Rue St. Honor toward the gate de Conferance; but
hearing that many were run before to the Twilleries, where Madamoselle d'
Orleans then was (for they had had some inckling of his departure) he turned
about and went by Port Richelieu, and got into the Fields where many of his
friends waited for him; he went toward St. Germans, accompanied by the Counts
of Harcourt, and Palaw, by the Marquesses of Ronserolles, Brevall, Plessis
Belliere, by Baron Camilliack, and by many others of good condition, who in all
might make about four hundred Horse. He staid at St. Germans, and sent speedily
to Monsieur Lion who was gone before to Haure de Grace, to negociate with the
Princes, to know what their intentions were touching agreements, and to know of
La Bar, if coming thither with orders from the Regent, he should be received,
and obeyed. But Lions negotiation proved imperfect, by reason of the novelties
which had happened at Paris, by which the Queen was compelled to send orders for
their Releasement without any manner of conditions. She also sent Count Broglio
to Tillier with a Letter, acquainting him that the Council stood firm to their
resolution of not setting the Princes at liberty, till that acknowledging their
obligation only from her, they might have no occasion to reconcile themselves
with the Frondeurs, but neither did this hit; for one of the Lords of the Privy
Council acquainted Chasteauneuf, that the Cardinal had concealed that the
Princes should be set at liberty by none but him. This man, though he were then
an open Enemy to Conde, did notwithstanding consent to his liberty, so to
sweeten him, and to let him see that he had forgot all former injuries:
wherefore it being given out that Mazarine was gone to free the Princes; their
Enemies fell to consider what prejudice might redound to them, if Conde should
come out merely by means of the Cardinal: wherefore that they might prevent
him, they began with great ardor to procure his liberty. And Chasteauneuf
caused President Perault, a great friend of Conde's, to be let loose out of the
Bastile, without order from the Queen; but howsoever the Cardinal went to Haure
de Grace, with firm intention, either to agree all things with the Princes, or
else to keep them still in Prison; and here he was aware of the falsehood of
many who appeared to be his friends: and how he had done ill in not making
their Majesty's go from Paris before he went away.

When it was known for certain that he was gone, many friends of his went after
him, causing a noise in the Streets, which began in Madamoselles House: whose
Servants going out armed into the Streets, stopped all passengers, as well
Gentlemen, as others, whom the common people carried before her; and she making
them be detained Prisoners, gave order with a man-like readiness, that all
passages should be blockt up, suspecting that the King and Queen would also be
gone. One of those that were stopped was Monsieur d' Estardes, the Governor of
Dunkirk, a man of great loyalty toward the King, who was soon released by the
Duke of Orleans; the noise of their Majesty's departure still continuing, they
suddenly took up arms. Beaufort, Count Tavannes, Monsieur di Chambois, and a
great many other Gentlemen, got on Horse back, and ran in have about the
Palace-Royal; and the aim of some of the most seditious, being to take the King
from the Queen, and carry him to Pallazzo della litta, the City Town house.
They made it be given out that the Queen was about to go out of Paris, and to
carry the King along with her; which made the people so jealous, as being stark
mad, they armed all the ends of the Streets which led to the Palace-Royal,
making also some Baracadoes: and this rumor being in a moment spread throughout
all Paris, the commotion was great, and the Frondeurs manifested their hatred
against the Cardinal with unheard of noise, more than before. The next morning,
every one being surprised with this the Cardinals so unexpected departure, the
Parliament met, and ordered that humble thanks should be returned to the Queen,
and that she should be again desired to give order for the Princes liberty: and
hereunto they added a desire that she would make a Declaration, whereby all
Forrainers should for the future be excluded from the Kings Counsel, and all
those of the Nation who had taken any Oath, to any other Prince, than the King.

After Dinner the Queen sent the Guard de Seaux, Marishal Villeroy, and
Secretary Tillier to entreat the Duke of Orleans to come to Council: but he by
the Coadjutor's Council, refused to come; saying, he could not do it with
safety till the Princes were at liberty, the Queen did again under her own
handwriting, desire him to come: but he stood firm upon the negative, replying
that he would not come, till according to his word, the Princes were set at
liberty; and that there was no safety for him there till the Cardinal were gone
further off; nor could he be induced to please the Queen, though those Lords
offered themselves to remain Hostages, if he doubted the safety of his person.
The Parliament Commissioners came to her Majesty to thank her for the Cardinals
departure, and to desire her that she would send away her Letters to Haure de
Grace; to which she answered, that she was fully resolved to take all necessary
order for the Princes freedom; but that shemust first speak with the Duke of
Orleans, for there were some particulars concerning their imprisonment, which
were not to be communicated to all. That she had offered to go to L' Hostelle
d' Orleans, or to any neutral place, as to the Queen of England's Court, if the
Duke would speak with her touching this affair, not thinking that he would
refuse to come and take his place in Council, after she had satisfied him in
the Cardinals departure, that if Orleans refused to communicate his opinion to
her, she should be obliged to call the great ones of the Kingdom together, to
advise with them of what was to be done, and that she could say no more till
she had assembled her Council.

The next day the Parliament met, where the first President reported what the
Queen had said; whereupon Orleans said, It was not at all necessary that he
should go to the Court to speak his opinion, for he would never say, but what
he had already often said, and which he did now again affirm, that he was ready
to set his hand to the releasing of the Princes, and to the sending of the
Cardinal out of the Kingdom. That the Queen jested, when she said, that she had
sent him away; for she had only made him change his habitation, going from her
Palace at Paris, to that of St. Germans, where he still played the part of chief
Minister of State, writ Letters, gave Council, and had ordered employment as
well since he was gone, as he did before; that when the Princes were
imprisoned, their Mothers Children, Kindred, Friends, and all that depended on
them were sent out of Paris. But when the Cardinal was sent away, with a report
that he was not to return, yet his Nephew Mancini, and his Nieces staid still
at Court, and complained to the King of their Uncles departure: whence it was
easily to be perceived that the Queen had not suffered him to depart, but that
she intended he should return; and that she dreamed of nothing less, than of
the Princes liberty. This being said, the decree was almost resolved upon,
which was made the next day. Several opinions being given, many were for the
issuing out of a Decree against the Cardinal, his Fautorers, and Adherents, and
against all those that were gone out with him. But Orleans said there was no
reason to punish his friends for accompanying him since they had therein
behaved themselves honorably; others moved to set a brand upon his house, by
declaring him a Perturber of the public peace. Monsieur Lands Payen, said a
man could not serve two Masters, reflecting upon some of the Members, who
seemed to be for the Parliament, and yet served the Court; he added that all
Cardinals should be forbidden all employments in State Affairs; as those who by
their Dignities are sworn to serve the Pope, and by being State-Ministers, are
sworn to serve the King; that they could not serve the one without being false
unto the other: there were some who spoke against having any more Favorites in
France; to which the Duke of Orleans replied, we are all of us the Kings
Subjects, and though I be in a very eminent degree, yet I am one as all you
are: we must not give Laws to our Sovereigns, nor force their inclinations, by
inhibiting them to love one Subject more than another; it were I must confess
(said he) to be desired, that Kings would never have any Favorite; but they are
not to forbid it.

At last the Duke not thinking it sit to make such have, his opinion prevailed,
and it was decreed that their Majesty's should be desired to give order for the
disimprisonment of the Princes, and that they should declare their intentions,
touching sending the Cardinal out of the Kingdom; and here it was observed, he
answered those with much moderation, who were too violent in their opinions.

The same day the Queen assembled together all the chief Lords of France who
were of her party, whereof there were two bodies composed: the one of Princes,
Dukes, and Peers; as the Dukes of Vandosme, Mercure, d' Elbeufe with their
Sons; Count Harcourt, the Dukes of Espernoun, and of Candalle. The other of the
Marishals d' Estree, di L' Hospitalle, Villeroy, Plessis Pralin, d' Aumont, d'
Estampes, d' Oquincourt, and Grance, who being told what had past, it was
resolved that Vandosme, Espernoun, and d' Elbeuse, should go and desire Orleans
to come to Council. D' Elbeuse delivered the message, who said that his
Highness might come with all safety to the Court, offering himself to be an
Hostage for him; the Duke replied, that d' Elbeuse should rather hold his peace
than speak, that it was a pleasant thing to observe, that when he was for the
Cardinal, d' Elbeuse was for the Parliament, and that now that he had declared
for the Parliament, d' Elbeuse was for Mazarine; which argued his continual
aversness to him, though d' Elbeuse had had many obligations to him. The
Duchess told him she was sorry that he was of the house of Lorrain, and
Orleans after having used many sharp speeches, told Vandosme, and Espernoun,
that he could not go to Court, without bringing the Princes with him. They then
returned all to Court; whither being gone late that Evening with the rest of
the King's people to acquaint the Queen with what had been decreed, and to know
her Majesty's pleasure, touching the sending of the Cardinal away; she
answered, That she was fully resolved to release the Princes: but that she had
somewhat to say to the Duke of Orleans, to which purpose she had desired to
speak with him; and that seeing he was full of Jealousies without cause, she
offered to send the Guard de Seaux, to confer with him, how they were to
proceed in the disimprisoning of the Princes: that if he would not treat with
the Guard de Seaux, she did not refuse to admit of those that were the Princes
Friends into the conference: that for what concerned the Cardinal, he was gone
without any hopes of returning, and that she did not know truly whither he
meant to go, he himself not being resolved upon it; for he could not return to
Rome, till there were a good understanding between him and the present Pope.
The Cardinal having afterward written to the Queen, that he thought it fit his
Nephew and his Nieces should go out of Paris, and this being granted, his
Nephew went out incognue, with the Abbate of Palaw, on the seventh day; as did
also his three Nieces the next Evening, by the means of Abbate Vndedey, who
taking them out of the Palace, and concealing them that night in a friends
house of his, they went afterward out of the City in a Coach with two Horses,
as Citizens; and that being come to St. Denis, where they were waited for, they
got into a Coach with six Horses, and being well attended, went toward Peroun,
whether by appointment the Marishal of Oquincourt's Lady was gone the day
before, who staid half way to meet them, and to bring them into that place,
whereof the Marishal her Husband was Governor, who had renounced Beaufort's
friendship, and embraced the Cardinals, proving himself therein truly grateful.

The Parliament being met the next day, they were acquainted with the Queens
answer. Orleans accepted of the Conference with the Guard de Seaux; and told
the Assembly, That he would assuredly treat that day touching the Princes
liberty; and that they should not be two hours together, before all necessary
orders, and expedition should be taken in it; as also touching the Declaration
of their Innocence, and that other against all Foreigners: so as the
Parliament resolved to trust the Duke with what concerned the Princes liberty.

And the Queen having told the King's people, that the Cardinal was gone
without any hopes of returning, the decree was unanimously made against him,
with order that it should be Printed, and sent to all the other Parliaments of
the Kingdom, and that the Chambers should keep together till the arrival of the
Princes. The Decree was, that within fifteen days he and all his Kindred and
Foreign Domestics, should be gone out of the Kingdom, and out of all other
parts within the King's obedience: which time being expired, the disobedient
should be extraordinarily proceeded against; and that it should be lawful for
all men to fall upon them, and inhibiting all men to receive them.

This decree was approved by almost all the other Parliaments of France, who
decreed the same. All this while the Baracadoes were kept up, and stricter
guard than ever was kept about the Court, and every night Duke Beaufort went on
one side, Count Tavanes on another, and Monsieur de Chambois on the third, with
Troops of armed men to clear the Streets: in so much as on the ninth of
February the Inhabitants of Rue St. Honor hearing the noise of Horses passing
to and fro, came out, and finding some Sentinels advanced to the Croix de
Tiroire they thought (according as it was cunningly given out) that there was a
design to convey the King out of Paris, and the Duke of Orleans hearing it,
sent Souches, the Captain of his guard presently to Court, where he found the
Queen in Bed, and the King asleep, which appeased the tumult, whereupon the
first President said the next day in Parliament, That it was an unsufferable
thing that they should proceed with such licentiousness against their Majesty's
to whom they ought to bear respect and Reverence. But the news of the King's
being gone, being dispersed throughout all the City, many did believe it, and
ran in such multitudes to the Palace-Royal, as the King was forced to show
himself twice or thrice at the window, whereupon the people cried, Long live
the King, and a fig for Mazarine. After Dinner the Queen sent the guard de
Seaux, and Marishal Villeroy, again to desire Orleans to come to Court; who
(the Queen having given him all satisfaction by sending her Letters to deliver
the Princes out of Prison) said he would come the next day; and that his wife
should first go visit their Majesty's. And that Evening the Queen sent for the
Provost de Merchants, and the Sheriffs, and told them how unfortunate she was,
that it should be thought she would carry the King out of Paris, to free them
from the fear whereof, she was content that Guards of good Citizens should be
set at the City gates; but notwithstanding all this, strange outrages were
committed against the Duke of Espernoun, Count Harcourt, and many others of the
Court party by the common people.

The next morning Monsieur Vrliere went to Haure de Grace, with Letters and
expeditions for the delivery of the Princes, without any whatsoever condition:
with him went Monsieur de Comminges to complement the Princes on the Queens
behalf; the Duke of Rochfaucolt, and Monsieur Arnault to do the like on the
behalf of the Duke and Duchess of Orleans; President Viola in name of the
Parliament, and Monsieur Champlastrux, as a servant and friend of Conde's, to
the people great satisfaction.

Orleans, according to his word given to the Queen the day before, went to
visit the Queen, with whom some usual complements being past, he staid not
long. The Cardinal being come this mean while to Haure de Grace, was met two
leagues on the way by Monsieur Lion, by whom he was informed of what he had
done before his entry, he sent the Horse that did accompany him to Harfleur,
and he came in with only his Guard and family. He was welcomed with the going
off of all the Guns, and by all the Inhabitants in their Arms from the gate to
the Citadell, at the entrance whereof he was met by Marishal Grammont, and
Monsieur Bar, who knowing now that he could not detain the Princes any longer,
resolved to be himself the first that should acquaint the Princes with their
liberty. Then the Cardinal after some short consultation had with Grammont,
Lion, Goulas, and Bar, went into the Princes lodgings, and addressing himself
with a cheerful countenance to the Prince, said thus. I bring your Highness
orders from the Queen for your own liberty, the liberty of your Brother, and
Brother in law, freely without any condition; yet her Majesty desires you to
love the State, the King, her, and also me: which being said, he bowed
affectionately toward him, not forgetting his degree.

The Prince, with a gladsome, but Majestical countenance, answered, I am
obliged to her Majesty for Justice, I will serve the King, the Queen, (and
embracing the Cardinal) and you also, said he. The Cardinal replied, The Gates
are open, I beseech you go presently forth: The Prince of County, and Duke
Longueville would have gone out immediately; But Conde seeming to be in no
have, called for Dinner, and so without any manner of Ceremony, the three
Princes, the Cardinal, Grammont, Paluau, Lion and Goulas set down at the Table,
and did eat with the same Domestickness, ^s if they had always been good
friends; Dinner being ended whilst order was taking for their departure, some
discourse past apart between the Prince and Cardinal, which what it was, is not
known: from the Chamber they came into the Courtyard; where they got into
Grammont's Coach, Lion staying behind to receive orders from the Cardinal
touching what the Queen was to do in his concernments; Conde was the last that
stepped into the Coach, whom when the Cardinal bad farewell, he not answering any
thing, neither by action, nor word, bad the Coachman drive on. The Cardinal
wondered much, not finding this answerable to the civilities he had received in
the Chamber, and found what he was to trust to from him, who had showed such
inconstancy in so short a time; he was notwithstanding comforted to think, that
if this mutability should continue, they might also alter their minds who were
his Enemies, and might rely more upon him, as indeed many did, as shall in due
time be said.

The Princes lay that night at Gromeny, four leagues from Haure, whither that
very night came Rochfaucolt, Vrliere, Viola, and Arnault, who knew not as yet
that they were delivered. They supped altogether; Co^de jested sometime with
one, sometimes with another of them, very merrily, according to his custom,
mingling mirth with seriousness in his discourse. He writ from thence to
Monsieur Croisy, to assure the Duke of Orleans, that he was not entered into any
Treaty with the Court, and that he ought all his obligation to him, desiring to
know how he was to behave himself when he should be at Paris, touching his
presenting himself first to the Queen, or to the Duke, from whom he did
acknowledge all his obligation. Croisy did as he was desired, and talked of the
rest with the Coadjutor, who found as a medium, that Orleans should meet the
Prince, and carry him to the Queen.

They went the next day from Gromeny to Roan, where they pressed the Parliament
to make the same decree against the Cardinal, as the Parliament of Paris had
done, saying, That they were charged so to do by the Duke of Orleans. From Roan
they came to Magny, and so to Pontoise, where they found many of the Court
Coaches ready to receive them, and it being divulged amongst the people, that
Conde had bound himself to renew his friendship with the Cardinal, the opinion
vanished in a moment, when they heard from the Prince his own mouth, how small
account he had made of him, and of the conditions which he had offered him.

As they came to St. Denis, Monsieur de Guiraut complemented them from the
Queen, and from that Town to Paris the whole fields were covered with Coaches,
Horses, and with a multitude of people, with extraordinary applause and
Jubilee. Orleans, Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all the other great ones met
them at the Croix Penchant, where lighting out of their Coaches, they
complemented them. The Prince at the entering of Fort St. Denis, caused his
Coach to stay, and gave the Soldiers fifty Pistolets; from thence they went to
the Palace-Royal, paid their respects to the King and Queen, thanked them for
their liberty, and tarried with them about a quarter of an hour, discoursing of
things indifferent. They then went to visit the Duke of Nemeurs, who was sick,
and so went to L' Hostelle de Orleans, where they were expected at Supper;
diverse Princes and Cavaliers sat down with them, where in their Cups they
forbear not to speak dispitefully against the Cardinal, the Prince drunk the
Duke of Orlean's health, and a fig for the Cardinal, they all pledged it in the
same terms, except Grammont, and Arville, who drunk Orleans his health, but
would not say those other words touching the Cardinal. After Supper Conde went
to visit the Princess Palatine, professing much obligation to her, ^or what she
had done for him; the next day, being the 17 th. of February, they went to
Parliament to witness their acknowledgments; where they were brought in by
Orleans with great Retinue, and applause, professing their obligations to their
Majesty's, to his Highness, and to the Parliament, professing also that they
would always serve the King, and would be governed by the Parliament. The first
President, after having declared how well the Parliament was pleased with their
liberty, spoke much in praise of the Prince, showing what prejudice had been
suffered by his detention; and here some desired that a declaration might be
made of his innocence, and of all theirs that had adhered to him.

But to return to the affairs of Normandy, those who were of the Prince his
party, were not a little troubled at the news that was given out, that the
Cardinal was gone to Haure, to secure himself yet better, and that the Queen
sought all means to be in safety out of Paris. And the Frondeurs growing still
more wavering, being still bent to bring affairs to some extremity, strove to
raise sedition in the City, under color whereof they might leg^timate their
pretense to remove the Queen from her Regency, chose a new Council for the
King, and that they might take the Government of the Kingdom upon themselves;
but were it either out of Gods goodness, or the innate goodness of Orleans and
Conde, who were against too violent Revolutions, all such attempts were still
kept back, leaving the Government to the Queen, and continuing the Kings
Council in their places, in peaceful manner.

The Cardinal went from Haure with about One hundred Horse, and with some of
his friends, marching in long, cold, dark nights, till he came into Picardy,
where he was received civilly by all, but by the Town of Abeville, where he was
forced to pass over the Some in small Boats, which were there by chance; and
being past over, he came to Dorlans, (a strong Town between Amiens, and Arras)
accompanied by Bar, the Governor thereof, where he staid a while, considering
how he might take his journey with most safety, for there was danger in passing
those Frontiers without a pass, which made the Queen write to him, to be gone
speedily out of the Kingdom.

The Parliament being assembled on the 20 th. of February, the King's
Declaration was brought unto them, which contained, that no Foreigners though
naturalized, should hereafter be admitted into the Council of State: which
being read, it was added, that no Forreigner, nor French Cardinal should be
admitted into the Council, which was done not so much in respect of Cardinal
Mazarine, as to exclude the Coadjutor, who disturbed all things, that he might
be made a Cardinal, and so become first Minister of State. Beaufort, was one of
those that were the Authors of this Addition, being distasted with the
Coadjutor, for having concealed from him the negotiations which he secretly
held with other confederates. And the Princes friends insisting still to have
them declared innocent; the Queen being willing to please them, was content
that such a Declaration should be made, the contents whereof were; That the
King growing apprehensive of the Princes their actions, by information had from
several parts was forced for the good of his State to secure them, that time
which matures all things, and brings the truth out at last, had made him know
their innocence, and how the Crown was prejudiced by their imprisonment; that
therefore in an affair of such importance, and in respect of the Parliaments
earnest supplications, and by the advice of his Uncle the Duke of Orleans, and
others of his Council, he had resolved not only to give them their liberty, but
to take away all pretenses that might prove prejudicial to their Loyalties, he
did declare the said Princes not only innocent of all jealousies which had
wounded their Reputations; but that all Conde's actions in particular had never
tended to any thing, but to the establishment, and increase of Regal Authority,
and to the good of the Crown, whereof the King was fully satisfied annulling
all Letters, and Decrees given out against the said Princes, and restoring them
to their former places, honors, and dignities; this Declaration was verified
in Parliament on the 27 th. Printed and dispersed throughout all Europe: And
therein were also contained the Duchess of Longueville, Marishal Turenne, and
all the rest of that party. Six days after the Parliament met again, and the
Decree made against Foreigners, though naturalized, was read, with the
addition of excluding all French Cardinals from the King's Council. Orleans was
the first who spoke, being wished so to do by the Coadjutor; and said that after
this Declaration the Clergy had made a Remonstrance upon it to the King, and
that Archbishop Ambrune had told his Majesty, that of the three orders which
are in France the Ecclesiastic was the first and noblest; that no such motion
had at any time been made since France had been a Monarchy. That the Oath which
Cardinals take unto the Pope, comes after that which they take to their King
and Country; so as they were injured by being excluded the King's Council, and
in being berest of serving the State; that this exclusion would not be well
taken in Rome'^ that they had been Mazarinians that had insinuated this novelty
into the mind of some body to revenge themselves of the Parliament, by putting
discord between it and the Clergy, that when this Declaration was made, he was
present, and was against inserting that clause, foreseeing the mischief it
might occasion, by causing division between the Clergy and Parliament.

The first President said, That the French Clergy were not any ways concerned
in this, for in the decree all French Archbishops, and Bishops were excepted;
wherefore they had no reason to complain, and that the Archbishop Ambrune would
be but little praised for his Remonstrance, it being well known, who it was had
excited him to make it. Monsieur de Courtine, master of the requests, alleged
two examples to show that the Clergy ought to content themselves with their
callings, and not meddle in Court affairs. The one of Antonio Perez, who being
fled into France in the time of Henry the 4 th. was one day asked by his
Majesty, how he thought France might be best governed? he answered, by three
things; by good Council, rich Finances, and by keeping great power in Rome;
inferring that to be powerful in the Pope's Court, they must have many
Cardinals there, and that therefore they were to be kept at Rome, as not being
necessary in France. The other was the example of the late Archbishop of
Bordeaux, who going to take his leave of the Pope's Nuncio, when he went to
command the King's Fleet, the Nuncio thundered these words into his ears; You
shall not give an account of the men that shall be slain in the War which you
go to make; but of those that shall dye in your Diocese during your absence,
you shall be sure to give an account, inferring that a Pastor should have a
care of his flock. Monsieur Barin, la Galissennieve, who was also master of the
requests, spoke against the Cardinal, saying he was to be made to give an
account of his Administration of Government. President Charton said that the
Crown had suffered much by the Administration of Cardinals, and that worse was
to be expected, if they were continued in that employment.

The Resolution was put off till the next day, when much dispute being had
thereupon by the first President, it was at last decreed, that the Cardinals
should assist in their Functions in Rome, and not meddle in State' affairs, and
that her Majesty should be humbly desired to send a Declaration to the
Parliament conformable to the Decree of the 9 th. and of the 20 th. of last
February, as well against Foreigners, as against French Cardinals, that they
might not be admitted into the King's Council; and Archbishop Ambrun's
Remonstrance was much spoken against. But these discourses had no foundation,
and were totally false; for who knew not, that France did never flourish more
than when Governed by Richelieu, and Mazarine? These proposals were known to be
mere invectives, and calumnies; so as though the Decree past, it was never
executed; only a notable Decree succeeded thereupon (as you shall hear
hereafter) against Mazarine, who by the delay of Pasports which were expected
from Flanders, was forced to tarry in France; so as the Queen was forced, by
reason of the noise that was made in Parliament, to send Billinghau, and
Ravigny with new Letters to him to make have out of the Kingdom.

The Cardinal's friends, and well-wishers were so incensed with this the
Cardinals so unlooked for departure, and by his being so sorely persecuted, as
many of them did readily offer him their best assistance to make head against
his Enemies: amongst which Marishal de Hochencourt, Governor of Peroun; Count
Navailes, Governor of Beaupames, and Count Broglia, Governor of la Bassea,
did all of them offer him their strong holds and therewith their lives. And
Monsieur de Bar, Governor of Dorlans, Monsieur Mondedieu, Governor of Rue,
Monsieur de Faber Governor of Sedam, Monsieur de Montigue, Governor of
Rocroy; and Monsieur Rale, Governor of Retel; and others that were well
affected to him, offered to raise 10000. fighting men, and by means of those
chief Forts to defend him in despite of his Enemies; which might have been
done, but not without much prejudice to all France, for all assistance might
have been expected from Spain, as was already offered, the Spaniards profering
the Cardinal 100000. Crowns a year, and to reimburse to him whatsoever he
should lose in France in all his movables, and Revenues: but the Cardinal did
generously declare in public, that he would rather be a wanderer in the world,
than be at any time so much as in thought, occasion of any prejudice to that
Crown to which he ought all his fortune; and knowing what danger their
Majesty's, and all his friends would run, if he tarried longer in France, he
observed the orders exactly which he had received by these Gentlemen; and went
presently from Dorlans to Peroun, and then went with his Nephews who were
there, to la Fera, and from la Fera, to Retel; from whence he sent Count
Angusshiola of Parma, to desire Major General Rosse, to come and conduct him on
his way; but he excused it, and sent only 300. of his German Horse; from
Rethel, the Cardinal intended to go to Bovillion, a neighboring place, out of
France, in the Country of Liege, belonging to the Elector of Collen.

But the Governor was not able to receive him without orders from his Master,
he therefore went to Balduck, intending to go for Alsatia; and as he was going
to Nancy, a Messenger came to him from the Elector with ample offers not only
of Bovillion, but of his whole State; wherefore he altered his mind, and went
to Cleremont, attended, and defrai'd by the Marishal Ferte Senetre, who being
his faithful friend, met him upon the way. When he was at Cleremont, two of the
Prince of Conde's Gentlemen came with order from the King to the Marishal to
deliver up that place to them, to which he answered, that he very well knew
that those Commissions were extorted by violence from his Majesty; wherefore he
would not surrender the Fort, unless he were commanded by the Cardinal, who had
given it him in custody. The Cardinal, who was present, wished him to obey the
Kings commands; which he did. From Cleremont he went to Sedam, where he would
have staid, had he not received orders again from the Queen to be gone speedily
out of the Kingdom, which he at last did.

Many thought it was not politickly done to send so chief a Minister of State,
who was so well informed of all the affairs and secret interests of the
Kingdom, out of France, and that the Crown might receive much prejudice
thereby. Wherefore the Queen endeavored by the Princess Palatines means to
acquaint the Princes with the importancy thereof; and that she would wish them
to permit, that some safe place might be appointed to the Cardinal to live in,
in some corner of the Kingdom, but they would not be persuaded thereunto.

The Cardinal being in Bovillion, and not able to pass any further without a
Pasport from the Spaniards, he would not demand one from the Archduke, without
the Queens leave, who willingly granted it; he therefore sent Monsieur
Baiseman, Lieutenant of his Guard, to desire Count Fuenseldaglia, to procure
him one from the Archduke, which being readily granted, and also another from
the Duke of Lorrain; he was conducted by Don Antonio Pimontell, with a Regiment
of Croats, from Bovillion, to Rochfort, a Castle held by the Lorrainers; from
whence he went to Huy a City in Liege, and to Liege it self, where he was met
by the Governor, and by all the Inhabitants in Arms, with the going off of
Guns, and other demonstrations of respect. He lay that night in a Village two
leagues off; and then went to Aquisgrave, where he was visited, and
complemented by Seignior Chigi the Pope's Nuncio, and by the Lansgrave of
Darmestate, who were both afterward Cardinals, from Aquisgrave he went to
Iuliers, where he was received with as much honor, as if he had been the
Archduke, being thrice saluted with all the Guns. From Iuliers he went to
Chempen, a place belonging to the Duchess of Chevereux, where he staid and
refreshed himself; and from Chempen he came to Brales, whither the Prince
Palatine sent Count Fustenberg to Treat him like a Cardinal; he was lodged in
the Electoral Palace, well provided of all things; and two days after, the
Elector came to Bona to visit him, as did all the chief men of Cullonia, and of
the whole Country, and particularly Prince Francis of Lorrain, Bishop of
Verdune, and Brother to Duke Charles. The Cardinal went afterward to Bona, to
return the Electors visit, where he staid one night, and was sumptuously
treated; he received Letters from all the Princes of Europe, with offers of all
possible honors and conveniences. The Pope himself answered a Letter of his,
with expressions of great esteem and affection.

Upon occasion of the Cardinals being accompanied in his journey by Pimantell,
a very great confident of Count Fuesendaglia, he thought good to enter into
some project of a general peace with him, which Pimantell accepting of, as if
God had been the Author of this holy work, a treaty was by his means introduced
between the Cardinal, and Count Fuensendaglia, who received ample Authority
from Spain to continue, and conclude the business; but a meeting being
requisite to be had between them, for the agreeing of all things between the
two Crowns, without other Mediators; The Prince of Conde's sending of Marquess
Sillerey into Flanders, to establish an Union with that Crown, did discompose
all things; for the Court of Spain, building great hopes upon the troubles of
France, and upon the Reputation which Conde had won in Arms. Fuenseldaglia's
order was revoked, nay he was forbidden to hold any correspondency with the
Cardinal, to avoid giving jealousy to Conde's party, which was well minded to
join with the Spanish faction: but before the Cardinal went from Dorlans, after
having received orders from the Queen by Belingau, and Ravigny, he writ a
Letter to her Majesty of these contents.

Madame,
HAving seen the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to honor me with all,
and heard what Monsieur Ravigny delivered me from your Majesty by word of
mouth, touching what concerns your Majesty's service, to wit, that together
with my departure from Court, I be speedily gone out of the Kingdom, I have
willingly obeyed your pleasure, whose commands shall always be the only law and
rule of my life. I have sent a Gentleman to find me out some Sanctuary, though
I want all necessaries for a long journey; To morrow without all fail, I will
go toward Sedam, and from thence to any place, I can get, for my abode. I am
so much bound to observe your Majesty's orders, as I will not give way to
retard the willing obeying of them; yet Madame, there are many, who were they
in my condition, and had they justice, and number of friends that I have, would
find ways to defend themselves from the persecution which I undergo; and
whereon I will not think, chosing rather to content mine Enemies, than do any
thing that may prove prejudicial to the State, or displeasing to your Majesty;
and though upon this occasion they have been able to keep his Royal Highness,
from seconding the motions of his innate goodness; they have notwithstanding
witnessed unto him, (though contrary to their wills) the good opinion which he
is forced to have of my entire obedience, as also of my zeal for the good of
the State. For did they not know that I were not to be removed from this sense,
they would not have been so unwise, as to reduce me to these extremes, without
reflecting upon the knowledge that I have of the secret and most important
affairs of the Kingdom, whereof I have by your Majesty's favor, had the
Government so long; and have served you faithfully, as is known to all the
world. But Madame, I am too much obliged to your Majesty's goodness, to dream
of any thing contrary to your liking; and would the sacrificing of my life give
you the least satisfaction, I would readily do it; and I do protest, that I am
very well satisfied, when I shall know, that in this my misfortune your Majesty
will be pleased to remember what service I have done the State, after the late
King of glorious Memory, was pleased to honor me, and to trust me with
directing all things, and did often before his death, desire your Majesty, to
keep me in the same employment: with what integrity, zeal, and unconcernment to
my self I have discharged it, your Majesty knows; and (if I may be permitted to
say so) with what good success: for the wisest, and even the Spaniards
themselves do confess, that they do less wonder at the conquests made by your
Majesty's Armies in the first five years of your Regency, than to see how you
have been able for these three last years to manage affairs, and to save the
Ship from Shipwreck, which has been played upon from so many parts; and
agitated by the storms of home divisions. I wish Madame, that I could conceal
from strangers the ill dealing which I receive for fencing off the blame from a
Nation, which I have always loved, and reverenced. But when they shall see me
go to seek, whither I may retire to live in safety, with those that are nearest
unto me, they will have too much reason to wonder to see a Cardinal so treated,
who has the honor to be the King's Godfather, and that two and twenty years
of faithful service have not been able to procure a safe place to retire unto
in this Kingdom, whose confines the world knows are much increased by his
means. I beseech God, Madame, that as what has befaln me, shall never alter
the passion which I shall preserve till death for the Grandezza of your
Majesty, and for the flourishing of your State; it may also make all disorders
cease, making it appear that those who have declared against me, have done it
only against my person.


Having written this Letter, and being come to Bovillion, where he received new
orders to go further from the confines of the Kingdom, he thought fit to write
another Letter to Count Brien, the first Secretary of State, wherein many
things being touched upon, which may give more light to what is here treated
on, I hope it will not prove tedious to relate them.

I send you an answer to the Letters written unto me by her Majesty; I should
have been some days ago upon the Rhine, had I been the only guilty party: but
my nearest Relations being likewise involved in my faults, and sentenced to be
sent out of the Kingdom; I could not possibly be more diligent, since I was to
carry them with me; and to cross an Enemies Country full of Armed men, without
a Pasport. I am very much perplexed in performing the orders which are sent me;
since I cannot imagine, that their Majesty's intend that I should expose my
self to apparent danger of either being slain, or taken Prisoner, as I am told
for certain, his intention is, who boasts amongst those of his party, to have
framed the decrees against me, before they came into Parliament, and that he
had sufficient means to make the Court acquiesce therein. For I may easily
conceive, what his intentions are touching the State and me, after his
punctuality in seducing a Colleague of his to imbrangle the Parliament,
Nobility, Clergy, and People, and to bring all to ruin, unless he were chosen
Cardinal. And I very well see, how he labors incessantly to cause orders be
given me, and at the same time to keep me from obeying them; that so he may
have a pretense to raise a hubbub in Paris, and to compass his ends, by my
utter ruin. If this could be any way advantageous or acceptable to the King or
Queen, I would concur therein with all my heart: But I must then have known it,
for being given to their Majesty's, I cannot dispose of my self otherwise, than
as they shall command me; it was their pleasure that I should go from Court,
and out of the Kingdom, together with all my nearest Relations, and Domestics,
and that at the same time I should be brought to the common Goal at Paris. Now
that I am out of France, they will have me go yet further, and at the same time
they lay traps and ambushes to hinder me. I desired to be conducted to
Charleville, and Mesieres, but was denied. I must not go into the King of
Spain's Dominions, and they have requested several Princes not to suffer me to
come into their States. They leave nothing undone at Rome to incense the Pope
against me. Seven of the Duke of Lorrain' s Regiments are come within four
leagues of this place, and lie upon the way that I am to go for Germany.
Marishal Turen sent some Horse out against me, when I went from Retel; and two
days after he sent 100. Horse to sack a village, but one league from hence: who
after having taken all things from me, and evilly entreated the Master of the
Place, they dispersed abroad great store of Tickets, wherein was contained,
that if Cardinal Mazarine should be received into any Towns in the Country of
Liege, those Towns should be plundered, as you may see by one of the Tickets,
which I herewith send you. I do very much wonder that one whom I have served so
much, and whom I have so tenderly loved, and so highly esteemed, should so much
insult over me in my present condition. I must believe my persecutors think me
some body, since they leave nothing undone to ruin me; whilst they are so much
troubled about me; but I promise you, if they saw how I bear all this, it would
lessen their delight in persecuting me: for having always served the King well,
and faithfully, as all men know, I am at peace within, my conscience not
upbraiding me with any thing that I have done amiss. And could my desire of the
good and welfare of the State be greater than it is, it should be so much the
greater by how much greater my troubles are: never was any man of my condition
treated as I have been; But thereby they afford me matter of consolation,
knowing that it is interest, and not justice that prevails with them: they have
robbed me of all, as well of what I had got in serving the late King, as of all
the best and most curious things which I brought from Rome, which as all men
know, I intended to bequeath to Paris, as I had bequeathed my self to France;
Of all the favors I have received from his Majesty, they have left me nothing
but the Cardinals Cap, which his Majesty procured me after twelve years
service; wherein he has experienced my Loyalty, and my zeal. I was the means
of taking many places which are now under the Dominion of this Crown, and as
the King has said often, whilst he was alive; I contributed boldly to the
glory won by his Armies in Italy, particularly at Casal, where without loss of
one drop of blood they gave the Law; I ended the negotiation of Pinarolle; by
my means, the Princes of Savoy Mauritius, and Thomaso, did the second time
forgo the Catholic King's party, whereby many Towns in Piemont were gotten
from the Spaniards, at which being highly distasted, they did always afterward
oppose my promotion, which I had deserved as well as any other, for my service
done to the Holy Church. I was the cause that Sedam, and many other Towns fell
into the King of France his hand, as is well k^own to all the World.

I conjure you to desire their Majesty's from me, that they will procure from
Rome, that the Cardinals Cardinals Cap may be taken from me, and that it may be
bestowed upon some more deserving person, who may serve them better; and I
shall be very well pleased, when after being berest of all, I shall in my heart
bear more affection to their service than ever. I beg but one only favor of
them, which is, that they will be just to me in the preservation of my honor:
which they ought not suffer to be questioned by my Enemies, since it is
apparent, that the preservation, and increase thereof has been that which I
have only aimed at during the course of my whole life. If any persecutors have
reason to punish me, methinks they should do it by the usual course of Law, and
not by unpractised violence: I hear of no accusers; and yet they have begun
with me by a sentence; and have done by me as we hear in holy Scriptures, that
God had wont to do (but with infallible wisdom) punish whole Families for the
sins of their Forefathers. After they have punished me, no fault appearing:
they have left nothing untried to make the meaner sort of people believe, there
lives not a worse man than I; you know whether it was I that hindered the
conclusion of the general peace; and with what sincerity the Duke of
Longueville has always spoken therein, though he was not then bound to defend
me, and how often after his return from Munster, he has said in Council, that
he could never find what it was the Spaniards would be at.

You know also, that the Plenipotentiaries did not extend their power so far as
they might, to make peace; and that in their Letters they alleged reasons
which diverted them from doing otherwise; amongst which one was, that the
result of making peace, would be to manifest their own weakness, without doing
any good. The Spanish- agents being bent to spin on the business with France,
that they might draw on the conclusion of peace with Holland; believing that
being free from War on that side, they might the more easily turn all their
forces against France.

You may remember that when it was known the Holland- Agents had power to make
peace with Spain, without France, they used all possible diligence, that it
might be jointly done, and therefore resolved to sweeten all points that the
Spaniards stuck upon. You may also remember that it was then held fit, to have
extraordinary Councils, which were held in L' Hostelle de Orleans, and
sometimes in my House by his Highness orders, wherein the dispatches of Munster
were read, the points examined, and answers resolved upon, which being done,
they were again read over in Council, to see whether there were any thing to be
amended, added, or diminished: every one striving to do or say something which
might contribute to the perfecting of so good a work: but all this diligence
did nothing; and Pignoranda made known what his orders were: for when he had
concluded with the Hollanders, he was never at quiet till he was retired from
Munster, to avoid being pressed by the Mediators, to accommodation with this
Crown.

I had not only been persidious, but out of my wits, if I had not done what in
me lay to make peace; for the Kingdom being thus quieted, I should not only
have shared of the good which this peace would have produced; but should have
purchased much glory, and thanks. Those who to render me odious to the people,
labored to make it seem that it was I who did impede peace, know the contrary;
and there needs no more to make their malice notorious to the whole world, than
the knowledge of all the dispatches sent to Munster, the particular Letters
written to the Duke of Longueville, Monsieur de Avaux and to Count Servient,
and what answers they received.

These bad minded Critics were apt to backbite, and to puzzle all that could
be done in the Assembly: and much more if peace had been concluded, as they
were then afraid it would be; for I remember they began already to give out,
that too much was yielded unto, and that the Queen who was Sister to the
Catholic Catholic King, and I a forreigner, would content the Spaniards at
the loss of France. But whatsoever their intentions were therein, they should
not have consented to the laying down of Arms then, when they were so
successfully employed against an Enemy, who whatsoever agreement should have
been made, would never have been reconciled to this Kingdom, for getting free
from the bad condition he was in, he would have so ordered his affairs, as to
re-commence War, when he might do it upon best advantage.

Nor will it be doubted but that their malice extended further, if reflection
be had upon what they said against the peace of Germany, though the Spaniards
made it sufficiently appear by their being displeased therewith, how much they
were prejudiced thereby, and left no stone unturned, but used all their power
and industry at Vienna, and elsewhere, to hinder the conclusion thereof.

They valued not the acquisition of so goodly, large and opulent a Country as
Alsatia, and of two so important places upon the Rhine, as Brisack, and
Philispburg, nor the having reunited the three Bishoprics to the Crown, with
all that belonged thereunto, which had been formerly the occasion of bloody
Wars.

It may be seen by the instructions given to the Plenipotentiaries by Cardinal
Richlieu, in the late King's time, whereof I have the original, if there were
any pretention of getting any footing in Germany.

Finally, my Censurers, and those that do their worst, and make the greatest
noise, have by their contentions diverted the Spaniards from applying
themselves to peace, and they will notwithstanding have me to be the occasion
thereof. Let me tell you, that to confirm this unto you, and to let you know,
that these are the same tricks used to the same ends, with the same pretense
that they practiced not long since against me, and against the State, as they
did three years since. Briefly I make it manifest unto you, that they had
prepared all things necessary to make me sure and to break my neck, whatsoever
had insued on my last voyage to Champagnia, their design being to reduce me to
nothing. After the Prince of Conde' s imprisonment, it is evident what means
they used to put that Prince into a place where they might dispose of him as
they lifted.

Then descending to the particulars of the relief of Guise, when besieged by
the Spaniards, to the recovery of Retell, and to the winning of the Battle
against Turenne, he ended his Letter, and dated it the 24 th. of Februaoy, 1651.

When this Letter was read in the Privy Council, there were few who were not
sensible of so manifest an injury done unto him, who had never offended any,
and who was naturally given to be civil, and courteous; but they durst not show
it outwardly, it being too dangerous to appear a friend to him; so as his
Enemies might without any opposition, reduce things to what pass they pleased.
And as the Parliament was forced to proceed reservedly, and finally to moderate
the addition of the decree made for excluding French Cardinals from the Privy
Council, by reason of the exceptions taken thereunto by the Coadjutor, and the
Clergy, and backed by the Duke of Orleans; so the Cardinal being destitute of
all support, or assistance, and his friends turning with his fortune, remained
a Butt to be shot at by all his enviers, and a new decree was made against him
on the Eleventh of March, containing that the other decrees made against him on
the seventh, ninth, and twentieth of February last, and of the second of this
present March, should be punctually put in execution: that himself, Allies, and
Domestics, should be immediately proceed against, as well for not having
obeyed the aforesaid decrees, as for the reprisals, (which they said were made
by his consent) of Foreign Vessels, the squandring away of the Finances, the
conveying of moneys out of the Kingdom, the hindrance given to the conclusion
of the general peace; and for having given bad Council to the King. That
therefore, all his goods, as well moveable, as immovable, should be
confiscated, that process should be made against all those who had followed,
assisted, or received him, or that had held correspondency with him by Letters,
or otherwise after the time prefixed by the aforesaid decrees; and besides the
two Deputies who were chosen to make inquiry into his ways; who were the
Counselors Brussels, and Munieres, the Counselors Birault, and Pithou, were
also charged to proceed to the drawing up of the said Information; and they
were to go to Dorlans, or whithersoever else it was requisite to make process:
it was also ordered that all the Commonalty, and Officers of the Kingdom,
should bring him to justice either alive or dead; and that whosoever should
know, where any part of his Estate should be concealed, they should make it
known upon pain of grievous punishment and this severe and unaccustomed decree,
was not only Printed, and posted up upon all public places; but was not
without much scandal, approved of by all the Churchmen of Paris; who instead
of opposing it, in defense of Ecclesiastical indemnity, against Decrees
unjustly made by Laymen against a Cardinal of the holy Church, did not only
suffer so important a prejudice to have its course, but did lend their helping
hand unto it, permitting that the Official of the Archbishop of Paris should
give out a writ of Excommunication, against all such who knowing where any of
the Cardinals Goods were, should not bring them in to the Parliament
Commissioners: and because their conscience struck them for being Authors of so
detestable an act, they durst not name him in their Writ, but past it in the
name of quidem homo: a thing which certainly deserved to be severely censured,
if somewhat were not to be permitted to the misfortune of those times, which
wrought such strange emergencies in all places, and especially in France. But
nothing was effected either by this process, or by any of these Decrees; for
whatsoever diligence was made, nothing was found: so as that Ship cannot be
said to be a tall Ship, which has not endured some great storm; so could not
the Cardinal have purchased full glory, but by the oppositions and persecutions
of his Enemies; nor could it be better evidenced how great a friend the Heavens
are to Innocence and Piety, than by the dangers which the Queen ran, which
according to humane capacity, were unevitable; whilst the Coadjutor laboring
that the Regency might be taken away from her, (which peradventure might have
been the best advice which could have been taken for the interest of that
party) the Duke of Orleans, the Princes, and the Parliament, opposed it; not
thinking of what might happen; but contenting themselves with the bare
superficies of present affairs; left if they should take the Government upon
them, which could not be done without jealousies amongst themselves, and in the
Parliament it self, which was desirous to enlarge its Authority, which being
usurped, must needs have been to the prejudice of the Princes, whose Maxim it
was to keep the Court weak, and flexible to their pretentions; but not to
increase the power of Parliaments; which was the reason why they abstained from
all violence, and meddled not with the Government: not forbearing
notwithstanding to bereave the Queen, as much as in them lay, of her
faithfullest servants, that they might place their friends and confidents about
her; which though it were foreseen by her and her State-Officers, yet they
suffered that cloud to discharge it self upon the Cardinal, and they instead of
giving themselves over to the contrary party; did stoutly maintain Regal
greatness, so to find out means how to bring the Cardinal back; so the
remainder of that year past on, as shall be by degrees related.

4 The Spaniards in Flanders were this mean while intent upon what the issues
of the Novelties which were budding forth in France would be: upon which other
considerable consequences for them did depend. They sent to the Duchess of
Longueville, and to Marishal Turenne in Steney to mind them of the agreement
made between them, never to separate till the Princes were set at liberty, and
the peace between the two Crowns were concluded. They answered, that they would
go to Paris, to cooperate therein as much as they could; and that if the
Spaniards should not be content, and that their Mediation should do no good,
they would return again to Steney, and make good their promise, where with all
were fully satisfied; whereupon the Duchess went from Steney, and sent
Monsieur Sarasine Secretary to the Prince of County, to Brussels, to thank the
Archduke and Count Fuensaldaglia, to assure them that when they should be at
Paris, they would endeavor the perfecting of the treaty by which the Princes
after their disimprisonment had obliged themselves to continue the War, till
such time as peace were concluded between the two Crowns.

The Duchess came to Paris on the 15 th. of March, with great applause of the
People, and was met without the City by the Princes her Brothers, by her
Husband, and by a great many Lords and Ladies; and this the rather, because her
coming brought with it some appearance of a general peace, which the people did
very much desire; so as if her departure from Paris were cause of great
disorder, her return was no less noble and glorious.

The Gates of Paris were still guarded as before, with Armed Citizens; for they
still suspected the Queen would carry away the King; and now the Court, nor L'
Hostelle de Orleans were no more frequented with visits, but Conde's house, and
Longuevilles, the famousest Warriers flocking to the one, and all the Ladies to
the other: the Prince of Conde, and his Sister Longueville, might have then
become Arbitrators of the Kingdom, if actually keeping that inclination to
peace, as they seemed by their words to do, they had made use of the favorable
conjuncture of time; for they coveted nothing more than reality in proceeding
of the Treaty of peace; nor was there any that doubted the truth of their
desires, for the Duchess of Longueville sent away Monsieur Croisy to Steney
with power from the Court, to conclude peace, or a general Truce. This treaty
was so carried on, as though neither the Spaniards, nor the Princes faction did
really desire it, it afforded Turenne a fair pretense to withdraw from the
Spaniards employment, so as that Orleans (as shall be hereafter related) being
afterward offended by the innovations of Paris, for the permission given by
the Council to the Marquess of Chasteauneuf; the Flanders Agents thought it now
a fit time to listen to the proposals of peace, made by Croisy. For the whole
negotiation was reduced to a particular conference between the Duke of Orleans,
and the Archduke, without the intervening of Mediators; and it being believed
that the Queen would not trust the Duke of Orleans with such a negotiation, the
Archduke made his good intentions toward peace appear unto the people, which
if refused, would increase the troubles in France, for all the stops that
should be met with therein, would be imputed to the Court; but it proved
otherwise, for the Duke of Orleans being in some sort reconciled to the Queen;
the Spanish Agents, though they gloried in this their desire, by sending Don
Gabriel di Toledo to Paris, and by assenting to the particular conference,
which was agreed should be held between Peroun and Cambrey ( Croisy having
declared that the Duke of Orleans, the Duke of Longueville, the first
President, and Count Servient would be there) their little desire thereunto
appeared, when they said that they must first expect orders from Spain, and
that though they knew it was the Catholic King's intention, that this treaty
should be commenced, they could proceed no further therein, till they had
received Commission from the Catholic Court; which was by the going of
Marquess Sillery to Brussels, who by his proposal puzzled the whole business;
wherefore Turenne knowing that he had fully satisfied his promise of procuring
peace, took occasion to retire, and to fall totally off from the interest of
Spain, and went likewise from Steney to Paris.

But Conde being intent upon making himself great, and professing much
gratitude and affection to the Duke of Orleans, that he might come more
vigorously with him, in withstanding the violences of the Court, and to bind
themselves to a more faithful confederacy, concluded articles of marriage
between the Princess of Alanson, and the Duke of Anguienne, Conde's eldest Son,
which though peradventure it might not be pleasing at Court, by reason of the
consequences which it drew after it; yet it behoved the Court to seem to like
it for the prejudice which might have been otherwise received by the increase
of popular tumults.

Conde's endeavor to break the Marriage between the Duchess of Chevereux, and
his Brother, was very prejudicial to him; for thereby he provoked a Ladies
hatred who was apt to bring much trouble upon him; the success whereof by
reason of what insued thereupon, being worthy to be known, I will briefly
acquaint you with it.

The Duchess of Chevereux was always no less noble than generous in her
proceedings; wherefore the first time that the Prince of Conde visited her,
after he was at liberty, she delivered up unto him the promise which her
friends had gotten in writing for the marriage between his Brother and her
Daughter, saying, that she had not desired that writing to oblige him
thereunto, otherwise than to assure him by such an earnest, of her endeavoring
his liberty. This noble action was much talked of at Court; whereat the Queen
was much troubled, as if she did triumph over her misfortunes; so as not only
for the Queens dislike thereof, but in respect of the interest of the Crown,
these ensuing marriages were held to be the forerunners of new troubles, for
that the Alliance made between Subjects of so great birth, and spirit, might if
they lifted keep the Kingdom still in disorder, had not several interests
interposed in breaking this Alliance; one whereof was the Duchess of
Longuevil's arrival at Paris, who as being a handsome young Lady, could not
without envy tolerate this honor in Madamoselle Chevereux, who was not so old
as she; who when she should be her Brothers wife, as Princess of the blood was
to be her Superior, and because she could not brook coming beneath her; being
infinitely beloved by her Brother the Prince of County, she endeavored to
divert him as much as she could from the Marriage; to this was added the
opinion of the Prince of Conde, that his Brothers life might be shortened by
this Marriage; he being in the opinion of Phisicians, but of a weak complexion,
but much more, that he might not be bound to renounce for ever the great
possessions, which belonged unto him by Church Livings and that he might also
give too great countenance to the faction of the Frondeurs; nor was the Court
wanting in having an influence upon this, whose Agents, and particularly Count
Serviente, and Monsieur de Lions, had a great hand in the Government thereof;
who being still thought to be good friends and faithful servants to the Prince,
did according to what suited best with his interests, infuse into him what they
knew was good for the King's service. The Queen likewise had a part therein,
who being desired by the Prince so to do, wished the Duchess of Chevereux to
proceed no further in this Alliance, without the Courts consent; in short, the
treaty vanished, the very Princes failing in their Devoirs; whereat the house of
Chevereux was highly scandalized; in so much as the Duchess, who was very
sensible of injuries, and of a manlike spirit, resolved by the Coadjutor's
means, who was her great friend, to be revenged. Whilst this treaty was
breaking off, the Duke of Rochfaucolt to bring it on again, agreed with Madame
de Rhodes, an intimate friend to the Duchess, to her Daughter, and to the
Coadjutor, that it behoved the Prince of Conde to have his Brothers Marriage
take effect, and that it behoved the Frondeurs to make Conde Governor of
Guienne; County Governor of Provence, and Lieutenant General of Guienne; and
that this should be done at one and the same time on both sides. But the
Frondeurs not being in a condition to make good what they offered unto the
Prince, he thought himself also not bound to observe what he had promised
concerning the Marriage. The Coadjutor, who was become an Enemy to the Duchess
of Longueville, and to Rochfaucolt, told the Prince that the Duchess, and her
friends were not troubled at his proceedings in this affair, but that the
Duchess of Longueville did for her particular concernments go about to break
this match, yea without the Prince his knowledge, and that therefore he
acquainted him therewith, that he might be aware thereof: the Prince finding
out the design, was very angry; and told the Coadjutor in plain terms, that he
was sure to expect little from him, and from the Duchess of Chevereux, when
the match should be concluded, since he sought to put division in his Family,
and to put discord between him and his sister, allied unto him no less in love
than in blood; and then he communicated the whole business to the Duchess, and
to the Duke of Rochfaucolt. The Prince by this visit found that his Brother was
really in love with Chevereux, and that he had desired President Viola to draw
up the Articles, that so all obstacles might be removed, and the business not
retarded. That Monsieur de Leghe, a friend to Chevereux had discoursed long,
and frequently with County; so as these things being added to the Advertisement
of President Mortaro, who was a friend, and servant of Conde's, who told him
that the Marriage was to be concluded secretly, without expecting dispensation,
and without his participation; which made him resolve to take his Brother off
from the thought thereof, awakening in him some jealousy which he had formerly
conceived, adding that he thought he might do well to renounce that contract,
wherein his Sister Longueville did also labor, so as they jointly agreed how
to silence it for ever; and afterward they agreed with Count Serviente, and
with Monsieur de Lion, that the Queen should forbid Chevereux, and County to
proceed any further in these espousals, which was the cause of all the
distasts, and disagreements which insued afterward, and which did facilitate
the Cardinals return to Court. Thus Conde losing the Duchess of Chevereux,
lost also the Coadjutor, who became his bitter Enemy, as well for this, as for
that he found he either could not, or would not help him to be Cardinal. The
Duke of Bullion and Marishal Turenne flew also from him, for his coolness in
maintaining their interests in the business of Sedam, he likewise lost
Grandpree, for not restoring him to his Government of Moson, in the acquisition
whereof, he had so great a share, and which was yet held by the Spaniards; he
likewise lost the Marquess Savebeuf, by reason of some certain pretentions
which he had, and by his changeable nature: he lost the first President of
Parliament Mole for having preferred President Viola to be Secretary of State,
before Champetreux, who was his eldest Son; and with him he also lost many
Counselors of Parliament, he likewise lost the Princess Palatine, for not
using his Authority in making Marquess Vieville superintendent of the Finances;
as also in consideration of her own interest, and that she having assisted
Conde so much, she had not as yet got any good thereby; she knew that to quench
her thirst, she must go to the Fountain's head, and that persons of her
condition could receive favors only from the King; wherefore upon conference
with the Duchess of Longueville, they both agreed, that if they could get the
Prince to give way that the Cardinal might return to Court, they might have
what they would of the King; they communicated this their thought to him, who
suspended his resolution therein, neither granting, nor denying it. Which they
interpreting to the best sense, the Princess Palatine motioned it to the Queen,
who listened attentively thereunto, and said she would procure excellent
conditions for Conde, if he would do his duty: But he having diverse respects,
one contrary to another, was a while doubtful what answer he should make: but
being told by his friends, that he could not handsomely treat thereof without
the Duke of Orlean's consent who had dealt so cordially for him, and remembering
with what applause he was received in Paris, when after his imprisonment he
came thither, not so much in respect of himself, as for being held to be a
bitter Enemy to the Cardinal, he resolved upon the denial: wherefore the
Princess Palatine having discovered her thought unto him under the Seal of
secrecy, and he resolving not to consent thereunto, he presently acquainted
Orleans with it; so as the Princess being sensible how her service was
neglected, thought she was no longer bound to back him.

Those who were gratified by him, were Count Marsine, who after the Prince his
return from Haure de Grace was made Governor of Steney, Marquess Boutevile,
who was made Governor of Belgarde; Monsieur Arnault, made Governor of the
Castle of Dijeon: Marquess Persan, made Governor of Montrond: Count Melle,
made Governor of Cleremont: Count Tavanes, destined to command the Princes
Troops, and Regiments in Champagnia, and Burgundy; of all whose fidelities he
did no ways doubt, beside some others to whom he gave several employments.

The Princes, together with their liberties, were restored by order from the
Queen, to all their Governments; the Duke of Longueville was restored toh is
Government of Normandy: But he and his friends in that Province, and Count de
Alets, with his adherents in Provence, severed their interests from those of
the Prince, and left him to himself in affairs, which did occur: that which
moved them chiefly thereunto, was, for that these Princes being of more mature
years, and of a more settled nature, would not hazard themselves upon such
misfortunes, and ruin, as wisely they foresaw: but as for the Duke of Nemeurs,
and Rochfaucolt, though neither of them were fully pleased with the Prince, the
first kept faithful to him by means of the Duchess of Chastillion, and the
other by the Duchess of Longueville. His most considerable friends were the
Duke of Orleans, by Beaufort's means, the Duchess of Monbason, the Frondeurs,
and part of the Parliament, who fearing the Queen and Cardinal, sided with him.
The whole Clergy of France were already sufficiently wounded by the Decree of
Parliament, and by the verification thereof, in excluding all Cardinals from
the Kings Council; which made them by frequent meetings of Prelates seek
remedies for this wound. Many Gentlemen also who were weary of the Wars, and
grown poor, did frequently assemble, under pretense of proceeding to a
Convocation of the States General, whereby to amend disorders of the Kingdom:
many thought good to add the Clergies grievances to theirs, so to seek remedy
for so many evils; wherefore some of the Nobles having had discourse with the
Churchmen, they all joined, in endeavoring the Convocation of the States
General; to this purpose was Count Fiesco chosen, who was President of the
Assembly, and more imbittered than the rest. He, with the Secretary, and with
twelve Gentlemen of the twelve Provinces of France, went on the seventh of
February to the Covent of the Augustine Friars; where Fiesco in a Hall where
the Clergy was met, spoke as follows: Gentlemen!
The whole Nobility which is now in Paris, being brought together under the
Protection of the Duke of Orleans, the King's Uncle, and the States Lieutenant
General, the first thing resolved upon was to desire you to join with them,
which desire being so just, and grounded upon so many examples, they cannot
doubt but you will readily embrace it; the rather for that this assembly is no
other than a continuation of that which was made the year 1649. by leave from
the King, Queen Mother, and the Duke of Orleans, where you made the same Union
with us which is now demanded. You may remember Gentlemen, that when we broke
up, we were allowed to meet again, whenever the things that were then
promised us, were not observed, and when remedies should not be applied to the
violence used to Gentlemen contrary to the privileges, and immunities of their
birth. We should go less in our condition, and in what our predecessors have
won for us by their blood lost for the aggrandising of this Crown, if we should
silently lose them, and not use all just and lawful means to preserve them; our
design being so justifiable, we beg of you to join with us, and cooperate with
us, adding your Suffrages to ours, and second the Duke of Orleans his generous
resolution in obtaining the liberty of the Princes of the Blood Royal, and in
assisting his Highness to break the Cords of these unfortunate Princes, who
have been declared innocent by Parliament, their detention being so prejudicial
to the King's service and to the common good: Behold here Gentlemen our
Commission, which we beseech you to approve of, for which our Assembly does by
us promise you their respect and service.



The Archbishop of Rheims first President of the Clergies Assembly* answered,
That the Nobility had always been gracious to the Clergy, and that the Assembly
acknowledged the obligation; and so with specious words dismissed the Nobilities
Commissioners. They then presently fell to examine the Proposals which were
made unto them, and resolved to represent to the Queen, and to the Duke of
Orleans, that there had ever been an Union between these two bodies,
insinuating their inclination to continue it. The chief thing desired by the
Nobles, was the Princes their liberty, wherein the Assembly had formerly been
supplicants to his Majesty, and would still continue to be so, and would desire
the Duke of Orleans to use his power therein with the Queen: and because the
Clergy had not as yet paid their respects to the King, and Queen, they sent to
the Duke of Orleans to know, if he would be pleased that they should send
Deputies to their Majesty's, which he approving of, the Archbishop de Ambrune,
with diverse other principal Prelates went on the ninth of February for audience
to the King, where they expressed the reasons of their Assembling, alleging
the example of the year 1949. and the Duke of Orlean's Authority; and in fair
words did supplicate their Majesty's, for the Princes liberty. The Guard de
Seaux answered them, That the Assembly of the Nobles was unlawful, that the
Queen did disapprove thereof, and that she would not take it well, that they of
the Clergy should join with them, that for what concerned the liberty of the
Princes, it was that which her Majesty did desire, so as they that were of
their party would lay down their Arms; and that she had sent Marishal Grammont
to treat with them; then the same Deputies went to the Duke of Orleans, and
desired him to continue his noble inclinations, and put an end to a business of
such importance for the public peace. The Duke thanked them, praised their
endeavors, and said that as for their joining with the Nobility, they might do
it; that by all means he would have the Princes out of Prison, and that they
needed say no more unto him: wherefore the Bishop of Cominges was sent by the
Clergy the next day to the Assembly of the Nobles, accompanied by diverse other
Bishops, and Abbots; and acquainting them with what he had to say from the
Assembly, he assured them of a constant confederacy. To which the Marquess of
Lordis answering with like civility, an Union was agreed upon; but that the
Duke of Orlean's assent in writing must be seen for the meeting of the Nobles;
which they obtained from him in these words; We do consent, and approve that
the Nobility do Assemble, to give in their grievances in writing, so asthey put
them into our hands, and that they comprehend not any thing therein, which is
not conformable to the orders, and decrees of the States General, and that when
they shall have received satisfaction in their grievances, they dissolve when
we shall bid them; Upon these conditions we promise them our protection. This
was written, and subscribed on the second of February, 1651. They then sent to
the Prince of Conde, and to the other Princes to congratulate their liberty,
and Marquess Lordis, President of the Nobility, made an Encomiastical Oration
to the Prince, the act of Union was subscribed on the 21 th. of February; as it
had been drawn up seventeen days before by all the Nobility of the Assembly,
except the elder Marquess Vieville, who was won over to the Court, upon hope of
being made superintendant of the Finances. The Princes were well satisfied with
the Assemblies complement; they then dispatched away Letters through all the
Provinces to exhort all other Gentlemen to enter into their Union; and
continued the Assembly that they might advance their designs. Count Fiesco did
very much labor the Convocation of the States General, as the only means to
come by the wished for general peace; and strove to keep the Clergy firm to
their first intentions; and accordingly Archbishop Ambrune, and Bishop Cominges
spoke boldly for this Convocation, using examples, and places of Scripture to
draw all men to the same opinion.

In this interim, the Parliament, which did not like the Convocation of the
States General, as well for fear left their Authority might thereby be
moderated, and that the Sale of places might peradventure be thereby suppressed
and conferred upon better deserving men; as also out of the innate jealousy
which is commonly found between Parliaments and States; the latter pretending
to be superior in Authority, and the other did maintaining that States can
resolve nothing, unless it be by them verified; notwithstanding met. And here
Monsieur de Coqueley brought a request, presented by the Procurator General,
wherein he blamed the Assembly of the Nobility: for being met without the
King's Authority, and insisted upon the inhibiting thereof: but whilst they
were deliberating hereupon, and that the first President moved, that the first
Authors thereof should be punished, reading the Letters sent by the Assembly to
the several Provinces, wherein the Duke of Orleans was concerned, by whose
permission the Assembly met; that Duke, and the Prince of Conde were entreated
to come to the Parliament to deliberate upon this weighty affair; for the
Assembly began to be in great vogue in the Provinces, and there was danger that
by continuing the Assembly new disorders might arise. This mean while the
Queen, by agreement with the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, sent on
the 16 th. of March, to the Marishal de L' Hospitalle to inform the aforesaid
meeting, that it should break up, and that as for their desire of having the
States General called, they should have it granted to meet on the first of
October next, at Tours. The same was confirmed by the Duke of Orleans, and the
Captain of his Guard past his word, that what had been said by the Marishal de
L' Hospitalle in the name of the King, and Queen, should be punctually
performed. The like did the Cavaliere de Vieville, by order from the Princes of
Conde, and County; none of which were pleased with the calling of the States
General, as things too prejudicial to Regal Authority, and to themselves in
particular, and therefore they sought by such excuses, and promises, to carry
things on, to the end that all might afterward dissolve into nothing.

The Duke of Orleans, instigated by the Coadjutor, who partook of all his
secret Councils, became Protector of the Assembly of the Nobility, the major
part whereof depended upon him, as being his intimate friends. And the
Coadjutor being very much troubled that even French Cardinals were by Decree of
Parliament debarred being of the Privy Council, whereby he was deprived of his
hope of becoming the chief Minister of State, and of being Cardinal, made the
Duke of Orleans encourage the Clergy to join with the Nobility, and to complain
onto the Queen of the unjust proceedings of Parliament, whereat the Court was
not at all displeased, seeing her adversaries at variance within themselves.

This Assembly of the Nobility was introduced when the King's Authority began
to totter by reason of the hatred conceived against the Cardinal, and it was
begun by certain Bishops who were discontented at the Court proceedings, and by
certain Nobles who were not therewith well pleased, only to make a noise, and
to make themselves of some consideration; at first these Assemblies were held
but by a few, and in private houses. The chief Authors of those of the Clergy
were the Archbishop of Sens, Brother to Marquess Termer, the Bishops of
Orleans, Haghen, and the old Bishop of Albi, who were all three of the house of
Been, and come to France from Florence, the Bishop of Cominges, and others, the
Marquess of Lourdis, and of Vieville, the Counts of Betumirs, Fiesco,
Montresore, Vrse, Fourilles, Montignack, and others who were all without any
charge, and but little considered at Court: they took their pretense from some
ill usage of the Nobility in the Country of Vexin, by the King's Officers,
about a suit touching some counterbar'd Salt brought in by the Soldiers, and
hid amongst their baggage in the March, which the Army made, toward the
Frontiers; some of them came to Paris to complain thereof, and finding men
displeased at the imprisonment of the Princes, and laying hold of that pretense
that Mazarine had told the Queen in full Council, that the Nobility of France
hated the King, and that the Parliament would do as that of England had done,
they bethought themselves of calling the Assemblies, by the Assent, and
Authority of the Duke of Orleans, who was not altogether content with the
Court. So as nothing but novelty was sought after, whereby to win credit, and
get some Office, or place in the King's Council. The same whereof being spread
over the whole Kingdom, so numerous was the concourse of Prelates, and of
Cavaliers, as they became formidable, not only to the Court, and Parliament,
but even to the Princes who had first protected the Assembly, for they thought
that the States General would moderate their power, by taking away their
Governments and places, and that peradventure they would take the boldness of
England; for when the third Estate should concur, and the States General should
be met, the Arbitrament of affairs would almost depend upon these.

Afterward private houses proving too little for these Assemblies, they were
adjourned to the Covent of St. Francis, and St. Augustine, where in the great
Halls thereof, affairs were disposed of in good order: But this being done
without the King's permission, and State Affairs being therein treated of, the
Queen forbad all that belonged to the King or Court to go thither; as did also
the Duke of Orleans, and the Princes; but finally all ended in the aforesaid
eager desire that the States General might be called, that by the Authority
thereof the disorders of the Kingdom might be provided for, and it was prayed
that they might be held in Paris. But the Queen did withstand it as much as she
could, and was seconded therein by the said Princes. After many contestations,
not without heart-burnings on both sides, the said Convocation was by Letters
from the King put off to be held on the first day of October at Tours, and was
afterward adjourned to the eight of the said month; on which day the King
entering into his Majority, the Court and Princes hoped to disanull it; since it
was introduced by the discontent and interest of particular men, and not for
the public good, as was pretended; France never having been in a more
flourishing condition then it was then, had it not been for these intestine
alterations.

The Assembly finding that the Queens design was to spin on time till the King
was of years, that he, as his Mother hoped, might make it vanish, those
Gentlemen were much confused, and were in dispute whether they should obey the
Kings orders or no; but the Parliament being met in the interim, to oppose
these Assemblies, the Duke of Orleans declared that he had assented thereunto;
First, to obtain the Princes liberty, Secondly, to Counterpoise the Cardinal,
and to remove him from*about the King; and lastly to preserve every man's
interest; that notwithstanding that these three points were ended, the public
quiet could not be secured, whilst Count Servient, Tillier, Lion, and Madame
Navailes were about the Queen; all which being the Cardinals Creatures, he,
although he were far off, did by their means govern the Court, disposing of all
things as he had done formerly, and having disposed of three Abbeys of late, of
no small concernment, that he would therefore desire the Queen to remove these
four from her, and would entreat the Execution of the Decrees. That lie and the
Prince of Conde had endeavored to separate the Nobility upon good pretense,
and to that purpose the Queen had given way to the calling of the States
General on the first of October next. But that the Nobility having represented
that this promise might prove null, since her Regency would then be at an end,
the Queen had promised what she was not able to perform, unless the King should
consent thereunto: that as the Queen had been desired to put off the meeting
till the first of September next, so he desired the Assembly to retard all
resolutions till the next Monday, in which time he hoped to end the business
with satisfaction to all; that he was sufficiently informed that the Cardinal's
friends had used all their endeavors that the Parliament might make a Decree
against the said Assemblies, and that they had endeavored to divide the Prince
of Conde from him, since the Mazarinians could not subsist but amidst
divisions, and disorders. The Prince of Conde spoke to the same Tune, and
added, that it was not long since they had gone about to pluck him from his
Royal Highness, but that they had gained nothing therein, for that he was
constant in the Union agreed upon, for the King's service, and preservation of
Regal Dignity.

After this the first President spoke against this Assembly, terming it
unlawful, and contrary to Regal Authority; that they ought to obey the orders
brought them by the Marishal de L' Hospitalle, and not join with the Clergy,
was yet more to contemn the King's Dignity, and therefore was not to be
tolerated by Parliament; that the end thereof was to confound Government, and
to introduce civil War; so as to oppose it, and destroy it, was to serve the
public good. That the Duke of Orleans had promised by the Marishal de L'
Hospitalle, to cause it to dissolve on last Wednesday, and that notwithstanding
it still continued, that the Parliament was grieved to see the fractures of the
Royal family, which was fomented by some troublesome spirits, who abusing his
Royal Highness good nature, fed him with false representations, and adding one
disorder to another did confound all: in so much as after the Cardinals
expulsion, those who stood candidate for the same Dignity afforded matter of
new Revolutions, the remedy whereof was no longer to be retarded. The Duke of
Orleans answered, That he had not appointed Wednesday with the Marishal de L'
Hospitalle; that he would resist, and not maintain any thing that was
prejudicial to the King's service, and promised that on Monday next, the
Assembly should be quietly dissolved. The first President replied, that he
heard another Assembly was held in the Covent of the Carmelites at the Palace
Mobert, which took upon it the quality of the third Estate, and which tended to
new sedition; that therefore it was no longer time to neglect the King's
service, and the States interest, the King's Authority being so far engaged,
and that the business was to be taken into consideration, according to
yesterdays Decree.

The Duke answered, he did not think the Company would deny him three days, at
the end whereof he promised to be present in Parliament, and to give his
consent to all Decrees, if the Assembly were not first dissolved. The President
of Mesmes asked him, whether or no he would disapprove the said Assembly, if it
did not dissolve before Monday. And Marishal Grammont, to ease the Duke of
replying, propounded, that if the Assembly should not dissolve before Monday,
his Highness should promise to disapprove it, and to oppose it with all his
Power and Authority; upon which promise the Resolution was put off till Monday.
President Cognieux, Brussells, Thou, and Charton, spoke in favor of the
Assembly, and Thou said there was of the best blood of France therein, to which
the first President answered, that there were men in France who were twenty
times better than they, who had not subscribed it; whereof those of the
Assembly being advertised, they presently published a declaration of their
pretentions, showing that they were met only for the public good, and this was
accompanied by a Letter sent upon the occasion of the Assembling of the
Nobility, which did contain a declaration against those who said their
Assembling without the King's Authority was Criminal: they said that all that
could be objected to it, was that it was done without the King's permission,
for that the Laws forbid all public meetings without his Majesty's consent;
that for any thing else what the Nobility did complain of, and whereof they
could speak, was correlative to the Law, and what in justice could not be
denied; that during the King's minority, his Authority was in the Regent, and
in the Lieutenant General of the Crown, so as their Authority must be had to
make a lawful Assembly: that the point lay in this, whether they were to have
the Queens permission, or whether it was sufficient to have leave from the
Lieutenant General; that the Nobility had Assembled for three reasons; for the
liberty of the Princes, for driving out the Cardinal, and for the maintaining
of the Nobilities privileges, which were lost by the bad Government of State
Ministers. That nobody could doubt but that the two first points were contrary
to the Regents desire, since the Princes had been imprisoned by her; that
therefore it was unnecessary to ask leave for the Assembling of the Nobility,
seeing it was contrary to her sense: wherefore not being able to address
themselves to her Majesty, they had be taken themselves to the Lieutenant
General; who having given them leave to meet the occasion of taxing them for
having taken upon them an unjust power, ceased. That those who sided with the
Cardinal, said, this was a Criminal fact, but that they could not show any
other way which was more innocent; that they were shut up between two great
extremes, either to become guilty by complaining, or to be oppressed by holding
their peace, and to suffer, that without remedy, the honor of their Wives and
Daughters, their Goods, their Houses, and all they had, should be exposed to
the insolence and violation of Soldiers, Marishals, Taskmasters, and to the
avarice of Officers; and that their liberties and immunities should be oppressed
through the jealousy of those who had neither birth nor worth, thatthe Kingdom
of France was a free Kingdom, and that the most noble and freest part thereof
ought not to be forbidden lamenting, and demanding justice against such
excesses; and their conclusion was, that any thing might be done which was just
and reasonable, at last the Clergy, and after them the Nobility did acquiesce
upon the reiterated desires and persuasions of the Duke of Orleans, and of the
Prince of Conde; and much the rather, for that they had not met with such
correspondences as they looked for from the meeting of the third order, without
which, and contrary to the King's power, the Clergy, and Nobility could of
themselves do nothing. So all was hushed up upon hopes of the next Assembling of
the States General, which Orleans and Conde did under their hand assure them of.

The Cardinal being gone from the confines of France, Paris grew weary of
keeping continual Guards at the gate, for which the Soldiers had no pay,
wherefore those Guards were taken away; so as the Court being at liberty to go
into the City and Country, the Princes party was thereby not a little weakened,
who confided much in Armed men.

Conde began to apprehend a second imprisonment, which he feared, as himself
said, more than death; wherefore he grew more circumspect than usual. The Court
began to take courage, and to think how to uphold the King's Authority; and
because the Cardinal at his departure counseled the Queen to recall Count
Chavigny, who was Conde's friend, to keep him from thinking to return by some
other means, he was sent for back: and the seals were taken away by the Queens
direction from the Marquess of Chastauneuf, who was suspected to be become a
friend to the contrary party; and were given to the first President Mole, which
made it be believed that the Queen did all by intelligence with the Prince, who
was a friend to Chavigny, and Mole, and an Enemy to Chasteauneuf, the next day
he took the wonted Oath, and the Queen used him with honor and esteem, whereat
the Duke of Orleans was much amazed; in whose House the Prince of Conde, Duke
Beaufort, the Duchess of Chevereux, and of Mo^bason, met together with the
Coadjutor, and other conspicuous persons of that party; and they discoursed
long upon the Queens taking too much upon her, contrary to their pretentions;
speaking openly that if the Duke of Orleans would suffer such shame, he would
encourage his Enemies, who would grow the more haughty.

But, because the Council differed in their opinions, it will not be amiss to
lay open the affections of the one, and of the other; because private interest
is more minded in France, than in any other Court, or Nation, and is preferred
before any public consideration. The Duke of Orleans, his Daughter
Madamoselle, Duke Beaufort, and the Duchess of Monbason, minded only their own
greatness. The Prince of Conde and his adherents, cared not much for this
mutation, as being adversaries to Chasteauneuf, and friends to the first
President; the Duchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor, as friends to
Chasteauneuf, were more incensed against the Queen than all the rest; the
rather for that they thought they had been upon good terms with her Majesty.

Orleans broke forth into sore complaints against the Queen for making such
alterations without his knowledge, Duke Beaufort offered to make the people rise
in his behalf when he should please. Count Montresore, a great friend to the
Coadjutor, said, it was no longer time to dally; that the people must forthwith
take up Arms; and force the first President to forgo the Seals, and afterward
go with the like fury to the Queens Court, and do as occasion should serve; it
was thought that this being a violent proposal, came from the Coadjutor, who
was of the same opinion: but the Prince of Conde, who held private intelligence
with the Court, declared he would not engage himself in a War in the Streets of
Paris, as not being accustomed to fight with stones, and that therefore he
would leave the care thereof to others. That he would be ready to obey the Duke
of Orleans, if he should so command him, in going presently into Burgundy to
raise men, and make War wheresoever he should please. Upon these speeches of so
renowned a man, the diversity of opinions ceased: and the Marishal de Estampes,
one that loved not troubles, said, it was now late, and that the business might
be deferred till the next morning, which was done.

The Coadjutor finding Conde to declare thus much, entreated the Duke of
Orleans to give him leave to withdraw himself from the intrigues of the Court,
and follow his study; and seemed to continue a while thus resolved. The Queen
was somewhat troubled at the taking the Seals from Chasteauneuf, and giving
them to President Mole, by reason of Orlean's so highly resenting it, which the
Frondeurs also did; so as fearing some extravagancy, though she did much
protect the first President, she was at last forced to forsake him, and to take
the Seals away from him, and to deposite them in the Lord Chancellor's hands;
with promise under hand to the said President by Marishal Grammont, that they
should be restored unto him, when the King should be of years; yet was not he
well pleased, since the Queen had made him accept that place against his will,
not being able to protect him therein, but he was more offended with Conde,
from whom for his past service he promised himself more fervent assistance;
wherein the Prince failed him, to keep from breaking with the Duke of Orleans.

Before the Seals were taken away, upon fear that the Duke of Orleans might
withdraw from Court, and seduce Conde along with him; the Queen being desirous
to recompense the first President with as good a thing, or better, made many
gracious offers to him: as to make a fifth Secretary of State, and give the
place to his eldest Son, or to buy a Presidents place in Parliament for him, or
to give him his own place after his life; but he not being content with any of
these, she offered to make him Archbishop of Tolouse, and indow him with 6000
pound sterling a year. And it was further said, that she offered to make him a
Cardinal, and his Son first President, so as he would willingly resign the
Seals; all which he did scornfully refuse, and contrary to the wishes of all
his friends, who told him that a Cardinal, and a first President were never
known in France to be of one, and the same Family; which made it be believed,
that either he thought very well of himself, or that he feared to be deluded,
or that the place of Guard de Seaux, was to be preferred before all these.

A treaty of peace with Spain was this mean while introduced by the Duchess of
Longueville's, and Marishal T^renne's return to Paris; but Conde foreseeing,
that if this were effected, he should be ruined, he resolved to send Marquess
Sillery about the end* of April to Flanders, under pretense of the same treaty
of peace, but in effect to negotiate his own concernments, and to renew the
treaty which was held at Steney with the Spaniards, by Monsieur Croisy, and
this was the first correspondency which the Prince had with the Spaniards, and
which yet continues, and was the cause why the Spanish Agents did not agree
with France, touching the general peace.

The Duke of Espernoun desired as much as the Court did, that he might be
permitted to quit the Government of Guien; so to shu^ the disorders which might
ensue by his remaining in a Province ill af^e^ted to his name; the only
difficulty lay in finding out another Government equivalent to that of Guienne.
It was reported that the Prince of Conde, not being well pleased with those of
Burgundy, for not having appeared in h^s imprisonment, cooled in the affection
which he bore them before. Espe^^oun thought therefore that Conde would be
easily persuaded to change Governments with him; especially, being much obliged
to the (...), for having made head against the King for his liberty, wherefore
the Duke of Cand^lle sent Gourvill to propound this unto the Prince; whom he
found willing to accept thereof upon some conditions, which were, that he would
have Guie^ne with all the Towns therein, and that he should reserve unto
himself in Burgundy the Castle of Dijeon, and the Town of St. John de Asne, no
mention was made of Belgard, it being his own particular Patrimony; for that
Burgundy yielded five or six thousand pounds sterling more than Guienne; but
these things not being agreed upon, the business broke off. The Cardinal
hearing of this negotiation, wished the Queen not to permit this change for
many reasons, which shall be hereafter mentioned. The Prince hearing this,
began to desire that which formerly he had not cared for, saying, that he would
have that change, with the aforesaid retentions, and that if the Court were
against it, he would cause new troubles; this business was often debated in the
Privy Council, pro and contra. Some said, that Guienne was well ^cituated for
receiving help from Spain, and England, in case of revolt. That the Prince of
Conde held intelligence with Spain already, which was the only cause why he
desired that Government; that Guienne, and Poictou joined one upon another,
whereof the Duke of Rochefaucolt was then Governor, who was Conde's great
friend; that the Duke of Rohan Chabot, in Anjou, was of the same party; that
Brovages, both of them places of importance; and the Islands of Olleron and Ree
were in Count Ognon's hand, who declared against the King, that Normandy was
under the Duke of Longueville, Brother in law to Conde; and that Britany was in
the Government of Marishal Millerey, who was about to ally himself to the said
Prince, by marrying his Son to Madamoselle de Tremaglia. That by reason of so
many Towns, Provinces and friends backed by the Spaniards, and if need should
be, by the English, France was exposed to apparent danger; it was therefore
concluded, that this evident danger was not to be permitted in so many
important Provinces; the rather for that the Prince keeping Belgard, St. John
de Asne and the Castle of Dijeon in his hands, should be still as good as
Master of Burgundy.

These reasons were of themselves sufficient not to permit that Province to the
Prince of Conde, had not Count Serviente, one of long experience in Court
affairs, with strong reasons maintained the contrary, he said, that in great
storms experienced Mariners stood not upon casting part of their loading
overboard to save the rest: that the King's Authority was in great danger;
that it was therefore needful, not only to watch carefully, but even to spend
whole nights in thinking how to fence it, if not in whole, yet in part from the
assaults of ambitious people; that their Majesty's were as Prisoners in their
Palace; whilst the Frondeurs pretended to take the Regency from the Queen, and
to take the Government of the whole Kingdom upon themselves. That the
Assemblies of the Clergy, and of the Nobility pressed the calling of the States
General, pretending to keep off the King's majority till he were Eighteen years
old, and in the mean time to choose a Governor of the Kingdom. That that
strong-wound-up Rope composed of the several threads of many friends, became
strong, and not to be broken: that destruction was at hand, unless this knot
were untied by the yielding of one, and abating of the other party; that he was
of their opinion, who held that it was not good to grant Guienne to the Prince,
so to make him greater; but that when he considered how great an acquisition it
would be, to take off a Prince of such esteem from the Frondeurs, he was of
another mind; for that the true means to break the knot of the Enemy, was to
divide them, the Malcontents being then only to be pacified, when they see
themselves abandoned by great ones; that it was true that Guienne was of
importance for situation, and for the peoples condition: but that it was as
true that it could not prove so prejudicial as was supposed. That it was well
known that the greatest part of the Gascons were of the Prince his opinion, and
that it was not to be doubted, but that they would second his designs, as well
if he were far off, as if he were their Governor; so as by giving him that
Government, that was only given him, which was already at his disposal; and
that by gaining Burgundy made him lose what he had. That the one of these two
Provinces lay toward Spain, and England, the other seated amidst the Richest,
and most noble Provinces of France: confining upon Flanders, and not far from
Germany; that it was not to be imagined the first should be able to subsist, by
the backing of Spain, and England; because it was not to be believed that the
Prince of Conde, who by blood was so interessed in the Crown, would be so
foolish as to dismember the Kingdom of so noble a Province, to throw it into
the hands of the Spaniards, who were natural Enemies to France, or of the
English who were proud foes: nor were things so easily done as designed; that
it was not time for Spain to engage in new enterprises; and that all the aid
was in considerable which could come from England, which was not sure to
establish her new state by her own Forces, much less to send them abroad to
purchase new Enemies; that reason of State might require that the power of
France might be divided, and weakened; but that the English could not desire,
that by the lessning of this, the power of Spain should be increased, which as
being apter to raise Naval Fleets, ought consequently to be by them more
feared: that on the contrary Burgundy, the Prince of Conde's Government,
confining upon Germany, and joining upon Flanders, which is the Magazine of the
Arms of the Spanish Monarchy, would be more apt to foment the Malcontents in
Paris, when that City, as there was now great likelihood, should declare for
their party. And that the Princes passing over the Loire to Carita, and joining
with Berry, the Government of the same Prince, and from thence with Poictou,
Limosin, and Anjou, all which Provinces were held by his friends, and
afterward with Guienne, it was to be feared that the Kingdom being cut through
the very midst by such a knot, the said Princes might not only be able to
maintain themselves in Guienne, but make good their party in Paris, by the
assistance of Neighboring Burgundy, and by the Forces of Flanders, and Spain
reduce the King's Dignity to an inevitable precipice, it being insidiated by so
many seditious malcontents, who by such an opportunity, might compass their
pernicious Machinations.

That therefore his opinion was, that this change might be permitted, and that
to moderate the great opinion which the Gascoigns have of Conde, they should be
suffered to see him; for that men are apt to worship a great Warrier, more when
they hear of his prowess in War, than when betaking himself to his quiet, he
falls into those licentious courses, as are usual to the military profession,
and oftentimes those Flowers which are most pleasing to the eye, do most
nauseate the Nose.

And the mean while the King's power breaking out in his Majority, would like
the Sun dissipate those clouds which do darken the luster of this Kingdom; and
obfuscate the splendour which other Planets exhaled from thence, and the Crown
will reassume that happy motion which has hitherto accompanied it.

Wrought upon by these reasons, all of them did unanimously concur to the
permutation of these two Governments; the which being obtained by the Prince,
made him also pretend to change Champagnia; but the Government of Guienne not
appearing so prejudicial for the aforesaid reasons, as that of Provence, it
would not be listened to. The Cardinal (without whose allowance this change was
made,) blamed the resolution, weighing that if it made not much for the Prince
his interest, he would not have pursued it so hotly, writ that he thought it
would prove too prejudicial, unless it were granted him for some more secret,
and more important respects: and for what concerned Provence, he exaggerated
much against them, who would so much as hearken to it; and wished the Queen and
Council to have a care of it, and not to place so much power in the Prince of
Conde; for that the more power was given to him, the more was the King's
Authority lesned.

It had been much better for the Prince to have taken upon him the supreme
command of the Army, as well for the Grandezza of the Kingdom, as for his own
glory and Reputation; but he did not value it, as well in respect of what has
already been touched upon, as that he did not too much trust the Queen, who was
jealous of all his ways; and therefore considering that putting himself into an
Army composed of Veteran Soldiers, who were all faithful to the King, who
reverenced nothing but his Majesty's orders, he imagined that he could have no
other obedience from them, but what did merely concern the service of France;
wherefore he refused that command which the Queen conferred upon Marishal de
Auniont. This Army being provided of Officers, who did all of them depend upon
the Court, was considerable both for number, and valor; but did not much that
Summer for want of moneys, which was occasioned by the Kingdoms disorders,
lying only upon the Frontiers of Flanders, as shall be said hereafter. Whereat
the Parliament being moved, whose designs were to win upon the peoples
affection, seeming to be their defenders, decreed on the 19 th. of June, that
the order made before for remedying the unruliness of the Militia should be put
in execution; and nominated some Commissioners to that purpose, who were to go
whither they listed; but all in vain, for they wanted power to make themselves
be obeyed, the Soldiers making themselves merry with all their resolves, which
was not unpleasing to the Court, whose concernments were Governed according to
advice given ever and anon by the Cardinal, who though he were at Brules in
Germany, was informed of all that was done at Court, according to which the
Councils were there regulated, and the King did continually assure him by his
Letters, that he would by all means have him near his person, though it should
be with hazard of his Crown; yet great secrecy was used in this correspondency,
the Court being at Paris, for fear of being again beset with the City Guards,
if it should be known.

Amongst these irresolutions of the King's Council, the Cardinal's friends
sought to win over the Prince of Conde, industriously employing those therein
who were known able to promote so slippery a business. The Princess Palatine
was desired to interpose her self in this accommodation; but she being
unwilling to break her word given to the Duchess Chevereux touching the
Marriage, and to the Coadjutor touching his being Cardinal, declared that she
would be ready to do any thing that would not clash upon these two points, by
retracting from whence, she might be taxed with breach of promise; but the
affairs in the treaty of Guienne altering upon the breach of Madamoselle
Chevereux marriage, opinions also altered, and hence began all things to change.

The Princess Palatine did notwithstanding say, by consent of the Duchess of
Longueville, that if the Queen would be gracious to the Prince, she would quit
the Union whereunto she was now annexed, and would cordially join with the King
and her Majesty's interest, and if occasion should require, declare her self
against the Frondeurs. The Princesses entered into the treaty; the Queen seemed
ready to give them all reasonable satisfaction, the Prince inclined to
agreement, but some of his friends, and particularly Chavignie whispering in
his ear, that he ought not to forego his old friends for new ones, that the
Court was full of subtilty, whereby he might be sure at last to be deluded; and
he listening more to bad, than to good Counsel; he would not be fed with bare
hope, nor confide in the Court. So as not being able by these means to reduce
him, they tackt about, and resolved totally to ruin him; for he being
suppressed, little care was to be had of the rest, and to effect their intent,
they resolved to secure themselves of all the Provinces of the Kingdom. And the
Duke of Longueville, who was Governor of Normandy, and Brother in Law to the
Prince, was sought to be won over by a secret treaty, which was effected by
friends on both sides: and whereunto Longueville listened, not for that he had
any natural good inclinations, but because he was not well pleased with Conde,
who dealt disdainfully with him, and fomented his Wife in Domestic differences
that were between them; he engaged his word, that he never would recede from
what was agreed on with the Court: no not for any, whatsoever offer might be
made him of bettering his condition. All the Officers of the Flanders Army were
also treated with, who took a new Oath to serve his Majesty against all his
Enemies within or out of the Kingdom, and declared that they did depend only
upon the King. They summoned in all the Troops which served under the name of
the Prince to appear at a general Muster; and that they might be disposed of in
several parts, they thought either to detain their pay, or to give them
inconvenient quarters, or if need were, to disarm them; but the Prince
suspecting this, wrought so as that they drew up toward Burgundy, Champagnia,
and the Frontiers of Picardy; and that they should never come within three days
march of the King's Army. They afterward endeavored to draw over from the
faction of the Frondeurs as many of the Parliament, or of the chief Citizens as
they could; among which President Novion was one, deceived in his hopes of
being the Director of the Duke of Orlean's Council, Monsieur le Feure Provost
of the Merchants; and finally, all means were used to draw over the Princess
Palatine, who afterward grew a great confident of the Queen, and Cardinal, by
reason of her being but badly requited by Conde's Family, after her so much
partiality and good service done to Conde; and they also won over the Duchess
of Chevereux and the Coadjutor, promising to call the Marquess of Chasteauneuf
to the Privy Council again, and to nominate the Coadjutor to be Cardinal when
the King should be of age; the joining together of the two last was of great
importance in this business, out of their desire to revenge themselves of the
Prince, and as being partakers of the Duke of Orleans his most secret Council;
all this was managed by the Court with their accustomed cunning; for the most
wary were of opinion that the Queen could not confide neither in Chevereux, nor
in the Coadjutor, in whom she was forced notwithstanding to seem to trust, and
to believe things which were unlikely; and though it was thought that by
Chasteauneuf's return to Council, Chevereux might pretend to have a share in
the Government of the Kingdom, and that the Coadjutor by being Cardinal, might
one day prove Favorite; even they (allured by such hopes) labored to keep in
favor with their Majesty's, and to seem desirous of Mazarine's return; wherein
Chasteauneuf being of all others most vigilant, fearing Conde's faction, and
considering that the Cardinal would at last overcome all difficulties, since it
was the King and Queens will; having with great wonder hard the question asked
by Priolo in Conde's name, whether or no, he would approve of the Cardinals
return, he was desirous to sound the bottom of the business; wherefore he sent
his confident Berret to Brules, with a Letter of credence, and with exhibition
to employ all his power in helping his return; when the Cardinal saw the
Letter, he very warily made Berret write down the articles of instruction at
the foot of the Letter; and that he might the better discover truth, treat the
more securely, and know the true meaning of the Queen, he sent Abbot Vndedey to
Paris incognito, in whom he trusted much; who coming thither with much danger
of losing his life, he behaved himself so well, as he agreed with Chasteauneuf,
that he should be made chief Minister of State when the King should be of
years: he assured the first President that he should have the Seals restored to
him, and Marquess Vieville that he should be made superintendent of the
Finances.

Vndedey not having a Pasport from the Spaniards, was in his journey to Paris
stopped by the Garrison of Charlemont, but was released at thirteen days end; for
they considered that it made not for them, to detain one, who by his
negotiation might renew jealousies, and afford new pretenses to the
Malcontents, he being employed to revive the Cardinals Party, whose
subsistence was judged necessary by the Spaniards, thereby to make Conde join
more firmly with them, and holding that this was the only means to widen the
wounds of France. The Princes were advertised of his detention, and of his
being set free; and they laid snares for him by the way, but he fearing it,
turned about by Mesieres, and past in disguise through the Princes Troops, and
got safe to Paris; whereat the Queen was very glad. Vndedey staid Eleven days,
not being discovered by whatsoever the Princes could do: he negotiated all the
business that he was come about, which was all put off till the King should be
of years; but fearing afterward to be found, he went to Peroun, and staid
there incognito till the King was of years, and till the Prince retired from
Court, after which being recalled by the Queen, he returned to Paris, to finish
what he had begun.

The Parliament knowing that it was an unjust and odious thing to make a man
guilty without naming his fault; that they might the better justify their
proceedings against the Cardinal, sent two Counselors of the Chamber into
Normandy, and Picardy, and to all places through which he past, to inform
themselves diligently of all his comportments: in order whereunto Cantarini, an
Italian Bancker, was imprisoned, and had all his Writings taken from him,
hoping to find notes of the sums of Money which he was said to have conveyed
into Italy and Germany; and Brousell was appointed to make this inquisition,
who was his chiefest Enemy; but after having spent much time in making diligent
search, he returned without any thing worthy the Assemblies knowledge. Nothing
was found in Canterini's writings which did aggravate him, and Broussels self
said, that for all his diligent search, he had found nothing whereof to accuse
him; but Counselor Longueville, a man of a great reach, and very turbulent,
said in the Assembly, that they were to make process against a man for
particular affairs, but that other proceedings were to be had in management of
the State, and that mere shadows were to be made use of, and that it made for
the public good to give sentence as Caiphas did; inferring thereby, that to
cloak their private intentions, who were it right or wrong, would rid their
hands of him, they must make him cause of all the blame, palliating the
injustice with zeal to the common good.

The Prince all this while forbear not to bind himself faster to Orleans,
Beaufort, the Frondeurs and Parliament, telling them that his ruin was not
aimed at by the Court, without drawing theirs after it; that he had always
served the King faithfully, and that those who sought to distroy him, made use
of the fruits of his Victories. He afterward forbad his Troops to join with
those of the King, alleging the Authority, and consent of the Duke of Orleans,
who being Lieutenant General of the Kingdom during the King's Minority, might
command this, as he pretended; but whilst these affairs depended thus, his
friends thought he did much amiss in not putting on a ready resolution to fall
by degrees from the King's Army, and go to Charity a great Town upon the Loire,
half way between Paris, and Lions; where when he should be arrived, the Queen
would never have left Paris and brought the King to wage War with him; but were
it either for want of ready resolution, or that he would not be the first who
should begin a breach, (which the Prince his Father left him for an unalterable
Maxim,) or, as it is more likely, that he thought to send one of high esteem to
command those Troops, he unfortunately let this opportunity slip. The Court
beginning afterward to take courage, fell at unawares upon these Forces, which
they did not defeat, because they were not all got together; but they forced
them to retreat in great disorder toward Steney upon the Mose, and to go out
of the Kingdom, with great loss of those that ran away; suspecting then some
danger to his own person, he began to be very circumspectful of his ways in
Paris, and quite forbore the Court; and as it was apparent that his actions did
not answer to what the Queen might expect from him, nor to the good intentions
he promised her Majesty when she granted him the Government of Guienne, but did
rather daily covet more Offices, and Governments of Towns for his friends and
those that did depend upon him; and that he took a course contrary to what was
expected from his gratitude, the Queen to counterpoise his power, was forced to
listen to what was propounded by the Frondeurs; which was, that they would
serve her, with all their faction, in case she were not satisfied with him: so
as though the Privy Council were unwilling to come to an open breach with
Conde, thinking it better to keep him fastened to the Royal Family, and because
till then he had always refused to mingle with the Frondeurs, with whom he was
displeased for their having failed him in many things, and sought to make use
of him rather for their own concernments, than for his sake; at last the Court,
being forced by the Prince his too scornful comportments, and by his too high
pretentions; Monsieur de Lion, with whom the Coadjutor was desirous to speak,
was permitted to see the Coadjutor in Count Montresor's house, as he did once
or twice; the which being observed by one that dwelt over against Montresor's
house, he by means of Count Chavigny acquainted the Prince therewith, who was
afterward better advertised thereof by the Duke of Orleans, to whom the
Coadjutor had entrusted the business, the Prince began to suspect that he was
once more intrapped; so as to this terror infused into him by Chavigny, another
accident being added of certain Soldiers who were upon the Guard in the Fauburg
of St. Germains, to bring in some Wine which were di contrabando, without
paying the impost; he thought verily that those were the Regiments of Guard
which were to enter his house; as he was falsely informed by his Domestics
Vieville, and Recuses. Wherefore getting on Horseback by night, on the sixth of
July he went out on the back side of L' Hostelle de Orleans, where his fear
making him mistake certain Horses that were laden with Victuals, for Troops of
Horse which might wait for him, he went with the Prince of County to his house
at St. Maure, to shun what he had suspected; and thither came the Dukes of
Nemeurs, Rochefaucolt, Richelieu, and Bullion, Marishal de la Motte, and other
of his friends, with as much wonder to the Court, as it was till then far from
any such thought.

At his going out of Paris, the Prince sent Veneville to acquaint the Duchess
of Longueville, that she should also retire to St. Maure, least she might be
staid in the City, and so all his designs discovered; who though she were sick
of a Fever, followed him. Her malady increased, and lasted above three weeks,
which was the cause why the Princes her Brothers could not hold their Counsels,
as they had wont to do, in her house, for fear of disturbing her who was
troubled with increase of Paroxismes; when her malady decreased, which was six
weeks before the declaring of War, she resolved to go from her Brother, before
it was resolved what he should do; for being upon treaty of either agreeing, or
totally falling off from the Court, she would not have a hand in any thing
which, come what would come, she disliked; she considered that though peace
seemed good, it was not certain; and if War should be thought necessary, her
Family would be thereby much endangered.

She therefore desired the Prince to let her depart, and that since the
Princess his Wife would be better in Montrond, than in St. Maure, where she
might be an incombrance upon any occasion that should happen, he would give her
leave to wait upon her, the rather for that such a retirement would make the
Court jealous, it not being ill to keep it in fear of War, till it should
endeavor to hinder it.

Conde consented thereunto, and the Princesses went away, not having any hand
in what was afterward resolved.

It appeared better at first, that the Duchess of Longueville should go to
Normandy, to her Husband, than to Montronde; least by following her Brother who
was for War, and abandoning her Husband who loved peace, it might be believed
that she was of a troublesome spirit; but two reasons moved her to the
contrary. The first, because the Duke of Longueville having after his liberty,
desired to have nothing to do with what concerned his Brother in Law, but to
wind himself out of the party, if the Duchess who was much distrusted at
Court, should go into Normandy, it would have been suspected that she had kept
intelligence between those Princes, and given the Court occasion to take the
Government of that Province from her Husband, so as to keep from doing so, she
was forced to keep far from him, and that she would rather seem discontent than
otherwise, to the end that if the Prince should embrace peace, she might
presently be gone to Normandy. The second reason was, that the Duchess
governing the Prince of County at her pleasure, who was not upon over good
terms with his Brother; were it either for his being young, which would not
suffer him as yet to have full cognizance of weighty affairs; or were it by
reason of his easy nature ready to alter upon any occasion, it was
consequently requisite that the Duchess should keep them joined together;
wherefore she went to Montrond on the 28 th. of July.

When the Prince was come to St. Maure, he sent Duke Rochefaucolt to desire the
Duke of Orleans to assure the Queen from him, that he was not withdrawn out of
any ill intention, but to free himself from danger which he apprehended; the
Duke wondered at this his so sudden departure, and answered, that he would
endeavor to put all things in good order, being sure that the Court had no ill
opinion of him. The Queen sent Monsieur de Cominges to the Duke, to tell him,
that she put the King's concernments into his hands, to the end that he might
give sufficient caution to the Prince, whom she accused of being too apt to
believe false and imaginary suggestions.

When Orleans spoke with her Majesty, they resolved to send Marishal Grammont,
to discover the Prince his pleasure, and to offer him all security if he would
return to Court. The Marishal acquainted the Prince with what the Queen and
Duke of Orleans had given him in charge; the Prince grew to know his Error; but
doubted least he might grow less in Reputation if he should so easily
acknowledge, he had put on a resolution for which he had no ground; wherefore to
maintain what he had done, and to make it appear that he had done it not out of
any causeless fear, he dryly answered, there could be no safety for him whilst
the Cardinals creatures kept about the Queen; whereupon the Marishal desired to
speak with him in private, but he would not consent thereunto; saying, that he
was not to treat with him of any thing which was not to be discovered to all
his friends; so dismissing him with very small satisfaction, the Marishal
returned to acquaint the Queen with what had past. The Princess Palatine went
also to acquaint the Prince into what a precipice he was about to throw himself
upon vain suspicious, suggested into him by such as desired Novelty, and desire
the ruin of the Royal Family. She told him he needed not doubt the Queens
word; and that she having interposed her self in the first agreement, and
promised in his name what was agreed upon, these retractations seemed strange
to her, which were grounded upon weak pretentions.

Marishal Villeroy, and Count Chavigny went to him also to the same end, but
could do no good; the Prince said, he had been once deceived, and durst confide
no longer, so long as Count Servient, Tillier, and Lion, the Cardinals
creatures kept in the posture they were in with the Queen. That the Cardinal
would undoubtedly return; with whom continual commerce was held,
notwithstanding the Parliaments prohibition; that private negotiations had been
had in Sedam, and in Brisack, to bring the Cardinal into one of those strong
holds; wherefore the Prince had thought fit to withdraw himself into a place of
safety, and he sent afterward a Letter by a Gentleman to the Parliament unto
the same purpose.

The first President answered, that Conde had undertaken a dangerous
Resolution, whilst not many days before, the Queen had assured him by the Duke
of Orleans, that there was no imaginable evil conceived against him, that he
might go to the Parliament, and freely propound his sense, that he should find
there the same security that County had, the Assembly was adjourned till the
next day, and County being this mean while returned from St. Maure, he
acquainted his Brother with what had past; on Saturday he came to the
Parliament, where those of the King's party appeared with a writing from his
Majesty containing: That the Queen did not believe the Prince of Conde would
have continued his Iealousies, so as to withdraw from the Court, after that she
had sufficiently assured him that she had never any thought which might make
him mistrustful; that the Duke of Orleans knew the sincerity of her actions,
and that he had ascertained the Prince of the Truth of what her Majesty had
said unto him; that it was far from her to act any thing contrary to the
liberty of his person; that Marishal Grammont had assured as much to the
Prince, who might inform the Assembly of what had past. That the King had
empowered the Duke of Orleans to treat of an agreement, and that he would be
very glad the Parliament would intercede therein, that if the Prince his
Iealousies consisted only in his own safety, and in the Cardinals return, her
Majesty declared from the very first her intentions of not recalling him. That
she had past her word thereupon unto the Parliament, which she would
religiously preserve, and that for what concerned the negotiations of Sedam,
and Brisack, she might justly think her self injured that the Lieutenant of
that Government had without his Majesty's order thrust the King's Governor
out: that for as much as concerned those who were of the Privy Council, that
they being the Queens Domestic servants, which she might at her pleasure
choose; it was answered that the first had served the late King with such
fidelity, as the Prince had no reason to distrust them, that her Majesty could
assure them that she had never had any occasion to suspect they had any
intentions contrary to his Majesty's service, and that none of them was engaged
in the Cardinals return. That if the Prince did not admit of what was offered
him, but should still keep far from the King, it was to be suspected that there
was somewhat else which kept him from waiting personally upon the King, which
the Queen was infinitely troubled at, who desired nothing more than to see a
perfect Union of the Royal Family, which was so requisite for the good of the
State.



This writing being read, the first President began to discourse thereupon; and
turning to the Duke of Orleans, said, that it belonged unto him to undertake a
business of such importance; since the Queen putting most confidence in him,
and that the Prince was more joined in interest with him than with any other,
he might easily do good. He therefore desired him to use his wisdom to grub out
those Roots which might bud forth into the unevitable ruin of France, wherein
civil War would without speedy remedy be kindled. The Prince of County thinking
that the first President's words aimed at the taking the cognition of these
affairs from the Parliament, stopped him at the word of Civil War, saying, he
wondered that he should speak of Civil War, where the Prince his Brother meant
nothing but safety to his own person; He wished him therefore to give over
these speeches, which tended only to make the Prince his actions appear
contumacious, and blameable, which were of themselves just, tending to the
public good, and to the keeping up of the Grandezza of France, which consisted
in being governed by those of her own Nation, and not by Forrainers, who mind
only the undoing of others, to enrich themselves. The first President replied,
he wondered no less to be interrupted, it being a thing not permitted to any
one, and that in that place he was to speak any thing which tended to the
King's service, and to the common good. County answered, that he had the honor
to be a Prince of the blood, and that when he heard his Brother ill spoken of,
he was bound to defend him, and that he thought it improper to speak of civil
War, when a Prince was spoken of who had done so much for the service of the
King and State. The first President replied, that the Princes of the blood were
in that place but mere Counselors, that no notice was taken there of any
Prince but the King, and that such speeches as these had been heard upon the
like occasions in other times; but the contention was interrupted by the Duke
of Orleans, and the Parliament was adjourned till the next day.

Affairs were kept this mean while on foot at Court; and touching giving
satisfaction to the Prince, it was wholly put over to the Duke of Orleans, who
holding good intelligence with the Prince, it was hoped that by his means some
good agreement might be come unto; or if that he should further his designs,
the Court might have just reason to make good her resolutions to the world of
humbling the Family of Conde, which was grown too great for the King's
Authority.

Orders were sent to all the Governors of Provinces, and Towns to stand upon
their Guard, nor to own any commandment but from their Majesty's: Marishall
Grammont was sent to his Government of Berne, a Province bordering upon Spain
to watch over whatsoever might be contrived on that side against the King's
service; to which purpose the Queen used all means to bring the Cardinal back,
who as a forreiner, and not depending upon any faction, was known to be
requisite for the good of the Government, and for the defense of his Master's
Dignity: and because she found there were few of his friends who spoke freely
for him, since the very imagination of not being against him was able to make
any honest man hated, she caused the Abbate of Ondedey to return to Paris, who
kept incognito as has been said, at Peronne, to the end that by his dexterous
fidelity he might bring the wished for endeavors to a good end.

The Parliament meeting again on Monday, another Gentleman appeared from Conde
with a Letter, wherein he discovered himself more fully touching his
suspicions, and pretenses: complaining that the Kingdom was governed by those
that adhered to the Cardinal; saying, that Tillier was made Secretary of State
merely by the Cardinals favor; that Monsieur de Lion had the honor to be the
Queens Secretary, only for having been in the same employment formerly, for the
Cardinals service: and that Count Serviente had added nothing to what had made
him deserve being deprived of the Office wherewith he was honored by the late
King, more than hindering the conclusion of the general Peace; that if these
three were removed from the Court, he would forthwith return unto the King.

These Letters were perused, and presently sent by the King's party to the
Queen; by whom the Duke of Orleans was again desired to interpose in appeasing
the Prince, and to free him of his conceived jealousies; to which purpose the
Duke went to Rambulliere, not far from St. Antoine, where he spoke with the
Prince, but to as little purpose as formerly; for he persisted that he would
see the aforenamed three persons removed, whom he held to be his chiefest
enemies; to this he was egged on by the Counselors Croisy, St. Germain, Count
Fiesco, with the privity of Chasteauneuf, and the Coadjutor, who contributed to
the business, though underhand, to avoid the making Conde more jealous, who
held no good correspondence with them.

About the midst of July the Duke of Orleans spoke again with Conde at Rene,
two leagues from Paris; which though it appeared to be for this agreement, yet
the truth was, that instead of reducing the Treaty to some fair issue, and
reciprocal satisfaction, as was thought might be done, if Orleans had dealt
really, they agreed to expel the three forenamed Men, to the end that the
Queen being deprived of their assistance, and others who depended upon them
being put into their places, they might predominate in the Council, and obtain
their desires. They therefore pressed the Parliament as much as possibly they
could to interest them against the aforesaid three, to which the Parliament
would not consent, Monsieur Tillier the mean while, knowing that the whole
Caball was against him alone; (for as for Servient and Lion he did not think
them to be so far out with the Prince, as that he should seek their ruin;) he
told the Queen; that though his being Secretary of State might dispense with
him for not condesending to the Prince his demands, and for keeping the
Parliament from interesting themselves therein, that notwithstanding, having no
other end but the King's service, and the quiet of the State, he would
willingly yield, so to put an end to all pretentions, and to obviate new
disturbances. The other two followed his example, so they all got leave to
retire from the Court, and went to their Country houses: wherefore the Prince
adding still to his pretenses, and growing still more haughty, came to Paris on
the 21. of July, accompanied by Duke Rochefaucolt, Marishal de la Motte, and
other friends of his; and going to Parliament with the Duke of Orleans, he
thanked them for their protection, and went from thence to visit the King and
Queen: and because he seemed still to doubt new Imprisonment, many men were
placed about the Palace Royal. And the Duke of Orleans, who upon his word had
brought him to the Court, showed him a Dagger as he went out of the house,
which hung by his side, saying, that he would with that kill the first man that
should offer to stop him. The King was willing to see him; but the Queen
appeared somewhat cool, and avoiding any discourse of interest, talked only of
what did presently occur, whereat the Prince was not much satisfied; and as it
is usual for men that are apprehensive to interpret all things to the worst, he
declared his distaste, by saying, he would return no more thither.

But keeping his negotiations on foot, as well in Flanders, as in France, to
the end that he might effect his designs abroad, if he should not effect them
at home, he with large offers, and fair allegations invited the Duke of
Longueville to enter into his party. But Longueville, who was wise, and loved
his quiet, though he seemed to join in his interest, yet keeping his agreement
made with the Queen, did not accept the invitation, saying, that though the
beginnings of all civil Wars seem specious, yet their middle and their end
prove fatal to those who undertook them, and that therefore as a true friend
and allye, he exhorted him to agree, and peacefully to enjoy his Governments,
well foreseeing what the contrary might produce, as being fomented by ambitious
people, and who for their particular concernment desire to put the Kingdom into
troubles.

Yet these the Princes ways tended not to the precipice of War, though they
seemed to do so; for by what happened afterward, it was known he pretended
rather to make an advantageous agreement, than to enter into an uncertain and
dangerous War. At this time the Prince received a Letter from Marquess
Bouteville, Governor of Belgarde, wherein he advertised him, that Monsieur de
Isole was come thither, sent by the Emperor, who desired to speak with him,
and to let him know that if he would declare himself, he would invest him in
Brisack, and would cause all the rights of the house of Austria therein to be
given unto him; That moreover he would give him 4000 Soldiers, which he would
add to the Garrison of Franchendelle, which the Spaniards should abandon; so as
together with his own Soldiers, which at that time were 5000, he might make an
Army of Ten or Twelve thousand men.

The French Army lay this mean while, about the River Liss, but was not able to
make any considerable assault upon that Frontier, for want of Corn and
Artillery, and much more for want of Money, the rather for that the Enemies
Towns were all well fortified; whereat the Queen was not displeased in these
present disorders, that so she might have her Forces disingaged, and free to
send against the Prince upon any emergency Notwithstanding Marishall de Aumont
incampt at Arleaux, not far from. Doway with 10000 foot, and 6000 horse, and
sent Duke Chaunes to fall upon two redoubts which were sheltered by the River
Scarpe, making 600 Musketeers ford over the River at the same time, conducted
by the Count de Espagne, and Chevalliere Chaunes; so as the Spaniards having
had two* Squadrons of Croats routed, forsook the redoubts; by the taking
whereof whilst it was thought the French would approach Doway, they went away
without doing any thing else; and went to Inchy, a Town three leagues off, and
quartered in the Abbey of Vauxelles.

On the other side Marishall Fertesenetre, Governor of Lorain, went with some
Troops gathered up in the Neighboring Provinces, to take Charte upon the
Mosell, the Castle whereof though it were but small, was well fortified, and of
no little consideration, in respect of the Neighborhood of Lorrain; and he took
it, though it were by the Garrison stoutly defended, to the great advantage of
the King's Forces, who were thereby likewise unincumberd on that side.

Whilst things were in this condition, Duke Mercure, who staid in Paris after
the Cardinal was gone, met every night with the Queen, when all others were
withdrawn, maturing such expedients as stuck most with them; and seeing himself
much pressed in his own particular affairs, for the ill satisfaction which was
conceived against his Family, by reason of his interest with the Cardinal, he
begged the Government of Auvergne. Her Majesty before she would gratify him
therein, asked the opinion of one of her confidents; who told her that if the
Duke should get what he desired, he might find some means to avoid marrying
Madamoselle Mancini: and that therefore he thought fit to defer it, and make
advantage of time; which advice being approved of by the Queen, made Mercure
(who was aware of the cunning delay) to protest seriously that he intended the
marriage, and that there was not the least reason to doubt his word, showing
all possible readiness to accomplish what was agreed upon: notice was given of
this to the Cardinal, who though he went not from what was agreed, yet knowing
that this alliance would afford matter to his Enemies to make the troubles
greater, would howsoever prefer the King's service before his own concernments.
He therefore answered Advocate Bluet, that he did not approve the Duke should
go from Paris, as well for his shunning the bad accidents which might befall
him by such a voyage, through the alterations which upon this pretense might
arise in Paris, as for that there was none with the Queen but himself, and
Marishall Plessis Prali^, with whom her Majesty might freely discourse, and
trust without suspicion.

But the Duke not admitting of this denial, held himself bound in honor, and
thought that the exposing of himself in so turbulent times, and in the greatest
heat of persecution to a dangerous voyage, would give the clearer testimony of
his faith, and the more oblige the Cardinal to assist him in his marriage. So
as having often acquainted her Majesty with his firm resolution he brought her
at last to give way thereunto, and she gave him moreover 1000 pounds for his
journey; this being therefore resolved with all secrecy, to shun the treachery
which might be laid for him in his journey, he sent his Gentlemen into the
Vandomase, seeming as if he would take that journey, and he feigning himself to
be servant to Monsieur de Siron, one of the Cardinals Domestics, went from the
Queens Cabinet on the beginning of July, and went post with the same Siron to
Peronne, and from thence to Brules, where on the twelfth of the same month the
marriage was solemnized by the Archbishop of Colen, which being done, he
returned with like speed to Paris.

At this news great rumors were had in Paris, arguing thereby, that assuredly
the Cardinals return was endeavored; but because by their Majesty's
Declaration, and by the Decrees of Parliament, not only the Cardinal, but all
his kindred were sentenced, they were of opinion that the marriage must prove
null; since (as they said) a Prince of France was not to marry without the
King's leave, and much less with one that was banished, and an enemy to the
State. Being come in great pomp to the Parliament at Paris, sent for as Duke
and Peer, he was much pressed to declare the truth of the business. He answered,
that he was not bound to say any thing, save only that he had done nothing
contrary to their Decrees; and did publicly affirm, that the Duke of Orleans
and Conde had engaged him in the said marriage; that if afterward they had for
their own concernments altered their opinion, he knew what belonged to a
Gentleman that was born a Prince, touching the keeping of his word;
notwithstanding all this, his father the Duke of Vandosme was sent for to
appear in Parliament, and being asked whether or no he had given his consent,
he could not deny it, saying, that he had been therein assisted by the Duke of
Orleans in the beginning, but that after the Cardinal was gone, he spoke no
more to him therein, there being no occasion for it; so as the business
remained thus without more ado.

Paris being in great commotions by reason of these Controversies, all men's
eyes were upon the proceedings of the Court, and Princes: and the curiosity of
inquiring into these affairs grew to such a degree, as when the Parliament met
to treat of public affairs, and of the Cardinal, many of the Commonalty, and
of the Nobles, ran armed to the Palace, some to assist the one, some the other
party; wherefore the danger growing daily greater, by reason of the several
interests, the Parliament made a Decree, that all men should withdraw upon pain
of life; and the King's Officers were charged to see the decree executed.

The Duke of Orleans was desired to interpose in making the agreement: but the
greatest part were for Conde's party, whereof Orleans was one; wherefore the
Prince, encouraged by so great a party in Paris, resolved to tarry in his
Palace, which was well guarded by those who lay therein, and in the
neighboring houses; nor went he ever to the Court, alleging that it was only
out of fear of his life, or liberty: but he forbear not to pass freely through
the Streets of Paris; and being once in a fair Coach in the Course, together
with the Prince of County, and the Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, he
unexpectedly met with the King, as he came from bathing himself: whereupon
causing his Coach to stay, as others did, he made a low reverence to his
Majesty; but this encounter was not well interpreted neither by the King nor
Council; and the King was well nigh to have made him been unhandsomely treated
by his Guard, had not his fear of displeasing the Queen his Mother (as he told
her afterward) diverted him. Wherefore Conde gave out that he would go to his
Government of Guienne; which he would have done, had not his partakers, fearing
least the Cardinal might return in his absence, keep him from doing so;

This mean while the Queen having sent a Letter to the Parliament, to send
Commissioners to her, which were soon sent, she told them that the Declaration
against the Cardinal was not yet issued forth, because those Commissioners who
were to agree thereupon with the Chancellor, had not as yet appeared; that
howsoever her Majesty would not teach them what to do, knowing the zeal and
fidelity which they bore to his Majesty's service. The Chancellor made a long
speech afterward, in praise of the Prince; extolling his deserts, in regard
whereof, as also to satisfy his Highness, the Queen had turned away three
Officers, who had served her well; whom she had not only no mind to recall, but
did declare that they should return no more to Court, which she was content
might be Registered in Parliament; that howsoever she could not forbear saying,
that the Prince was ill advised, since he had no way to excuse his now
proceedings, being bound to keep about the King whom he was to serve with all
due respect and obsequiousness, he added that nothing but seditious and
scandalous Papers were thrown about the City, of which he desired them to
inform themselves, and to punish the Authors; though some were not pleased that
the mouth of the common People should be stopped, for to take notice of what they
say, was to make what they said better reputed, and was an occasion to make
them renew their railing with more petulancy, the chat of the rabble rout,
being like a fire of straw, which the more you strive to quench, the more it
smokes.

The Queen did at this time desire the Duke of Orleans, That he would join with
her in choosing a Council to assist the King: who answered, that he would speak
therein with the Prince of Conde. The Queen replied, that was not to be done,
for that he had declared himself to be an enemy of hers, and blamed the Prince
for endeavoring to incite tumults amongst the people in his own behalf; and
that as the King went over the new bridge to the Jesuits, the people being set
on by him, cried out, may the King live, may the Princes live, and away with
Mazarine.

The next day the Parliament met, and and fell to discourse of Duke Mercure's
Marriage, who was charged that within three days he should deliver up unto the
Secretary of the Parliament the circumstances of his marriage, that all might
be made known to his Father the Duke of Vandosme; it was also ordered that all
the Decrees against the Cardinal, his Domestics, and Kindred should be
renewed; and particularly against Madomoselle Mauzeni, whom they did by name
forbid coming into France, and commanded that if she should come, she should go
from thence within Eight days. The Declaration which the King was to make
against the Cardinal was also read, and Orleans caused the damage to be added
thereunto, which had insued by his hindering the general peace; as also by his
undertaking the War of Bordeaux without his consent: and Conde caused it also
to be inserted, that his imprisonment was occasioned only for his not
consenting to the marrige of the Cardinals two Nephews with the Dukes of
Mercure, and Candalle.

The Queen who had still an eye to Conde's actions, being told that his Troops
would not only not come to the King's Army, but march toward Champagnia, and
being also advertised that the Prince caused diverse Towns to be fortified, she
made the Duke of Orleans tell him, that he should give her a precise account of
those his actions, and that chiefly he should command all his Troops to join
with the King's Army: and that otherwise she would give order to have him
treated as an Enemy, and to be imprisoned. But Conde attributing the reasons
thereof to his aforesaid jealousies, which made him provide for his safety,
left the Court in the same perplexity. Who thinking they had good reason to
proceed against him as guilty, sent a Letter to the Parliament who were meeting
to treat of the aforesaid marriage, charging them to come to the Palace Royal,
and did the same to the Sovereign Companies of the Chambers of account, aids,
and to the Magistrate of the Commonalty of Paris, who going all thither, they
were brought before their Majesty's, in the presence of the Duke of Orleans,
the Prince of County, and of many other Dukes, Peers, and Marishalls of France,
and of other chief Officers of the Crown. The King told them by his own mouth,
that he had sent for them to acquaint them with his intentions for the public
good, as also to let them know the proceedings of the Prince of Conde, with
which he hoped to take good order speedily; referring himself for what was more
to Count Brienne, the first Secretary of State; who presently read a writing,
dated the 17 th. of August, containing That his Majesty with much sorrow found,
that after so many Declarations made formerly against the Cardinal, the Enemies
of the public good did still make use of the same pretense, to foment the
dissentions which were already kindled in the State: which had made his Majesty
to send for them to him, to declare again that he intended to exclude the
Cardinal for ever, not only out of his Council, but out of his Kingdom,
inhibiting all his Subjects to hold any correspondency with him, and declaring
that whosoever should countervene this his Royal will, should incur the
penalties specified in the ancient orders of his Predecessors, and by the late
decrees of his Sovereign Courts, to which purpose he commanded that all
necessary courses should be taken.

That after having given this assurance to all his Subjects, his Majesty could
no longer conceal without prejudice to his Authority, what was done. Here he
mentioned all the favors and graces which the house of Conde, and this Prince
in particular had received from the late King, and the now Regent; that his
Majesty after having consented at the entreaties of the Queen his Mother, and
of his Uncle the Duke of Orleans, and of the Parliament, to grant him his
liberty, he had restored him to the same place as formerly in his Councils: had
returned unto him the Government of the so many Provinces and Towns, which he
and his adherents held in the Kingdom; so as it was easy to be believed that
he rather chose to be feared than loved. That after having confirmed the Forces
raised by him, which were sufficient to make an Army, that after having given
way to the change of his Government of Burgundy for that of Guienne, he had
moreover permitted him to keep the Towns which he held in Provence: whereby he
had granted him more than had ever been granted to any. That he had caused the
immense sums to be paid unto him, which he said was due to him for arrears of
Pensions, for the pay of his Soldiers and Garrisons, which were such, as to
content him, he was forced to alter the moneys which were designed for the
maintaining of his Majesty's household, and of his Fleets; and that finally, he
had left nothing undone which might give him entire satisfaction, and make him
employ those good qualities wherewith God had endued him, as he had done
formerly to his Majesty's service; that his Majesty having expected this, found
much to his dislike (by the actions so contrary to the solemn protestations
made unto him by the Parliament) that he was much deceived; for that as soon as
he was free from imprisonment, his solicitations had induced his Majesty, to
make the alteration which they all saw in his Council, and that having thrived
in this his first attempt, he grew so bold as to complain of the conduct of the
three Officers, and of the Queen his Mother, who commanded them to withdraw not
only from the Court, but from Paris; so to take all pretense of complaint from
the Prince, and to appease the revolts which he was about to raise. That when
by all these graces it was hoped he would comply with his Majesty in some
things, or at least forbear his evil courses, he then did the clean contrary,
to what his Majesty's goodness toward him had strove to withdraw him. That
after the Duke of Orleans, had past his word to him in his Majesty's name, and
had offered unto him all he desired, and pretended unto. He kept many days from
resolving to see his Majesty; notwithstanding, that he met him once in passing
by: that at last being desired by the said Duke, and by the Parliament to pay
his Majesty his due respects, he saw his Majesty but once, and was then
received by both their Majesty's with all demonstration of love, sufficient to
wean him from all sinister opinion; that his Majesty was obliged to declare
what was come to his knowledge as well within as out of the Kingdom. And that to
begin with public affairs, that after two months he had absented himself from
the Council, speaking ill of the Parliament, and saying, that he could not
trust his Majesty nor those that were about him. The Prince had written to the
Parliament, and to many chief Cities, to imprint sinister opinions in them of
his Majesty: engaging many in every Province, to take up arms when they should
be desired to do so by him, and by the City of Paris, which gives motion to all
other places. That he had given out an ill report of his Majesty's good
intentions; that he had reinforced the places entrusted to his Government;
that he had fortified them with all things necessary, and done this then
without any order from the King; employing his Majesty's Subjects therein, and
making them forego gathering in their Harvest. That he had taken his Wife and
Sister into the strong hold of Montronde. That he had got together a
considerable sum of Money; that he had practiced all things which might make it
be believed that he held intelligence with the Enemies of the Crown,
particularly at Brussels, with the Archduke, and Count of Fuenseldaglia,
causing their Messengers to be guided to Cambrey, by Horse drawn out of his
Troops; that the Prince had done these things without his Majesty's knowledge
or leave, that therefore his correspondency was not to be doubted with those
with whom the King had declared War. That he would not make the Spaniards go
out of Stenay, as he was obliged to do; which was the only condition that was
required from him when he had his liberty given him. That he had afforded means
to Don Stephano di Gamara to come with his Army to the Mose, that he had
munition'd Moson, and kept the passage of Dun, whereby part of Champagnia was
put to contribution, thereby to make the Spaniards more able to undertake
things against the Kingdom, and to divert the proceedings of the King's Forces,
which being greater than theirs, might be made greater in the low Countries by
an enterprise never known in France. That notwithstanding all express orders
given, those that commanded his Forces, would never obey the orders given them,
to join with the body of the King's Army; which occasioned the confounding of
all designs, as well in respect of the differences which the King had had with
the Prince, as for having given time to the Enemy to know themselves, and to
put themselves in a condition to oppose his Majesty's Forces; moreover that he
had made them more resolute by the hopes, or rather assurance given them of
some co^motion in the Kingdom. That he must not forbear to mind them of the
dissolutions committed by the Soldiers under Conde's command in Champagnia, and
Picardy, which ended in the ruin of those Provinces, instead of carrying the
War into the Enemies Country. That the liberty taken by those Forces, to
plunder his Majesty's Subjects, had caused many Soldiers to go from his
Majesty's Camp, and to go into the other which did what they would; that he had
thought fit to acquaint them with all these things (though the most of them
were already sufficiently known) believing that these public proceedings of
the Prince, would prove that his secret designs could be no less dangerous, nor
could be no longer dissembled without abandoning the rudder of the State, which
God had put into his Majesty's hands; and which he was constantly resolved to
maintain. That without speedy remedying disorders, the Enemies of France would
never apply themselves to the so much desired general peace, nor reform the
abuses of the Kingdom without stopping the course thereof, which his Majesty
was resolved to do.



This writing being read, the Prince of County, who was present, told the Queen
that the Prince his Brother had done nothing but what he was able to justify,
and that these were the impostures of his Enemies, whilst things continued in
this disorder, Conde continued to visit the Counselors, to assure himself of
their favors, and endeavored to keep his friends well disposed to him in all
parts, and upon all occurrences. The Queen on the contrary, advising
continually with her friends, and making particularly use of Abbate Vndedey,
who did all he could for the service of the Queen, and Cardinal, found it was
necessary to choose new Counselors to supply the places of those that were put
out. And the Duke of Orleans being of the same mind, who was therein advised by
the Duchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor; it was resolved that as soon as
the King should be of years the Marquess of Chasteauneuf should be made chief
Minister of State; that Marquess Vieville should be made superintendent of the
Finances, and that the first President should be confirmed Guarde de Seaux; the
first, because he promised to use all his power in getting the Cardinal
recalled, though he failed therein afterward, as shall be said. Vieville,
because President Maison, who was superintendent of the Finances, was thought
to be too much concerned in Conde; but the Prince declaring that all this was
prejudicial to the decrees of Parliament, and to the King, and destructive to
the Princes of the Realm; promised he would never consent to Chasteauneuf's
return, who would prove worse than the Cardinal: saying, that those that
favored him, were his implacable Enemies. That the Duchess of Chevereux, and
the Coadjutor were the chief Plotters; saying, that they and the three Barboni,
were Authors of the writing which was pretended against him; he therefore
desired his Royal Highness to maintain his interests, as he would do his till
death. For what remained, he absolutely declared that rather than to see the
King put into the hands of his Enemies, he would throw himself into the hands
of the Spaniards; and after so much freedom of words, he bewailed the
unhappiness which threatened France, and all good men; wherefore the Coadjutor
thinking that the Prince his words might work something with the Duke of
Orleans, he strove to keep the Duke in his former opinion.

A treaty was this mean while begun between Chasteauneuf, Villeroy, and
Chavigny, by the means of Counselor Croisy, and Monsieur de St. Romain,
whereby they had almost brought the Prince to consent to the establishment of
the aforesaid Council, provided that the Queen would speak to him therein. But
these Lords not daring to move the Queen to do so, least she might suspect they
held some intelligence with the Prince; the Duchess of Aiguillona, and Count
Brien, were employed to desire the ^ueen, that she would suspend the business
for a few days; but she fearing that this was a new trick of Conde's, to keep
her from performing her word, proceeded in the establishment, which afforded
afterward cause of new complaints.

This writing was followed by diverse other pressings, that the Prince his
actions might be known to be such as did not become his duty, and which were
condemned for such, when the Parliament met, the Prince appeared, waited upon
by some of his followers; but Orleans came not thither that day; wherefore
Conde entreated the Assembly to adjourn the handling of what was communicated
to them at the Palace Royal, as also the reading of the King's writing; to the
end that the Duke might be present at the reading of them; pretending to
justify his actions, wherein the Parliament was pleased to gratify him, and
sent to invite Orleans to come thither, but it was thought he would not come,
having heard that what was done against the Prince at Court, was thought to
have been done by his knowledge, for that it was imagined the Queen would not
have attempted it without holding intelligence with him: but foreseeing that
unless he were protected by Orleans, his adversaries might undo him by what was
alleged in that writing, he again desired his presence in Parliament, that he
might not want such a prop in a business of such importance. The Duke having
excused himself for several reasons the second time, the Prince desired him
that at least he would give him a Declaration of what had past between his
Highness and him: the Duke could notwithstand the violence of these pressures,
which were seconded by President Viola, but yielded thereunto, rather enforced
than willingly. So as sending immediately for the Secretary, without giving the
Duke leave to repent, he caused it to be written the 18 th. of August, the
contents thereof being as follows: His Royal Highness declared, that till
after Seven a clock at night on Wednesday last, Count Brien had not acquainted
him, with the Queens resolution, of calling the Sovereign Assemblies together,
and those of the City, to tell them that her Majesty had no intention to recall
the Cardinal, and that she would issue out all necessary Declarations to that
effect, and that she might say, that the Prince had not been at the Palace
Royal, since he the Duke had brought him thither. That the next day the Queen
made him come into her Oratory, and caused the aforesaid writing to be read
unto him, whereof he had had no knowledge; wherein there were many things which
might be gainsaid, and particularly touching his intelligence with Spain,
which he judged not fit to be read; but that the Queen would absolutely have it
done; saying, that it was necessary for her discharge, the King being to be of
years within Twenty days. He moreover declared that the Prince had propounded
unto the Queen and Council, after Marquess Sillerey was sent to Brussels, that
there were two ways whereby to make the Spaniards go out of Stenay: the one by
a treaty, the Spanish Agents having offered the said Sillerey, so as a
suspension of Arms might be had between them, and the Towns of Luxemburg,
during that Campaign; the which being by the Queen denied, the Prince had told
the Queen that he could not drive 500 Soldiers who were in the Town, out with
200 in the Citadel, those of the Town being at all times to be reinforced by
the Enemy; wherefore if her Majesty would send him 2000 men, he would do his
utmost to expel them; he moreover witnessed that he did not think it fit that
the Princes, or Dukes Forces which were designed for the Army of Picardy,
should be commanded by the Marishal Ferte Senetre, who being too true to the
Cardinal, had guided him in his journey, and received him into his Towns after
the Decrees of Parliament made against him; that moreover he had desired him as
Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, to send some that depended upon him, to
command them, promising that he^ would willingly obey him; and that to that
purpose he had named Monsieur de Vallon for that employment, who being ready to
go, he received orders to the contrary, whereby the said Forces were willed to
tarry there, and expect Monsieur de Vallon, who was to command them. He
declared also, that the Iealousies which were taken were not causless, as he
had formerly declared in Parliament; knowing that something had been done to
his prejudice; and that after having brought him to the Palace where he was not
too well received, he had not desired him to return any more thither, he also
affirmed that otherwise he did not believe that the Prince had at any time had
any ill intention against the King's service, or the good of the Commonwealth.



The Prince having obtained this writing, thought he had gotten all he could
desire from the Duke of Orleans, and doubtless this Declaration, though a weak
one, made for him; but the Duke being troubled that he had so easily granted
this writing, acquainted the Queen therewith, saying, that he had protested to
Conde, that he would please him only that one time: and that for the future he
would never do so again, nor that he did any ways intend to nourish civil
dissentions, to the King's prejudice; yet this was ill taken at Court, though
covertly, not to increase ill will.

The Parliament meeting afterward, and the King's Declaration being read, the
aforesaid Declaration was read by a Secretary of the said Dukes, containing
Conde's justification; which being read the Prince added many other things
tending to his own discharge, and added that all proceeded from the actions of
his Enemies, whose designs were known to be pernicious to the State, alleging
for example the violent proposal made by the Coadjutor the preceding winter in
L' Hostelle d' Orleans, to go and take the Seal by force from the first
President, and go from thence to the Court.

The Coadjutor rising up at these words, said boldly, that what he had said was
altered; that he could justify all his actions, and Counsels, and that he
would never cry peccavi for any thing he had ever spoken. High and bitter
speeches past on both sides. The Counselors began to speak their opinions not
being displeased with the present differences, whereby they became Arbitrators,
and almost judges of the Royal Family, many things were said: many would have
the Queen produce proofs for what she had said against the Prince, others that
the Duke of Orleans should be entreated to intercede in a business of such
importance, and to beseech the Queen that she would out of her goodness
extinguish this fire in its beginning. In fine that all things should be
referred to her Majesty, to whom they sent the writing which was given in by his
Highness, in excuse of the Prince, that she might order all things by her
supreme Authority, as she should think would stand best with justice, but the
time being short nothing was concluded, and the Assembly was adjourned till
Monday. The Prince went forth, followed by many of the meaner sort; the
Coadjutor did the like, being also well accompanied. The Sabbath day being
spent on both sides in getting Votes; the Duke of Orleans had private
conference the same day with the Queen; but what it was, is not known. On
Monday the Parliament met, where the Prince appeared, attended by many; the
Coadjutor did the like, accompanied amongst others, by the Duke of Brisack, by
Monsieur Montresore, and other Courtiers, and with many Citizens who were of
his party, Armed with Swords, and Pistols. And the yard and great Hall which
are by the Parliament house, were filled with people of both factions. The
house being set, and Conde being told how the Coadjutor had been attended
thither, he said he thought it strange, there should be any in that Assembly
who should vye with him for Magnificency, and as it were contend in the Streets
with a Prince of the Blood, and that he believed the Parliament would take
order with such audaciousness. The Coadjutor finding himself concerned herein,
said that he wondered much at such complaints, all men knowing what respect and
value was to be put upon a Prince of his condition and merit; and that if he
were aimed at therein, he professed all honor and respect unto him. But that
obedience was due to none but the King; who left the way open for all men. To
this the Prince answered with some Acrimony; and as the Coadjutor was ready to
reply, a murmuring arose in the house, which silenced them both. Many
Counselors said, this was not a way of Parliamentary proceeding; the rather
for that the Palace yard was full of armed men, who were assembled there,
little to the safety of the Counselors, and less to the freedom of their
suffrages. The first President seconding this, said unto the Prince, that he
being the most eminent person, was to give the first example, wherefore he
desired him to dismiss his retinue, and then turning to the Coadjutor, said as
much, alleging what inconvenience might else ensue.

The Prince gave order to the Duke of Rochefaucolt, to dismiss those who were
come along with him; the Coadjutor said he would go do the like, but in a bold,
and scornful manner, in so much as walking faster then Rochefaucolt, he got
thither before him, and as he walked Per la Perquet, or in the ante-Chamber, he
came into the Hall, at whose appearance all his party drew their Swords, and
those belonging to the Prince did the like. The Duke thinking that the
Coadjutor, who was in the midst of the Prince his people, would hardly escape,
thought how to make use of the present opportunity: but the Coadjutor being
aware of the danger, returned presently to the Parquet, or Ante-Chamber.
Rochefaucolt, who stood at the gate and saw him coming, shut his head between
the two leaves of the gate door, where he held him fast, affording time to
those of the Princes party to have killed him if they had would; for Rochefaucolt
would not kill him himself, least Montresore, and others of the Coadjutors
party might have drawn their Swords, wherefore he left it to the Prince his
followers, amongst which were the Count of Duraz, and Signan, Marquess Rogefer,
Monsieur de Picaces, and others; whilst the Coadjutor was in this condition,
likelier to dye than live, Monsieur Champeltrux, Son to the first President
came to the door, endeavoring to open it, which Rochefaucolt seeing, he left
the door to him, and returned to his place in Parliament. Not long after the
Coadjutor came thither also, complaining of the violence which was used to him,
and that Rochefaucolt had shut the door upon him, that he might be slain.
Rochefaucolt answered, that he shut the gate to keep the Coadjutors followers
from falling upon the Prince, who was to be preserved against the bad
intentions of all wicked men. The Coadjutor not at all disturbed with the
danger he had past, said boldly Cavaliere la Franchezza. Rochefaucolt told him,
he was a wicked man, that if he had been served rightly his head should have
been broken. Here Duke Brisack took the Coadjutors part, and they fell to foul
words, but the Duke of Orleans quieted them.

The Prince going out of the Assembly, next to the President as he was wont to
do, when he came into the Hall, wondered that he saw none of his followers, who
when they heard him speak, strove to get in; but he went into the yard, where
meeting with his friends, he got into his Coach, and returned to his house
attended by many. The Coadjutor came also to the same yard, attended by those
of his party, and many of the Nobles, and getting into his Coach was followed
to his house by all the aforesaid Gentlemen on foot, with their Swords drawn;
and it is to be noted that the hundred men who came last into the Hall, were
Soldiers of the Kings Guard, conducted by a wise and valiant Officer. This
business being divulged through the City, all men thought that somewhat of ill
would happen the next day, unless some remedy were taken: the Duke of Orleans
sent therefore to the Prince, desiring him to avoid the danger of such
disorder, and that he would come to Parliament only with his usual attendance,
and that the Coadjutor would do the like; the Prince answered, he cared not for
what the Coadjutor would do, but that he knew what respect was due to his
Highness, and that he would obey him. The Duke did the like to the Coadjutor,
assuring him that the Prince would come attended only by his own Servants; he
answered, he had no mind to concur with Conde, and that it was not in his power
to keep his friends from favoring him; but that rather than displease him, he
would forbear coming to Parliament, and acknowledging that he ought his life to
Monsieur Champeltrux, he went to pay his thanks to his Father, the first
President; whereupon their former distasts were reconciled. Madame de
Chevereux, and others of the Coadjutors party, went likewise to complement the
first President, and it was thought that this made them all join in concurring
against the Prince his interest.

The distasts between the Coadjutor and the first President, arose from the
Presidents disliking the Coadjutors demeanures, who would have his hand in all
things. And next from a difference between the Bishop of Bayeux, Son to the
first President, (who was provided with the Treasury of St. Chapels) and the
Coadjutor; for Bayeux having means thereby to appear in Paris in a Pontifical
habit, and to give benediction to the People; the Coadjutor was not pleased
therewith, but complained thereof to his Father the first President; who said,
if my Son have not power to do it, he would be the first who should forbid it
him; but that if it were a privilege grounded upon the Pope's Bull upon the
King beneficency, and upon ancient custom, he would never tolerate that those
privileges should grow less in his Sons hands; and again because the Coadjutor
was thought to have a hand in the Treachery which was plotted against this
first President, and the Princes, the 11 th. of November, 1649. which appearing
upon deposition of witnesses, the first President was refused to be Judge by
Duke Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and by Brussels, who made him descend from the
Tribunal.

The Parliament sat again on Tuesday, whither the Prince came, accompanied by
the Lords of his party, and with many others, who did not enter into the
Palace, the gates whereof were shut and guarded; the Coadjutor was not there,
being in a procession which went to Nostre Dame, and was to pass by the Palace,
where he appeared in a Pontifical manner, with his Miter and Crosiers Staff.

Much was said in Parliament upon the present occurrences, and they resolved to
carry the Prince his justification to their Majesty's, together with the Duke
of Orleans his writing, and humbly to desire them, that they might proceed
therein according to their wonted justice. The Duke of Orleans was also desired
to interpose with their Majesty's, to adjust a business of so great weight,
whilst the Parliament sat. All the Prince his followers, who were kept out of
the Palace, staid without in the Streets, where thousands of People being
gathered together it was maliciously noised abroad, that the Prince was
imprisoned there within, which caused great commotion in those that were
without; who when the Palace gate was opened, with their weapons in their hands
withstood all those that came forth, not suffering any one to come out* till
they might see the Prince; who accompanied by above 2000 persons, went toward
his house in the Fanburg of St. Germans, the new bridge, Palace Dauphine, and
other Streets which led to his house were so full of People, as his Coach could
not pass without hurting some body, he then drove along the River toward St.
Austine, where meeting with diverse companies of the Guards, the People would
have fallen upon them, but the Prince hindered them; passing on with the like
concourse of people through two Streets more, he met the Coadjutor as he was
going in Procession, the Prince caused his Coach to stay; the Coadjutor seeing
him and the Duke of Rochefaucolt bowed low unto him, and blessed him, and
continued on his way, which the people observing called him Mazarine, and gave
him other injurious speeches, in so much as the Prince was forced to make those
who were in his Coach go out and hinder the people from falling upon him, and
cutting him in pieces, which might have happened, had it not been for the
respect they bore to his Pontifical Habit, and to the hindrance made by the
Prince.

After Dinner the Assembly met in Madamoselle de Orlean's house; whither the
Marishals de L' Hospitalle, and Scomberg came for the Courts party, Duke
Rochefaucolt, and President Viola for the Prince, and other indifferent
Counselors and Gentlemen; where discourse being had of the present
occurrences, nothing was concluded, but all was put off till two days after,
wherein also nothing was done.

The Prince being much troubled hereat, and being resolved howsoever to make
his cause good, he presented a writing in form of a Declaration to the
Parliament; wherein after the Preamble, he answered all the imputations that
were laid unto him, and for what was objected, that he made use of the
Cardinals name to foment the divisions of the State, he said he had nothing to
do in any thing that had been said or done against him, before his
disimprisonment, and that if he had afterward joined with the sense of all the
Parliaments of the Kingdom, and with the Votes of all the people, it was only
to maintain the quiet which might be disturbed by his return; and that if the
Kings Council had been so diligent as they ought to have been in taking away
the jealousies occasioned by so many sendings to Colen, the Parliament should
not have needed to be troubled at his return, nor to desire a Declaration in
confirmation of the Decrees which had been made, which it seems was endeavored
to be deluded by that writing, which wanting the usual form, ought to be of no
consideration.

That though this were enough to say, That he had no need to answer, that
notwithstanding, since it had been said in the presence of that Assembly, and
in the rest of the body of the City, and which had moreover been Printed; he
thought it fit to convince all men of the calumnies which were laid upon him;
for what concerned the favors conferred upon his Family by the King, he said
he had deserved them by the service he had done the Crown. That Sfenay and
Claremont had been given him in recompense for the place of Admeralty, and for
the settlement of his Brother in Law, the late Duke of Bresse, which by his
death was lost. That the Governments had been justly confirmed upon him, having
been held by the Prince his Father; that he held his liberty from the favor of
their Majesty's at the desire of the Duke of Orleans, and Parliament that he
thought he should be faulty in gratitude, if he should partly allege justice
for this obligation, and that the Declaration made by her Majesty of his
innocence, was a sufficient proof of the violence which he had suffered under;
that he thought it strange, that after Thirteen months imprisonment, without
any known cause, his liberty must be acknowledged as an act of Grace; and that
he did no less wonder, that it should be said he was restored to the Kings
Council, since that place having been given to the Prince his Father by the
late King, and since the time of Regency, he could not attribute that to
favor, which did of right belong unto him, as Prince of the blood; and whereof
he could be no more be justly deprived without apparent injustice, than of his
Towns and Governments. That it was ridiculous that the Cardinals new
confidents, (who as it was likely had dictated that writing) should give out
that he strove rather to make himself be feared than loved by reason of
thenumber of Towns which he past, (though he had no more besides Stenay, and
Claremont, than those that had formerly been in his Family) no complaint having
ever been made of any violence by those that commanded; and that he was not
troubled to defend himself against any thing that was upbraided unto him, had
he not in some sort sacrificed his interest, and glory, to the obedience which
he ought unto the King: whereof his Enemies made use of now, to discredit him,
and that he referred himself to the judgment of the Parliament, whether or no
these intrigues of the Cardinal were enough to upbraid him with the number of
his Governments; since the Cardinal and his Domestics, possessed Pinarole in
Italy; Salse, Perpignone, and Roses in Rosiglion; Dunkirk, Mardike, Bergue,
Dorlans, Bapumes, la Bassea, Ypre, Cotra in Flanders: besides Portalongone and
Piombino, which he had suffered to be lost: not reckoning an infinity of other
places, the Governors whereof did wholly depend upon him; which was sufficient
to denote, that more than words were requisite to secure the Kingdom of the
absence of one, who had so many gates to enter by; and when it was
experimentally known too fatal to France, that his policy was always to make
himself formidable to all men. That for what was said that the Forces which the
King had given him might make a whole Army, it was well known to all France,
that the advantages which his Majesty had gotten over his Enemies, were partly
got by them, that his having changed the Government of Burgundy, for Guienne,
was occasioned by the Queens desire, merely for the peace of that Province
which could no longer tolerate the Duke of Espernoun; that he had preserved
the Towns which he held in Burgundy, because none were given him in Guie^ne;
and that having bought them, it was not just they should be taken from him,
without having some others given him in charge, or at least without having the
moneys repaid that his Father had given the Duke of Bellegrade. That he had not
received above 5000 pounds for all that had been assigned to him, as well for
maintaining the King's Kitchen, as for the maintenance of his Troops; and all
this because the moneys were otherwise diverted by the Cardinal and his
friends, as he could prove unto the Parliament; that his having solicited the
sending of Count Servient, Lion, and Tillier from the Court, could not be
termed an undertaking against the Regal Authority, since the Parliament
justified him therein, by their Demonstrances; and for that he had seen their
Majesty's but once, it was by reason of their new ordering the Council, putting
in persons newly engaged in the Cardinals interest, without his knowledge, or
consent; it being most certain that none were admitted into the Council, but
such as did depend upon; and were partial to Mazari^e; wherefore he could not
hazard himself any more in their hands, who were swaid by ambition, and who
consequently had given him just occasion to apprehend their Counsels; and to
declare that whilst they were without his advice of the Council, he could have
no safety there. That for these reasons he had forborne coming to Council, not
having any other considerations than those which he had declared to the Duke of
Orleans in his last Declaration. That his having written to the Parliaments of
the Kingdom, and to several Cities, was done to give them an account of his
actions, and to make them lose the opinion which was given out, that he would
introduce civil wars into France, in consequence of the Letters which the King
writ to all the Provinces after his retreat to St. Maure, with the faults
therein imputed unto him; it being false that he had written to raise any men
more than usual; as also that he had reinforced the Garrisons in his
Governments, and fortified them of late, forcing the people of the neighboring
Towns to work, which had he done ought rather to be commended in him than
blamed; and that it were to be wished that all Governors of Frontier Towns
would do the like. That the retreating of his Wife, and of his Sister the
Duchess of Longueville, was upon the consideration, that they were to preserve
his Family, which after so many jealousies were not in wisdom to be trusted in
any one place; that none but those that desired his ruin, could be offended
thereat, and that if these had been less circumstantial and better advised,
since they knew that his Sister was in the Monastery of Carmelites at Burges,
and his wife assigned to a house of his, in the time of his imprisonment, they
would not have raised jealousies of a thing which was not only permitted, but
also very indifferent, nor yet badly interpret the exhibition made by him of
his Revenues, for the payment of his Debts, and keeping of his House in the
time of his imprisonment.

That no condition was drawn from him touching Stenay, wherein it was easy to
judge, he could not oblige himself in any thing, since it was not in his power,
the Duke of Orleans having made it sufficiently known that he had not failed in
any thing that became his duty to the King, nor to his Birth; since conformable
to what was witnessed by his Royal Highness, after the return made by Marquess
Sillerey, who went to Brussels by order from the King, he had offered to make
the Spaniards go out by way of treaty, so as promise might be given that no
Hostility might pass between the Towns of Stenay and Luxemburg; or that if they
would give him 2000 men, he would force them to withdraw from thence, which not
being granted him by the Queen, he was not to be blamed, that the Garrison
which consisted not of above 200 men, did not drive out the Town Garrison
wherein were 500, and which might at all times be recruited by the Archduke;
for what concerned the pass of Dun, it was so inconsiderable as 300 men might
have driven out the Enemy, which was unable to preserve it, that concerning his
Forces abiding upon the Frontiers, he could not be therein better justified
than by the Duke of Orleans; who declared that he had done nothing therein but
by his direction, and to hinder the dissipation of the Forces, which might be
very serviceable to the King, and wherein their ruin, and that of the whole
Army would have been unfallible, which was commanded by Generals and Officers
totally depending upon the Cardinal; it being well known that the rumor spread
abroad, that the Forces abiding in France was but a trick to exclaim against
him; since nothing was said of the Forces of Turenne and Vandosme, who were
quartered in the neighboring Towns of Schale, and Netencourt, and which were
never drawn out into the Field, that the licentiousness imputed to his men, was
an epidemical, and no particular malady, against the which the Parliament
having provided, he had already declared, and would still protest, that he
would take order that those who should have failed therein in his Troops should
be punished according to Law. To what was said that he held intelligence with
the Spaniards, he with much vehemence protested it was totally false, and
merely the Calumnies of his Enemies; for which he required reparation from the
Parliament, as of the greatest outrage which could be committed against one of
his quality, and to the dignity of a Prince of the blood, and he desired the
Assembly to interpose their Authority, in desiring their Majesty's to nominate
the Authors of those Calumnies, and to demand memorials, and advertisements of
the said imputed intelligence; wherein he would submit himself to their
judgments, if they should find that he had done any thing contrary to the duty
of his birth.

By the news which was had of this writing, and by the endeavors hotly pursued
by Conde, and his friends, the Queen, after many passages in Parliament, was at
last enforced by the same necessity, which made her do many things in that
present conjuncture of times, even contrary to her will, to make the King
publish another writing, clean contrary to the former, in discharging the
Prince of the former accusations, which she sent to the Parliament, which
argued great weakness in the Court, and gave occasion of blaming the first
endeavor as a thing unusual.

The Parliament did this mean while declare, That all this was done to render
him universally odious, and to make him despair, that according to the Courts
designs, he might be the first that should take up Arms; and from the 22 th. of
August, till the 7 th. of September, it was much debated by those of the
faction of the Princes, whether or no Conde could with safety be present at the
Ceremony of the King's Majority, but fearing, or seeming to be afraid, he went
two days before from Paris, pretending to visit the Duke of Longueville at Try
in Normandy, and writ a Letter to the King before he went, which was given his
Majesty by the Prince of County the same morning that his Majesty made his
entry on Horseback, and went afterward he and the Duke Rochefaucolt waiting
for him in their place in Parliament, to assist at the Celebration of his
Majesty's Majority; This Letter said, that not for want of good will, but
merely out of fear of danger to his own person, he forbear being present at the
Ceremony.

The Prince being gone, accompanied by the Marquess of Iersey, and Monsieur de
Monpasson of the house of Gondrine, went by Pointois, to Try, at the same time
that Longueville came thither, with whom he complained much against the Court
proceedings; and particularly that Servient, Tillier, and Lion, being banished
from the Court; Chasteauneuf, Mole, and Vieville were put into their places.
The first, chief of the Council, the second, keeper of the Seals, and the
third, superintendent of the Finances; all which he thought were worse than the
former three, he then desired him to declare for him, and to follow his
fortune, assuring him of assistance from the Spaniards, both in men, and money;
but the Duke keeping firm to the Court, would not put himself into these
troubles, upon uncertain hopes, and so giving him fair words, kept firm to what
he thought was best for his own interest.

After this meeting, the Duke returned to Normandy, and the Prince having heard
that the Duchess of Aiguilon had offered the Queen by Count Harcourt, that she
would bring him to her either dead or alive, with bare 200 men, which the King
had given her, (the which was absolutely denied by his Majesty) instead of
returning to Pontoise, went to Chantelly, where the Dukes of Nemeurs, and
Rochefaucolt went to meet him, to know what resolution they were to take.

But to return to the affairs of Catalonia, the Spaniards after the taking of
Tortoise, kept quiet there in their winter quarters; providing for War, that
they might carry on their Forces in due time to such enterprises, as the time
should invite them; whereof the Catholic Court making use by reason of the
civil discords of France, which happened so opportunely for Spain, the
Spaniards failed not to weigh wisely what might make most for their advantage:
but their chief hopes were to take Barcellona by the re-inforcements which they
expected from Italy, England, and Germany; being thereunto invited not only by
the weakness of France, but also by the miserable condition of that City, which
was grievously visited with the Plague, which after having destroyed 35000
persons, had left the rest in so miserable a condition as there were scarce 400
Citizens who were fit to manage Arms, to which was added, that the people were
wearied by the violence, and extortions of the French. And were inclined to
submit themselves under their first masters; remembering that in time of peace
they were better dealt with, than what they now experimented under the
Government of the French, being too late aware that the change of masters
happens seldom without the ruin of the Country. This resolution being put on
then in the Council of Spain, fitting orders were sent to the Governor of
Millian, to the Viceroys of Naples, and Sicily, and to all other parts, from
whence Men, Victuals, or money might be expected; and from Naples, besides
Forces, Count Ognate sent three Vessels loaded with Corn thitherward, whereof
there was then great scarcity in Spain, to maintain the Army, which had much
ado to subsist in a Country totally impoverished, and desolate. But these three
Ships were taken by Cavaliere Polk, who roved upon those Seas, which retarded
the design for three months. Finally, all things necessary being prepared, and
about 6000 foot, and 2500 horse being raised in the parts about Lerida by
Marquess Mortara who was General, together with Baron Sabac, Captain
Camp-master General, Count de Aro, Son to the Constable of Castile, General of
the horse, Fra. Giovanni de Marchesi Pallevicini, a noble Genuese General of
the Artillery, Baron de Bontiere a Burgundian Commissary General, and other
valiant and experienced Captains and Officers, they went with sixteen field
pieces, and four pieces of Battery taken out of Lerida, toward Cervera on the
8 th. of July, and feigning as if they would fall upon Bellaguer, they tarried
two days before that Town, wherein was much Victuals, Ammunition of War, and
fifteen pieces of Artillery, which served the Prince of Conde at the Siege of
Lerida, but the Queens, and Anjou's Brigades being brought thither by Marquess
Marcelly, they rose from thence on the 10 th. of July (for that was not their
design) and went to Vaglies.

But because after Duke Mercure's departure, Catalognia was without a Viceroy,
and for that by reason of the Spaniards preparations it behoved them to have
another speedily, it was much pressed for to the Court of France. So as in April
Marishal de Oquincourt had that employment given him, and was sent for from his
Government of Peronne to Paris; where whilst it was discust how they might send
him well provided of men and moneys to keep the field in that Province, Conde
being bent upon other designs, used means to keep him from going upon that
employment, who was faithful to the King, and a friend to the Cardinal.
Endeavoring that in his stead Count Marsine should be sent thither, who was
his inward friend, that (as it was noised) he might by holding intelligence
with him, dispose of that Principality as he should please. So as Count de
Iglias, Don Giuseppe Fontenella, and Don Giuseppe de Pinosa, all of them prime
Catalonians, being then at Paris, Conde treated with them, and wrought so with
them, as they managed the business at Court; and got Marsine to be chosen
Captain General of those Forces; with order to be speedily gone, for that the
Spaniards were already ready to march into the field, and to enter Caterlonia,
many Catalonians having turned over to their party; but Conde's intention being
to win upon Marsine's affection, who was a wise and valiant Warrier, he
procured Madamoselle de Cleremont to him, for his Wife, with whom he had some
little relation in blood: wherefore instead of making have to his charge, he
kept a month longer about the Court, upon pretense of that Marriage, and
fifteen days longer at Fontenblean, where the opinion of the Court was, that he
treated with an Envoy from Don Gabriel de Tolledo, who was then at Paris, about
a General peace, and that they had already agreed privately how to plot all the
Prince his designs, who was already confederated with the Spaniards. And Conde
as also the three aforesaid Catalonians, and desiring that Marsine might have
the Title of Viceroy, they used means by counterfeit Letters (as was
discovered) from Giuseppe Payssa, fifth Counselor of Barcellona, a great
friend of the said Fontenella, which were written to the King, wherein the King
was persuaded to grant that Deputation, whereunto the King gave way, giving him
hopes to make him Marishal of France upon the first occasion, it was
notwithstanding thought preposterous by many, to send Marsine back again to
that employment, from whence he had been wrongfully removed, as well not to
afford him means how to revenge himself, as also to shun the dislikes which
might arise between the said Marsine, and those that had arrested him, it being
probable that there might be jealousies allways between them: but the unhappy
conjunctures of that Court, made those resolves unfortunate.

Marsine being at last come upon the 14 th. of July to Rastello in Barcellona
he spoke therewith Don Giusippe Margherite, with the Consuls of Barcellona, and
with the Deputies of Catalonia; and having discoursed with them upon the
affairs of the War, and upon the designs of the Enemies, he went to find out
the Forces, and tarried at Piera, where he ordered Don Giusippe de Ardena, who
was returned a little before from France to Catalonia, with title of Lieutenant
General, to return with his men to where they had been a little before; and
were staid until the Spaniards, after having received a recruit of three
Brigades of Italian foot, and four of the Irish, should march without
Artillery, which they sent by the way of Villafranca to Taragona, toward
Barcellona, wherein there being but few men, and less Victuals, Don Giuseppe
Margherite, and the Consuls, were very diligent in causing those who were
returned into the City, from the neighboring Villages which were visited with
the Plague, to bring in Corn, and other Victuals; in so much as for eight days,
so many Carts and Mules were seen to enter by the three only gates which were
left open, as enabled the Town to hold out fifteen months longer.

It being in this interim known that the Spaniards marched from Vagliez,
toward the hill Sodoner, Marsine retreated to St. Andrea upon Lobegrate, where
he haulted till the Spaniards began to descend the hill Lodonner, he neither
withstood their march, which he might easily have done, they being to pass down
the steep hill for the space of a Catalonian league, nor did he oppose their
coming into the plain of Lobegrate, though he knew that the Van began to fall
down on the last of July, the Rear was not yet come thither, the French Army
being then above 1700 horse, and 6000 foot. But retreating from St. Andrea,
left only Ardena with his Catalonian Regiment, and some other Commanders to
Skirmish a while till all his other men got to L' Hospedeletto, one league
distant from Barcellona, where on the 4 th. of August he retreated to the
Covent of Valdonsella, not far from the Walls, and encamped his men about the
Ditches of Barcellona, making two quarters, one in the same place, the other in
the Covent of the Angeli Veuki.

The Spaniards being this mean while fallen down without any opposition, from the
hill into the plain of Lobegrate within sight of the City, they encamped
themselves along the River, and having taken a Tower upon the head of the same
River on the 8 th. of August, they landed their Artillery which came from
Taragona, and 2500 Germans, and on the 12 th. day accosted the City, incamping
from Sans to Saria, and the next day they enlarged themselves toward St
Martino, a mile distant on the East from Barcellona; with the aforesaid six
Ships, and with three others afterward, and six Galleys, they came within
sight of the City, and here the French committed a second error, in suffering
the Spaniards to march from Maria to St. Martine without assaulting them, as
they might have done, which infused such jealousies into the Catalonians, as
made them march out after three in the afternoon to fall upon them with all
their Foot, and part of their Horse; but the Rear which was already come up to
the body of the Battle, finding the design staid; so as Marsine finding his
design discovered; returned to his quarters, from whence he was not advanced as
far as a Musket might shoot.

On the 15 th. day the Spaniards began to make their Trenches on St. Martine's
quarters, and advanced with them toward Masquinardo, and at the same time made
three little Forts upon the tops of those Mountains seated between the said
Masguinardo, and the Covent of Madonna delle Gratia, where not long after they
made another quarter, in which things they spent many days without any
considerable success, for though the French sallied out with 300 Horse, and
fell upon some of the Spanish Forces who went for forage, no great harm was
done, the Spaniards being succor'd by a great body of Horse, which drove the
French back into their quarters; and thus went affairs without any great
novelty till the 20 th. of September. Where after Marsine by the means of
Marquess Monpullion who went, as the Catalonians said, to treat with the
Spaniards, where Letters past between him and Conde, the business being agreed
upon, Marsine went presently away, pretending to go upon some enterprise
toward Taragona, and then turning his march toward Ponts, and Vrgil went into
Guienne to the Prince of Conde, he was accompanied by Marquess Monpullion, by
Monsieur Luzzan Marishal of the Battle, by Espencee who commanded his Regiment,
and with about 400 Horse, and some carriages of Baggage and Munition. He would
have carried more people away with him, but was hindered by Don Giuseppe
Marquerite, and Marquess Marcelly, who discoursed of the way of stopping him,
(for they had apprehensions of him) whereunto Barcellona would easily have
agreed, for that City mistrusted him: all the Catalonians who sided with him,
were much suspected by those who were more faithful, and began to observe
either vvays, which was always afterward prejudicial to France.

A great sense was had in Barcellona of this flight of a General who could
not know well how to better his condition. Don Giuseppe Margherite, by consent
of all the Citizens and Council of Barcellona, took the Government of all
things upon him, and sent Monsieur de Roy who commanded the Queens Regiment to
the Court, to acquaint their Majesty's with all that was past, and to solicit
them to send another Viceroy speedily; Don Giuseppe de Ardena, and Count de
Alets, who were at this time gone out with about 800 Horse were sent for back
into Barcellona, they being in the parts of Gravoile, as also the Deputies of
Catalonia, who were at Mandrise ten Leagues from Barcellona, making new leavies
of men, and providing things fitting to relieve the City, fearing least after
Marsine's flight the Spaniard would have stormed the City.

For defense of this Town, there were before Marsine went away 3000 French
foot, 1200 Switzers, 1700 French Horse; besides these that received pay, there
were 3000 Armed Citizens, and 85 pieces of Artillery.

For what concerns the Province of Catalonia, the best, and strongest Towns
were in the Spaniard's hands as Taragona, Lerida, Flix, Mirevet, Tortoja,
Fragra Monson, and others; and none held for the Catalonians but Barcellona,
Bellaguer upon the River Segra, Arbecca, Cervera, Camerassa, Vrgell, Trem, the
Castle of Valenza, Sauroca, Alose, Roses, and Palamose.

The Baron della Fera, a French man commanded in Bellaguer, with 400 foot; in
Arbecca Monsieur Marie, with 40 or 50 men, in Arger, Cavaliere Austrea with 200
foot; in Camer assa an Officer of the Garrison of Bellaguer with 30 Soldiers;
in Trem, Don Giame Dearill, a Catalonian with 200 foot; in Sauroca Monsieur
Durnareda with 40 Soldiers: in Alose Sieur Rochfertier, with 300 men: in Roses
the Marquess Della Fara, elder Brother to the Baron, with 300 Soldiers; in
Palamose Sieur de Chastenure with 50 men: all which places were capable of
greater Garrisons: but were guarded by so few for want of men; for most of the
Governors were so avaricious, caring little for any thing but how to fill
their own purses, made false musters, that they might pocket up dead pays, to
the ruin of the public and of their own private honors.

The affairs of Catalonia going thus, and the Siege of Barcellona, before which
the Spaniards fortified themselves still more, and engrossed their Army with
diverse Troops which came from several places, they hoped to put a good end to
that War. Marquess Mortara who applied himself wholly to this end, failed not
to provide what was necessary, and knowing that it was fit to make a line of
Circumvallation before the French could be able to bring succor, after he had
minded the perfecting of the head quarter at St. Martino from the 13 th. of
August to the 3 d. of October, Marquess Palanesine who came that very day, went
to Sans with part of his men, to make another quarter there, forcing some
Catalonians who were fortified in the Churchyard to yield; and then they fell
upon the Tower of Losiere, guarded by Captain Brodas with 40 foot, about which
the Catalonians came, where about 100 of them were slain, and taken Prisoners,
which Mostares brought to relieve it: and the same time they took the Monastery
of St. Matrona by night, seated in the midst of Mongenick, which commanding the
whole City, they placed 7 pieces of Canon upon it, and began to play upon the
Houses, but did not much harm. During these prosperous successes, Don John of
Austria appears, the 19 th. of October, with Nine Galleys, and one Ship on the
Strand over against the said quarters of St. Martine, where casting anchor he
landed about 700 foot; so as the Fleet which consisted only of eight Ships, and
fourteen Galleys, was hereby increased, as it was afterward by the remainder
of the Galleys, brought by Duke de Alburcheque who landed some foot, wherewith
the Castillian Camp was ever and anon furnished, as well by Sea as Land, some
2500 Soldiers, what foot, what horse being arrived at once, and two pieces of
Canon, conducted by Don Pietro Vancella, on the last of December Governor of
that Town to the great joy of all the Army; so as being assured to be
assaulted, the besieged battered their Guards, and began chiefly to have an eye
to those who were held to adhere to Marsine, and Spain; wherefore Don Giuseppe
de Ardena, who as has been said, was sent for back to Barcellona, marched down
the Mountain with 350 foot on the side of Valuedriera, and by the Covent of
Madonna delle Gratie, and entered the Town on the 25 th. of November. The
Spaniards this mean while acosted the City with their Galleys, and Ships, and
October and November were spent in making little Forts upon the neighboring
Mountains, which were the Fort Masguinardo upon the hill Portello del Pino, and
another near the Covent of Madonna delle Gratie; whereof nothing succeeded of
note but a deluge of Rain which drowned diverse Soldiers. Wherefore failing of
Victuals which were daily brought from Taragona, the Army was well nigh forced
to rise, there being no Corn, nor any thing whereupon to sustain themselves in
those desolate parts, yet that Nation enjoying the great prerogative of
sobriety, and sufferance, they at last won the day.

The Court of France, though involved in intestine troubles, was not wanting in
doing what the bad conjuncture of time would suffer them to do: and now that
the season would not permit the use of Arms in Piemont, the King writ in
November to Marquess St. Andrea Monbrun, to make have back over the Mountains,
leaving only Scoope's Regiment of foot to guard the Towns upon the Frontiers;
that most of the foot, together with Camilla's, and Terme's Regiments of Horse,
the Gens de arms, Prince Thomaso's Guard, and le Compagnie Franche of Villa,
Monte, and Vaosi, should go into Burgundy, and that the rest of the Horse,
together with the Foot Regiments of Normandy and Britanny should march into
Guienne; which Andrea doing, not without some delay, by reason of the
opposition made by the Duchess of Savoy, who was loath to be abandoned by
those Forces; but the Horse not being able to pass over the Bridge St. Esprite,
by reason of the abundance of Rain that fell, which caused Rhodanus to swell,
they were forced de ingolfare le truppe in Dolpheny, and to enlarge them in the
Towns of that Province, and the Forces consisting of 37 Companies of Horse, and
60 Foot Companies, did much oppress that Country; Wherefore the Nobles sent
Commissioners to complain thereof to the Marquess; who willing to content them,
could take no other expedient than to make his men march over the Bridge of
Avignion which was not usual, and which was not to be done without the Pope's
permission, who is Lord of that place: yet the Vice Legate Seignior Corci gave
him leave, for which the King himself did afterward write thanks unto him.
But because there was greater need of help in Catalonia, than in Guienne, he
was no sooner come to Nimes, but that he received Letters sent from Marishal
della Motta, who was declared Viceroy of Catalonia by the King; wherein he was
ordered to go and relieve Barcellona, telling him that the only sight of his
men would suffice to free the City, and promising him that he should return
within one month after he had entered that Province; in Conformity whereunto the
Marishal wrote unto him likewise from the Court, that those Forces not being to
stay above a month in Catalonia, Sopra di cio dovea prender le sue misure, he
was accordingly to take his measures. The Marquess who found his men wearied
with their long march, writ to la Motta, that he might have leave to refresh
his men one month in Languedock; which la Motta refusing, wished him to go into
Catalonia and raise men, saying, he must not look to hear any more from him,
upon consideration that the journey was short, and that he needed not carry
along any Baggage for the more have, to the end that relief might come before
any succor could come from Spain.

This years Campaign ended in Piemonte, without any affair of Consequence; for
though the Spaniards advanced as far as Montcalliere, not far from Turenne,
seeming to have some design upon Pivaralle; their end was only to ease the
State of Millan, and to refresh their Army with plundring Piemonte, which was
already wasted very much; whereby the Spaniards hoped to bring the Duchess of
Savoy, (since she had but little hopes of succor from France, by reason of the
intestine troubles) to some reasonable agreement. But Marquess St. Andrea
Monbrune mustering the French Forces, traced the Enemy so luckily; as by
frequent Allarms, and Skirmishes he made them forego part of their booty, and
at last overtaking them in a Village called Boutelliere, two of their Squadrons
of Horse, were stoutly driven back by the French to the body of their Foot,
which guarded the Baricado at the entrance into the same Village; which gave so
hot an Alarm to the Enemy, as Marquess Caracena hasting to take Horse put his
foot out of joint. The next morning, knowing that St. Andrea was a narrow
passage between two mountains, where he might might fight them upon advantage,
he ordered Padaglian to fall upon the Spanish Army on the Rear, with three
Regiments of Horse, with Vxelles his Brigade of Foot, and with 900 Foot of the
Country Militia, whilst he should assault them on the Front. Affairs being thus
ordered, Pardaglian marched speedily after the Spaniards, and after three hours
march upon the going down of the Sun he overtook them in the Valley of Montison;
but not having order to fall upon them, till after St. Andrea had begun on his
part, whereof he heard no noise, he haulted upon the banks of a little River
within sight of the Enemy, with whom he Skirmish'd all the night with his
Horse. But Caracena being removed at Sunrising, Pardallian did the like,
taking to the left hand; and being come to the Castle of Courtendome, a mile
distant from the Enemies Army, he there heard that St. Andrea could not assault
them according to agreement; for that the Spaniards were gotten by intelligence
into the aforesaid Castle; yet that he might not return without doing any
thing, he came once more up to the Spanish Rear, and finding that the Enemy
withdrew their Foot, leaving three Squadrons of Horse to guard them, he
presently charged them with his forwardest Horse, hoping to engage the Foot;
but the Horse betaking themselves to their heels, he in the head of his Troops
chased them even to the gross of their Rear, ordering the rest to hault at the
Village above the aforesaid Castle, that he might make use of them, if he
should be forced to retreat. The Spanish Captains coming in as their Soldiers
ran away, rallied them so, as the French were forced to retreat to their
reserve, where the Foot behaved themselves so well, as having disordered the
Spanish Horse by a furious volly of Musket shot, Pardalian had opportunity to
fall upon them with his reserve, and to discompose them, killing many, and
taking many Prisoners; The rest of the day was spent in defials and slight
Skirmishes on both sides, and they lay that night in the fields, which retarded
the march of the Spanish Army one day, and made the Spaniards hazard the loss
of their Rear, if Pardallian had had more men, or had the Piemontese Militia
done as they ought to have done. Thus without making any more attempts, they
all retreated to their former quarters, and where they staid till they were
forced to remove by mere accidents as, small be said in the ensuing books. The
remainder of this year, and the beginning of the next were spent in treaties
between the Governor of Millan, and the Duchess of Savoy, to whom the
Spaniards made great offers, persuading her to make use of the present
conjunctures of time, when little assistance being to be expected from France,
by all reason she ought to agree with Spain, and shun the ruin which Piemonte
was likely to run into, for want of necessary defense; but the Duchess, though
she seemed not to be distasted with such a treaty, yet entered she thereinto
only to feed the Spaniards with hopes, till times might prove better.

THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The SEVENTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The King's Majority, after which diverse expeditions are made. Marquess
Chasteauneus is sent for back into the Court, and made Minister of State. The
seals are given again to the first President Mole. The Coadjutor Gondi, is
named by the King, to be Cardinal. The Prince of Conde retires to Berry, and
from thence to Bordeaux. The King goes with his Court to Berry, and from thence
toward Guienne. Diverse accidents of War happen. Cardinal Mazarine is sent for
back by the King; who raises men to enter France. War begins again in Guienne,
with several successes which are advantageous for the King. Count Marsine
abandons the King's service, and goes from Catalonia to France, to Conde's
party. The Duke of Nemeurs raises men in Flanders, and falls in with the party
of the Malcontents. The Cardinal parts from Sedam, and comes with about 6000
Soldiers to Poictiers, to serve the King, the Duke of Bullion, and General
Turenne are received in favor to the Court. Turenne is declared General of the
King's Army. Angiers is taken. The King marches to Blois. Nemeurs enters
France with the Army which he raised in Flanders. Differences arise between him
and Duke Beaufort, who differ in managing the War. Count Paluan besieges
Montrond. Madamoselle comes to Orleans, and keeps that City from declaring for
the King. The King's Army advances to Guienne. Conde comes incognito from
Guienne to Nemeurs and Beaufort's Army. Several accidents of War happen. The
Spaniards continue the seige of Barcellona.

ON the 7 th. of September, the day destined for the Ceremony of the King's
Majority, all things were prepared which were fitting to Celebrate such an
action, the King, Queen, Princes, and great ones of the Court, go to the Hall
of Parliament; where the King being seated in his Chair of Justice, the Queen
sat on his right hand, together with the Dukes of Anjou, and Orleans, Prince
of County; the Dukes and Peers of France who were there, viz. the Dukes of
Vsses, Mercure, Beaufort, Luines, Brisack, Rochefaucolt, and Candalle; who were
followed by the Marishals of France, viz. D' Estree, de L'Hospitalle, Villeroy,
Oquincourt, la Motta, Plessis Pralin, de Estampes, the Son of Millerey, great
Master of the Artillery; and on the left hand sat the Lord de Aumaule,
Archbishop of Rheimes, Cohorse Bishop of Beauvois, Vialarde Bishop of Chalouns,
Barada Bishop of Noyoune, the four Ecclesiastical Dukes and Peers, all these
sat on high: and lower on the right hand sat the Archbishop of Paris, the
Bishops of Saulis, and Tarbes; at the Kings foot sat Duke Chamberlain Ioyeuse,
the chief Provost of Paris, the Counts Charost, Tremes, Gesure, and
Villaquiere, who were Captains of the King's Guard. Count Brienne, Messieurs
della Vrliere, Plesses Guinagaude, and Tillier, who were four Secretaries of
State upon a Bench over against the King's feet. At the Queens feet sat
Monsieur Guitand, Captain of her Guard, Coninges her Lieutenant, Count Harcourt
with the Crowns Sword in a violet velvet sheath studded with Golden
Flower-de-luces. The Chancellor in his usual place in a velvet Gown; upon
another seat behind the Counselors of State, sat the six Masters of Requests,
and President Montaro; upon another Bench sat the Princess of Carrignano, and
her Daughter Princess Luise, and then the Queens maids with their Mother, in
the high Lantern sat the Queen of England, the Duchess of Orleans, Duchess
of Espernoun, the Marquess of Gesures, and Cominges; in the Lantern on the side
of Nodari, the Pope's Nuntio, the Ambassadors of Venice, and Holland; in the
Tribunal upon their knees, four Heralds at Arms, two before, and two behind,
one bearing the hand of Justice, another the Scepter, and the other two
Truncheon of violet Velvet, studded with small Golden Flower-de-luces, the
Dukes of Crequi, and Mortman chief Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber, and
Marquess Sourches grand Provost of France, and on seats below, all the
Counselors, Officers, and others of the Court and Parliament.

Being thus stately inthroned, the King spoke thus; I am come to the
Parliament, to tell you, that according to the Laws of the Kingdom I intend to
take upon my self the Government of the State, and hope through God's goodness
to do it with piety, and justice. The Chancellor will tell you the rest; who
standing up and bowing low unto the King, made a neat discourse upon that
action; which when he had done he returned to his place.

Then the Queen rising a little from her seat spoke thus unto the King. Sir,
this is the 9th. year, that by the will of the late King, my ever honored Lord
and Husband, I have taken upon me the care of your Education, and the
Government of the State. God of his goodness has blessed my endeavors, and
preserved your person, which is so dear to me, and precious to your Subjects,
Now that the laws of your Kingdom call you to take upon you the Government of
this Monarchy, I with much satisfaction surrender the Authority that was given
me of Governing it; hoping that God will assist you with his spirit of strength
and wisdom, whereby to make your Kingdom fortunate. Then the King turning
toward her with a cheerful countenance, said, He thanked her for the care she
had taken of his Education, and of the Government of the Kingdom; that he
desired her to continue counselling him, and that she would be his chief
adviser. The Queen bowed, and in sign of Homage would have kissed his hand, but
the King embraced her and kissed her with much tender affection.

The Duke of Anjou being next him, kneeled at his Majesty's feet, and kissed his
feet, swearing fealty unto him. The King with a smiling countenance embraced
him. The Duke of Orleans, and County did the like; the Dukes, and Peers, and
Marishals of France, stirred not from their places.

Then the first President, as chief of the Parliament, making a low Reverence,
said, that in a day of so August memory, and of the applause of all the orders
of the Kingdom, he could not forbear telling his Majesty what obligations they
all had to that great Queen, the second Deity on earth, by whose wise Counsels
her Regency had so happily terminated, and with such like eloquent expressions
concluded those affectionate fidelities which are due from Subjects to their
Sovereign.

This being ended, the King, Queen, all the Dukes, Peers, and Marishals of
France, humbly bowing themselves in order, and the whole Parliament standing
up, his Majesty descended from his Throne, and went to the Chapel of the
Palace, where after having powered forth some prayers to God, went down, and
returned in his Coach to the Palace-Royal, attended by the Princes, Nobles, and
Lords on Horseback, and as he past over the Pont Neufe, was cried up with that
infinite affection which the French bear their King.

This Ceremony being over, Marquess Chasteauneuf was sent for back to the Privy
Council, and the Seals were again taken from the Chancellor, and given to the
first President, as the Queen had promised him. This Establishment of the first
President, as also of Chasteauneuf, and Vieville, who were called the three
Barboni, or great Beards, was suddenly done, without any delay, because
Chasteauneuf being in his heart an Enemy to the house of Conde, and the first
President, and Marquess Vieville not very acceptable to the Frondeurs, it was
not thought fit to defer it any longer, least they might meet with such
hindrances which might be interposed by factious people.

After Chasteauneuf had been banished, and had had the Seals taken from him, he
did all he could to reunite himself to the Cardinal, for that on the one side
he was an Enemy to the Prince, and on the other side, found that he had not the
credit with the Duke of Orleans which formerly he had, because it was
counterpoised by the Coadjutor, whom he knew to be of a turbulent spirit, and
who rather would have suffered Mazarine in the administration of State, than
him. Moreover he persuaded himself that in time he might regain the credit
which he formerly had had with the Queen, for which he had been persecuted by
Richelein. Mazarine was well contented with his re-establishment in affairs,
for he thought him true to the King's service, and for that he was not only
well thought of, but was allied to the chief Families: But when these three
Lords were settled in their places, they did not very well agree together; for
Chasteauneuf did not much esteem Vieville, though he had formerly been his
friend. He was likewise jealous of the guard de Seaux, finding that the Queen
placed all her confidence in him, the guard de Seaux despised both of them,
saying, that all affairs depended upon him, though Chasteauneuf was therein
better experienced than he; so as upon these differences diverse accidents
happened, which caused Chasteauneuf at last to withdraw himself.

For all this the Chancellor was not displeased with the Queen; for he knew
that those blows proceeded not from any demerits of his; but from the mere
necessity of the present conjunctures, which forced the Queen to do things
which were far from her desire, to evade a greater mischief, he went no more
notwithstanding to Council, but did withdraw himself of his own accord. And
Monsieur Guinegaude, when he took the Seals from him, told him that their
Majesty's were very well pleased with his service: and the Queen made him be
told by another, that in case any other change should at any time be made, she
would prefer him before all others, and would assist him and his Family by her
protection upon all occurrences. Chasteauneuf also in the beginning of these
troubles when the Seals were the second time taken from him, offered him to
keep them for him, and to restore them unto him, if he would yield up the first
place in Council to him, as was done to the Cardinals, who were first
Ministers; whereunto the Chancellor answered, that his private interest should
never derogate from the Dignity of his place; for he was a private man, and the
Cardinals were Princes of the holy Church.

Affairs beginning now to be treated of, bare faced in Court, Marishal de
Aumount's Forces were sent against those of Conde, which were within three days
journey of the King's Army; but they fled, and dispersed themselves without any
fighting, and some of them got safe to Stenay, some to other Towns belonging to
the Prince, who returned no more to Paris, but went to Eusone, and from thence
to Argeville, a house of President Perauts, where he tarried one day, expecting
to hear from the Duke of Orleans, whether the Court did not remit somewhat of
their austerity, in the treaty of agreement which was again reassumed by the
same Orleans, when the endeavors of the Princes Palatine proved vain, whereby
the Prince would have easily condescended to the Cardinals return; for he could
not well tolerate that Chasteauneuf should have that charge. But Count
Chavigny, who would very unwillingly have seen the Cardinal return, cunningly
perverted the Prince his good disposition, frightning him with a new
imprisonment, and minding him that if he should condescend to any thing which
might contradict what he had formerly promised the Duke of Orleans, and the
Frondeurs, he would totally lose their adherence, and deprive himself of all
other refuge, and give himself over to the pleasure of the Court, which he was
always to suspect, having had too great proofs thereof, to which was added the
Coadjutor's secret dealings, and the like of some others to break this
agreement, as shall be said afterward. Orleans being willing to endeavor the
Prince his satisfaction, and to quiet all private discords, chose Croisy as a
friend to the Prince and Chasteauneuf to go unto him, and to wish him from the
Duke to be at Eusonne between Argueville and Simouns, whither Orleans was gone;
but a whole day being spent in making these expeditions, the Duke sent one of
his Gentlemen to entreat the Prince to tarry for Croisy at Argueville. The
Gentleman mistaking the place whither he was to go, (were it either by
misfortune or fate) instead of going whither he was sent, went to another place
which was also called Argueville in Beaux, far from the other Argueville. So as
the Prince having attended one day with impatience, and interpreting delay, to
be dis-respect; parted the next morning discontentedly toward Burges a chief
City in Berry, which had declared for the Prince; here Croisy met him, and
proposed unto him a meeting with Orleans, which Conde refusing, he offered that
if he would keep quietly in his own Governments till the calling of the States
General, he should have good quarters assigned him for his Forces, to the end
that during the Assembly of the said States he might be in a condition of being
considered; and he further promised him in the name of the Duke, and of
Chasteauneuf, that the States should be kept in an unsuspected place, and that
if they could get the Queens good will, they should be kept in St. Denise,
where by the neighborhood of Paris he might have entire liberty. The Prince
considered the advantage of these propositions, whereby he might preserve his
Troops, and fortify them during the winter, an unfit reason for War,
foreseeing that he should hardly withstand the King's Forces, with his new men;
and he knew that if the Cardinal should be re-called whilst he was in his
Government, that finding him Armed, and stuck unto by so many friends, all that
he could desire either for himself or his friends must necessarily be granted
him; and that if the Cardinal should return without his consent, all the
Provinces, and Parliaments that were the Cardinals Enemies, would declare for
him. And that if the Cardinal should keep away (which he could hardly believe)
all France would acknowledge this satisfaction from him, and would be obliged to
him for it. When he had well weighed these proposals, and was willing to accept
them, he called the Prince of County unto him, and the Dukes of Nemeurs and
Rochefaucolt, and acquainted them therewith; but these believing that when Arms
should be taken up, the Court would grant all that he could pretend unto, told
him that these were but tricks to weaken him, and his faction. They wished him
to consider that Bordeaux was ready to declare, and that Spain did with
impatience expect this resolution; that if he should lose this occasion, he
should lose all the succor and assistance that he could expect from thence,
and that he would lose all his chief friends; in this diversity of opinion, the
Prince would put on no resolution, till he went to Montronde, to debate every
particular with his Sister Longueville, and willed Croisy to follow him. He
held diverse consultations in Montronde, and freely made it known, that he was
inclined to an agreement: but being contradicted by all the rest, it may be
said he was forced to a resolution contrary to his will; and as he was walking
in his Park, he said aloud, that since they were absolutely for his taking up
Arms, not to oppose them, he agreed thereunto: but bad them remember that he
was the last who as enforced thereunto took his Sword in hand, but that he
would be the last who should sheath it; soon after he called for Croisy, and
charged him to present his respects to the Duke of Orleans, and to desire him
not to slacken his endeavors, and authority in finding out some way of
accommodation, for he would be ready to accept of peace, when he knew he might
safely do it. But his friends and kindred were so desirous of a breach, as left
he might agree, whereunto they found him* willing enough; the Prince of County,
Duchess of Longueville, Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, President Viola,
and diverse others agreed privately amongst themselves, promising never to
separate, but to join even against the Prince himself, if he should agree with
the Court, without obtaining such-satisfaction for them as they pretended to;
and this they did to make themselves considerable, and not totally dependant
upon the Prince. So as first Chavigny, and then the rest, were the impulsive
reasons of the Prince his precipice, and of all the troubles that befell France
afterward; for all things would have been sweetened, and the Prince re-assuming
the Military employments of the Crown, would have triumphed over his Enemies,
he not being really corrupted in his will, but by the inticement of others; so
as it may be said that from hence arose the civil dissentions.

The Prince leaving his Wife and Son in the Castle at Montronde, together with
the Duke of Nemeurs who followed him, and Prince County, and Duchess
Longueville, staying in Burges: went on the 16 th. of September toward
Vertuile, where he found many of Rochefaucolt's friends, whose house that was,
to whom he gave Moneys and Commissions to raise men; he from thence continued
his journey without any interruption, and arrived at Bordeaux, where he was
received with extraordinary applause, and upon his coming thither made the
first President be told that he should not come before him, and that as being
partial to the Queen, he should go out of the City; whereunto he was incited by
the Frondeurs, and by Blanck, the second President; but the Prince assured him
of his friendship, if during these commotions he would keep neuter in his
Castle at Rilandraut.

When Conde came to Bordeaux, he sent his trusty servant Lenet into Spain, to
treat with Spain, which treaties were concluded as soon as begun, for the
Spaniards thought it was not now time to slight a Prince of France furnished
with friends, and one so famous in War; the treaty was agreed upon between his
Catholic Majesty, and him, and his adherents, with these expressions. First,
that the treaty of Stenay, between the Archduke, the Duchess of Longueville,
and General Turenne, should be confirmed in all parts. That the Prince should
be bound never to treat of peace without the King of Spains consent, who also
promised never to make peace with France, without comprehending the Prince,
upon such terms as should satisfy him. His Catholic Majesty obliged himself
to pay 500000 Crowns to raise men, and to keep a fleet in the River of
Bordeaux, which might be able to secure that City, and to keep commerce open
with Biscay. That he should absolutely command all the Armies of Spain, and
that all the Towns which should be taken in France, should remain in his hands,
save one Haven, which should be allowed the King of Spain for the security of
his Fleets at Sea, and of the Towns which had been taken from the Spaniards in
the present War. That the King of Spain should send about 8000 to the Prince
his Soldiers who were in Campagnia, which should be independantly under the
sole command of the Prince, or of him that he should send. The King promised to
pay yearly 600000 Crowns, for maintenance of the Forces; and the Prince having
given hopes, upon such ends as has been formerly touched upon, that the Duke
of Longueville should enter into the same concernment, the King promised that
in such a case he would assist him with Arms, Money, Men, and Shipping, that he
might wage War in Normandy.

In prosecution of which treaty Conde did what he could to make Marishal
Turenne take upon him the command of his Army in Campagnia; and he was so
confident of his valor, and so doubtful to meet with hardship if he should
oppose him, as he offered to give him Stenay; and to that purpose gave order to
Monsieur Chammegli who commanded there, to receive his Troops, and totally to
obey him, in which hopes the Prince continued for above four months, not
sending any other to command there which was the chief occasion of the
dissipation of those Troops. But Turenne did generously refuse all his offers,
and those that came to him as well from Flanders, as Spain, joining on the
contrary with the King his Master, as shall be said. Whilst the Prince staid in
Bordeaux he gave out Moneys, and Commissions to as many as would serve him; and
thinking it fitting to secure himself of the upper Guienne, and of Perigneaux,
he made a journey accompanied by few, more than Prince Marsilliack, Son to Duke
Rochefaucolt.

But to return to what the Coadjutor did, when he knew that the Princess
Palatine endeavored to reconcile the Prince to the Court, he to disturb it,
sent one to the Cardinal, to offer him his service, and to go out of the
Kingdom upon any Embassy, or employment, to avoid all jealousies; and promised
him that he would make the King go to Rheimes, and would reconcile him with the
Duke of Orleans; and that resuming his posture with satisfaction to his Royal
Highness he should return to Germany to end the treaty of the general peace,
which was commenced by the said Cardinal, as shall be said. Moreover Marquess
Noirmonstore, who was firm to the Coadjutors concernment, not only out of
friendship, but because he was allied to the Duchess Chevereux, and that he
hoped to be made Duke and Peer, and to get some Government, offered a confident
of the Cardinals to deposite into his hands the Brief for nomination of a
Cardinal, and Warrant for a Duke and Peer of France, till such time as they
should bring him back to the administration of Government, and that then, and
not till then they would receive the said Brief and Warrant.

But the Princess Palatine, having brought Bertet, who was the man that came
too and fro from the Cardinal, to the Coadjutor, who was willing to go himself
to Brules, was obliged by strong arguments to persuade the Cardinal that the
Coadjutor was generously minded, that it behoved him to prevent him by being
beneficial to him; and that his thoughts being generous and full of gratitude,
he would use more hearty endeavors upon these motives than any other.

This being a proposal of reciprocal advantage, it was to be believed that it
was sincerely meant. He therefore accepted the offer, and gave the business in
charge to Abbate Vndedei, who at last brought the Queen against her will, to
give way to the naming of the Coadjutor to be Cardinal, at the next Election.
The Coadjutor seemed to be very well content, and acknowledged himself highly
obliged; but not being able to use deceit without too much ingratitude, he went
very warily about to take it out of his hands; for considering that his name
was not acceptable to the Pope, it might so fall out that it would not so
satisfy him who was the promoter of this favor, and so that he might refuse
it, at least make it more difficult, as had befaln Abbate Riviere. The Cardinal
to oblige him the more, referred the said nomination to the Queen, who out of
the same respects having assigned it over to the Duke of Orleans, the Coadjutor
began to study how he might obtain his ends, and delude the Cardinal in what he
had promised him; wherefore finding that treaties with Conde grew desperate,
and his desire being to see both Conde and the Cardinal ruined, so as he might
have the absolute Government of affairs, he withdrew himself dexterously from
what he had promised upon frivolous excuses, and sought by moneys, and the
means of his Kinsman Cavaliere Gondi, who was a chief Officer of the great
Dukes to make sure the Court of Rome, whither he sent his confident Abbate
Charie, with much expense and presents, whereof he was not sparing, to
solicit his so much desired promotion, and to get it effected before more
novelties should arise in France, which might revoke the said nomination,
fearing least the Cardinal might do as he had done by Abbate Riviere, whom he
had undone by delays. This touched the Cardinal to the quick, for he was
acquainted with the Coadjutors designs: so as fitter medicines being applied to
a known mallady, he knew so well how to apply such Antidotes, as at last (as
shall be seen in the progress of this History) he salved all wounds
miraculously, and triumphed more than ever over his Enemies, and over
persecution and envy.

But as report does usually aggrandize things, which not being visible men do
with curiosity desire to know: the Princes his provisions being given out at
Paris, to be greater than they were, the rumor grew so great, as people grew to
be severally minded; some thought that the Prince made War merely out of
ambition to aggrandize himself; others that he intended to raise himself to
what was equal to his prepotency, and experience in managing Arms; and the
Court was not only full of these conceptions, but even many good Citizens of
Paris, who being stirred up as well by fear of a civil war, as hoodwinck'd by
ignorance of the Arcana, fancied that the Cardinal being out of the Kingdom, it
was not known what the Prince did drive at, for the first overture of breach
was grounded upon his desire of having the Cardinal banished, which when it
should be obtained the cause being removed, the effect would cease: by these
whisperings the Prince fell somewhat from that general affection which he had
gotten amongst the Parisians after his being set at liberty; others thought
that he prepared for defensive War, rather out of fear of the Court, than out
of any other design.

But the Court nourishing the opinion, that they were the effects of insatiable
ambition; that they might have a lawful pretense to apply powerful remedies to
the evils that threatened the State, gave out that upon the present occurrances
it was requisite that the King should go in person to Berry to withstand the
first commotions, but two more important and concealed reasons moved thereunto.
The first, to secure it self by going out of Paris from the people, and
Frondeurs who so insolently had blocked them up in the Palace, which they might
do again upon any new rumor that might arise. The second, out of a desire that
the Cardinal might return which could not be done if the Court should tarry in
Paris, by reason of the Predominion of the Frondeurs, and seditious
Malcontents. Chasteauneuf adhered to the first reason as well to show himself
willing to please their Majesty's, as out of a belief, that if the Court should
be further off the Cardinal would find more difficulty to return, being to make
a long and dangerous journey, of which opinion were many others. On the
contrary the first President, Plessis Pralin, and Vieville said, that it was
fear, and not ambition which made the Prince do as he did; that it was best to
leave him quiet in his Governments, and not put him into despair, forcing him
to take up Arms in his own defense. That if Conde should begin the War, that
then the Court, and King's Army might go thither, whereby he might be
overthrown; but this opinion differing from their private intentions, who could
not advantage themselves but by War, was laid aside, and under pretense that no
parties should be tolerated in the Kingdom, save such as were obedient to the
King. Their Majesty's and the Duke of Anjou went on the 24 th. of Sebtember
from Paris, to Fontenbleau, together with the rest of the Court; which stands
upon the way to Charity, whither some of the Princes Forces were come, to guard
that important pass over the Loire, which enters into Berry, where was Prince
County, and the Duchess of Longueville, encouraging the Inhabitants of Burges,
by the great Towers which serve there for a Castle, and which was garrisoned by
their men, to join with them, whereby they intended to make head against the
King, in case he should assault them; but Conde staid too long in Bordeaux,
whose own person was requisite for such a design.

This departure of the Kings from Paris, caused much murmuring amongst the
seditious people, who said, that the Queen and Council meant not to return to
the City without the Cardinal, who by his directions did in his absence govern
all things; and the hearts of most men were so poisoned by the pravity of some
seditious people, as all things seemed to tend to open War; wherefore the
Spaniards, who wearily observed the conjunctures, and endeavored to
counterprise the balance justly, to the end that the pretentions on both sides
keeping upon a straight beam, that discord might be kept alive in France, which
was most adequate for their affairs. And least the too much fomenting the
Princes faction might necessitate the King to give way to their pretentions,
and agree with them; or that by the Spaniards great preparations they might
make the French aware of the danger which over-hung them, and to make them lay
aside all spleen, and join together in the common defense; they fed the Princes
more with hopes than effects, and went so reservedly in their proceedings with
them, as that in due time they might reap the fruit of their collegation. They
therefore contented themselves with taking some of those places which might
facilitate the recovery of Dunkirk, when they might with safety turn upon that
important place. And therefore on the 10 th. of August went to besiege Fournes,
which was assaulted by Marquess Sfomdrato with the Flanders Army, and was taken
within six days; for wanting fit provision wherewith to hold out, and having no
hopes of relief, Monsieur Bosquet, the Governor thereof was forced to
surrender it on the 16 th. of the said month; which did afterward facilitate
the enterprise of Burges St. Venoz, which not long after was fallen upon by the
same Sfomdrato, and Count Fuenseldagnia, who went thither with new Forces; but
though it were better situated and fortified then Fournes, yet Marishal de
Aumont (who to that purpose was advanced with the French Army) not being in a
condition to force the line, nor yet to come near the Enemy, for want of men
and other provisions, after the Garrison had valiantly defended the Town for 24
days, being encouraged by their Governor Belloy, it was at last forced to
yield upon honorable conditions on the 29 th. of September. So the Spaniards
were also masters of this place, seated within a league of Dunkirk upon the
River Colme, whereby it communicates with the Sea. Thus they made way for
falling upon Dunkirk, Graveline, and Mardike, and freed many Towns in Flanders
from contribution, extorted by the Garrison of Dunkirk, which was enclosed by
these two Forts.

Signior de Estrades, then Governor of Dunkirk, a valiant and well experienced
Gentleman, had from the beginning of July so eseen the Spaniards design upon
Fournes, and had desired 2000 Foot, and 1000 Horse from the Court, wherewith he
promised not only to preserve those Towns, but to fight the Enemy, who could
not hold communication between one quarter, and another: but the King having
need of men against the Prince of Conde, and not being able in this confusion
to raise other Forces, the Spaniards without any disturbance might obtain their
intent. Estrades forbear not notwithstanding to provide for Bergues, Dunkirk,
and Mardike, which were under his Government; he sent diverse Barques to be
loaded with Corn, Arms, and Ammunition in some neighboring Towns wherein he
had so good luck, as they were no sooner entered Dunkirk, but the Spanish Fleet
appeared, and cast Anchor in the mouth thereof, and blocked it up whilst the
Spaniards had fallen upon Fournes, and placed a great quarter of Horse within a
league of Dunkirk, the Governor put 500 Foot into Burgues, whereby it was
defended longer than Fournes. During these Sieges the Garrison of Dunkirk
scowred the Country, broke diverse of the Enemies Convoys, and took many
Prisoners.

Linch, Hanvin, and Burbury, were taken after Burgues, and Fournes, so as
Dunkirk was soon besieged by Sea, and Land, being berest of receiving any
commodities from those parts. And that they might block it up the straiter,
they built three Forts, at the entrance of three Rivers which come to the Town,
one at Hauscote, the other two at Slen, and Miltrech; whereby Estrades not
being able to send parties further into the Country, he caused 12 flat
bottomed Boats to be built, every one of which carried two small Guns in their
prow; and imbarquing 300 Foot in them, he on the 10 th. of December assaulted
the Fort of Hanscote, and took it, as he did also the other two, which were
immediately demolished, and burnt; wherefore he made several inrodes that
winter, took many Prisoners, and a great many Cattle, which being powdered, were
of good use to the Garrison of that Town.

Whilst the Court of France was at Fontianbleau, well pleased with being out of
Paris, where the seditious Malcontents predominating, the King's Authority
was highly prejudiced, the Prince of Conde's business was warily disputed, but
not without great jealousies; and it was given out that County, and the
Duchess of Longueville, fortified themselves with friends in Berry: a Province
which at that time was of great importance, defending the way to Guienne, and
keeping the neighboring Towns favorable to the Princes; whereat the Court was
much troubled. None durst propound going further then Fountainbleau: for the
King not having men enough for the enterprise of Burges, it was not thought fit
to fall upon it, unless they might hope to take it, least it might more lessen
the King's parties Reputation, and increase that of the contumacious, as would
have happened if they should have been unfortunate at the first. Yet the French
being extraordinarily devoted to their King, the Inhabitants of Burges by the
means of Chasteauneuf, who was much beloved in that Province, wherein much of
his estate lay, sent a Citizen of theirs speedily away to Fountainbleau, to
invite the King to their City, where he should be lovingly received, and
faithfully served. Diverse discourses were had hereupon before their Majesty's.
Chasteauneuf was for their going thither out of three reasons, wherein his own
interest was concerned the first, for that being no friend to the Prince, he
sought to bring him lower; the second, because by such advancement he got
esteem amongst the people, and thereby made himself necessary for the
administration of Government. The third, for that the further the Court should
go from Paris, he thought the Cardinals return would be the more difficult as
well by the Parliaments animosity, as by the bad season, wherein he was to pass
over fourteen Rivers; and by keeping him away, he put the Duke of Orleans in
Authority, which was his chief end: the Guard de Seaux opposed this, saying,
that it behoved not to hazard the King's Authority, by undertaking what was not
sure to succeed well, and that the foundation was to be grounded upon his own
strength, not upon the uncertainty of the peoples favor which was always
wavering.

This design of Chasteauneuf's being seen into by the Cardinals confidents,
whereof there were but few in the Council, though they all appeared to be much
his friends, they concluded there was no better expedient for the service of
their Majesty's and of the Cardinal, than to make use of their own Forces, and
to get that thereby, which they could not do by reason, nor fair means;
wherefore by orders from the King, who by reiterated Letters had sent for the
Cardinal back, Abbate Vndedey went to Brules, to acquaint him with the
necessity of this expedient, and to acquaint him truly with all that had past;
assuring him of their Majesty's excellent intentions toward him. For whose
service it was requisite that he should return, and take upon him the
Government of affairs, they being now sensible that none could do it better,
nor with better affection. The Cardinal listened diligently to the Abbate, as
confiding much in him, yet was he doubtful what to resolve upon, but at last
the reasons alleged by Vndedey prevailing, he resolved to raise with his own
moneys an Army of about 5000 fighting men, whom he committed to the charge of
the Marishals of Oquincourt, and of Ferte Senetre, the Count Navailes, and
Broglia, who took upon them the employment, and diligently applied themselves
thereunto. This being thus resolved, The Cardinal desired a pasport from the
Spaniards to return to Bullion, which they procrastinated, foreseeing how
prejudicial his return to Court might prove; wherefore he went unexpectedly
from Brules, and instead of going to Iuliers, went toward Duren, a City
belonging to the Duke of Newburg, and from thence to Aquisgrave, Siege, H^y,
and then to Dinan, whither the aforesaid Counts of Novailes, and Broglia came
to agree about their leavies, for which they there received moneys, and in
forty days which they staid in that Town, they raised their men.

But because the Malcontents might not in the King's absence, plot things
prejudicial to the Court, the Guard Seaux, Guinegaude Secretary of State,
Marishal Vievelle, and the Marishal de L' Hospitalle were left there, to whom
jointly the King gave all Authority, being assisted by the Duke of Orleans, who
remained there as Viceroy; which was because the Guard Seaux being the first
President in Parliament, might prevail much by his Authority; that Guinegaude
might make the dispatches of State, Vieville who was the master of the
Finances, might find moneys, and the Marishal de L' Hospitalle, as being
Governor of Paris, and much esteemed in the City by those who loved the Court.
But the Duke of Orleans, who was not well pleased with the Kings going against
the Prince, as well for the union between them, as for fear the Cardinal should
return, complied artificially, and palliated his affection as well as he could
with the Duke of Arville, and with others who were sent unto him by the King to
be assistant to him. Yet the Duchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor, who
desired the downfall both of the Prince and Cardinal, watched the Duke of
Orleans narrowly, and making use of the credit they had with him, endeavored
to stave him off from them both, and would have wrought their ends upon him,
had not Count Chavigny, and Monsieur Gaucourt, who were the Prince his friends,
counterpois'd their designs, being fomented by Beaufort, and the Frondeurs, who
desired to uphold the Prince, that they might keep the Cardinal from Court. But
Beaufort on the other side considering what need there was of a Commander of
the Forces in Guienne, who might vye for valor with the Prince, wrought it so
as the King gave that employment to Count Harcourt, a Prince full of courage,
and of great esteem in Arms, and who was well disposed to the Kings service,
and a sincere friend to the Cardinal; whereupon, he went to Fountenbleau (after
he had received the Patent in Paris, the same day that the King went from
thence) to kiss their Majesty's hands, and so to go toward his charge.

The King had with him 4000 of his French Guard, and Switzers, and for their
General the Marishal de Estre, whose Lieutenant General was Count Paluau, both
of them particular friends to the Cardinal, and 4000 more were taken out of the
Army of Picardy, under the Marquess of Castelneau, who was also Lieutenant
General, together with other Troops, which were raised in other parts. Marquess
St. Luke, Lieutenant General of Guienne, was ordered to take what care he could
of that Province, and that he should keep in Cohors, and Montaubank, to keep
those Towns in the King's obedience, which he did.

This going of the King to Berry did infuse much fear into all the Prince his
friends, in so much as they severed themselves, and withdrew some to Montrond,
some elsewhere; the Prince of County, and Duchess of Longueville forsook even
Burges in great confusion, when they knew the agreement made between the
Inhabitants of that place, and the Court; but the Duchess of Nemeurs, as not
accustomed to the rumor of War, went to Vandosme, that she might keep quiet
there.

The Court being gone from Paris, the tumults which were almost ceased in
Paris, grew greater than ever, as well amongst the people, as in the
Parliament, to impede the Kings journey; and keep the Cardinal from returning.
Wherefore the Dukes of Orleans, and Beaufort, the Frondeurs, Parliament, and
part of the people, returned to their former commotions, not with Arms, but by
decrees of Parliament, and Remonstrances to the Court; but Chasteauneuf, who
still endeavored to keep the Cardinal away, and to make the Court prevent the
resolutions of Parliament, used this precaution, as when he found that any
decrees were to issue out from thence, contrary to the private ends of the
King's Council, he anticipated them by Letters from the King, commanding the
same things which he thought the Parliament would ordain; and did studiously
apply himself thereunto upon these emergencies, with intention to save thereby
the King's reputation, seeming as if he were the Author of those decrees,
changing the aspects of those decrees, which tended much to the prejudice of
his supreme Authority, but the Parliament finding out these artifices, made no
more account of the King's Letters, thinking that the Court did not therein
desire what it seemed to do, and that all was but tricks to make vain their
designs. And the Queen suspecting not without reason before the Prince
departed, that Marsine, General of the Catalonian Forces was turned to be of
his party, as being much affected to him, and that by his concurring with Conde
he might much prejudice the King's service, she thought she might make him lay
aside all sinister opinions by putting some esteem, and honor upon him, and to
keep him loyal out of mere gratitude; as he had been till then, much to his
glory; and this was by sending him Letters Patents to be Viceroy of Catalonia;
but the Messenger who carried them, came too late, for he had already abandoned
the King's service, and betook himself to serve the Prince, as has been said,
and shall be said hereafter.

Count de Ales was at this time in Paris, his Father the Duke of Angolesme
being dead, who was Governor of the Province, where those that sided with him,
Maugre Vandosme kept the City of Tolon, a famous haven in that Province, where
he was particular Governor; and having out of a desire of returning thither,
consented that Conde's friends should attempt some novelty there; The Baron of
St. Mark, a Gentleman of Aix, and friend to the Prince, was sent thither, with
others that related to him, intending to raise a party for Angolesme, and to
interest the Prince therein, but after some rather Chimera, than undertakings,
it turned all to nothing, by the vigilance of the King's Commanders, who
diverted all their plots, and the City remained as before in obedience to the
King: wherefore the divisions failing in that Province, whereby the Prince had
thought to bring Forces into several parts of the Kingdom, and to divert the
punishment wherewith Guienne was threatened, the Malcontents were mightily
affrighted, and confused. The Prince of County, Duchess of Longueville, the
Duke of Nemeurs, and others who were in the Castle of Montrond, fearing least
they might be therein shut up, went out by night with 200 Horse, leaving
Marquess Persan there with a good Garrison of Foot, and Horse; afterward the
Town was besieged by Count Paluau with about 3000 men at a distance, commanded
by Cavaliere Barada and others, the besieged were constant in the defense
thereof, as well against Famine, as against the assailants. County, with his
Sister Longueville, and Duke Nemeurs went to Bordeaux, losing some of their
baggage, for the Marquess of Sauntbeuf with many Gentlemen of those Provinces
was continually upon their backs. The King came to Burges, to the great content
of those people, whom he permitted to demolish the Tower, which belonging to
Conde's Government, was interpreted the beginning of a breach, and it was known
that they were to think of War, rather than of Peace; which being resolved
upon, they were treated with to raise men: the Towns of Dordognia were secured
by Conde, and he put Garrisons into Bergerack, St. Foy, Libourn and Perigreu,
good Towns which commanded a great tract of Country. All the Towns upon the
Garomne till you come to Again were secured by Conde; who treated with Count de
Ognone, Governor of Rochel, Brouages, and the Isles of Oleron and Ree; and
with much ado having drawn the Count over to his party, he provided diligently
for all emergencies. Ognone joined with the Prince, hoping to be made Duke and
Peer of France, by the Prince his means, which he had endeavored to do by the
Court, but could not: at this novelty, not only the Kings party was much
troubled, but all others who wished well to the State. It was therefore
resolved that the King should go into Poictou, to secure that important
Province, which is esteemed one of the best of all France; and to provide
against the eminent dangers of Rochel; Count de Ognone was second Brother to
Marquess St. Germain Beaupre, and as one who had been Page to Cardinal
Richelieu, had contracted a particular friendship with Marishal de Bresse,
chief of the Navigation; he was employed in the Fleet, and after made
Lieutenant in the Government of Brouage, which belonged to the said Bresse; and
in Rochel, Oleron, and the Isle of Ree which belonged to the Queen, after the
said Bresses death it was not hard for him to get to be wholly master thereof,
though he were not well beloved by the people. He entered into Conde's party by
the Princess her mediation, who was Sister to the said Bresse. The King wrote
to the Duke of Orleans before he went from Burges, that out of the great desire
he had of his Subjects quiet, he did again refer Conde's business totally to
him, and desired him to speak with him, and to know the reason of his
discontent, wishing him, to take along with him, the Marishal de L' Hospitalle,
Messieurs de Alegre, Marguiri, Mesmes, Menardeau, Champre and Chaumont,
assuring him that he would do what he could to serve him. In pursuit hereof the
Duke sent Monsieur de Serre, Son to Marishal de Aubettere to desire the Prince,
that he would give him a meeting in Richelieu; Conde sent la Serre back with
answer, that he should hear from him in this particular within three days.

Soon after the Prince was come to Bordeaux, Gurville went thither, and told
him from the Duke of Bullion, that if he would listen to reason the Duke would
mediate for him, and endeavor his satisfaction; and how the Cardinal did much
fear, that if civil Wars should arise in France, they would not be well able to
maintain War abroad; wherefore he studied how to divert it; and that he had
declared, that he would procure the Government of Blay for him, and all fitting
satisfaction for his Friends. Gourville made this proposal to him; but the
Prince having then sent to treat with Bullion, and Marquess Turenne, would not
listen to the proposition; but said, That if he would put the treaty in hand,
he must first declare in his behalf, and that his Brother Turenne must go to
head his Forces which were gone into Flanders, and that when this should be
done, he would give ear to what had been proposed. The Prince spoke high,
because he thought that Turenne would not refuse the command of his Army; and
that when he should have so famous a Commander on his side, whom he only
feared, it would make much for him in treaties of peace, or in making War. And
being that very day assured of Count de Ognons joining with him, as also of the
Messieurs della Forza, except the Marquess who was in Normandy, and intended to
do as Bullion and Turenne should do; he sent Gurville back to Paris the same
night, that together with Gaucourt, who attended the Duke of Orleans on his
behalf, they might tell Orleans, that he could not upon any terms accept of the
conference desired in Richelieu. For that having disbursed much money in
raising men, and being ready to declare, this might suspend their resolution,
and make his Officers retard the levies which were already begun, intending to
make use of the moneys which they had received, in case of agreement: moreover
his conditions with the Spaniards would be broken, and he should be much
puzzled, not being able to rely upon the Dukes constancy, who adhered to the
Coadjutor, his declared Enemy. The Duke accepted of the Prince his
justification; and though he did effectually follow the Coadjutors advice, yet
he always declared for the Prince against all men, except the King's person.
But Conde, and those of his party, finding that the Coadjutor did still cross
him in all things, and that he would engage with the Court, out of the hopes of
being made Cardinal; and fearing also that if he should close, Orleans might by
the Coadjutors means fail him; he bethought himself with his trustiest friends,
how he might rid himself of the Coadjutor, whom he apprehendedmuch, for that he
was very bold, revengful, had many abettors, and infinitely ingenious. Some
were for killing him presently, but the Prince who was of a more generous mind,
would not give way unto it, declaring his hatred to all Treachery; but he
resolved to remove him from Paris, and to imprison him somewhere else, which
being resolved upon, Gurville, a man of a ready wit, and lively spirit, had the
employment given him; who taking it upon him, authorized under the Prince his
hand, who made him plenipotentiary, he sent for some of his friends, and
kindred to Paris, and causing Monsieur della Roche to come from Danvilliers,
with others that depended upon him, and in whom he durst boldly trust: feigning
afterward to go from Paris, and to go for Germany to take the Elector of
Brandenburg's Forces into pay, which being to be cashiered by reason of the
peace made with the Duke of Newburg, he kept concealed in the City, and calling
his men together, he told them that he had orders from the Prince to make a
great man Prisoner, and not telling them who it was, save only two in whom he
thought he might safely confide, and who always followed the Coadjutor, who
telling him one night that he was in the Duchess Chevereux house, he placed
his confidents between the Gates du Conference, and le Guichet, commanding them
not to stir from thence. He moreover placed 15 Foot over against the Louvre,
and he himself stood near Chevereux her house to observe his coming out, hoping
that if he went not along the River, he might advance his men to the new
Bridge, and to the Ponte de nostre dame, if his Coach should go by the R^e St.
Honor but the Coadjutor went out in a Coach with Ladies, and his own Coach
followed without Torches, which made them believe he was not yet gone.

The next day the Coadjutor was not very well, and kept his house. But Gurville
being told that he was the next day in a house at Marets, where he used to
entertain himself at night, he diligently assembled his men, but not so many as
were sufficient to have all things in readiness before he came out. So as
Gurville failed in his design; Gurville had always a Coach with him, to put the
Coadjutor into. The design was to carry him to Danvilliers with 15 or 20 Horse,
which was not hard to do; but the Heavenly influences having power over mortals
actions, we must believe that they seconded not these designs; for though the
Coadjutor suspected not these plots, yet being wished by his friends to be
circumspect, he withdrew himself to his house early, and went not out by night,
not so much out of any apprehension of the Prince, as of the Cardinal, least he
should have endeavored his death, and lay the fault upon the Prince, who was
his more discovered Enemy. So as Gurville perceiving that in many days the
Coadjutor returned home late but once, and then well accompanied, he feared
that he was discovered, and therefore fearing some disaster might befall
himself, he resolved to return, and to put off the business till a more
favorable conjuncture of time; he therefore sent his men away secretly, and he
withdrew himself cautiously from all public Company. Monsieur de la Roche went
from Gurenne, with Monsieur de Fay, Lieutenant of the Prince of Countie's
Guard, as he came from Brussels; but he was stopped at Chastres, it being thought
that he brought the Princes treaty with Spain along with him; wherefore he was
imprisoned, together with a servant of his who being interrogated upon pain of
death, what company his master had kept since he went from Danvilliers, said,
that he met with many as he came along the River, and that he feared Gurville
had a design to make somebody Prisoner: which was interpreted to be the
Coadjutor, who did all he could to come by the certainty thereof; but though he
could have no certain proofs thereof, he was persuaded that Gurville would have
detained him, wherefore he also endeavored to take Gurville, in his return,
but without success.

Count Tavanes, who (as has been said) was gotten to Stenay, and to the
neighboring places, with the Prince his Troops; knowing that he could not
subsist in those parts, sought how to get with his men into Guienne, where the
Prince wanted old Soldiers. But finding the chief passes possessed by the
King's Soldiers, he sent to Flanders to negotiate with the Spaniards, and being
promised to be received by them, he past with his Troops over the Mause, and
retreated toward Charlemont: where being eyed by the King's Forces under the
Command of Marishal Ferte Senetre, he with much danger past over part of
Luxemburg, and going over the River Semoy near Sedam, and then by Liege, he
repast over the Mause at the Bridge of Gives, and entered safely into Hamault;
and so having with these few Forces escaped the King's Soldiers, they were
received, and quartered in the Spanish Towns, whereby France was freed of their
continual inroads. And the Spaniards intentions being to let all other things
alone, and foment civil war in France, they furnished the said Tavanes with
moneys, as well to satisfy his Soldiers, who for want thereof lessened daily,
some running away, some dying for want, as to make them fit to go through with
their design; in pursuit whereof the Spaniards failed not to increase the
jealousies, and distasts, which the Parliament of England pretended to have
received from France, as well for the welcome which the King of great Britain
and his followers received there, and for their inciting the Scots to go
against this new Commonwealth; as for Piracies committed by the French upon
diverse of their Merchants Ships, in the Mediterranean Sea, and out of the
natural emulation between those two Nations, for it was easy for them to get a
great many Irish Foot from the English for their King's service in Spain, which
were willingly granted them, as well to weaken that Island by taking away many
of their Soldiers which were almost all Catholics: as also thereby to balance
the power of France, whereof England was very jealous. And to back the Prince
of Conde in Guienne; after they had confederated with him, they sent Baron
Batteville with 13 Frigates, and 6 fire Ships, from St. Sebastian to Bordeaux,
carrying with them 1500 Foot, moneys, and other warlike provisions; who coming
upon the Coast of St. Onge, was there complemented in the Prince his name by
Marquess Lusignan, and on the 25 th. of October, a Spanish Brigantine entered
Bordeaux with some men, and moneys, who in the name of the King of Spain
negotiated a good intelligence with the Burdelois, to make them keep firm to
Conde. The Spaniards were first received into Talmont, a Town upon Garomne, and
then into Bury, to the number of 1200 commanded by Iuseppe Oxorio, who was made
Governor, and fortified the Towns; this was given as a cautionary Town to the
Spaniards. The King of Spain did also command Archduke Leopald in Flanders, to
foment the Princes in France as much as he could, and to give over all other
proceedings, rather than to let slip so fair an opportunity of nourishing civil
War in these two chief parts of France, to wit, Guienne and Champagnia. The
Queen was much troubled at these preparations, knowing how prejudicial it would
be to the Crown, if the Spaniards and Rebel French should make a nest there,
whereby revolts might daily be made in the Kingdom; she therefore wisely
applied all means to destroy it: and since all the rest of the Kingdom was
quiet, and that only Bordeaux and some other few Towns in that Province stood
for Conde, without Veteran Soldiers, with but little moneys and provisions; she
was resolved to vanquish him before he should have fortified himself better,
and before the Spaniards should give him any more assistance. She brought the
Council to resolve, that the King should advance with his Army into Poictiers,
as was done; but before they marched from Burges the King writ a Letter to
Mazarine, dated the 26 th. of October, the words whereof were these: Cousin, I
have reason to believe, that according to orders which were sent you, you have
raised the Troops which you were commanded to do, and that they are already
ready to march to my relief. My desire is, that it be suddenly done, and that
you come along with them; to which purpose I have also written to Marishal de
Oquincourt to advance with the Forces he has raised in Picardy, and
Champagnia, and by an order sent unto him, have commanded all the Cities and
Towns within my Kingdom to give them quarter, and to all my Officers, and
Subjects to be assistant to them in their march, I am confident out of the
affection, and loyalty which you have always born to my service, that you will
do this, it being my will, and so, Cousin, God have you in his protection.



He also writ to Marishal de Oquincourt to raise as many men as he could in
Picardy, and Champagnia, to join with the Cardinal, and that they should come
jointly in to his succor.

Things being thus ordered, the King, Queen, Duke of Anjou, and all the Court
went with their Forces on the 25 th. of October toward Poictiers; the greatest
Town in France next Paris, but not much peopled: it is the Metropolis of
Poictou, seated in the heart of France, very strongly, partly on a plain,
partly on a hill, watered by the River Cleive, and enclosed within Ponds and
Marshes, which render it almost inaccessible, it is not far from Rochel; and
because Marishal de Estres had not the Command of this Army, who being
Lieutenant General of Vallois, and Laonois, was gone thither to keep them in
obedience during the King's absence, Count Paluau was last Commander in chief
in St. Amand, near Montrond, to continue the Siege slowly, the Court being
unprovided of men and moneys for so many enterprises at one and the same time.

Count Harcourt being designed General of the Army, and Governor of Guienne,
followed the Court to Poictiers, from whence the King writ to the Duke of
Orleans, complaining grievously of the Prince his proceedings, saying, that by
his procurement the Spanish Fleet was in the mouth of the Garomne, and that
many of his Subjects forewent their obedience, that it being therefore
necessary for his Majesty to go into those parts, he gave him notice of it, to
the end that he might know he was resolved to keep his Subjects from being
injured by the Prince; who having forgotten his word solemnly given, and
confirmed by oath, that he would never have any dependence upon the Crowns
Enemies, nor receive any assistance from them, could not but expect punishment
from God, for failing in his duty and alliegance to his King.

The Prince having this mean while secured Again, the second City of Gascony;
and Marquess St. Luke having fortified Montauban, and Cohors with men, and
moneys, he left Marsine to command the Forces in those parts; and he himself
accompanied by Duke Rochefaucolt, and Prince Taranto, resolved to go to Xantes,
where staying upon Charente he pretended to keep the War from Bordeaux, whose
Inhabitants dreaded the King's neighborhood very much, reflecting upon what had
been done before: but it being hard to maintain an Army without the convenience
of a City, or some great Towns, from whence Bread, Munition, and other
provisions may be had; before he went from Bordeaux, he sent Prince Taranto,
Duke Richelieu, and Count de Ognon, with such as they had raised to take Xantes
the Metropolis of St. Onge. Monsieur Bassompeier, Son to the Marishal of that
name, who was Bishop of that place, strove to make the Inhabitants defend the
Town; but they considering the weakness of their old walls, and the want of
many other necessaries, instead of taking up Arms, accepted of an honorable
composition offered by the Princes, and received them into the Town, where they
made their head quarter, and grounded their greatest security. After the taking
of Xantes, the like of the Castle of Taleburg followed upon the same Charente:
wherefore the Prince bethought himself of taking Angalesme, which has a
considerable Castle; but not being sufficiently provided for such an
enterprise, he turned upon Cognack, begirt with old weak walls, but guarded
with a great Garrison by Marquess Gionsack, Governor thereof: by which Conde
would have secured that tract of Country which extends it self to the Rivers of
Dordone and Garomne, and would have kept the King's Forces from entering into
Guienne, and might have quartered in that rich and plentiful Country. He left
the taking thereof, which he thought would not prove difficult, to the Duke of
Rochefaucolt, and Prince Taranto, and went himself to Bordeaux to be assistant
in the affairs which were in treaty there; particularly with the Spanish
Agents, as also to consult with Count Ognone, touching the managing of the
begun War, whom he persuaded it was necessary to put 4000 Soldiers into Rochel,
and to make use of that situation which lay convenient to receive relief from
Spain, and England, and to secure all the Islands, and Towns taken by Ognone.
The Prince his intention herein was, how to puzzle the Court most, and how to
lay a solid foundation for the subsistence of his party; by making a firm place
of retreat and easy to be preserved, without being necessitated to rely upon
the unstable people, or confused Parliament of Bordeaux, and might have kept on
the Wars; but particular interests having always been the ruin of better
Resolutions, Ognone would not agree thereunto, least if the Prince should
become master of that place, he should not be so considerable to him, as now he
was: wherefore his answer was that he promised, and was confident to preserve
it, and that no fear was to be had thereof; whereby the Prince found that the
Count dreaded the Kings small Forces more than he did confide in his own.

When the King was got to Poictiers, he haulted there, not thinking it fit to
advance further, there being no other Cities capable of his Court in those
parts, save Xantes which was already in the Prince his possession, and
Angolesme, and Rochel, which were somewhat far off; and having exactly
ponderated in his Counsel what was best to be done, it was found necessary to
secure Rochel, and to keep the Malcontents from making further acquirements,
or establishing themselves better in those Provinces. Those of the Kings party
who were in this City, finding this design, sent their Deputies to profess
their obedience, and loyalty to his Majesty, and what aversion they had to
Count Ognone; wherefore the Court resolved to order Count Harcourt who was then
at Niorte raising men, and providing, to oppose Conde his proceedings, whereby
to have an eye to Rochel, and to what might be most for the service of the
Court, leaving the conduct thereof to his experienced guidance; and the
Marquess of Estisack, Brother to the late Duke Rochefaucolt, who as native of
Poictou was well beloved by the people, and the Duke of Roan, of the house of
Goufiere, Governor of Poictou were declared his Lieutenant Generals. Count
Harcourt marched diligently, with a Company of the French Guard, and Switzers,
with the Gens de Arms, and King and Queens Horse, and with Iornack's Regiment
of Horse, together with Marquess Plessis Belliere, Lieutenant General of the
Army; and being come to Surgeres a little walled Town four leagues from Rochel,
he heard there that Ognone had advanced a body of 600 Horse, and 1200 Foot to
Tonney Charente, to bring them into the same Town, whose Inhabitants he
threatened with fire and plunder, if they did not join with him against the
King. And here Harcourt heard also how Rochefaucolt and Prince Taranto, had
fallen upon Cognack with 2000 Horse, and 4000 Foot, playing upon it with six
piece of Canon: so as weighing the importancy of both these places, and knowing
that the King's service required no delay in the securing of Rochel, and that
he ought not by any means to permit the Enemy to gain reputation by the loss of
Cognack, according to his wonted wisdom, provided to supply both these at one
and the same time; wherefore causing four Companies of the Guard to advance
with Monsieur de Berne, Commanded by the aforesaid de Estisack who was well
beloved in Rochel, they were brought in by a great number of the Gentry of the
Country, into the City where Estisack was cried up Governor, who fortified the
heads of the Streets, which lead toward the three Towers upon the Gate, which
were Garrisoned and fortified by Ognone, till such time as they might assault
them with Artillery, and a greater number of Soldiers which were expected. Thus
the coming of the Kings men into the City made much for the Kings advantage,
and made good the prejudice presaged by Conde to Ognone.

Rochel being thus secured for the King, Harcourt went immediately from
Surgeres, with the rest of the Forces which he had, and came the same day to
St. John de Angeli, being resolved to relieve Cognack; the good success whereof
depending upon making have, he marched all night, leading the Horse along with
him, and as many Foot as he could, intending to assault the Suburbs by break of
day, which was entrenched by the Prince his men, and guarded by above 800
Commanded Foot; with whom the Army encamped beyond the River did communicate,
by means of a Bridge upon Boats which was made to that end: but the night being
so dark, and rainy, as the Soldiers not being able to march apace, the Sun was
risen before they had gotten half way, the Count was forced to return to St.
John de Angeli; but this sinister encounter may be said to have the preludium
of fortunate success; for if they had fallen upon it that day, they would not
peradventure have had that good success which they had afterward. For Harcourt
thinking how to compass his intent, was advertised by an express sent from
Iohnsack, and Bellafons, that they were able to make good the Town for three or
four days, if they were provided with Warlike Ammunition. This employment was
given to Pelseran, wherein he succeeded, conveying in some sacks of powder:
they being thus recruited, Harcourt advanced with the rest of his men to
Breissemburg. Conde's generals proceeded slowly in the seige; the Town had
assuredly fallen into the Princes hands, had he not staid so long in Bordeaux,
but he came not to his Camp till the night preceding the relief; where finding
the River infinitely swollen with water, and the Bridge upon Boats ready to break
by the rage of the water, he knew that the Kings men would raise the siege;
wherefore that he might not lose the men who were quartered beyond Charente, he
made them pass over to the other side, leaving only 18 Companies of the Guienne
Brigade, which might amount to about 800 Foot, with Officers to guard the Town.
Harcourt being advertised of all this, resolved not to lose the opportunity,
but immediately made Marquess Plessis Belliere advance, that together with
Folleville he might accost the besieged Town, as he did, with five Companies of
the French guard, commanded by Genlis, two Companies of Switzers, the King, and
Queens Gens de Arms, and Horse, Iernack's Regiment, 300 Foot of the recruit,
and the Gentry of Poictou, and St. Onge; all which he drew forth in Battle
array within sight of the Town, and of the Enemies Camp. Cognack upon the banks
of the River Charente, having a Bridge, which passes into the Suburbs beyond
the water, and an old Castle begirt with strong Walls, and Towers, and with a
large deep ditch; but it being requisite that at the same time when the Suburbs
should be assaulted on the other side, the besieged should also make a Sally
and assault the Suburbs, Monsieur de Rochecheviera was sent into the Town to
make agreements with those Commanders, and ordering the assault in three parts,
that of the middle was given in charge to Plessis Belliere, with the French
guards, and 150 forlorn Foot, led on by Captain Chassonville; that on the right
hand was led on by Monsieur Folleville, with the Switzers Guard, backed by the
Queens Gens de Arms, and Cavalry; that on the left hand was given to Monsieur
Haudecourt, with Harcourts Recruit backed by the King's Cavalliers, and by the
Duke of Rhohans, Gens de Arms. The rest of the Horse were placed in a
convenient place, to back those that were to give the assault; affairs being
thus ordered, Harcourt summoned the Suburbs, who answered with the mouth of
their Muskets, and Monsieur de St. Aubine, a Domestic of the Prince who
commanded there, said, that was all the composition which they would give. So
as the French guards advancing under Monsieur Chassonville, they made
themselves masters of the first Barricado, as did all the rest with miraculous
courage on their parts. Monsieur Heudicourt was wounded on the thigh by a
Musket; Vmont, Captain of the Switzers guard, Cavalliere Bagnol, Beauvoire
Captain of Harcourt's Regiment, and Monsieur Godiniere were also wounded.

At the same time Monsieur Bellafons came out with the Gentry which were in the
Town, and assaulted the same Suburbs on another part which opens upon the
Bridge, whereby he kept the Enemy from saving themselves by the River: so as
after a stout defense, the Suburbs was stormed, and all that were in it either
slain or taken Prisoners; amongst which Monsieur de St. Aubine, Noier, and many
other Commanders were taken, and four Captains, eight Lieutenants, and about
300 Soldiers were slain, and the Town was opportunely relieved to Harcourts
great glory; for it was done in sight of the Enemies Army, and of Conde's self,
who was ready to go wild, seeing his men routed, and had he not been hindered by
his men, he would have put himself into a small Boat, and have endangered
himself, to relieve his party. The business of Cognack being thus vanished,
whereupon the Prince did build very much, they who had conceived great hopes
were much dejected, and the Prince his business grew daily worse; he retreated
with his Forces in such confusion, as they left behind them twelve Cart load of
Ammunition; as also Prince Taranto's baggage, and in passing over a little
River, the Prince his Van taking their own Rear, for Harcourts Forces, was so
terrified, as seeking to save themselves, many of them were drowned.

But because the getting of the three Towers upon the Gate which were
fortified, made much for the peaceful possession of Rochel, Estisack having
received Artillery and some recruit of Soldiers, presented himself before that
of la Catena, and Lanthorn, the Soldiers when they saw the Canon ready to
thunder upon them, surrendered upon conditions. But the third, which was greater
and much stronger, called St. Nicola, gave more trouble to the Kings men, there
being above 130 Soldiers in it, with several valiant Commanders; so as Harcourt
came before it himself in person with more strength, and assaulted the said
Tower, the Governor resolved to parley: but Harcourt answering that he could
not treat with a Rebel, and telling the Soldiers that they should have no
quarter, unless they would kill their Governor, and throw him out of the
Window into the Ditch: they were so terrified as they slew their Commander, and
surrendered on the 27 th. of November, and Rochel, together with the Country of
Aunis remained well Garrisoned under the Government of Estisack. The zeal which
not only the Catholic Officers showed upon this occasion to the Kings service
is remarkable, but even the Hugonots, who showed excessive hatred against
Ognone. The Island of The submitted likewise to the King.

After these prosperous successes, Count Harcourt went from Rochel to a Village
three leagues off, the weather being so bad as would not suffer his Foot to
come further than Surgeres; where hearing that Cavalliere Crequi was come to
Parancy, which was within two leagues with the Flanders Forces, and that the
Prince had caused his whole Army to come on this side the River over the Bridge
of Tonney Charente, he thought to make use of the occasion which was
fortunately offered him by this recruit. He therefore sent away orders to the
said Crequi to muster all his men in Parancy, whither he himself went the last
of that month, intending to surprise the Prince by a secret and sudden march,
to which purpose causing all his Forces to pass over a certain Ford by which he
was to go, he put himself in Battle array before Tonney Buttonne a little
walled Town, where there is a great Tower, wherein the Prince had placed some
Musketeers to make good that station: where leaving some few Soldiers to take
it, he presently advanced his guards under Plessis Pralin, and gave him order
to charge some Squadrons of the Enemy, which appeared on the top of the hills
near Moragne, behind the which he thought the Enemies whole Army had been, and
so to give them battle; but they by the advantage of the night were not seen,
so they came not to blows till the next morning, when the Kings men being come
within sight of the Enemy, Crequi on the right hand, Bellafons on the left, and
the Volunteers in the midst, inheartned by Harcourt, who followed them with the
body of the Army, they charged the Enemies Squadrons so bravely; as though they
resisted stoutly, yet they were pierced through and through, and pursued to a
breast-work where the Prince stood with other twelve Squadrons, and could not
keep his men from being slain and taken. Plessis Belliere, and the other
Officers who were on the head of the Anjou's Regiment, seeing there was no
means to pass the breast-work which Conde defended with a considerable body of
men, and discovering that there was a quarter on the left hand, from whence
some Troops pretended to go and join with the gross body, they charged them so
hotly as many were slain upon the place, others saved themselves in the washes,
and the rest got to a strong house, where they rendered upon discretion to the
Anjou's Regiment. Harcourt with some others advancing at the same time to cut
off the way from the Princes men, met with another breast-work which hindered
him, and the night coming on parted the two Armies. The Kings men were encamped
half a league from the Enemy, who returned to Tonney Charente, and past by
right over the River, having lost 3 or 4 hundred Gentlemen, together with
diverse Officers and their baggage. Harcourt went afterward to Tonney Charente,
having re-made the Bridge which the Prince had broken. Thus the two Armies
stood facing one another for about 20 days, making only some small Skirmish.

At the same time the Castle of Dion which till then had held for Conde was
after 12 days siege surrendered to Espernoun. The King had all this while
deferred his Declaration against Conde, hoping that being aware of his error,
he would accept of the agreement managed by the Duke of Orleans, who proceeding
slowly therein, the Court grew jealous that they held intelligence together;
and that though they seemed to oppose the Cardinals return, yet they did in
their hearts desire it, that they might make good their pretenses, which were
grown very low, and to draw over the people to them: but at last on the 16 th.
of November the said Declaration was sent to the Parliament of Paris, and was
presented by the first President which caused great noise in the City, and
chiefly in the Duke of Orleans his Court, and amongst the Frondeurs, the
Declaration said, That the Prince of Conde was become guilty of high Treason,
having taken up Arms against his Sovereign, and against the State; that he held
confederacy with the Spaniard, intending through his ambition to disturb the
peace of the Kingdom. The Prince of County, Duchess of Longueville, Dukes of
Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, with other of their friends and adherents were
contained in the same Declaration. The King's Declarations being to be
registered in Parliament, they could not refuse to do it, seeing that Conde was
in open War against the King; it was therefore Registered; but with a caution
that the Prince might have a months space to return to his obedience; but the
Frondeurs, not being content with the proceeding of Parliament, and highly
netled with the fame of the actions of the King's Forces in Guienne, foreseeing
thereby the Prince his ruin, and therewith the like of their own faction; on
the beginning of December scattered abroad diverse papers in the Streets of
Paris, inviting the people to meet in Tornon-street, intending by sedition to
cause the Parliament to make such Declarations, as might divert the Court from
their begun proceedings against the Princes. And some of the most outrageous,
getting into the midst of an insolent Rabble, went first with them to L'
Hostelle de Orleans, exclaiming against the bad Government; and then went to
the first Presidents house who strongly defended the Courts cause, and
consequently the Cardinals; for he was grown so hated by the Malcontents, as
upon this occasion, and many others, he was in danger of being hainously
outraged: but being a courageous Gentleman, instead of hiding himself, he came
down into the yard to that tumultuous rout, and did by his presence so appease
their fury, as it might be well seen these tumultuaries were set on more by
others than by their own passion; for when they saw him not, they were enraged
against him, and when they saw him, had not a word to say, such force has
integrity, and a masculine virtue, to mollify any unbridled insolency.

The Parliament being met the 9 th. of the next month, made another decree
against the Cardinal, upon advertisement that he raised men to re-enter France;
and began to think upon all means how to hinder his return; but he staying
still at Dinan, solicited new leavies, whereby to come and reinforce the King,
and his time of departure growing near, he renewed his desire of a pasport from
the Spaniards; but they feeding him only with words, he stole away suddenly one
night, and without drawing bridle for eighteen hours went to Bovillion, not
without danger of being interrupted by the Spaniards, who kept an eye upon him;
or by Conde's Forces, who being quartered on the other side the River, did ever
and anon, make excursions into the neighboring parts. He sent from thence to
acquaint the Spanish Commanders that he was gone; and that though they would
not pleasure him with a pass, he hoped they would favor his friends with one;
which was presently granted, and they were with much honor conducted by Don
Antonio Pimontel to Bovillion; from whencegoing to Sedam, he resolved to march
forthwith with the 4000 men which he had raised, into France, together with the
Forces of Marishal de Oquincourt, which were sent unto him by the King.

When this news came to Paris, it caused great rumor, and the Frondeurs,
Parliament, and Dukes of Orleans, and Beaufort were more troubled than the
rest; who being surprised when they least thought of it, said aloud that it was
not to be thought the Court would have so apparently broken their word which
was so faithfully given, and that their scorn in being thus deluded was too
apparent. They therefore hereupon called together all the Chambers of
Parliament, and decreed that in prosecution of the judgment given by the
Parliament four days before, Commissioners should be sent to their Majesty's to
complain of what was done contrary to their Majesty's service upon the
Frontiers, by raising men, giving out of moneys, and by news of the Cardinals
return, which were all contrary to his Majesty's Declaration, and the Duke of
Orleans was desired to send some from him to join with these Commissioners, and
to insist upon keeping the Cardinal from returning. They afterward by public
decree prohibited all Cities, Towns, and Governors upon those Frontiers to
assist him upon pain of high Treason, and though they got but little good by
these Declarations, at which all men laughed, thinking it a madness in them to
command, where the King had all lawful power, yet some of them were so
bewitched by a foolish presumption of Authority, as they believed an order of
Parliament was sufficient to keep the whole Kingdom in obedience. So proceeding
from one inconvenience to another, declared on the 29 th. of December, that the
Cardinal had incurred high Treason, for having contrary to their prohibitions,
returned to Sedam, and being ready to return to France. They ordered also that
his Library, and all his Movables should be sold, and all his Rents and
Benefices were confiscated; and voted 50000 Crowns to be given to any body that
would kill him, or bring him alive into the hands of justice, desiring his
Majesty in such case to grant a pardon to the Murderer, who if through
misfortune he should be slain in doing it, they declared the 50000 Crowns
should be given to his Heirs. This infamous and scandalous decree, by what was
known afterward, was made by the private intelligence of Count Chavigny, who
by this means thought to keep the Cardinal from returning.

The Court of Rome was acquainted with all this, it being believed that the
Sacred College would not suffer such an example to remain in memory of man,
and that such remedies might be found for it as depend upon the Pope's
Authority; but it being considered that if they should fail in their attempt,
the Apostolic dignity might be too far engaged, it was past over, nor did the
Cardinal want Enemies as well in Rome, as in France.

This mean while Marishal de Oquincourt following the King's orders, had
appointed the Rendevouz of the Forces which he had raised in Champagnia and
Picardy, to be about Laon, to join with the Cardinal, and those that he had
raised, to come with him into France; so as the appointment being made to meet
about Dormans and Esperney upon the Marne on the beginning of January, the
Marishal went from Peroune on the 18 th. of December, and accompanied by many
other Nobles, he past through Han and Fera, and coming to Nisis, he found there
2000, what Foot, what Horse, and diverse other Regiments wherewith he marched
the next day toward the River Aisue passing over the Bridge Arcy, and la
Merne, and staid at Troisy expecting the Cardinal, who having left his
alliances at Sedam, marched toward Esperney, whither he came the second of
January with about 5000 choice men, and he was met there by several other
Forces, and three pieces of Canon. Oquincourt met the Cardinal at Esperney,
where it was concluded that Oquincourt should advance with 1000 Horse, and
possess himself of the passes of the Rivers Aube, and Senna, which he did; then
passing over the Aube without any obstacle near Auglure, and la Senna at Merry
he met with the Foot, and Horse Regiments of Monsieur St. Moore. Where hearing
that the Duke of Orleans had sent out four Companies of the Langnedock Brigade
to Pont sur Iona; Oquincourt advanced with 1000 Horse, endeavoring to get to
that Town before the Enemy should be aware of his march. On the 9 th. of
January he was upon Alba^, where being informed that two of the Counselors of
the Parliament of Paris, Bytant, and Cowdrey Genies were come thither to break
the Bridge, and to raise the Country against the Cardinal, he made a party of
his men ford over the River, to discry some Horse, with whom they skirmished,
and slew some of them, and took Bitant Prisoner, but Coudrey escaped to Sens.
The Marishal being come to the head of the Bridge, which the Townsmen broke
down, he acquainted them with the Kings orders, and speaking with Monsieur
Morandiere, who commanded Orleans his Forces, and had orders to resist him, he
caused some of his Horsemen to light, who fell so courageously upon the
Bridge, as Morandiere, articled to return to his Master, leaving the pass free
to the Cardinal: it was thought that he had secret orders from the Princes not
to hinder him, though he could: for finding their business grow desperate,
since the whole Kingdom inclined to the King, they knew nothing could keep them
from ruin, but some new pretense whereby to justify their cause, and keep the
Subjects from assisting their Sovereign, and that therefore they did not all
they were able to oppose their march.

But because Marishal Turenne having honorably disingaged himself of the
Spaniards service, and had refused all the offers made by Conde, and was
reconciled to the King; Conde gave the command of his Forces in Flanders to the
Duke of Nemeurs; who in the beginning of the year 1652, went privately from
Bordeaux, giving it out that he went by Sea into Flanders; but came first to
Paris by bie-ways where the Duke of Orleans seemed to be very well pleased, as
having need of opportune succor; and he was received with extraordinary
applause by the Parisians, and because the Coadjutor thought to make the Duke
of Orleans foment a third party of French Malcontents, and Enemies to the
Cardinal, he used all his industry to effect it, to the end that making the
Queen afraid that the Duke might adhere more narrowly to Conde, he thought she
might be necessitated to keep the Cardinal away for ever; in which case the
Duke by joining with the Court interest, and strengthening himself by the
Lorrain Forces, he should also undo Conde for ever.

But Count Chavigny, with other of the Prince his friends, held the Duke of
Orleans steadfast, they made him see that he could not subsist but by joining
with the Prince. Nemeurs stipulated the agreement in the Prince his name with
the Duke, the contents whereof were the keeping the Cardinal away, and a
general peace.

The news being known in Paris, and the orders given by the King contrary to
his former Declarations, it is not to be said, how incensed those were, who
were of a contrary spirit; but all they could do was to make a noise in Paris;
for the Kings power prevailed in the Kingdom. And though the Cardinal was
withstood in one place, he was fomented in another. The Parliament of Britanny,
being desired by that of Paris to make the like decree with them in favor of
the Princes, against the Cardinal, did order on the contrary, that proceedings
against him should be suspended, till the Prince should perform his duty, and
till the Spanish Forces should be gone out of the Kingdom: but though the
rancor of the Parliament of Paris, and of the Frondeurs could not be greater
than it was, yet could not the Parisians be brought to disburss moneys for the
raising of men, and to provide against the threatening occurrances, but were
always readier to lay on their mouths, than to lay out their moneys; the noise
continued still in the Palace. The first week of January the Parliament ordered
the Cardinals movables to be sold, and not to make good the Kings Declarations
against the Prince, till that against the Cardinal were effected. Wherefore the
Cardinal must be gone out of the Kingdom again, ere the Parliament would pass
the said verification; to which purpose they made many resolves which were
great in appearance, but weak in substance, and some Deputations were sent unto
the King. The Court spoke ambiguously, and spun out business at length, hoping
the time would alay the bitterness of turbulent spirits. The Queen sent
Monsieur Rovigny to exhort the Duke of Orleans earnestly to remove from Paris,
so to take away the apprehensions which were had of him, but it did no good.
The Parliament added to their instructions given to their Deputies which they
sent unto the King, that they should press Bitaut's Releasement, and that
Marishal Milleray should not be made a Duke, till he had given satisfaction to
the Parliament of Rheims in Britanny; and moreover that no Duke, Marishal of
France, or other Officer should execute their function afterward, till the
Cardinal were withdrawn from the Kingdom; which was thought was done to take
away the great credit which he had in disposing of the Offices of the Crown,
and making those his friends whom he had preferred thereunto. But the Nobility
made small account of this; the more incensed the Parliament grew against the
Court, the less did they value any of its decrees, since they might be anull'd
by the King's Authority. And therefore those who sounded affairs to the bottom
found it was best to keep the paths of obedience, and not walk in the crooked
ways of precipice: therefore the Princess Palatine, who at first was Conde's
friend, grew a great confident to the Queen and Cardinal. The Queen sent for
her to Court, that by her ready and ingenious spirit she might foment such as
were proper to destroy the Cabal of Malcontents; whither she and diverse other
Lords came. This mean while the Cardinal coming with the Army and all the
Generals, from Pont Sur Iona, went to Chasteau regnarde, where hearing that
Marquess Sourdis, Governor of Orleans, was come to Gien to keep him from
passing over the Loire, he found that the Citizens would not receive Sourdis
men, who fearing to be arrested, withdrew his men, and in great have retreated
to Orleans. The Cardinals Army therefore at that Bridge past over the Loire, and
quarterd in the Suburbs beyond the River, and in the neighboring Villages; and
going along by Aubigny, came to Veirson, where he left his Army to be brought
by Count Broglio to Guienne; and he came on the 28 th. of January to Poictiers,
accompanied by Oquincourt, Granee, Navailes, Maincampe, Quincy, Cossy, Bea^an,
Lainville, and other considerable persons. He was met without the City by the
King, Duke Anjou, Prince Thomaso of Savoy, and by all the Princes and Grandees
of the Court. The King came out of the Coach embraced the Cardinal, and went
along with him to the Queen, whose joy, as also that of the whole Court was
greater than ever; but the gladder these were, the sorrier were those of the
contrary party; which did not appear more in any place than in Bordeaux. Whose
Parliament followed the example of that of Paris, and continuing their
meetings, and unlawful decrees, drove whole Families of such as were well
affected to the Kings service, out of the City. They took a Brigade of Foot
into pay, to guard the Town; they provided Victuals and Ammunition; raised
plat-forms, half Moons, and other Fortifications about the Walls, whereunto the
Citizens did freely contribute their Moneys, by little and little they framed
the Council del l' Olmiera, so called from the Elms under which it was kept:
which grew so great and so considerable afterward, as in a short time it
arrogated all Authority unto it self, whence many disorders arose, as shall be
said. The chief directors hereof were Advocate Puy, ^rest^e Gay, and two others
called Villars, and Duratesta, who were fomented by President Gourges, Blanc,
Moivesine, Esparguet, Raimonde, Duke, who were all of them Counselors, and by
other unquiet spirits who thirsted after Novelty; and all this was done under
the protection of the Princes* who made use of these, to keep the other
Citizens true to them, and to abase the pretentions of Parliament.

When the Cardinal was entered into France, the King with his Council of State,
did on the 16 th. of January annul the decree of the Parliament of Paris, made
the 29 th. of December, expressly forbidding all men to obey it, and not to
attempt any thing against the Cardinal upon pain of life. He prohibited the
sale of his goods, or books; the offenders being to lose as much as they should
pay for them, and be fined in 1000 pound, he declared that the said decree was
contrary to his intent, contrary to the usual course of justice, and to the
custom of the Kingdom, injurious to the sacred College of Cardinals, and to
the Apostolic Sea; that the Cardinal was come into the Kingdom by his express
order, and to bring with him a good body of Soldiers, raised at his own
charge, to serve him in these present commotions; and that being supreme King
he ought to be obeyed by his Subjects without limitation.

The Prince of Conde not being able to keep longer in the field, as well by
reason of the season, as by the blows which he had received from Harcourt, put
his Forces into their Winter quarters, beyond the Dragona to secure them by
that great River, upon which he had diverse good Cities and Towns; and having
won over the Duke of Rohan, Cabot, Governor of Anjou, who took his pretense
upon the Cardinals return, and encouraged by the Army raised in Flanders by
Count Tavanes, which was just then to enter the Kingdom; he caused the people
of Angiers to rise; he provided the Castle with all things necessary, and
pretended to second the Princes party, whereinto upon several hopes he had
thrown himself. Angiers is the chief City in Anjou washed by the River Main,
which devides into two parts, and a little below falls into the Loire: it has
a very long Bridge well built, with houses on both sides; it is begirt with
walls, and Towers all antique; the Castle stands upon a height, flanked by
Eighteen square Towers, built of black Stone, with a Ditch cut out of a Rock,
and has a River on one side, which on that part makes it unaccessible.

The Prince garrisoned Loudan, Durtal, la Flesche, and other walled Towns. The
Lieutenant General of Angiers was arrested, and Monsieur Arnaud, formerly
Abbate of St. Nicholas, then Bishop of that City being gone into the Country of
Servient, found the gates locked upon him at his return, and was not suffered
to enter; The King staid six days at Poictiers after the Cardinals return,
wherein great concourse of Gentlemen, and Commissioners from all Provinces came
to him to do their duties and to assure him of their loyalty.

Diverse Councils were held frequently about the present affairs, which were
reduced to two points; the one to go with all their Forces into Guienne, to
defeat Conde totally, and vanquish Bordeaux, and this was seconded by the
Queen, and Cardinal, who alleged that Conde had but a few men with him, and
those no veterans, who were cowed by being beaten, so as he would easily be
made to fly into Spain with loss of all his Forces, and reputation; and though
(the season of the year considered) was thought might prove long, yet they did
not doubt the issue. The other was to march toward Paris with most of their
Forces to dissipate the Duke of Orleans his men, to countenance the well
affected Citizens, and to keep out Nemeurs his men, who were to come from
France. Several reasons were alleged for both these opinions; but it not being
thought sit to leave the Prince in Guien where he might recruit himself, and
put himself into a condition of continuing the War, the first opinion was
adhered unto, and it had been effected, had not the insurrection at Angiers
hindered it; for instead of going to Guien, the Cardinal thought fit to march to
Saumeures, which was done on the 6 th. of February, much to the grief of
Marquess Chasteauneuf, who finding that it was resolved in the Council to go
for Guien, and that afterward without his knowledge the march to Anjou was
resolved upon, thought he was not much considered, and that the Cardinal was
again become the Arbitrator of all things: wherefore he resolved to do as you
shall hereafter. Their Majesty's were received by Monsieur Cominges Governor
of the Castle, and by all the Inhabitants with much joy: and here the news of
the Duke of Rohan's preparations continuing, and that he fortified the bridge
of Cee, the King ordered Marquess Oquincourt to advance with his Forces, and to
endeavor by the assistance of the loyal Subjects to get into the Town.

Oquincourt went from Saumeurs on the Tenth of February with the Horse
Regiments of Espance, Roquespina, with Fertes Gens de Arms, and with Mazarins,
and Barbarino's light Horse; and came the same day to Beaufort; where being
advertised from the King, that the Inhabitants had promised to keep a gate open
for him, he marched thitherward two hours before day with his Cavalry only,
reinforced by 100 Norman Gentlemen which young Count Grance brought; and the
next day he appeared before the City; charged the Enemies that fallied out, set
upon the Barricado but to little purpose, for it was impossible to storm it
without Foot; he lost some Horse, and had some Gentlemen hurt. The besieged
fallied out at the same time against the Guard by the Mills, but were repulsed
by Volunteers who came speedily thither. Five Companies of the Guards coming in
afterward, he the next morning fell upon the Suburbs of Bersigny, guarded by
Barra's Regiment, and by the Inhabitants called Loricersi, more seditious than
the rest, who basely did abandon it, and the Kings men entering, fell suddenly
to make a Barricado against the City, whereby to fence themselves against a
Raveline and a Tower upon the Gate; from whence Monsieur de Iuxsen a Son of
Oquincourt was slain by the shot of a Faulconet. And another Gentleman was
slain near All Saints Gate.

But the Marishal wanted Forces to take the City, wherefore Count Broglio was
ordered to advance with his Troops, and Marishal Millerey was ordered to
furnish him with four pieces of Battery, and with necessary Ammunition, which
was readily done; but it was very hard to bring them, by reason of the
extraordinary waters and high wind; their being neither Bridges, nor Barks to
pass the Horse over; and for that the Duke of Rohan, had fortified a Village
called Pointa, upon the mouth of the River, and furnished it with a great
Garrison and with armed Boats; yet Broglia made a shift to get over in certain
small Boats, and came without delay before the said Pointa, where he charged
the Enemy in their Trenches, overcame them, and got into the Village, just when
those of the armed Boats were come on land, and were going to Dine. He took
Cavalliere Ierse, and diverse other Officers Prisoners; and made himself master
of the place, and Pass, so as great Artillery, and Ammunition might be brought
to the Camp before Angiers; wherewith the Batteries were perfected. They then
opened the Trenches, and the Kings men approached the Wall; from whence the
besieged shooting off small pieces, and Muskets, the only Son of Marquess
Florenville was slain. The Duke of Rohan being straightened, and wanting succor
beat a parley, desired a suspension of Arms, and leave for his Wife to come
forth, and treat of composition, which was granted; and it was agreed that he
for a while should be deprived of the Government of that Province; that he
should put the Castle into the King's hands, and that without undertaking any
thing contrary to the Kings service, he might retreat quietly with his Family
to Paris.

The Garrison of Ponte de Ce was not comprehended in this Capitulation; which
holding for the Princes Forces were sent against it, under the same Count
Broglia, and Count Naivailes; to each of which, Marishal de Oquincourt assigned
400 commanded men, this place lies in an Island in the midst of the Loire,
begirt with with several modern fortifications, and famous for Wars in former
ages, so as it could not be assaulted but by Boats, and afterward by an
Isthmus of land which thrusts out into the River toward Nantes. The foresaid
named Counts imbarqued with their Forces, and being backed by some Gallisoists,
landed upon the point of the Island. Broglia assaulted the Tenaglia on the
right side, and Naivales on the left, so courageously as they soon took it;
putting most of the Defendants to the Sword. Monsieur de Beauvean, Governor of
the place got into the Castle, caused the draw Bridge to be raised, and made
signs with his hat, that he would capitulate; the Marishals self treated with
him, and granted him his life upon surrender; this enterprise ended thus,
whereby the whole Province remained in obedience to the King, with the loss of
but a few remarkable people; (for besides those that dyed before Angiers, none
dyed in this Action of Ponte de Ce, but the Marquess of Signeres, and two or
three were wounded.) Oquincourt left a Garrison there commanded by Monsieur
Fontenelle, Captain of the Piemont Regiment; he returned from thence to
Angiers, and then to the King at Saumeurs, whose Council thinking that he had
done much, published that he had been greatly profitable.

We must not here omit to tell how Marishal Turenne being restored to the
King's favor by the Cardinals means, presented himself before their Majesty's,
ere they parted from Poictiers, by whom he was civilly received, and without
re-capitulation of any thing that was past, was taken into the esteem which he
was formerly in. On the contrary, Chasteauneuf being troubled that the
resolution of going to Guienne was put off without his knowledge; were it
either that he had engaged himself to his friends, never to serve with the
Cardinal, or that he thought he should never be able to endure him, and
therefore feared himself might be removed, did of himself take his leave of the
King the very morning that he went from Poictiers; and with his Majesty's
consent, retired to live privately at Tours; so as the Cardinal remained sole
Arbitrator of all affairs, as formerly, but not without the Envy and Emulation
of those who could not endure that the superintendency should be committed to a
Forreigner.

Conde having staid two or three days at Dromet, went to St. Savinian, a place
belonging to the Prince Taranto, where he staid a week, and returned from
thence to Braissemburg, and from thence to Xaintes, where he past over the
River, and came to Pons. Monsieur Baugy Camp Marishal advanced with 500 Horse
by bie-ways, and was advertised that the Enenemies Forces were quartered in
several places; wherefore about Sunset he on the tenth of January forded over
the River Ne, at Merpin and two hours before day, came before Brive, intending
to surprise some of their quarters, in which Village was Duras his Regiment
quartered; where Monsieur Fouvilles advancing with 40 Horse, pretending to be
of the same party, charged some Horse who were come out to make discovery, so
furiously, as they were forced to retreat with some confusion, and Bougi fell
so furiously upon them, as the greatest part of the Enemy were either slain, or
taken. The Prince his quarters were divided far one from another; so as though
the Trumpets sounded to Horse, they could not meet together time enough to
escape Anguier's Regiment, but being charged by Monsieur Vivias with Crequi's
Regiment, most of them were either killed, or taken Prisoners. Wherefore the
Prince hearing that Harcourt was marching toward him, left Prince Taranto in
Xaintoigne, to defended Xaintes, Faileburg and some other Towns which were for
him, and went with some Horse and Foot into Guienne himself, that he might be
sheltred by the River Sille, and by the Town of Bourg, within one league
whereof Harcourt was lodged, who diligently pursued him. But Ambleville, and
Berbisieux, two walled, and well Garrisoned Towns being on his back, which
might much incommodate the Army: he that would take them must leave pursuing
the Prince, and give him time to look to his affairs; otherwise he should err
against the Maxims of War, wherefore Harcourt resolved to continue his march,
and yet at the same time to reduce the aforesaid two Towns to the Kings
obedience. He sent Marquess Plessis Belliere against Ambleville, who upon the
sight of the Canon reduced it; he left Monsieur Bellasons with the Regiment of
Picardy, to reduce Barbesieux, who discharged himself therein with much honor;
and Harcourts self staying no where, came with miraculous speed near to St.
Andrea, within three leagues of Bourg, almost before his march was known; where
he found that Aubeterre, whom he had sent before to possess himself of the
passes, and to take up quarters, had been repulsed, and but badly treated, in
his attempting the Regiment of Baltazar, which was got into the Village of St.
Antoine; and that the Prince was in Arms with all his men, and that he had
placed himself in very good order, in advantageous places. So as not da^ing to
advance further by reason of the advantagiousness of the Prince his situation,
he spent that night only in some small skirmishes; wherein Harcourt not being
able to discover the Prince his weakness, many of whose men were wanting, and
could not come up unto him, he lost an opportunity of routing him totally, and
might peradventure have taken him Prisoner. The Prince passing his men here
over the River, went to Libourn; and having refreshed his men there, he went to
Bergerack, where he made the Fortifications desensible, and returned from
thence to Libourn to see the Princess his Wife, who was with child of a Son
which was afterward called Duke of Bourbone. Being advertised that the Prince
of County had taken Guadacosta, a Town three leagues from Libourn, and that he
faced Marquess St. Luke, and was ready to fight him, he marched toward him,
and came opportunely; for finding the King's quarters lay a sunder about
Miradaux, he got into the midst of them; but being to pass over a Bridge,
before he could assault them, they had time to give an Alarm, and to put
themselves in order about that Town; notwithstanding he charged them with
Marche's Regiment on one side, and he himself being on the head of his men,
fell so furiously upon them, as he slew many, and took many Prisoners; the rest
got into Miradaux, and gave an Alarm to the head quarter, whence St. Luke came
out with his men, and put them into battle array. The Prince did the like,
though he were fewer in number; thus they stood looking upon one another, not
doing any thing. Prince County came thither four or five hours after with the
Marquess Montespan, and with the rest of the Forces; and here a Council of War
was held, to know whether they should charge the Kings Camp or no. Conde's Foot
were but few, and all new men, they exceeded not 500 Foot, and 700 Horse: St.
Luke had about 2000 old Foot, and 700 Horse, the situation was steep, and
advantageous for the King's men; so as it was thought fit to forbear attempting
them, till three pieces of Canon were come, which the Prince had sent by water
to take in Again. All the day was therefore spent in lusty skirmishes, wherein
the Marquess his men had the better at first, but when the Prince having
released some of the Kings men whom he had taken Prisoners, let the Enemy know
that he was on the head of his Troops, the Enemy were so affrighted at his very
name, as they began to retreat by night to Leyteres, two leagues off, in such
disorder, as the Guard which was advanced by County, discovered their march,
and gave notice thereof to the Prince his Brother, he took with him what Horse
were ready, caused all the rest of his Soldiers to march, and overtook the
Enemy at Miradaux, and charged them so furiously, as he routed the Enemy, who
ran with some loss; then with no less fervor, he fell upon the Brigades of
Champagnia, and Lorrain; who not being able to make their party good, unbacked
by Horse, got into the Town, but fared but ill; the Town is environed with old
weak walls, broken down in many places, and may rather be termed an open
Village, than a walled Town. The Prince summoned Count Marin Camp Marishal, and
Couvanges, Colonel of the Lorrain's Regiment, to surrender upon discretion;
they offered to yield up the Town, and not to bear arms against him for six
months. But Conde finding the Town weak, and that it wanted Warlike Ammunition,
thought he should have them all Prisoners of War within two days: wherefore he
refused their offer, and resolved to attack the Town, and planted two pieces of
Artillery against it, though he had but 80 Bullets, and very little powder. The
besieged were likewise but badly Ammunition'd: but St. Luke found means to have
some brought in every night; yet the Prince resolved to make a breach, and made
his Horse men light to give an assault, but was hindered, as not being in a fit
condition. Count Harcourt was come again to St. John de Angeli, after his
having given many defeats; where h^aring of the Prince his proceedings, marched
speedily toward him, he past the Garomne at Avilare; The Prince being far
inferior in number, would not stay for him, but quitted the enterprise of
Miradaux; and retreated to Stafort, where he refreshed his men, and divided his
Army in Pluma, Peregrin, and in the neighboring Towns; and sent from thence a
party of Horse to inquire after Harcourts ways, who was gone from Avilare to
Lomagna, intending to secure his quarters, by taking Beaumont, a little walled
Town upon the River Gimona. Marquess St. Luke being gone from Auch with other
Forces, was marched toward him; and Saufbeauf advancing as near Stafort as he
could to charge the Troops which should come out of the Enemies quarters, Count
Illabone, and Aubeterre, went toward Pluma, to charge Conde's Gens de Arms
who were quartered there, and St. Luke went also against Pergaime. Harcourt
with the rest of the Army tarried in the midst of them, to relieve such as
should have most need; The Prince not having had any news of the Enemy, till
such time as they were got into the midst of his quarters, was much surprised;
but being an excellent Commander, and good at putting on resolutions, he
presently made all that were with him get on Horseback, and drawing forth his
Foot, accompanied by the Dukes of Rochefaucolt, and Belgarde, Count Marsin, and
others of condition, went to discover the King's men, which he found to be so
many, as he was forced to retreat, not without danger; and sent to all his
Forces to meet at Buet, a Town upon the Garomne, that they might go from thence
to Again. Harcourt pursued him, and would assuredly have routed him, had he not
tarried to take Pergaime, whither all the Guards of the Prince his Generals
were gotten, commanded by Monsieur Roches; where the Town being well walled, he
tarried till the Prince was come to Buet, and had past over the Garomne, which
was done with much fear, and in such disorder, as had but 200 of the Kings
Horse then appeared, he would have run danger of being defeated and taken. The
baggage which had not time to get to Buet, was sent by water over against Again,
whither it was no sooner come, but Harcourt (leaving St. Luke before Pergaime)
followed him with the rest of his Forces to Burg, over against that City.
Illabone, Crequi, and Coudray, Monpensiere, fell furiously upon the Baracadoes,
which were no less valiantly defended, and the forlorn hope being lost, Conde's
men did so seasonably defend themselves, as the Prince hasting thither, and
sending his men to assist their fellows, he freed them from danger, and forced
the assailiant to retreat; thus his baggage got safe to Again, and the King's
men lost their attempt. Harcourt staid all that day in Estillac; and the next
day returned to before Pergaime, but finding it already surrendered upon
discretion he sent Cowdray, Monpensiere, and Fermecon toward Stafort, where
there was 300 of the Prince his Foot and some pieces of Artillery, and easily
made part of the Garrison turn over to the King, and other some return to their
own howses, upon promise never to serve any more against the King.

At the same time the Marquesses of Mountonsiere, and Plessis Belliere, by
intelligence with the Citizens, had besieged Xantes by approaches, and battery.
The Garrison which was not able to defend themselves against the Enemy within
and without, capitulated, and on the twelfth of March 600 Foot, and 50 Horse
marched out; which acquisition drew after it the like of Faileburg, whereby the
whole River of Charente was reduced to the King's obedience, except it were
Bourages, which held still for Count Oguon. Whilst the King's Forces were
employed about Angiers, the Duke of Nemeurs hasting for France with the people
which he had raised in Flanders, marched with about 8000 men for Fonsomma in
Picardy, from whence he went to the Province of Vexin, where the Nobles being
assembled to the number of 1000 Gentlemen, hoping to have been back by de
Elbeufs, and Aumonts Forces, would have kept him from advancing, being
encouraged by the Coadjutor, who having many friends in those parts, did
privately endeavor to keep Conde from receiving so considerable Forces. But
being afterward spoken unto by Orleans, who protested he would complain of him
in case his aversion to the Prince should cause him do otherwise than he would,
the Coadjutor forbear soliciting the Nobles, who were assembled at Maine to
consult how to oppose Nemeurs; The Duke of Orleans sent credential Letters to
them by Marquess Villenes to appease them, giving them his word that they
should not be injured by the Soldiers. Villenes found them otherwise minded, so
as he had much ado to persuade them: the Gentlemen were not willing to
understand him; fearing least by permitting those Forces to enter their
Province, they might draw the King's Forces after them, and that making that
place the seat of War, they should feel those miseries which are the product of
Military licentiousness; but afterward considering that they could not keep
from what they feared by opposition, they resolved to be quiet. They therefore
sent three of their number to the Duke to tell him that instead of hindering,
they would assist him in his march, which they ratified in an assembly held
afterward at Magny in the beginning of March; wherefore the Duke to make good
his word, that they should not be badly dealt with by the Soldiers, sent
Monsieur St. Ibar, one who was well known to the Spaniards, as to them; so as
Nemeurs past to Mantes without any obstacle; which Town he had secured some few
hours before he came thither: having thus past over the Scene, he quartered his
Army about Hadam, a little City which lies between Chastres, and Paris; and
whilst he refreshed his Forces there, he together with Tavannes, Clainchamp and
most of the Spanish Officers went to Paris, where they were received with
extraordinary applause by the Inhabitants, as deliverers of their City.

The Duke of Nemeurs, and the other Commanders thought not when they came first
thither to tarry there above two or three days, but to return then, and join
with the Duke of Orleans men which were commanded by Duke Beaufort, which
returned from the Provinces of Perch, and Main, whither they were come when
they heard of the siege of Angiers. But were it either by reason of the good
entertainment they found there, or by reason of their natural negligence, and
being fomented by Orleans, fearing least the Prince his Army, by taking Towns
upon the Loire, might go to the relief of Montrond, or go into Guienne,
afforded time, by entertaining them in pastimes at Paris, to the King's Forces
to go from Angier's, that they might take Ponte de Ce, secure the Provinces
beyond Loire, and come to Blois, and so to Sally; which fell out just so. For
having dispatched the business of Angiers, and knowing that Nemeurs was come
into France, the Court thought fit not to prolong time, but diligently to
provide for affairs on that side, whither all their friends desired the King
would come. Their Majesty's went from Saumures on the 7 th. of March and went
to Tours where diverse Lords sent from several Provinces, and Cities, came to
assure the King of their Loyalty, and Obedience; and amongst the rest Monsieur
Chamuallon, Archbishop of Roan, Primate of Normandy, sent by a great many
Pre^ates from Paris, touching the decree made against the Cardinal, showing the
King what injury was done thereby to the Church of Rome, and to his Majesty's
self in having a servant of his outraged. The Archbishop was graciously
received, and this Commission was famous as well for the matter, as for the
persons who brought it; and it fell to this Prelates share to preach before the
King, who appeared in a glorious manner, and with much eloquence enlarged
himself upon the Parliaments proceeding so rigorously, and by such unusual
ways, against a Prince of the holy Church, not respecting that these were forms
prohibited by both Divine and humane Laws; and which was miraculous, he in his
discourse did openly praise the Parliament, but obliquely stung it.

Marishal de Oquincourt marched at the same time with his Army, to the same
part by the way of Burgueville, and Beaumont, and sent his Artillery to Tours
to be imbarqued upon the Loire; and he with all his Troops went to Merolles
near Blois; whither the Court came likewise, which restored Count Servient to
his former State employments.

Oquincourt went from Chartres, toward the Loire about Vandosme, to oppose the
Army of the Princes (for so hereafter we will call it) and chose Baugency for
his station; and sent Monsieur Plainville thither with Rethlisi's Regiment, for
the nearness of the Enemies Forces made him fear that place would be assaulted,
whose loss would have been a great hindrance. The King staid some days in
Blois, as did his Forces in the neighboring Villages; where the Soldiers for
want of pay committed unheard of extortions, and overrunning the Country in
parties, they were met with, and a Sergeant Major of Valloi's Regiment, with
two other Captains were taken Prisoners. The Kings Council met oftentimes in
that City to consider whether the King had better to go for Orleans, or Paris;
it was long disputed whether or no he should go straight to Orleans, where the
Inhabitants were for certain faithful to the King, or whether he should go some
other way, since Marquess Lordis was ill affected to the Court, and an Enemy in
particular to the Cardinal, which was the reason why that thought was given
over; as also for that the King was not able to advance with safety, his Army
not being great, and for that he ought not to trust himself in the hands of an
indiscreet people, apt to sedition.

They therefore thought of sending the Guard de Seaux, and Council thither; but
neither was this adhered to, it not being thought fit to hazard the King's
Authority, by exposing his commands to the danger of not being obeyed. It was
therefore held better to advance with the Army, and to do as occasion should
serve, when the expected recruits should be come. They therefore went from the
quarters about Blois on the 26 th. of March, where passing over the River upon
the Bridge, they resolved to march toward Gergeau, whither Vaubecourt, and
Paluau's Troops were to come. Marishal Turenne was sent thither with 2500 men;
to take upon him the command of the aforesaid men, and together with Marishal
de Oquincourt, to do what should be best for the King's service. And the King
with the Court went also from Blois to Sully, and the Army was quartered at
Sandillon, between Orleans and Gergan.

The Princes Army, after having taken some contributions from the parts about
Chastres, went into Beaux, the Province wherein Orleans stands, with intention
according to Nemeurs opinion, to take Gergeau, and Guien. Those of Orleans
wavering in what they had best do amidst this noise of Arms, being incited on
the one side by seditious people, who were of opinion, that they ought not
recede from the obedience of the Duke of Orleans, who as Lord of that Town, if
they should so do, would hold himself highly offended; and being sorry on the
other side to forego the duty of good Subjects to the King their Sovereign,
resolved to remain neuters; whereof the Duke of Beaufort, who was come to that
purpose to that City, being assured, he acquainted the Duke of Orleans
therewith; adding that if that Town should be taken by the King, he would be
forced to forsake Paris; wherefore he thought it necessary that he should come
thither himself in person, to keep them all obedient with the Authority of his
own presence. But the Duke, not thinking it fit to abandon Paris when the
people were so wavering, ready to yield to any the least accident, resolved to
send Mademoiselle his Daughter thither, to weaken the Kings party by her
presence, and to encourage the favorers of his Family, who were many. This
Princess assuming a generous and man-like spirit, did not refuse to go; but did
so cheerfully embrace the proposal, as she appeared another Zenobia, or
Thalestris, who was going to make new conquests. She went from Paris
accompanied by the Marchioness of Fronseneck the young Countess of Fiesco, by
the Duke of Rohan, by two Counselors of Parliament, Croisy, and Bermont, and
by many other Gentlemen of condition. She past by Estampes; and after having
been received two leagues from Turry, a great Town in Beaux, by the chief
Officers of the Army, a Council of War was then held in her presence, wherein
it was resolved that the Army should march the next morning straight to
Gergeau, to secure that Town which had a Bridge over the Loire; and that in case
they should meet with any difficulty by the Kings Forces, which were not far
off, that then they should endeavor to make themselves masters of Guienne; in
performance whereof, Beaufort advanced to Gergean, which was seated upon the
Loire, and walled about after the old manner; but finding that Marishal Turenne
had cautiously prevented him, who was come into the Suburbs beyond the Bridge,
he was forced to hault, and fall to blows without any advantage; for though
there were none to defend it but some of the Kings Officers, who had
accompanied Turenne, they did so excellently defend it, as after Beaufort had
lost several Soldiers, and had had many chief men wounded, amongst which was
Monsieur Sirot, Lieutenant General, who not long after dyed, he was forced to
return toward Loris, a Village over against Sully on the Rivers side.

Mademoiselle being this mean while come to Orleans, she found the Gates shut,
and guarded by armed Citizens, whom she acquainted with her being there; and at
the same time appeared the Guard de Seaux, on the other side the River, who was
sent by the King to keep the people in their obedience. The Counselors were at
that time met in the public Palace, with several chief Citizens, to consider
how they should receive this Court-officer; the Guard not being able to open
the Gates to any without express order from the said Council, sent presently to
acquaint them how that Mademoiselle was come on the one side, and the Guard de
Seaux on the other; about which, whilst they were considering what to do;
Mademoiselle being upon the ditch, and weary with attending an answer, walked
toward the River; which the Boat-men observing, they boldly ran to the Walls,
and breaking up a little Gate, brought her into the City, not being withstood
by the Guards of the next Gate; where she was cried up by all the people; many
whereof were gained some days before by some moneys given by Monsieur de
Fiesco, to spoil the management of Monsieur Gras, master of the requests, who
was sent thither to that purpose by the King. The people flocked together in
great numbers in the Streets through which Mademoiselle past, to see, and
reverence her, and she using that French liberty toward them, which does not
at all derogate from civil modesty, their acclamations grew so great, as all
the City wondered at the unusual, and unexpected hardiness of that Princess.
Then going to the public Palace, she made the Council adhere to her party; and
to keep the Guard de Seaux from coming into the Town, she went the next morning
to the Gate upon the Bridge; and getting jocundly upon the Tower, she saw none
appear in that Suburbs, but Monsieur Champletreaux, whom she defied; whereupon
the Guard de Seaux returned to Court without attempting any thing, much
confused at what he had seen, and heard. The King therefore not being able to
go by Orleans, nor by Chartres, whither the Duke of Orleans had sent Marquess
de la Fretta Governor of Chartres, to make the people take up arms on his
behalf, they resolved to go by Gergeau, where finding the Bridge broken by the
violent current of the water, the Court went to Sully, and the Army to Saudilon
which was not far off; but as these marched toward Guienne, the Princes Army
went coasting along the other side of the River, to hinder his designs; the
Princes had in their Camp about 10000 men, 4000 old Soldiers of the Duke of
Orleans, commanded by Duke Beaufort; the rest were commanded by Nemeurs. The
next day after Mademoiselle was entered Orleans, Nemeurs sent to her to complain
for that she had not followed the resolution which was taken at Turny; Nemeurs
knew that Conde's Enemies had infused jealousy into the Duke of Orleans, as
concerning his march, making him believe that the Prince meant to make use of
his men, only to secure the pass over the Loire. To which the passion he had to
serve Conde being added, and to win honor for himself in the War, he was
impatient that Mademoiselle had not followed his advice. Mademoiselle on her
side, being displeased that the agreements put on in her presence, were not
more punctually observed; sent to Nemeurs, Beaufort, and the other chief
Commanders, to meet the next morning in one of the Suburbs of Orleans, to
resolve of what was best to be done; she was the first that came thither, and
then came the Generals and chief Officers, and the Duke of Rohan, who could not
be admitted into the City, the people being jealous of him, and refusing to
receive him. The Council being met, two opinions were proposed; one was to go
and take Montargis, a great Town Walled after the ancient manner, but for
situation of great importance; being 25 little leagues from Paris, upon the
way to Charity, with a Royal Palace in form of a Castle, washed by the River
Oing; they had let slip the opportunity of taking Gergeau, and Guien, which
were possessed by the Kings men: The chief motives were, that by securing
Montargis, Paris was likewise secured; the Princes Army lying between it and
the Kings quarters. The second opinion was to take Blois, which was abandoned
by the King, and so without all difficulty they might have a passage over the
Loire. Beaufort, and generally all the Duke of Orlean's Officers, were for the
first, and many of Conde's Captains, particularly Cleynchamp and Tavanes: for
they knew not Nemeurs his secret design, which though he concealed it, was to
go first to Montrond, and raise the siege: but he not declaring himself; it was
resolved to go to Montargis; wherefore, were it either that Nemeurs was sorry
that Beaufort had won the opinion, or that he did really think his opinion made
more for the Prince his interest, he said it was strange that those who had
promised to serve the Prince, should fail him. Beaufort thought he mean him,
and said he was a man of his word, and that it was false that he had failed the
Prince. Nemeurs was offended with this answer, and said he lied. Beaufort
getting to him before they could be parted, struck him on the face with his
hand; and Nemeurs gave him many ill words: but they were parted, and were
endeavored to be made friends. Beaufort was told that all that Nemeurs had
said was not sufficient to satisfy him for the blow he had received; so as at
last he was persuaded to ask him pardon; the which he did with very much
affection, with tears in his eyes, and saying, that he had rather have been
Bastanaded with that Cane which he had in his hand, than that any difference
should have past between them.

The Prince his affairs suffered much by these differences, and affairs in
Guienne went no better by his continual losses; wherefore when he had quartered
his men about Again, he knew he could not tarry long in that Province; he
therefore thought to go to Nemeurs his Army; but first to put a Garrison into
that City, to withstand Harcourt's attempts, and against the intelligence held
therein by the King's party. He therefore sent Countie's Brigade thither,
persuading the Consuls to receive a strong Guard; the desire was so ill
interpreted, as it was given out that he meant to sack the City, which made the
people begin to murmur, to make Conventicles, and at last to take up Arms. The
Prince got presently on Horseback, rid through all the Streets, and made those
that had made the works throw them down; but not being able to be in all places
at once, he was no sooner gone from one place, but disorders grew there again;
wherefore finding that without speedy remedy the tumult would grow past all
help, he thought good to bring in Counties said Brigade, on the Rivers side by
the Gate Grace, making it hault in the first Street which leads to the Gate.
But this, instead of terrifying the people, did so augment the sedition, as in
a few hours above 100 Baracadoes were made. The Prince notwithstanding with his
wonted undauntedness kept on Horseback in the Streets, together with his
Brother the Prince of County, Duke Rochefaucolt, Prince Marsilliack, Count
Marsino, Marquess Montespan, and Marquess de Force, and with diverse Officers
and well born Gentlemen; and notwithstanding the horrid confusion, he went with
his accustomed gravity and fierceness, sometimes to one, sometimes to another
Barracado, to make them be thrown down; but if the people did for the present
yield respect to his person, as soon as his back was turned, they would make
another within ten paces of him; and so great grew the insolence, as one
presented a Pistol to his breast, threatening to give fire. But he without
changing countenance staid above three hours amidst those Barracadoes, and rash
Plebeians, meaning still to make the Troops enter, but could not get the people
to consent thereunto: amidst this hurly burly an accident had like to have
happened, which would have put the Prince and all that were with him in danger
of their lives; for Monsieur de la Magdalena being on the head of Countie's
Brigade, one of the people discharged an Harquebuss at him, which by good
fortune mist him narrowly, shooting only some of the hair of his head off. This
Gentleman discreetly made, as if this accident had happened by chance, which if
he had gone about to revenge, things might have grown desperate. The whole day
being thus spent, and the Citizens being resolved not to admit of any Forces;
the Prince approved of the advice of some of his friends to seem satisfied with
appearances; he therefore willed the Duke of Rochefaucolt, (who was
particularly well beloved in that City) and Marquess Montespan, to work it so,
as that the Citizens might go home, and that meeting in the public Hall, they
might beg pardon for their Error; whereupon he would make his Soldiers retreat,
upon condition that they would by a new oath of fidelity, be bound to raise a
Regiment at their own cost to defend the City; which submission being made in
public, the Baracadoes were thrown down, Countie's Regiment retreated and all
things were hushed up.

By reason of these successes, and of the bad condition of his affairs in
Guienne, where it was impossible to do any good with new Soldiers; he reved to
go speedily to head his men who came from Flanders, and who were joined with
Orleans his men; and not being detained from doing this by any thing, but out
of the consideration that he must then abandon a City, and a Province, meaning
Bordeaux, which had declared for him, his friends persuaded him that he had no
way to save it, but by this diversion; for by that means he should draw all the
Kings Forces to where he should be; to which they added, that Paris stood in
need of being fortified by his presence, especially since it was thought that
the King would go thither. That Moreover it was necessary for him to go thither
to oppose the Coadjutors designs, who did all he could to make the Duke of
Orleans fall from him; which did the more oblige him to see whether it were
better for him to be friends with the Court, or else to agree with the
Coadjutor, or at least to make him of no use to the Duke. Upon these
considerations, and with intention to adjust himself with the Coadjutor, to
which purpose he had sent power for treating to Monsieur Croisy, he undertook a
hard and dangerous journey; he went privately from his Camp on the 24 th. of
March; accompanied only by Rochefaucolt, and his Son Prince Marsilliack, Count
Levy, the Barons of Chavigny, and Guitaut, Messieurs, Berzenet, and Gourville,
and marched nine days, and nights, with very little or no sleep, through the
Provinces of Limosin, Auvergne, and the Burboness; and the last day Guitaut
being known by a Courier of the Cardinals, the news was sent to the Court,
which was then at Guienne; and they thinking that he went toward Chastillion,
Monsieur St. More was sent after him with 200 Horse, to take him Prisoner; but
Conde had the fortune to escape that danger; for having been all Easter Day
amidst the Kings Horse quarters, he came to Chastillion, just when the Kings
Cavalry were quartered in the Town, wherefore he parted from thence at
midnight; and passing within 70 paces of St More, without being discovered, he
came to the Wood of Orleans; where he fell upon the forerunners of Nemeurs his
Army; making toward them, and crying Chi Vive, he made himself known unto
them; the news of his coming being known, the Army was as much joyed, as he
was confused to find the disagreement amongst the Generals. He sent Gourville
from thence to Paris, to acquaint the Duke of Orleans with his being there,
and he was ready to go thither himself in person, (not knowing how affairs
went at Court) to establish agreement, to inhearten those that were for him,
and to cure the inconstancy of the people, which are apt to vary according as
accidents alter. But knowing afterward that the Court was recruited in Forces
and courage, by the coming of the Duke of Bullion, and diverse other Gentlemen,
and Soldiers, from several parts, and that Marishal Turenne was their General,
he thought it better to tarry in the Army. Great joy being expected in the Camp
at Loris, by going off of Guns, and Bonefires, for the Prince his arrival; the
Court was not a little troubled at it, finding their designs vanished, which
they had built upon the unruliness of the Princes Camp.

Good discipline being established in the Camp by Conde, and all men being
encouraged by their belief in his Valor, he caused Montagris to be assaulted.
Monsieur Mondraville, who had put himself into the Castle with eight Gentlemen,
and 200 Soldiers, was forced to surrender, not finding his men so firm as he
expected. Monsieur Cotiere, who was advanced to relieve it, finding it in that
condition, retreated, doing nothing. By the taking of this place, the way was
opened for the Princes, into Burgundy, and the design which they might have to
prolong the War, was thereby facilitated. The Kings Generals lay betwixt the
River Loin, and the Channel Briara; Turenne at Briara; Oquincourt at Blenau,
four leagues from the way that leads to Chastillion, where the Channel, and the
River join. Turenne visited Oquincourt in his quarters, and told him what
advantage his quarters gave to the Enemy; and at his return he met with a
Letter from the Inhabitants of Chastillion, which assured him of their
obedience, and confirmed the news, that the Prince having left his Cannon, and
200 men at Montargis; was marching toward Chasteaurenart, which made the King
and Court believe that he was marching toward Burgundy. The same night
Oquincourt writ to Turenne, that he was assured by diverse Prisoners, that the
Prince was marching toward him, and desired him that he would come and join
with him suddenly, and at the same time sent order to his Troops to draw near
the Dragoons quarters, making his baggage march; and leaving only 200 Foot in
his head quarters at Blenau, he marched into the field. But the Prince, who in
all actions of War has always been acknowledged to be incomparably solicitous,
advanced so fast, as surprising part of Oquincourts Troops, he fell upon
several bodies which lay asunder; so as one only Volly of shot, and the
darkness of the night routed the Horse Regiments of Maipas, Rochpine, Renville,
Beivau, Bourlement, and Moret; the Foot Companies of Naivailes, Boda, and the
Polacks, and others who were left in the field, saved themselves, some in one
place, some in another, so as the baggage being abandoned, fell into the hands
of the Enemies.

The Prince making forward immediately, fell upon the Dragoons which lay below,
and sacked their quarters; some of them retreated to an old Castle near hand,
which was surrounded by a ditch, from whence they made some Musket shot
against the Enemy, and being willed to surrender, they refused till they should
see Cannon; which being brought they capitulated, and the Commander with many
of the Soldiers took pay of the Prince. Count Tavanes fell upon and defeated
another quarter of the Croats, and the Prince by these happy successes,
advanced into the head quarters without any opposal. Oquincourt drew his men
out into Battalia upon the banks of a River, to dispute the pass with the
Enemy; but being advertised by Monsieur Siury Lieutenant of the Croats, that
they had already sacked the baggage, he notwithstanding made his Troops advance
at the same time to the River side; Monsieur Gonterey headed Mazarines Horse;
all the French Horse were not as yet come. The Duke of Nemeurs having already
past over the River with some of his men, the Kings men thinking that more of
the Enemy were past, retreated to beyond their quarters, and left the
breast-work free to Conde, who passing over on the head of 100 Horse, went with
some others to fall upon Oquincourt's hindmost quarter; which he took, as he
had done the others; and whilst they were busy in plundering here, the
Marishal knew by the light of the fire which burnt the Houses, that there was
not above 300 of the Plunderers; wherefore he made toward them with 700 Horse,
which when the Prince perceived, he drew out his Squadron, and marching in the
first file himself, with Nemeurs, Beaufort, Rochefaucolt, Marsillac, Tavanes,
and three or four more of his Gentlemen, he exposed himself and all the chief
of his party, to do the duties of ordinary Gentlemen.

The Kings Troops charged his Squadron, and having given fire, neither side
gave back, but at the second Volly the Duke Nemeurs was wounded, and had his
Horse killed under him; at last the Prince was forced to give back; and all the
Officers having made the light Horse stay, haulted some 50 paces off; not being
further charged by the Kings Troops: wherefore a Squadron of 30 Horse belonging
to Megly, coming on at the same time. Conde and the rest of his Commanders
placed themselves again on the head of his men, and charged Oquincourt on the
Front, and worsted him, nor were his men ever able to rally again. From thence
he went to before Blenau, and Oquincourt followed the baggage which was then
totally plundered by the Prince his men.

The Marishal by reason of these exigents, retreated by the advantage of the
night, to join with General Turenne. Monsieur de Espouse headed his Squadron
and went directly toward St. Prive, that he might get from thence to Briara.
The Croats staid in their first quarter, sounding their Trumpets, to make it be
believed that their whole body was there: and they had order if they should be
charged to run as fast as they could by another way thither. Oquincourt rid all
the rest of that night, and met not with any encounter, for the Enemy did but
seem to follow him, and in lieu thereof chased 200 Horse, which on purpose went
another way.

When Turenne heard first of the assault, he caused to sound to Horse,
throughout all his quarters, and joining his Troops speedily together, he
marched toward the place where the assault was given to bring relief; but
having heard by the fugitives of the disorder, and the misfortune (which fame
makes always greater than it is) being ratified by diverse Captains and
Officers, he thought half the Kings Troops had been lost, and that in such a
case, it was better to think of retreating, and of saving the rest of the Army
(which if it should be lost, the Kings person would be in no small danger) than
to hazard a new bickering; yet he took a contrary resolution, and rallying his
Soldiers as he marched, he went straight toward Osay, on this side the Channel,
where Count Naivailes quarters were, thinking by the knowledge he had of those
parts, to get into some advantageous station, and that when the Prince should
see him march so franckly toward him, he would be more weary in his march, and
more apprehensive; and that fortune, (which always favors the forward) would
not abandon him in this, which was thought a great piece of valor. When he had
put his men in battle array, and had rallied many that ran away, he advanced
courageously against the Enemy. There is a small thin Wood within three leagues
of Briara, which parted the Generals quarters, nor could the one come to the
other, but by a narrow causey, near which Turenne advanced, thinking to make
the Prince believe that he would make use thereof, and defend it: which the
Prince did cunningly suffer him to do, intending afterward to incompass him,
and totally undo him. But Turenne with the wariness of a gallant Commander,
possessed himself of the causey with 50 Horse, observing Conde's ways; who
thinking to have him in a Net, went presently toward the Wood with his whole
Army, and with two pieces of Artillery. Then Turenne in stead of defending the
Causey, as he made it be thought he would do, and which would have been his
utter undoing; came speedily out, and drew out his men into an orderly
Battalia, in the midst of the plain, whereby Conde thinking that the Kings Army
retreated, sent out some Squadrons to pursue it. But Turenne facing soon about,
fell upon those that were advanced, that he might fight them before the rest
were come forth. Conde knowing his disadvantage, haulted, and recalled those
that were advanced, declaring that none but Marishal Turenne could have kept
him from an entire Victory, and that of all the friends that he had ever lost,
he was grieved for none so much as for him. The Kings men drew up toward the
Wood, where they planted their Canon, and began to play upon the Enemy, who
were a little damnified, not having Canon sufficient to answer the frequent
shot of the adversary: Monsieur Marrais, Brother to Marishal Grance, and chief
Commander of the Valoi's Regiment, were there slain. Turenne having thus by his
mere industry, stopped the Army of the Princes: they stood facing one another
all that day; when Oquincourt came in with almost all his men; for he had lost
but few, and those more by the darkness of the night, than by the Sword of the
Enemy. Oquincourt spoke with the Prince, who in a civil manner sent one of
Turenne's Captains, whom he had taken that night, back to him, and writ unto
him, that though he never thought to have seen him in the head of an Army
against him the Prince; yet he declared that he had always been bound to him,
and would ever be his servant, he presented his service in the same Letter to
his Brother the Duke of Bullion. The rest of the day being spent in the playing
of Canon, the Kings Generals a little before night caused their Troops to
retreat; Conde did the like, returning by the same way that he came from
Braliera, and went the next day to Chastillion, where having staid three or
four days, he found it necessary to go to Paris, being sent for thither by his
confidents, to interrupt the treaties which were then in hand between the
Inhabitants, the Parliament, and the Duke of Orleans, by such as were partial
to the Court, and for the jealousy he had of the Coadjutor. The Dukes of
Beaufort, and Rochefaucolt, Prince Marciliack, Monsieur Guitaut, and diverse
other Lords and Gentlemen went along with him; which was the cause of the
prejudice which afterward befell him, and his party.

The nights success being brought to Court, with such inlargements as use to
accompany uncertainties, did much perplex all men's minds, for it was thought
that day would prove fatal to one or other of the parties; and as the French
measure affairs by their own passions more than any other Nation, this doubt
remained a while; but when the Cardinal was fully informed of what had
happened, he presently informed the King how affairs went, moderating the
boasts which were made by the Enemy. His Majesty with a generous and Princely
mind leapt out of bed, and said he would be at the head of his Army himself,
promising himself good fortune, by the justice of God, who is the giver of all
Victory; which when the Courtiers heard, they all took Horse, and came to the
Castle, desiring to be honored with some Command. The Duke of Bullion, was
made conductor of the Volunteers, who having got some 200 together, came
presently to the Court.

The King got on Horseback, attended by his menial Servants, Guards, and Gens
de Arms; having moreover the greatest part of the Switzers, and French Foot
Regiment; the rest whereof staid to guard Guinne. He was further waited on by
the Cardinal, Prince Thomaso of Savoy, by Villeroy, and Plessis Pralin, Count
Brienne, and diverse others. When he was got half a league out, he was by all
his Council desired to hault, till he might know the condition of affairs
certainly, and accordingly resolve what to do; not any one who had a Sword,
staid in Guienne.

The Council did not intend to expose the King's person to the uncertainty of
fortune, but to let the battle begin, and that then the King might move
accordingly, with his Guards and Courtiers which amount to nigh 3000, and they
hoped that the Soldiers would thereby be so inheartned, as they doubted not the
Victory. Certainly such a resolution would mightily encourage the Combatants,
by reason of the incomparable affection which the French bear unto their King;
as was infallibly witnessed; for Bullion being come within sight of the Army
with the aforesaid Volunteers, and it being said, that the King was there, the
Soldiers threw up their hats, leaping, and dancing, with such joy and jubilee,
as if they had longed for nothing but to fight the Enemy.

Whilst War was thus in France, nothing of novelty happened in Italy, for Don
Lewis de Haro, favorite to the King of Spain, hoping to recover Catalonia with
as much honor, as it was lost with dishonor by his predecessor, applied
himself with all his might to recover Barcellona; the King of France being
diverted by civil Wars at home, was forced to slacken his remote assistances.
When Marquess Mortara had finished all the circumvallation about Barcellona, to
the line drawn from Sans to St. Matona, he on the sixth of January, gave order
for the building of a Fort called St. Rey, upon the Mountain Mongevick, whereby
he did almost totally finish the Circumvallution.

And the, French though troubled by intestine Wars, forbear not doing what they
were able. When the Marquess de St. Andrea Monbrune, had refreshed his Forces
for twelve days in Languedock, he marched with them toward Barcellona, and on
the 4 th. of January, they passed over the hill Pyrius, where he mustered 1200
Horse, and 450 Foot, and when he saw his Forces on Foot, he himself went to the
Rendevouze which was to be at Estalrich, where he found Marishal della Motta
waiting for them; but the Catalonians were backward, much to the grief of the
French, who were removed from their good quarters in France, to bad ones in
Catalonia; and where they suffered very much. La Motta had with him three
Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse, of the old Catalonian Army. And Monsieur
de Allets was sent with these Horse to take the Abbey of St. Colga, where all
the Forces met. The next day the Marishal, and St. Andrea, went with their
Guards and with 50 Horse, to discover the situation of the Spanish Camp, and
finding that this was the properest place, the French Army encamped within half
a Canon shot of the Circumvallation. The old Catalonian Troops were placed on
the right hand, and those of St. Andrea, which were called the Italian Army, on
the left, and being ranked all along the hill, in the Front of the Enemies
Camp, Count Pardalian advanced, to see by which way he might relieve it; he
found the line was not yet fully finished, though furnished with sufficient
Forts; with good store of Soldiers, and Artillery; he resolved to attack the
weakest, which was before the Fort Sans, and Baron Sabacks quarters, wherewith
he acquainted the besieged by some that he had conveyed in on purpose, to let
them know, that after midnight he would assault the line, to the end that they
might make out a general sally at the same time, and so the Spaniards Trenches
might be at one and the same time, assaulted on both sides; but the Soldiers
moving too early, they were to hault a while, and being forced by excessive
cold, made fires, whereby the Spaniards discovered the Frenches designs, and
had time to draw out their men into Battle array; two hours after midnight, the
French marched directly to the lines; which they did so furiously assault, as a
Sergeant of the Norman Regiment, leapt into the Trenches, by whose example
others did so likewise, and made themselves masters of the Corpse de Guard, the
Soldiers whereof threw away their Arms, and began to run.

The French would have effected their design, if the besieged had sallied out
at the same time; but they alleged that they did not know the signs well, and
that they wanted time to advertise la Motta therewith, that so they might have
been backed by him: wherefore the whole Spanish Army falling upon them, they
were forced to retreat to their former quarters, where they tarried some days,
till driven away for want of water, and forage, they went to St. Bois, a
Village on the plain of the River Lawbregate, as you go from Taragona to
Barcellona, where there was better store of forage, and which place lay fitter
to encounter all the Enemies Camp, betwixt which and the French diverse
skirmishes past, and the Marishal thinking how he might bereave the Spanish
Cavalry of forage; possessed himself of three or four places about the lines,
whereby he defrauded the Spaniards of more than half their forage; and as this
did straighten the Spanish Camp, so was it an advantage to Barcellona; here the
French made many acquisitions, as of the Tower of L' Eglise de St. Hospitalle,
within one hours space without any loss, as also another house that was
fortified, which yielded upon discretion; which being done they returned to
their quarters* which was imputed to them for a great error, for if they had
advanced with their whole body, it was generally thought they might easily have
relieved the City, or have obliged the Spaniards to a battle, which the
Spaniards avoided; not long after the Marishal went on Foot by night,
accompanied by Count Pardalian, six of his Guard, and a Catalonian guide, being
followed by St. Andrea, with 200 Horse, to discover the quarter of Sans; and
finding it fit to build a Fort upon the Mountain St. Pietro Martire, he did so,
and put 500 Foot into it; this served to overlook almost all the Spaniards
Camp, being within Musket shot of the Abbey of Petalba, which the Spaniards had
fortified a little without their line.

At last many expedients being discussed, they resolved to endeavor relief by
assaulting the Fort Alfonso, and to enter Barcellona on that side; he
acquainted none with this, but the Marquess of St. Andrea, and Marenville, and
Count Pardalian. The first whereof was to command the Troops which staid
without; and the other two were to follow him with 500 Horse, and as many Foot.
Fort Alfonso was a Tower, fortified upon the Sea bank, one side whereof was
secured by the Sea, and the other by an unaccessable Fen, which served for a
Trench for above 2000 paces, it had a strong Palisado on each side, which were
to be broken before the Horse could pass.

The Troops of the old Catalonian Army were to fall on the right hand toward
the Sea, and those of the Italian Army on the left hand toward the Fen; which
was accordingly done on the 22 th. of April.

Pardalian, who was to manage the assault on the left hand, set on the Norman,
and Britain Foot, against the Palisado, and after having dislodged those who
defended it, and made trial of a furious Volly of Canon and Muskets, they did
all they could to pluck down the Rafters, so to make way for the Horse, which
the mean while was exposed to Musket shot which played from the Fort, but they
could not break them.

In these straits Pardalian meditating on what side he might advance, it
happened that a Horse of a Soldier that was slain, went wandering up and down,
and at last past over the Fen; whereupon the Count made forward presently,
though the water came up to his Saddle skirts, and past safely over, being
followed by Boessack's Regiment, and by Prince Thomaso his Squadron of Gens de
Arms; and he charged the Enemy so furiously, as after a fierce bickering he
routed them quite, and pursued those that retreated to within their quarter of
Sans; he himself not being at all wounded, though his cloths were shot through
and his Horse shot under him five or six times. At the same time the others
fell on on their side; and came through the Seawater before the Palisado; they
assaulted the Fort by Ladders, which proving too short, they could proceed no
farther, but instead of tarrying to make new attempts, by which they were
likely to have done their business, the Marishal went toward the City, being
earnestly entreated so to do by the whole Council of Catalonia; which hindered
the getting of the Fort, so as it was known at last, though too late, that
those of the City had Counseled amiss: and the Spaniards grew so apprehensive
of that Fort, as they presently caused it to be new fortified, and provided all
things necessary. The Marishal was welcomed into Barcellona with extraordinary
joy, and jubilee, for having exposed his life to so evident danger for their
liberty; when he was got in, he chiefly be thought himself how to make use of
the great Garrison to open the passes; considering that the Horse which were
above a Thousand, could not be maintained long in the City; wherefore he
resolved to fall again upon the Fort Alfonso. St. Andrea being without with the
rest of the Army, which was much lessened, studied also how to break the line,
and so to get into the City; the Marishal in the mean while who acquainted St.
Andrea with his design, and agreed upon the manner how; thought to attempt the
Fort Rey, which the Spaniards had built within Musket shot of Mongevick, and
the next morning planted a Battery of six Canon against it, intending to
assault it. But Marquess Mortara who had drawn out his Army behind it, to
defend the Fort, was contented to play upon it for five days, till he had
answered St. Andrea: who going the mean while behind the Mountain St. Pietre
Martire, and seigning to return to his quarters, fell privately upon a Fort
under St. Ierolomo and took it; cut the Garrison in pieces, and took a Captain
who commanded it Prisoner, and took two pieces of Artillery, and gave sign by
fire to the City thinking that the Citizens would have sallied out, or else
would have fallen upon the Fort del Rey. But they doing neither of these, and St.
Andrea not being able without Foot to maintain the Fort, he abandoned it, and
returned to his quarters; where hearing that the Marishal intended to assault
the Fort Alfonso, he sent Monsieur Brecourt into Barcellona to desire some
Foot, without which he said he neither could keep his quarters, nor undertake
any thing against the Enemy. The Marishal sent him the Regiment of Britany, and
Normandy, which were not above two hundred Foot, and sent Monsieur de la Place
with them, to consult with him about the taking of the Fort Alfonso, and
Mongevick. The French advanced notwithstanding, and fell so furiously upon the
Spanish Horse, as notwithstanding the fires which the Spaniards made from the
Fort, and from their Ships and Galleys, they routed them, and forced them to
fly into the aforesaid Fen, with great loss of Soldiers and Officers, amongst
which Boutiers self was sorely wounded, and diverse Captains taken Prisoners.
The Marishal received a Pistol shot in the thigh: Perdallian was shot by a
Musket in the Arms, and also Maranville in his breast plate; but the French
for all this could not effect their ends; for the Spaniards having discovered
their design, doubled their Guards, and had seasonably put Five hundred Foot
into the Fort; so as not being longer able to resist the thunder of Canon, and
Musket, which played continually upon them from all parts, they were forced to
retreat, which they did in good order, and without loss; the Marishal retreated
into the City, and St. Andrea to his former quarters.

Whilst the Spaniards insisted upon the siege of Barcellona, they thought of
taking other places also, which the French were masters of in Catalonia; and
particularly upon those on the Frontiers of Aragon. Count Lemose, Viceroy and
Captain General of Aragon, having upon several occasions endeavored to
surprise Bellaguer, but still in vain, resolved to attempt it once again. Don
Pietro Valezuela Mendosa Governor of Lerida, cast his eye upon the said
Bellaguer, and prepared to get it by the intelligence which he held with some
of the Inhabitants; in pursuance whereof, his Garrison being reinforced by
some Foot, and by a hundred Horse; he sent Don Iovanni de Sala Manques to
confer with his friends in Bellaguer; and to agree upon the business. They
readily offered, that six of them would open a portcullis in the Bridge, that
they would kill the Guards, that they would do it by day; and that those that
were to do the business should hide themselves in the Covent of St. Dominico,
which was upon the head of the Bridge; and that to the same purpose they should
place some silly companions in the other Monastery de la perellas, who were
made to believe, that this was done in expectation of some French Merchants;
who were to pass over the neighboring Mountains with rich Merchandise; this
being agreed upon, the Spaniard went on the 7 th. of July to the places
appointed and were recruited by some Forces brought by Don Pietro de Lara; they
placed themselves so as that the Horse might withstand those who should first
advance; They were not above Four hundred, they marched very silently, and got
into the Monastery of St. Dominico The French Garrison, before they open the
Gates use not only to look about all the places about the Town, but to visit
the neighboring Covents particularly. The Sergeant Major hid himself, and his
Foot in a certain place which the French had never observed, and placed his
Horse in a place apart, called Valfagona. When day appeared, the accustomed
Guards went out to search the Covent; the Governor came to the Gate himself,
to wish the Soldiers to be vigilant, and to keep all Country people out.
Salamanque sent a Friar who was held partial to the French to acquaint his
confederates in the Town, and agreed with another, that whilst the one should
enter by the first Portcullis, the other should possess the second; this being
done, the Sergeant Major came forth with his men, and cutting the Rafters, and
breaking down the Gates, got with his best men at last into the City, and after
a small skirmish, wherein few of either side perished, he forced Faro the
Governor to retreat with his Garrison into St. Marie's Church, where he
capitulated to surrender the Town the same day upon honorable conditions,
which were granted him by the Governor of Lerida, who upon the first
advertisement went thither himself in person.

The Spaniards having gotten Bellaguer thus, turned presently upon the Castle
of Castellon de Farfana, and from thence to Camerassa, both which not being
provided for defense, received the first offers which were made by Pietro
Valenzuela, and yielded obedience to the Spaniards.

1652.
THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The EIGHTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The Prince of Conde leaves the Army, and goes to Paris. The Parliament sends
again to the King to discard the Cardinal. The Coadjutor Conde is made
Cardinal. Graveling is besieged, and taken by the Spaniards. Mardike is
forsaken by the French. The King of France goes from Guien, to Melune; and from
thence to S. Germans. The Army of the Princes fortify themselves in Estampes.
S. Martino is taken: Diverse other incounters. Orleans, together with Conde,
send to Court to negotiate Peace. Duke Charles of Lorrain enters France. He
makes the Kings Men raise the siege of Estampes. They incampe near S. Clou. New
troubles in Bordeaux. The beginning of the Olmira. Rumors in Provence. The King
goes to S. Dennis. The Prince of Conde endeavors to bring his Army to
Charrenton. He is followed by Turenne. He gets into S. Antoine; where he is
assaulted, and a bloody business follows. By Madamoiseles means, the Gates of
Paris are opened, and the Princes with their Men are received in. New Sedition.
The Palace of the Communalty is fired; with much confusion, and disorder, not
having effected what the Princes desired. Conde solicites the Spaniards in
Flanders to assist him. The King goes to Pontois, and carries the Parliament
thither. Most of the Counselors refuse to go; stay in Paris, and continue the
Assemblies. The Cardinal goes from Pontois, and withdraws out of the Kingdom.
The Parliament declares the Duke of Orleans, Lieutenant General of the Crown;
and set 50000 Crowns upon the Cardinals head. A Duel between Beaufort and
Nemeurs; wherein Nemeurs is slain. A general Amnesty published by the King of
France. The Duke of Lorrain, Prince of Witenberg, and Spanish Army, in Succor
of the Princes; they besiege Marishal Turenne in Villanova. Montrond
Surrendered. Harcourt retreats to Brisack. The Miseries of War.* Candalle
commands the Forces in Guienne. The King writes to the Duke of Orleans.
Barcellona besieged, and lost.

Whilst Arms were thus managed in the Field, Counsels were frequently held by
both parties, what resolution to put on: The Malcontents being still more
desirous how to establish themselves, by lessning the Kings authority. All
agreed, that the Cardinal was the ruin of the Kingdom: All Paris was full of
Libels, and Satirical Verses; of fabulous Histories, and politic Discourses.
Which casting dirt upon Mazarine, and the State Ministers, redounded to the
dishonor of their Royal Majesty's; and put bad impressions into the common
people, who were ignorant of the Arcana Regum. All the streets sounded of
nothing but of the Praises of the Princes, and of the Archduke, who were
celebrated both in prose and verse, by infinite Writers, stiling them
Liberators of the oppressed People. And many Parish Priests did in their
Pulpits take no less liberty, railing upon the present Government, and filling
the Peoples ears with sinister impressions, with no less blame to the Superiors
who tolerated it, then to the Authors thereof. The Parliament desiring nothing
more then the Cardinals ruin, sent President Nesmond with Five Counselors,
and other Deputies of the City, to Sully, where the King was, to represent how
necessary it was to put the Cardinal from his Council, according as his Majesty
had formerly promised: Wherein Nesmond spoke with no less eloquence then
freedom, upon the Declarations made by the King, and by the Parliament; and did
much complain, that they had been so delusively broken: But the Court was not
at all moved with this; for the others might well bark, but they could not
bite.

The Coadjutor, in the interim, continued in making a third party, by staving
the Duke of Orleans from off Conde's enterprise; with whom he seemed desirous
to be Friends, and did really negotiate it. But this was rather to persuade the
Court to concur in his being made Cardinal, which he thought the Court did
cunningly prolong, than out of a desire to reconcile himself to the Prince: Who
finding how necessary it was to make himself sure of the Duke of Orleans, and
to get the City declare for him; as also to receive applause for the happy
success at Blenau, and to justify himself in Parliament, touching the
Declaration made against him by the King, and which the Parliament had
justified, but suspended the effects for a while; came to Paris, where he was
received with general applause, being met by the Duke of Orleans, and an
infinite of people. The next day he came into the Assemblies, indeavoring to
justify himself. These Reasons brought him thither, but could not keep him
there, but for a while; for the Army needed his presence. Count Chavigny, who,
as it was reported, had made his peace with the Cardinal, by the mediation of
Monsieur Faber, and who did intend to do so with the Prince likewise: Possessed
the Prince with new jealousies of the Coadjutor, and of Chasteauneus; alleging
the example of the Duke of Orleans, in Count Soisons affairs, who had recourse
to the King for favor. By these pretenses Conde was detained in Paris, and went
not to his Camp, whereby great prejudice insued to his party, and greater to
his Forces, which in a short time, were almost all dispersed. It was already
agreed by the chief Citizens of Orleans, That the Prince coming to visit
Mademoiselle, should be admitted into the City, which might be a color for
them to declare fully afterward; but his abode in Paris ruined this design
also.

Nesmonds relation of what he had done at Court was afterward read, and the
Kings Letters of the first and second of March, which were written to the
Parliament, wherein he commanded, That all Decrees whatsoever, or Declarations,
were made against the Cardinal, should be delivered to the Guard de Seaux;
whereat the Counselors were much troubled, and would not permit that the said
Declarations and Letters should be assigned over: Whereupon the Parliament when
it met, did ordain, That the same Commissioners should return again unto the
King, to desire him, that the Remonstrances of the Parliament might be read in
his Royal presence; and that he should be earnestly desired to give an answer:
Wherefore the Declarations of the Duke of Orleans, and of the Prince, were sent
him, mentioning the Reasons, why the Parliament had forborne to Register them.
It was afterward ordered, that the General Assembly should meet in the Pallazzo
de la Communita, where the same Declarations might be made, and that there the
sending the Cardinal away, and the General Peace as well within, as without
France, might be resolved upon by the whole Body of the Citizens; and that, in
the interim, all Decrees made against the Cardinal should be fully executed.

But before we go further, we must not omit, that the Pope when he made
Cardinals in March, made the Coadjutor Gondi a Cardinal, who would afterward
be called the Cardinal of Rets, Increasing his pretensions by this new Dignity,
he kept his wonted customs, as well to abase Mazarine, as to ruin the Prince;
he was very careful, that discord between Conde and Orleans, might not
prejudice his particular designs * for he knew, that when, by their means, he
had suppressed Mazarine, he might more easily quell the Prince of Conde, whose
Sword he feared not so much as Mazarines Head-peace.

These Differences, and particular Interests, the more prejudice they brought
to France, the more did they redound to the advantage of Spain. For the
Archduke encouraged by the present conjuncture, resolved upon the enterprise of
Graveling, which wanted Men and Necessaries; and where the Governor, Marishal
Grance, was also wanting, who was then at his House in Normandy. Wherefore
sending an Army of Seven or eight thousand Foot, and of Three thousand Horse
into the Field, conducted by the Count Fuenseldaglia, Prince Ligny, and the
Marquess Sfondrato; Count Basigny, Governor of S. Omers, was sent with a good
Body of Men to possess himself of the Avenues, till the gross Body might come
to besiege it, before Grance should get in, as he intended; to which purpose,
he was raising Forces in Normandy: But these levies went slowly on, as well for
want of Moneys, as also not to cause jealousy by raising Men in that Country.
Duke Longueville, who was afraid to be held contumacious by the Court, by
reason of his alliance with Conde, and of the new Negotiations introduced by
the Duke of Orleans, who sought by all means to make Longueville declare for
him. Which though it did not work upon that solid, and peaceful Prince, yet was
the Court jealous of some collusion between them: And because it behoved the
Spaniards, if they would besiege Graveling, they must keep it from being
relieved by Sea from Calice, where Count Charrot was Governor, or from Dunkirk,
where Count d'Estrades commanded. Don John d' Almara, Governor of Ostend, came
there with some armed Vessels, to keep them from going out, who might be sent
to the place besieged, another Squadron of Ships lying still in the Mouth of
the Haven of Dunkirk. On the seventh of September, Fuenseldaglia sat down
before it; as did also the Archduke within eight days after, making the
Trenches of Approach, and Line of Circumvallation be made, and lodged his Army
in four Quarters, abounding with all things necessary, by the convenience of
bringing them from Newport, and from S. Omers. Graveling is so well fortified,
as it is almost impregnable, wanting nothing that is requesit to an exact Fort.
It stands in the Mouth of the River Aa, begirt with five strong Bulwarks, and
with a Citadel fortified by Charles the Fifth, to serve as a Rampire to
Flanders, and as a Bar of Defense to France. All necessary provisions being
notwithstanding presupposed of Soldiers, Victuals, and Warlike Ammunition.
Which Monsieur Valibert, the Kings Lieutenant in that place, wanting, he knew
he should be shreudly put too it, without speedy and convenient recruits;
wherewith he speedily advertised the Court, and also acquainted d'Estrades with
his wants, who calling a Council of War, resolved to abandon Mardike, and
demolish it. But not being able to bring the Garrison by Sea, all the Mariners
being run away at the news of the siege; nor being able to carry them by Land,
for want of a Horse Convoy, he was to use his wits, and to seek how to do it
some other way.

The Spaniards had a guard of Three hundred Horse upon the way, between Mardike
and Dunkirk, and One thousand Horse in Villages thereabouts, which it was
probable would go thither, when Mardike should be abandoned. Wherefore the
places where they formerly were, being free, Three hundred Men might be easily
conveyed into Graveling. Upon these hopes, d'Estrades went with One thousand
Foot, and four small piece of Cannon, and at unawares fell upon the Spanish
Horse beyond Mardike, he blew up the Bulwarks of Mardike, rased their
Counterscarps, took all their Cannon and Ammunition, fired their Houses, and
retreated into Dunkirk with Three hundred Men that were there in Garrison, who
had meat but for two days. This design being happily effected, the Spaniards
removed presently from their Quarters, and came to dismantled Mardike with
three Brigades of Foot and One thousand Horse: Wherefore those other places
being free, Monsieur Villers, who was Captain of the Guards, went with four
other Captains, many Officers, and Three hundred commanded Foot toward
Graveling. That he might enter there at the same time when Estrade coming from
Dunkirk with Five hundred other Foot, might divert the Enemies elsewhere, and
draw them as near him as he could. In performance of which Agreement, Villers
by night, on the Seventeenth of April, by the help of guides, past over three
Rivers, and one Fen, the water coming up to men's middles; and speedily marched
six leagues. Being come to a little Bridge at the entrance into the Enemies
Line, he charged a Troop of Horse and One hundred Foot, who were there upon the
Guard, and having treated them not over well, he got into the Town with Two
hundred and thirty men, having lost the rest in those Rivers which were deeper
then he thought; which when Estrades hard, he presently mustered all the
Garrison of Dunkirk, viewed the Ammunition, that he might the better know how to
defend himself, if he should be assaulted, which he assuredly thought he should
be; where he found Two thousand Soldiers, and Four thousand Inhabitants, who
wished well to the Spaniards, and Victuals for no longer then May. Wherefore he
thought it good to rid the Town of Three thousand useless Months, which he put
out of the Town, and brought all the Corn into the public Magazins: And
whilst the Spaniards were busied about the siege of Graveling, he got in all
the Victuals he could from the Neighboring parts, sent out Two hundred Foot
against a Village called Vulpes, between Fernes and Newport, where storming a
Guard of Fifty Musketeers, he took away all the Corn and Cattle he could find:
And on the other side of the River Colme, took diverse Barks loaded with Wine,
Beer, and other things, which were going to the Spanish Camp, and took several
prisoners.

When the news of the siege of this important place came to the Court, their
discontent was doubled; being imbroiled by the Princes, and having Civil War.
Wherefore they poured out imprecations against Conde, the first Author of all
the misfortunes that were, and that were likely to be. But he laughed, and laid
all the blame upon the Cardinal, so, as there is nothing which does more
advantage the interest of a third party, then discord between the other two.
The Spaniards were so fortunate this year, as even the very French did applaud
their proceedings, which made them easily active in those enterprises, which
otherwise would have required longer time, and have been of uncertain event.
The Court did notwithstanding, forbear to apply Remedies to the weighty
emergencies wherewith it was miserably distracted. Marquess Oquincourt after
the siege of Estampes, leaving the Kings Army to be commanded by Turenne, had
order to go with Five hundred Horse to that part of Flanders, and to join with
Monsieur Mondedieu who had Two thousand Foot, jointly to endeavor the
preservation of the place besieged; some Ships were listed in Britanny, and
some in Normandy and Calice; but want of moneys hindered Provisions; nor were
they to abandon the needs of their own Kingdom. Wherefore their applications
were so weak, and slow, and on the contrary the Spaniards were so solicitous,
and vigorous in their resolutions, as the Walls being still plied by Artillery
and Assaults, the Inhabitants by reason of their small number, not being able
to hold longer out, were forced to capitulate; and upon good conditions of War,
to march out with three pieces of Cannon, and about Eight hundred Foot, went to
Calice. Thus the Spaniards with no small glory were masters of one of the most
famous Forts of Flanders; and which was to make way for the recovery of
Dunkirk; toward which, Don Fernando Solis went with Four thousand Foot, and
Two thousand Horse, within half a league of Dunkirk; which he quartered in
several parts, and fortified himself every where, insomuch, as the Fort was
blocked up at large round about. Above Two thousand of the Spanish Army
perished before Graveling, and diverse Officers, of which, Marquess Sfondrato,
General of the Artillery, was one, which sadded all their content. He was shot
by a Cannon in a sally which the besieged made out, on the seventh of May, and
died on the tenth.

At the same time when Graveling was besieged in Flanders, the Spaniards forgot
not to think how they might get the long wished for Casalle; the best means how
to effect it, was looked into by the Spanish Agents; and it being hard for the
Spanish Army to approach that City, whilst all the Avenues were guarded by the
French; the Marquess of Caracena, Governor of Milan, knew that it was necessary
to have Trino, which lying in the way to Casalle, as well by the way of Poe, to
which, it is very near, as by Land, if it should be left in the Enemies hand,
would have much incommodated the enterprise. Wherefore, about Ten thousand
Soldiers being raised upon the Frontiers, together with Artillery, and all
things necessary for War: Trino was assaulted on all sides on the fifth of May.
There were Six hundred Foot and Seventy Horse in the Garrison, under the
Government of Catalano Alfieri, a Piemontese, who commanded there in the Duke
of Savoys name; Too small a number to defend so great a circuit as was that of
the outward Fortifications; so as it was undoubtedly lost without speedy
Supplies: Which the French not being, by reason of their weakness, able to
send, the care of preserving the place lay wholly upon the Duchess of Savoy,
who presently caused Three hundred Foot to be raised, and gave order that they
should fall down the stream to recruit the besieged: But it proved in vain,
for the Captain who had the charge of them, for want of Boats, as he
affirmed, staid two days longer then he ought to have done, whereby the
Spaniard had time to hinder the attempt. Wherefore the besieged failing of
their hopes, capitulated, and marched out with Arms and Baggage. Wherefore
Caracena returned glorious to Milan, but left the Army distributed into diverse
quarters upon those Frontiers, that he might be ready for new enterprises, when
the approaching harvest should be ripe. This acquisition was as acceptable to
the Spaniards, as that of Graveling. For by taking Trino, they might assault
Cassale, and drive out the French, as they had hopes by Graveling to recover
Dunkirk, to the great glory of their nation; who not only by valor, but by
wisdom, knew how to make use of their Enemies confusion and weakness.

Greater disturbance continued still in Paris, then elsewhere: Whether when
Conde was come, it is impossible to say, with what expressions of joy he was
received, to that degree as the Kings faithful Servants, and the Cardinals
Friends durst not stir out of doors without great advisedness. Which made the
Marishal de l'Hospitalle, the Provost of Merchants, Cardinal di Retz, and the
Duchess of Chevereux, send to desire their Majesty's to come speedily to
Paris; for otherwise, when Conde's faction should be grown stronger, they
themselves should be forced to forgo all Agreements and Treaties. The Kings
Council being hereby incited, and that they might preserve that great and
powerful City, resolved to draw near to it. There were diverse ways to go
thither, or to S. Germans; for the Queen would not trust her self in the City,
being acquainted with what had past; nor would she have been there received,
having the Cardinal with her. The shortest way was by Estampes, but by reason
the Princes, their Army lay about Montargis, and might fall upon the Kings men,
either on the Flank, or Rear; they took a way which was further about, but more
safe; which was, that the King and his Court, with some fevv more, got to
Auxere, where passing over the River Tone, they went to Melune, being
sheltered by that River, and by the River Seen. Their Majesty's were received
in Auxeres with incredible joy. So as the Court being comforted to find so
great loyalty in those Inhabitants, the King dismissed his own Guards, and
would be guarded by the Citizens. Auxeres is one of the chiefest Cities of
Burgundy, seated upon the Banks of Tone, begirt with Walls and Tovvets, after
the ancient form; of a large circuit, and well peopled, having about Five
thousand armed men usually lifted in it. From thence their Majesty's came to
Sens, an Archipiscopal City upon the same River; and from thence to Montreule,
and so to Melune upon the Seen, where the King was received also with
extraordinary content; and thither came many Parisians to kiss his hand, and to
assure his Majesty of their uncorruptible fidelity. And the preservation of all
these places, being the only means in these present conjunctures to vvin the
game, (for from those plentiful parts, the Parisians greatest subsistence
comes,) Foot and Horse Garrisons were put by the King into Forgeaux, Iogray,
Sens, Montereux, and into all the Walled Cities, and Towns, in those parts.
And vvhilest the Court went from one place to another, the Army marched still
by the parallel Line: So as when the Court came to Melune, the Army came to
Moret, a little Town upon the River Loin, near Fountainbleau, not incountring
any Enemy; for they lay toward Estampes, to keep the Passage, and
Communication free betvveen Paris and Orleans. The Famishing of Paris was
propounded in the Kings Council, and the compelling it to lay down all
contumacy, by bereaving it of the Commerce of the River; but the Cardinal
would not listen thereunto, knovving, that though the City fell then into
extravagancies, it was by the procurement of some seditious people, who were
more greedy to advantage their own particular interests, then the public
good, as was given out; but that being freed of the Witchcraft vvherevvith
thev were possessed, the King should not need to desire any thing of his
Subjects: Moreover, that it was not good to exasperate the people of that City
yet more by rigor, and to preci pitate them desperately to declare for the
Prince, which was the thing desired by him, and his followers, and without
which their party could not subsist. That those people often altered their
opinion, and sometimes for the better, as it was likely, they might do now,
they having desired his Majesty to return to his Royal Throne; to which they
had sent Monsieur de Leaygue to him: Though by these strong Reasons he sought
to persuade the Council to return, it was notwithstanding observed, that the
Parisians were only moved by the suspicion they had of the Kings Forces, which
not being able of themselves to oppose, they must consequently throw themselves
into the hands of Foreigners, or succumb to the Regal Authority.

But three things hindered the effecting of this Council. The first was the
condition of those who made the invitation; the second, because their Subjects
who were well affectioned to the Court, counseled the contrary; the third,
that it became not the King to put his person in balance with the People or
Frondeurs, without good Caution. By these, and the like arts, Paris was kept
from declaring particularly, but keeping, as it were, Neutral, though it
appeared otherwise, it afforded time for such things as made for the Kings
behalf: The Court went afterward from Melunt, to Corbeile, and from thence to
S. Germans, by the way of Silly, being still sheltered by the Army.

But before the King went from Gien, he sent a Letter to the Marishal de
l'Hospitalle, and to the Corporation of the City, to acquaint them with his
going from thence, and with his drawing near Paris: Wherefore he commanded,
that no Assembly should be made before his coming, for he intended to be there
in person; and having heard under hand, that Guards of the Inhabitants were to
be placed at the Gates, he gave order likewise for the same; to let it be seen,
that it was done by his Majesty's order, and not by the Parliament. And the
said Guard being desired by Merchants, as well in respect of the nearness of
the Armies, which came even to the Suburbs; as for the peoples insolency, who
in a sedition, were apt to plunder the houses of the ablest men: And that
though Paris was not in open Rebellion against the King, they held
notwithstanding frequent correspondency with the Princes; and for that Counsels
and Preparations for War were made there, and in the Assemblies; a General was
made, who should be one of the Corporation, assisted by the Deputies of
Parliament. In which Parliament it was Decreed, That when the Cardinal should
be driven out of the Kingdom, with assurance never to return; they would
immediately lay down Arms: But as they made use of this pretense, only to make
the people believe their actions innocent, and that they aimed at nothing but
the Public good, by sending away that State Minister; to whom they imputed all
their grievances, and the continuance of War. So the Court, knowing, that if
the Cardinal should be sent away, they should get no more by his dismission,
then they had done when he was before sent out of the Kingdom; and that by
yielding to the Princes pretensions, the Regal Authority would be insensibly
wounded, which ought to be absolute, and independent: They also pretended, that
it belonged neither to the Princes, nor to the Parliament to give Laws to their
Prince, but to receive Laws from him: And that the very pretending, that the
King should make use of such State Ministers, as they should choose, deserved
correction; since it stood not with the Maxims of good Government, That any of
his Majesty's Council should depend upon any bodies will but the Kings. They
therefore said it was impertinently done, to desire that any one should be
turned away whose service the King approved of, to place another there who was
not so much to his satisfaction; and who would be more careful to please
private men, than the public, or the Crown; and that it did plainly appear
that to deprive the King of the Cardinal, was to take his satisfaction from him
as they listed; that therefore to avoid so pernitions an example, though the
King should have a mind to dismiss him, he should forbear doing it, and
maintain him against all men; the King being their sole Patron and Master. The
Parisians who were not aware of the Princes their actions, had a general
assembly the next day, wherein they chose Commissioners to desire that their
Majesty's would return to Paris and to send away the Cardinal, which was the
way to restore peace to his faithful Subjects. But the Council finding that the
design of the Princes, and Parliament was to banish the Cardinal, to the end
that they might govern all things as they listed; they would not alter their
resolution of maintaining the Royal Dignity, but on the contrary resolved to
suppress the exorbitant, and indiscreet pretenses of the Princes and
Parliament; wherefore they endeavored to gain time, and to keep the Parisians
Neutrals, that they might not assist the contrary party with men and moneys,
which they wanted much. The Princes and Parliament on the other side, studying
to preserve their credit with the people by the specious pretense of easing
their grievances, forbear not any thing that might incite the fury of the
Inhabitants against the King's Agents; and because it was necessary for the
Commerce of Paris to keep the King's Army from passing over the Seen, and to
exhaust St. Germans of all things; by keeping it from the daily helps which it
received from Paris, they raised some Troops which being joined to other
Forces, overran the neighboring Country by night, doing more harm to the
neighboring Town, and Villages, than did the Kings men who came even to the
Gates of Paris.

The Prince of Conde caused two Arches of the Bridge of St. Clow to be broken,
and all the rest that were upon the Seen from Paris to St. Germans; and placed
good Garrisons in St. Clow and Neully; with Ammunition furnished from Paris,
but at the cost of the Princes: for the Parisians could never be brought to
disburse any moneys for them in this War; whose Troops having taken Estampes,
they pretended to fortify themselves there, hoping thereby to keep Paris, and
Orleans true to them, which was their main business. Whilst the Kings Army was
quartered in Chartres and thereabouts, the aforesaid Troops threw themselves
into Estampes, with their Lieutenant General: for the Prince, and Dukes of
Nemeurs, and Beaufort were gone to Paris, to keep the Frondeurs, and their
friends true to them, many whereof wished for the Kings return, and willingly
listened to treaties which were then in hand touching the receiving of their
Majesty's, who if they had then freely appeared they would have been welcomed
with all joy and applause, and the Princes, and their party had been driven out
for the common people were easily wound about, and the Citizens were mightily
afraid they should make trial of War, and the miserable effects thereof: the
Princes men had abundance of Victuals in Estampes, which the Kings Forces
wanted mightily; wherefore Marishal Turenne, who managed the War with much
precaution, when the Court was come to St. Germans, and that the treaty of
public peace was begun; upon the Princess of Orange her passing through
Estampes, and before the jealousy of the Duke of Lorrains marching toward
Paris grew greater, bethought himself of a gallant design. After he had
received a pass from the Court, and sent it to Madamoselle to carry her to
Paris, he propounded to the Marishal de Oquincourt, and to the other
head-Officers, that the said Princess being gone to Estampes, and the Army of
the Princes, which were drawn out in Battalia, when they should be retreated to
their quarters, and the better half of them according to custom gone for
forage; they might easily get some good advantage by falling upon them at
unawares. Upon this, with general consent they got on Horseback, and marched
quietly with all their Troops and Artillery on the third of May, (which was the
next day after Madamoselle was gone from Estampes,) thitherwards leaving the
Horse Regiments of Marcuse, and Lamet, and Rales, Burlemonts, and the Crowns
Foot to guard the Bagage at Chartres: which was five leagues from Estampes, the
design was to surprise the Suburbs St. Martine, wherein part of the Princes
Troops were; and having past the River Fuleville, they marched quietly, and in
good order, till an hour before day, within sight of Estampes; the Enemies Army
kept in Battalia; and when Madamoselle was gone, Conde's Regiment, and that of
Burgundy, together with seven other Dutch Regiments of Foot, and Virtembergs
and Bruchs Horse Regiments, quartered in the aforesaid Suburbs which was to be
assaulted.

The Kings Generals finding the adversary thus quartered, they drew out a body
of commanded men from out the body of Foot, to place them in the intervals of
the Squadrons of Horse, together with all the Pol-axes; the Army was drawn out
into Battalia, the Canon was placed within Musket shot of the Town. Turenne
took upon him the most dangerous charge with 300 Soldiers, whilst Oquincourt
was to assault the other end of the Suburbs with 500 commanded men. Virtemberg,
and Bruchs, Dutch Regiments, who were placed without, were forced by some shot
of Artillery to alter their station; the forlorn hope fell on upon the Suburbs;
but finding stout resistance, for the Princes men were many, and well
fortified, Turenne came in with his own Brigage, and those of Vxelles, and
Picardy, and after a hot skirmish, made himself master of some of the houses,
and of some of the Garden Walls which were defended by the Enemy, even to
throwing of stones: the mean while Oquincourt making forwards in the head of
his men, with his Sword in hand, was the first himself that got over the Wall,
and driving the defendants into some houses that were near the Church, yea even
into the Church and Churchyard, where they Barracadoed themselves. But because
the Kings men at their entrance into the Suburbs fell to plunder, so as the
Enemy might have come out upon their backs, and get some great advantage in
that confusion; Monsieur Varennes, a Voluntier who was near Turenne, rid with
loose reins into the Suburbs, and making the Soldiers come quickly out of the
houses, put them into Squadrons in the Street before the Churchyard; and
seeing some of Count Broglio's Soldiers lead Count Brioll Prisoner, ^e desired
him to let those Soldiers know, that there being no hope of safety, their best
course was to yield; which he refusing to do, Turenne sent him away Prisoner,
and caused a call to be beaten to Pieur's Regiment, who were fighting
desperately there: whose Officers knowing Varennes, capitulated and became
Prisoners of War upon his word; at which time Oquincourt coming in on the other
side, all the rest were also made Prisoners. Count Tavanes, who was in the Town
with the other Commanders, thought to go out and succor his side; but being
beaten back, all that were in the Suburbs were left to the discretion of the
assailants, and all the Soldiers, and Officers were generally slain, or taken,
not being able to get into the Town; nor to ford over the River. The Burgundy
Brigade abandoned its station, and retreated entire; Conde's Regiment did make
stout resistance, and recovered a place, where the Kings Commander yielded upon
discretion. Thus there being no more Enemies to make opposition, the Suburbs
was totally plundered, and little less than burnt to ashes; and the Generals
much to their glory returned to their quarters at Chartres; and two days after
to Palaisau. Many of the Kings Officers and Soldiers dyed in this action, and
the young Count de Quinchy, and Carlo Broglio were sorely wounded, whilst they
fought valiantly amidst the Enemy; this action was generous, and noble for
which the Generals were much commended, and the credit of the Princes was very
much lessened. The King staid at St. Germans, whither a Deputation was sent
unto him in the name of the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Conde, from Count
Chavigny, and Secretary Goulas, and the Duke of Rohan; but not without
jealousy of one another; for it was thought their private instructions
differed from their public ones; doubtless Chavigny was the ablest and wisest,
and he was for Conde, Goulas was for Orleans, and Rohan for them both; these
went with seeming orders not to confer with the Cardinal, but by private
agreement to treat with him; as soon as they were come to Court, and had made
their Commission known, they were told (the better to cloak the cause of their
coming) that they had taken pains to no purpose, and that so they might return,
so after having shown some reluctance, they obeyed the Kings will without any
contradiction; whilst all were curious to know the contents of this conference,
they were struck with wonder when it was known that the Gentlemen were shut up
with the Cardinal in his Cabinet, and that they did privately negotiate with
him; but they were much more a stonished when they heard that Count Chavigny
had himself alone private conference that night with the Cardinal, to whom he
propounded the Prince his full agreement, if four things might be granted him,
viz. That Count de Ognone might be made Duke, and Peer of France, Count Marsin
Marishal of France, Prince County Governor of Provence, and Conde himself
Plenipotentiary of the general peace. The Court would have yielded willingly to
the first two nor would the Cardinal have opposed it much; since it only
concerned Titles. But the Government of Provence, and the Plenipotentiariship
were totally rejected; for the Cardinal declared he would never suffer his
Majesty's Authority should be prejudiced, for his particular interest. This
Deputation did much injure the Princes; for it was made in a time when the
Parliament, and Parisians were most incensed against the Cardinal, and when all
the chief Companies had resolved to desire he might be sent away; when the
Commonalty of Paris began to be of the same mind; and when the Duke of Orleans,
and the Prince had declared in Parliament, that they demanded no other
satisfaction, but that the Cardinal might be sent away; wherefore they began to
suspect them, when they saw them act contrary to their former express
declarations; and many that were very well inclined to them grew cooler in the
business: which as shall be seen was one of their chiefest ruins.

After the Gentlemen were gone to Court from the Princes, the Parliament
Commissioners came thither, with Remonstrances to their Majesty's, for sending
away the Cardinal; against whom President Nesmond spoke very freely. The King
listened unto them very graciously, and told them, that he was very well
informed of his Parliaments good meaning, and wished that they were so of him;
that he would confer with his Privy Council, and would declare himself within
three days* thus with these general answers, which were no ways positive, did
the Commissioners return to Paris. They likewise that were sent from the
Chamber of accounts, and from the Court de Aides had audience the same day, and
had the like answer. The Provost, the Merchants, the Sheriffs, Procurator
General, the Communalties Notary, and other Parisians, came also to his
Majesty, representing unto him the miserable condition of his subjects; and
what necessity there was to send away the Cardinal, who was the sole cause of
all the mischiefs, and misunderstandings. The Guarde de Seaux answered, that
his Majesty was very certain of the love of his good City of Paris; for whose
further satisfaction, he promised to return thither as soon as the passages
should be open. This he did to flout them, for that at the same time, when they
made these representations to him, they indeavored to hinder his journey by
breaking the Bridges of Seen and Marne.

The Chambers were already met, to know what answer their Commissioners brought
from the Court, and Orleans, Conde and all the chief of the faction were there,
when news was brought, that the Kings Forces assaulted the Bridge of S. Clow,
which was guarded by a small Fort; whereupon the Prince got presently on
Horsback, crying aloud, as he rid along the Streets, Let us go to relieve our
Friends. This caused such a hubbub in Paris, as above Eight thousand Armed Men
ran on Foot toward the Wood of Bullonia, not far from S. Clow, with such
fervor, and readiness, as if they had been old Soldiers; and it was observed,
that there were Counselors, and Officers of Justice amongst them. The Prince
appeared at the Head of the Bridge, accompanied with about Three hundred
Volunteers, amongst which, was the Count di Rieux, the Dukes of Rohan,
Rochefaucolt and Sully; Prince Marsilliack, and other of the Gentry; and the
Cannon shot which the Kings men made at them, showed, that they themselves were
not come to conquer, but rather to retreat, as they did. The day was fair, and
the Parisians very glad to see themselves under the famous Conde, and their
welbeloved Beaufort, who drew them forth into Squadrons, with no less delight
for the novelty, then labor for their unskilfulness. The Kings men being
retreated from S. Clow, the Prince went to Madrid, (this is a Palace built by
Francis the First, King of France, to keep his word to the King of Spain, That
he would not go from Madrid, when being taken Prisoner, his Ransom was in
Treaty.) And here he resolved to fall upon S. Dennis, a league from Paris,
begirt with weak and ill composed Walls, and kept by Two hundred of the
Switzers Guard. But before he went about it, he sent to know the Duke of
Orleans opinion, who having consented thereunto, he marched with all those
Horse, and with about Five thousand Armed Parisians, backed by Six hundred
Soldiers of Fortune, which were newly raised to recruit Condes Brigade, and
that of Burgondy. Beaufort went with some Horse to the Highway, from whence
relief might be brought from S. Germans; and Conde came by night to certain
unperfected Earth-works, from whence he sent to the Switzers, to yield, and
march out: But they answering by the Mouths of their Muskets, those who were
with him, were so struck with such a panick fear, (though they were experienced
Men, and had shown their courage in a thousand other Incounters) as they all
began to fly; none staying with the Prince, but Duke Rochefaucolt, Prince
Marsilliack, Messieurs Berset, Guitaut, S. Ibar, Gurville, and Fontrailles: So
as if but twenty Horse had then come out of the Town, they might easily have
taken the Prince, and the Seven that were with him prisoners. But this fear
being over, and the Prince have rallied his men which were run away, he went
himself on Horsback on the Head of his Men, and lighting at the same time, got
upon the Wall, which was there broken down; and entering in, overcame two or
three Baracadoes, and made himself master of the place, charging Duke
Rochefaucolt to see no abuse done to the Citizens Houses, nor to the
Monasteries. The Switzers retreated into the Abbey, and after having defended
themselves half an hour, they rendered themselves prisoners of War, and were
led in triumph into Paris with their colors displayed. The Prince left Three
hundred Foot in Guard there, and entered gloriously into Paris; but Marishal
Turenne sent some of his Forces the next day from the Camp, which was at
Palaisseau, commanded by Monsieur Renville, a Colonel of Horse, who recovered
the Town; and the Garrison retreated to the same Abbey, and yielded upon
composition. At this news the Parisians went out with Beaufort to relieve the
Town: But all men's skill in Arms not being alike, the few Forces of the King
chased them to the Suburbs of Paris, and put them to some loss; but the King
being likewise unable to maintain that Town, without more men, it was agreed,
that it should be left Neutral, and the Princes were to quit S. Clow, Neully,
Charenton, and S. Maure, which they did. After the recovery of S. Dennis,
Illeadam, seated upon the River Oyse, near Pontois, and which was Garisoned by
the Princes men, was retaken by the same Renville. After this, the Parliament
having heard the report made by President Nesmond, resolved to send him again
to S. Germans, to receive the answer promised by the King. But since it made
for the Court, that all things should be proceeded in maturely, and with
deliberation, the Duke of Anville; one whom the King esteemed well, and who was
generally well beloved, went several times from the Court to Paris, treating of
agreement between the King and Princes. Conde, who was naturally warily wise,
as well as valiant, finding the sickleness of his party, was inclined to make
his peace, yea, without the removal of the Cardinal; thinking it better to
treat with him, who did at least give all men good words, then with others who
were naturally violent, as was the Cardinal of Rets. But the Duke of Orleans
being solicited by Rets, who wished Condes ruin, as well as that of Mazarine,
was by ingenious ways still dissuaded: So as Rets his presuming to get the
supreme Administration by the Prince his banishment, and by the remove of
Mazarine, was, that which did chiefly divert the agreement. For Orleans being
in a manner bewitched by Rets, did always oppose it.

Whilst things went thus in these parts, Count Harcourt was not idle in
Guienne; but finding, that his men needed some rest, took up his Quarters
beyond the Garomne, in the Condomise, and lay himself at Gondrine, intending to
bring the Neighboring parts to give contribution, as he did. He tarried here,
not doing any thing of much weight, save, that he reduced the City of Condonne,
and Port S. Mary, to the Kings obedience, driving the Prince his Men, out of
their Quarters, and pursuing them to beyond the Garomne. But the Inhabitants of
Again, being exasperated to find that Conde would put a Garrison there, thought
it better to have recourse to the Kings clemency, then to throw themselves
blindly into a party that could not subsist. They therefore treated with
Harcourt, and in three days came to an agreement: The Count was honorably
received into the City. This example drew after it the like of Marmanda,
Clairack, and of Aiguilon, which all sent Commissioners to him, with
Protestation of their Loyalty and Obedience. Harcourt sent his Nephew Bougy
afterward, with commanded Men to take Mas d' Agenois, a place advantagiously
seated upon the Garomne, wherein was a Garrison of above Five hundred Soldiers;
toward which, the Kings men approaching quietly, and holding intelligence with
the Prior of Pihon, and with a Consul of the Town, took it by Scalado, killing
about One hundred of the Enemy, and taking Four hundred; amongst which, were
Lieutenant Colonel Lusignan, Marsigniack, Dilebert, and diverse other Officers.
After the Success of Again, Harcourt went thither himself, and took an Oath of
Loyalty from the Inhabitants of Montsegeure, and S. Basil, who willingly
submitted. By these happy Successes, he thought to advance with all his Horse,
to try whether the Burdelois might not peradventure have changed their
resolution of Disobedience; to which end, going from Mas d' Agenois to Bread,
he sent a Trumpet with a Letter to the Giurati, and several other Inhabitants
of the City full of gracious Expressions, if they would return to their
Obedience. But the Prince of County being there, with all the chiefest of his
faction; the Trumpet was not let in, nor was the Letter received. The Royalists
approached the Walls, and those within coming out, a great skirmish was had:
But Harcourt not intending to tarry there, began to return; which the Burdelois
believing to be done out of necessity, and not of choice, they Sallied out with
more Forces, and chased Savebeauss, and Coudry Monpeisiers Squadrons: But being
repulsed with some loss, they returned to Bordeaux, and Harcourt continuing his
march, and having also reduced Rious, he went to Marmanda, and there by means
of a Bridge, which he caused S. Colombe to cast over, he past over his Horse
into the Country, between the Seas to refresh them, and to continue
Contribution in that Country: Where Castilialouse was besieged, and taken by
the Royalists, under the command of Count Marin.

More Corn being found to be in Estampes then was believed; and the Court not
willingly enduring the length of such a business, by which the Spaniards made
so great advantage; they resolved to fall upon the Army of the Princes, who
being berest of this leaning stock, their whole designs were likewise to be
ruined. They therefore bent all their thoughts upon the taking of Estampes. The
King to this purpose went from S. Germans to Melune; which being upon the
Seen, and nearer Estampes, the Kings Camp might more easily receive aid, and
be recruited from thence, and might at the same time obstruct the carriage of
Victuals which were conveyed from those fruitful parts to Paris.

General Turenne, who after the aforesaid action, commanded solely the Kings
Army, for Oquincourt was gone, as you have heard, into Picardy, went before
Estampes; the Army appeared, partly on the right hand over against the Suburbs
of S. Martin, and part on the left hand upon the Hills on this side the River;
where he drew a Line, and placed his Batteries, to hinder their Sallying out,
and to beat down a great Town. Which finding to be too strong he threw over a
Bridge to the Capuchins Church, passing Captain Segaime, with diverse
Musketeers, into the Church, whereby the Enemies Foragers were hindered, and
continual skirmishes happened with reciprocal Fortune: For the Defendants were
little less then equal; both for number and valor, to the Assailants. The Kings
men being afterward, by means of a Wall that was thrown down, gotten to an
Earthwork which was raised in midst of a Courtein, they assaulted the Half Moon
of S. Martins Suburbs, which was taken, and retaken thrice, with loss of much
blood. And here was Monsieur Shombert wounded by two Musket shot, near to the
Duke of York, Brother to the King of England, who served as a Voluntier; as
also Monsieur de Niaville, Son to the superintendant of the Financiers, who
died. Marquess Vardis, and Mancini, Mazarines Nephew, had their Horses shot
under them; Monsieur Sorvia, being shot in the Foot, had his Leg afterward cut
off General Turenne hearing the noise came in with his own Regiment, and those
of Naivales and Picardy, commanded by Monsieur Berbese. But the store of fire
which the besieged gave, made them retreat with some loss; whereupon Berbese
advancing, drove the Enemy at last away, took the work, and planted his Banner
upon the Parapet. The besieged endeavored again to beat them out, but in vain.
The next morning they sallied out upon the Pioniers, who were working in the
Trenches, slew many of them, and beat the Troops which backed them, and killed
a Lieutenant of the Gens de Arms* Turenne coming in seasonably with some
Volunteers, withstood the Enemy who would have past the line, beat them back,
and made the station good. So as the Kings men having gotten the said work,
they got into the ditch, and fell to undermine the Walls of the Town, which
they would certainly have won, had their mines played well; and what shall be
related had not happened; for the Princes finding that their Army could not
subsist long in Estampes, by reason of their continual loss of Soldiers,
prevailed with the Spaniards, that the Army of Duke Charles of Lorrain should
come to succor them.

This Duke had wont every year Di far un tratto di Campagnia, to draw out into
the field; for the which he received some moneys, and was bound to serve them;
they had engaged him this year to go into France, to relieve the Princes, in
order whereunto he marched with 4000 Foot, 500 Horse, and some pieces of
Artillery, through Champagnia toward the Seen, to raise the siege of
Estampes; and leaving his Forces at Lagni, he came to Paris, and was met
without the Town, by Orleans, Conde, and all those of that party; whereupon the
Court fearing Corveile, which was then an important place, sent Monsieur
Almerat presently away, with 500 Foot, 200 Horse, and six pieces of Canon, to
guard that Town, and provided for all other Towns which were worth preserving.

Here the Duke of Lorrain visited diverse great ones, and amongst the rest, the
Duchess of Chevereux, who was allied to his Family; who being a wise Woman,
and of a great reach, making use of the jealousy which is always between the
Princes of the blood, and the Dukes of Lorrain, and particularly against Conde,
who was more considerable to the Spaniards than all the rest; told him it would
be ill for him to assist them. The Duke embraced the Counsel willingly, that he
might find a pretense, to perform his undertakings to the Spaniards, whom he
had promised to relieve Estampes; thereupon Chasteauneuf writ to the Court, and
received Authority to negotiate with the Duke: wherefore they secretly agreed,
that to disingage himself of his promise, and keep unblamed by the Spaniards,
the siege of Estampes should be raised; making it appear that the condition of
the Kings Army required it; and that the next day after Turenne should be
retreated from Estampes, Lorrain should promise to withdraw from the Frontiers
of the Kingdom, to which purpose he should be furnished with Victuals and pay.
The Princes knew by his guidance of affairs, that he held intelligence with the
Court, and it may be they were advertised thereof by some private friend. They
therefore went to his Camp to persuade him to pass over the Seen; but he told
them they were to rest satisfied if the siege of Estampes were raised; and that
there being hopes that the Court would be persuaded thereunto, it was needless
for him to engage himself any further. Conde told him the siege of Estampes
would easily be raised, if he would afford them means of putting their men that
were there in safety; for they could no longer subsist in a ruined place; so as
after much discourse Lorrain was insensibly persuaded to make a Declaration in
writing to Orleans, and Conde, wherein he engaged himself to tarry a while in
his quarters upon the Seen, in which time the Princes might withdraw their
Forces from Estampes, and bring them nearer Paris. The Kings Army being
disingaged from the siege before Estampes, and the Court finding that Lorrain
failed in performing his secret treaty with Chasteauneuf; Turenne marched
speedily with his Army toward Corbeille, intending to fight the Lorrainers,
before they should pass the River and join with the Princes Forces; and when he
came to face them, they being astonished, and afraid to be engaged in a
battle, retreated presently, and sheltred themselves by a little River, which
falls there into the Seen. As the Kings Cavalry came toward Corbeille, they
took diverse Prisoners, which made Duke Charle's desire Beau^eiu, who negotiated
the agreement with him, to tell him why the Army marched against him, whilst he
was in treaty with the Court. Turenne made him be answered, that he thought
there was no more treaty with him, since he had failed in effecting his
promise, which if he would yet faithfully perform, he would advance no further*
allowing him four hours space for answer; which being past he waited an answer
no longer, but marched presently without baggage against a Castle which the
Duke held upon the River, within half a league of his quarters; which he took,
and throwing a Bridge over the River, he past most of his Foot, and his Canon
over, making the rest of his Army ford over a little higher, and came within
shot of the Lorrainers, which Lorrain perceiving, he sent my Lord German, a
near servant to the King of England, and who had interessed himself in the
agreement to Turenne to let him know he was ready to make his word good.
Turenne answered, that this had been good the day before, but that now being
ready to fight, and he not having kept his word, there were no more words to be
made of any preceding treaty, for the face of affairs was changed. But he sent
Monsieur Varennes back with my Lord Germain to find the Duke out, and to tell
him he would not forbear falling on, unless the Duke would give him the Bridge
of Boats which he had upon the Seen, unless he would also forbear to fortify,
and return presently by the way that he would appoint him, and get out of
France within fifteen days, and give him Hostages hereupon. The Duke after
having made some difficulty, was again threatened by Turenne; whereupon he
consented to all that was desired, upon condition that Turenne should not make
use of the Boats which he gave him, to go against the Princes Army, and that
the Princes Forces that were with him, might have a pass to return to Paris:
that conduct money might be given him for his march, and fifteen days allowed
him to get out of the Kingdom. That Marcouse, and Vaubecourt should be given
for Hostages on the Kings behalf; and Count Linville, and the General of the
Artillery, on the Dukes with promise that no Hostility should be committed in
his march; the treaty was thus stipulated by Turenne, much to his glory; which
being concluded in the face of both Armies, the Lorrainers began presently to
march toward Bria.

Whilst things went thus in these parts, the Parliament who now that Lorrain
was come, thought they had hit the nail on the head, raising their pretensions
still higher, sent President Nesmond again to the Court to insist upon sending
the Cardinal away; the Commissioners being come to Melune, made the Parliaments
desire known, adding that it was a small business for a King to deprive himself
of a Servant, whereby he was to regain the obedience of so many, who had
withdrawn themselves from it, only out of that respect. The King returned his
answer in writing; That having often heard the Remonstrances made by his
Parliament, wherein they still asserted their intentions to maintain regal
Authority, and that they would always contribute their chiefest power to the
advantage of his service; and that finding the wound did now begin to Gangrene
without speedy remedy, he desired that their Commissioners might meet with his
Privy Council, to the end that they might jointly find some remedy for the
threatening mischief: and to keep his people from the apparent ruin, whereinto
they were ready to fall, through the capricious unquietness, and ambition of
some sew; and that his Majesty endeavored nothing more than how to restore his
Kingdom to its former splendour.



When Nesmond had read this answer, he replied, That the only way to satisfy
all, was to send away the Cardinal; The King thus interrupted him, and with a
serious aspect said, You have heard my pleasure; no more words.

The Commissioners returned to Paris, where they gave an exact account to their
Companions of what had past. Many were for accepting the propounded
Conferences; but Brussels, with an appearing zeal to the common welfare, was
firm that there needed no other Conference, or negotiation, since all was
reduced to one sole head, which was the sending away the Cardinal, who being
the sole occasion of all resentments, they must stand upon it; for this being
had, all controversies would be ended. And the more averse he found the King to
part with him, the more he pressed it; not for that he cared much for it, but
that knowing how difficult a business it would be, he might nourish the
diffidences, and maintain discord. For it was apparent, that if the Parliament
had believed that the King would have parted with the Cardinal, and with that
reunite the Princes to his service, he would never have pretended thereunto,
but would have underhand endeavored his tarrying; for it did not make for him,
that the Kings Authority should be the more fortified by the joining of the
Princes with his Majesty, and that consequently the pretenses of the Parliament
should languish. Brussels opinion being adhered unto, it was decreed that the
Commissioners without any delay should return again to the King, and tell his
Majesty, that they had nothing to add, nor to propose, but the effectual
dismissing of the Cardinal, in conformity to the decrees, and Declarations made
by his Majesty, and to the protestation made by the Princes, who were ready to
lay down Arms as soon as the Cardinal should be gone out of the Kingdom. Letters
written from the Queen of Sweeden to the Parliament, were given to the
Commissioners, to be delivered to the King, the content whereof was, her
offering her self to interpose as a friend and confederate to the Crown of
France, in agreeing all parties. The Commissioners came to Melune the 12 th. of
June, and had Audience two days after, they represented the desolation of the
State by the Cardinals return, which they said was the only cause of all the
disturbances of the Kingdom. The business was referred to the Council of State,
and the answers examined; the Cardinal renewed his many former desires, that he
might be dismissed, saying it was not fit that the peace of the Kingdom should be
confounded merely for him. This the King denied, saying, that he was master,
and was to be served by whom he pleased, and that none but God could prescribe
laws to him. The next Sunday the Commissioners had Audience again, wherein the
King gave them a writing, saying, that thereby they should know his pleasure.
Monsieur Vrilliere read it, and gave it to President Nesmond, wherewith he went
to Paris; the contents of the Letter were these; That the King did very much
wonder, seeing there were so many wise and well advised Subjects in the
Parliament, that they should not know the desire of dismissing the Cardinal,
was but a specious and nice pretense, since the true cause of all the troubles
appeared to be the interest, and ambition of those who had took up Arms and
waged War when the Cardinal was in Germany, dismissed from the Court and
Government, which made it clearly appear that the maladies of a State are not
cured, whilst pretenses are stood upon, the roots whereof produce as many
mischiefs as by those pretenses are desired to be cut off; so there was no
remedy that would do good, but to pluck up the chiefest and deepest evil by the
Root. That if his Majesty should permit the Cardinal to withdraw himself into
some foreign employment, with due respect to his honor, how should he be
secured that the Malcontents would be quieted, since his departure in the
beginning of the last year, had rather augmented, than moderated the troubles;
so as it was not to be hoped it should fall out otherwise, when he should be
gone again, unless the cause which produced the effect were presently taken
away. That his Majesty did desire speedy and permanent quiet to his Subjects,
that they might not fall into the former inconveniences; the rather for that he
knew well, that at the same time when the Princes declared they were ready to
lay down Arms, if the Cardinal were sent away, they provided for the contrary
by strengthening their party with Foreigners, and by seducing other of his
Majesty's Subjects from their obedience; that what the Duke of Orleans had said
some days before to the Commonalty of Paris, touching his having no power over
the Duke of Lorrains men, which he had boasted to have brought, was not like to
that which he had affirmed in Parliament; that the treaty made with the
Spaniards by the Prince of Conde, mentioned not laying down of Arms, if the
Cardinal were sent away, nor indeed could it be spoken of, since he was in
Germany when it was made. That therefore the Princes were to give real, and
positive security for performing what they promised; wherefore he desired to
know whether they renounced all leagues, and associations made with
Foreigners, and all particular treaties had, and made with his Majesty's
Subjects against his Royal service; whether they would not pretend to somewhat
else, when the Cardinal should be gone, and whether they would come to his
Majesty and serve him as they ought, if the Cardinal should be gone; whether or
no they would send the Foreigners out of the Kingdom which they had called in,
and would promise that the Spanish and Lorrain Forces should retire, without
giving them that which they might pretend to, to the prejudice of the State.
Whether those who in their names made War with his Majesty in diverse parts of
his Kingdom, should be dismissed? Whether the Spaniards who were in Stenay,
Bourg, Guienne, and in other parts would retire or no, and in case they would
not, how Conde could force them to go? Whether the Prince of County, and the
Duchess of Longueville would do their Devoirs? and whether Conde had power or
no to promise for them? Whether County would forego all pretentions? Whether
they had all of them jointly Authority from those of condition who had followed
them, to answer for their obedience; and that they should renounce all the
leagues and confederacies, which they had made against him? Whether the Cities,
and places fortified, and guarded in the name of the Prince of Conde, would put
themselves into the same condition they were before? Whether Bordeaux would
submit to do its duty? and whether the decrees made against his Majesty's
service, since these present Commotions, should be revoked; and all things put
into the same posture they ought to be, according to the Articles of his
Majesty's Declaration in December, 1649. which things when he should be assured
they should be done without any Cavils, or new pretenses, it might easily be
believed that the remedy should be found out to cure the malady under which the
Kingdom labored.



When this Letter was read in Parliament, the Duke of Orleans said it was
wholly dictated by the Cardinal, and that not being well informed of the
Customs of France, he questioned the Princes of the Blood, by way of
Interrogatories; which was not a thing usually practiced. And that since they
had often declared, as they did now at this present, That they would lay down
Arms as soon as the Cardinal should be gone out of France there was no need of
further security: All things being done in sincerity, and without equivocation.
Yet this was long argued in the Assembly, wherein it was proposed by those of
the Kings party, that Commissioners should be sent again to his Majesty, with
authority to treat of Peace, which was so necessary to the State. Counselor
Brussels was still fixed to his resolution of refusing all Conferences, and that
they were only to execute their Declaration. Other Counselors not speaking of
such affairs, said, That it was necessary to think upon some means how to
maintain so many poor people. The Provost added, Who will give me Bread?
Counselor Betault answered, That one who had Three thousand five hundred
pounds sterling a year, ought not fear to die of Famine. Thus some sharp words
past between them.

The One and twentieth of June, the Chambers met again, where two Propositions
were made, the one, How to maintain the poor; the other, To raise Fifty
thousand Crowns as a reward for the Cardinals Head; if any would undertake the
business. But this was for that time laid aside, and it was only resolved to
raise One hundred thousand Crowns for relief of the poor, every Counselor
being to pay Ten pound sterling thereunto; there being many of them paid
purposely, that they might come and exclaim at the Parliament door, and make a
tumult which might oblige the Assembly to join with the Princes, which was
apparently their design; to the end, that they might necessitate Paris to raise
moneys, and other things for the maintenance of the War, by crying when the
Counselors went out of the Palace, Bread, Peace, and a fig for Mazarine. They
shut the doors upon some of the Parliament, insulted over President Bailleule,
and evilly treated many others, amongst which, Monsieur Vassan, and the Sons of
Monsieur Emery were kept four hours in a private shop, but were afterward set
free by Beaufort, who went thither himself in person; and as he returned to the
Palace, said aloud, That this was not the right way, but that they were to meet
in some place, and think how they might demand right from the Mazarinians. He
therefore wished them to come to the Palace Royal that night, where he would
be, where every one might propound their opinions. Thither came four or five
thousand of them, where Beaufort told them, They did not well to go bavvling
before the Palace, and pretend to force Justice, oppressing as well the good,
as the bad. But that they were to distinguish, and that Twenty four of them
ought to desire the Counselors to declare who were Mazarinians, and who
not, whereby they might know the Mazarinians, and fall upon them in all
places. He found the common people ready to follovv his advice, and disposed
them all easily to fury and sedition; so ending his discourse, He said he
would expect them the next morning at the Palace. The Provost des Merchants
hearing this, acquainted all the Quarters, and Colonels with it, ordering them
to have their Chains ready; and that the Inhabitants should be prepared to come
forth Armed upon the first Summons.

Nothing was spoken of the Streets, but of assaulting the Parliament, wherein
they said, there were many Mazarinians, who would declare themselves. The
people cried aloud to Conde as he entered the Palace, That they would have
Peace; to whom he said, He desired the same, and that he indeavored it, but
without Mazarine. The Parliament fearing sedition, met not on the Twenty second
of July, as they ought to have done; but the Frondeurs appeared there; the
Presidents met in Ballieules house, to resolve what to do, which the Prince
hearing, he went to entreat them in his own name, and in the name of Orleans,
to come to the Palace after dinner. Which they refused to do, saying, That
there was a conspiracy against them, and that they could not be their safe.
Conde treated Ballieule spightfully at first, threatening, That if he came not
to the Palace, Orleans and he would deal with him little to his liking. But
when he saw the other Presidents were of the same opinion, and that they valued
not his threats, he fell to entreaties. He desired the President to speak with
Orleans, which he refused to do, saying, That all was but Beauforts cheats,
whose designs he well knew. He again desired him, and assured him he should
receive no wrong; so as at last he prevailed with him.

Orleans pressed him very much, that the Parliament might meet that day.
Ballieule answered, That the Assembly was resolved not to meet, unless their
safety might be provided for; that the Duke of Beaufort had discovered his bad
opinion: And that though the Presidents and Counselors should be assured not
to meet with any offense, they could not come together before the Twenty fifth
of that Month. Whilst they were upon this discourse, Beaufort came in, who
appeared much astonished, that he should be blamed for the last days sedition;
and that a Soldier should be imprisoned that swore against him. But the Duke of
Orleans was not well satisfied with Ballieule, that the meeting of the
Parliament should be denied. The same night, whilst President Maison was going
to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, as he came out, he was followed by many Plebeians, who
cried, A Mazarinian, and kill him. He got into the next House, the door whereof
was assaulted, that they might have him out; but Beaufort and Conde coming in,
kept him from danger, and brought him to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, assuring the
people, That he was no Mazarinian. At last, on the Twenty fifth of June, the
Assemblies met, being assured by the Princes, that they should not be injured
by the people. And here Orleans and Conde declared, That if the King would send
the Cardinal away, according to his Declaration of the Sixth of September last,
they would readily do what was desired inthe Kings Letter, which was brought by
their Commissioners. After this, there was no more rubs in the business; only,
whether this Declaration should be sent by the Kings men, or by the
Commissioners of Parliament, who had been employed formerly, or by others that
should be chosen out of each Chamber, whereunto all the Princes consented,
excepting Nesmond, whom they suspected to have brought Moneys in his late
employments from the Court; and that he held secret Conference with Mazarines
friends.

This clause caused no little confusion in the Assembly; all the Counselors
holding it very strange, that they should be guided by the will of the Princes,
where their Votes ought to be free, and independent. This business was argued
three hours, and the wiser sort thinking the Princes pretentions, to be
unsupportable, bewailed the misfortune of the times: And finding palpably, that
to shun obedience to the King, they fell into the subjection of the Princes,
they found, that they must use the Princes, as the Court had done the
Parliament, refusing all things that might proceed from another authority. For
in such cases, by degrees desires turn to commands; and he who would not be
forced to obey, ought not suffer commands. They therefore resolved to send back
the same Nesmond, and the other Commissioners, to tell the King, That if the
Cardinal were sent away according to the Declaration of the Sixth of September,
the Princes would lay down Arms, and do all that his Majesty demanded of the
Parliament.

Thus the Assembly ended, and at the coming forth, the Counselors were kept
back by a crowd of people, crying out, Peace and union with the Princes;
whereby it appeared, that their design was to make the Parliament, and the City
declare; for many of the Soldiers of the Army were got among the Plebeians,
which caused a dangerous commotion against the whole Parliament, many of the
Counselors whereof, were pursued into the Neighboring Houses, not without
danger of life, for many shot were made at them. Many men were slain, and many
wounded; President Noion had great fortune to escape, for he was pursued by the
people thorough two or three Streets. The Lieutenant of Civil Causes got into
the Castle with some Counselors, where he was beset by the rout, who thought
to fire it; not being able to get in by reason of the number of Guard that
defended it, and they had fired it, had it not been for Monsieur Mitton,
Colonel of that Quarter, who with his Company made them retreat. Other
Counselors and Presidents shifted for themselves the best they could; the
sedition lasted till night drew on, with much horror and confusion. It was
mightily declaimed against, not only in Parliament, but in the Townhouse, and
it was resolved to provide for the common safety.

When the Parliament met, Monsieur Champrond was ordered to make process
against the chief Authors of the Sedition; as also against those that had
printed and published infamous Libels against the Court and Parliament;
moreover, a Monatorio Ecclesiastico, a Declaration of the Clergy was given out
against the Accomplices of the aforesaid things; and the Provost des Merchants,
Consuls, and Sheriffs, and other chief Citizens, resolved, That the Captains
and Colonels of each quarter, should have their Guards in readiness, and should
place a Corpse de Guard about the public Palace, to keep off further
insolences, and preserve the freedom of Parliament. But sufficient provision
not being had for the desired quiet, there being more that followed the party
of the Princes, then of the Parliament, and Council of the City, it was
concluded, That the most expedient means for the indemnity of Paris, and the
Parliament, should be taken in a General Assembly of all the Inhabitants on the
Fourth of July.

The Duke of Lorrain being this mean while, dis-incamped from Villa Nova, he
went on the Seventeenth of June, to Briacomte Rubert; from thence by Columniere
to Secana, and so by degrees, till he got out of the Kingdom, which caused
apprehensions, that he had betrayed the Princes, and which caused great
trepidations in those that were of the contrary faction to the Court. It being
thought, that the Kings Army being free from the Lorrainers, should incamp
before Paris, and that the Princes should be forced to comply; but when the
truth was known, the Duke was justified, and it was known, that all was caused
by the Spaniards, who were afraid, That if the Duke of Lorrain should stay in
France, and join with the Princes, the King would be forced to make peace; and
the Cardinal would be dismissed. Wherefore they sent for him back, to the end,
That the Court being strengthened by his retreat, might not moderate her
pretentions, but maintain those divisions, which it made for them, to soment.

The Kings Army being gone from Estampes, where there was no more Corn, and the
place much infected by the dead bodies of Men, and Horses which lay unburied,
the rest of the Forces were made to remove, and abandon that Town, which was
more then half distroyed; when through the news that was given out, that
Lorrain had betrayed the Princes, whose Army was thereby exposed to the
iujuries of the Kings Forces, who might pass over the Seen upon the Bridge of
Boats, which was surrendered by the Lorrainers. The Prince went out with only
twenty Horse, amongst which, were the Dukes of Rochefaucolt, and Nemeurs, and
Prince Marilliack, and went, not without danger of being taken, to join with
his men, who were marching toward Paris, and came with them to the Seen, over
against Villanova S. George, where the Kings Army lay. And the next day
hearing, what had past in treaty with Duke Charles, he came to between S. Clow
and Surenne, within two leagues of Paris, on the River side, and upon the way
to S. Germans, whither those few Forces that they had in Paris, were also sent,
wherewith they made a Camp of about Five thousand men. Which Army was provided
of all things necessary from Paris: All which was done at the expense of the
Princes; for they could never get money, nor any thing else from the Parisians:
But only free commerce, popular affection, and a receptacle upon need.
Wherefore the Prince knowing he could not long subsist, unless that the City,
and Parliament, would publicly declare for him, he used all means to make them
both second his designs, and at last used violence, by which he became odious,
and overthrew all his concernments.

The Castle of S. Vincent being in these emergencies, a place of no small
consideration, it was recruited with One hundred Soldiers by Count Chavigny,
Captain thereof, who was then in Paris, a great Confident of Condes, and a
prime Adviser of the Anti-Cardinalists. Many other provisions were likewise had
for the common concernment; and the Spaniards were solicited by many Messengers
for assistance; and to enter France from Flanders, with a powerful Army, to
drive the Kings Forces from about Paris: But the Catholic Agents not intending
to assist the Princes more then to maintain their pretenses, that by the
troubles in France they might work their advantage in Flanders, Italy, and
Catalonia, they fed their hopes now and then with moneys, not thinking that
affairs were yet brought to such straits, as that they were to neglect their
own occasions, to suppress strangers; nor did the Princes and Frondeurs omit to
foment such Burdelois as were desirous of novelties. And here it must needs be
pleasant to hear how divisions arose amongst those of the same party.

It is a known truth, that one fault committed draws on another, and that he
who cannot endure lawful Dominion, will not tolerate unjust usurpation. The
Frondeurs of Bordeaux divided themselves into two factions, one whereof was
called the Little Fronda, whose Chief was Monsieur Mirate, with whom the
President Dasis and Pichon, Todiasport and Fontene^le, all of them friends to
Conde, and who called him into Bordeaux. These divided the Province amongst
them, that they might get the Kings Taxes. Monsieur Guionet went toward
Tolouse, to Count Marsin, whereat the Parliament of Languedock took such
offense, as those who were the Kings friends, took occasion thereby to keep the
people in obedience to his Majesty. Monsieur Mousuiere went to the Haganoise;
and La Roche to S. Onge, as superintendent of Condes Army. Fryard and Halen
were made superintendents of the Sea Coast. So as this Little Fronda took upon
themselves the managing of all the moneys for War, which they themselves had
for that end raised; moreover in the Princes their Council, were the Presidents
Dasis and Pichon, and Messieurs Tarang, Mirat, and Grimart, these were of the
great Fronda. In the same Council President Gourges, Blanck, Movesine, and
Espenet. The great Fronda were very jealous of the confidence which those of
the lesser had in the Princes. Diverse Parliamentarians were of the grand
Fronda, who met in the same Gourges his house, where making use of the peoples
murmuring against the arrogance, and greediness of the petite Frondeurs, who
made merry with the present miseries to that excess, that Guionet having
invited his friends one day to Dinner, bid them eat cheerfully, for all that
was before them was the blood of the people; so as by this and such extravagant
proceedings they soon turned patience into fury, so as the grand Frondeurs had
a plausible pretense to accuse those of the lesser Fronda as Authors of all the
disorders, which did afterward ruin the Princes affairs; wherefore to
satisfy them, it was agreed that, Remont one of the grand Fronda, and de Due,
and Espenet should be employed also in gathering the aforesaid Taxes. It was
also ordered that the Council of the Olmiera should be governed by the lesser
Fronda, who to please the fury of the Olmiera, did Sacrifice as Victims, diverse
of the Kings faithful Subjects; and in an extraordinary assembly did declare
Salamon the Father and Son, Bernet, Montisquiou, and de Aribe, to be suspected
persons. The Advocate brought in a bill containing their names; and the names
of the Atturny General Pontack, Masquedet, and Doctor Roche; who though they
were adjudged by the Parliament, to be suspected persons, and therefore to be
sent out of the City, they were notwithstanding exempted, for having been
zealous for the public in the former War, and only the first three were
banished. They also prohibited the meeting of the Olmiera, but it was continued
under the protection of the Prince of County, and Duchess of Longueville, who
were desirous to lessen the Parliaments power, for that it would predominate
over all things, especially since the Prince of Conde was parted from Paris.
Wherefore it was resolved on the 14 th. of May, that a decree should be made
against the Olmiera, and that it should be proclaimed by the Hussieri, Ushers;
but those who undertook it were beaten by the Olmiristi; then being invited by
Monsieur Tarang, who threatened to hang them, they went in great numbers to the
Parliament, in a tumultuous manner, desiring that the decree might be repealed,
and in a threatening manner forbidding them to proceed any further; and their
rage increasing, they took up Arms, and drove out fourteen of the Parliament,
whereof President Pion was one, though he was a Pensioner of Spain, and more a
friend to Conde than the rest. Count Marsin, and Leuet advertised Conde of
this, blaming the Prince of County, and Duchess Longueville, as those who were
the Authors of all novelties for their peculiar interests; to balance which
Marsin and Lenet were to weaken the faction of the Olmiera, by means of the
Parliament.

The Prince answered these Letters, that he intended the Olmiera should be put
down; which being ill taken by the Olmerists, they went that very night to
Cornet Mercatante's House, with whom Monsieur Giurato Fontinelle supped, who
being surprised at the Audaciousness of these seditious men, suddenly assembled
the quarter of le Chappreaux, who falling upon them and shooting at them from
the Windows, slew Monsieur Lort, who was their chief, and wounded four more
mortally: the Parliament being highly incensed at this popular insolence, met
the next day, where the Giurati declared what mischief had happened, and
Conde's Letters were read, upon which a general Amnesty was resolved upon for
all the seditions; but they were prohibited meeting together. The fourteen that
were lately banished were re called; but not those that were first expelled; as
being thought too partial to the Court. The Olmerists were hereat mightily
scandalized; they met again at the Abbey of St. Croix, pretending to provide for
the defense of certain Towns upon the Garomne, which if they should fall into
the Kings hands, would block up the way for coming to buy Victuals. Monsieur
Guiraute, one of the Giurati having notice of their meeting, endeavored to
separate them, which not being able to do neither by fair words nor foul, he
went to the quarter of the Chappeaux Rouge where were the exiled Officers, and
the rest of the lesser Fronda, who with their adherents made about 300, and
dividing them went in Squadrons to meet the Olmeristi, who by Blanck, the
Procurators direction had taken the public Palace; he fell valiantly upon
them, and broke some of their Barracadoes; but not being backed by Fontenella's
Squadron, he could not perfect his design. The Duchess of Longueville by her
fair words, and by her Majestical aspect, made them face about, and the
Princess of Conde, as one who strove with her Husband for glory and applause,
came into a Street next to the public market, and by her Authority, kept the
Olmerists from assaulting the Parliament; whereof two or three were slain by
shot out of the Windows. The confusion being thus ceased, and the parties
parted by these two Princesses; The Olmerists, being fomented by the Duchess
of Longueville were still resolved not to be suppressed by the Parliament; but as
Inhabitants of the City, pretended to be the chief directors thereof; for
having forgon their obedience to the King they thought it not fit to be subject
to the Parliament which was full of interessed people, and governed by
ambition: being thus persuaded they possessed themselves of all the principal
stations. That very night, those who were in the quarter of the Chappreaux
Rouge remaining there, fomented by Lenet, and by the Princess of Conde, to
moderate the power of County, and of Duchess Longueville. Lenet having
assigned over the public house of Convoy, to a particular assembly of some
Counselors of the lesser Fronda, but finding many Citizens of the faction of
Chappreaux Rouge who were well vvishers to the King, and unconcerned in their
party; as also that the Parliament too proud of their successes would quell
all superior Authority, or those who they were jealous off, and considering
moreover that the greatest part, if not all the Olmerists were mean people,
easy to be corrupted by moneys; Lenet joined with the Duchess of
Longueville, and they caused the alteration which happened on the 24 th. of
June, wherefore the Olmerists the next day, being assisted by some Giurati,
and Captains of the Wards, with many Officers of the Troops mingled amongst
them, met armed in good order, with Drums beating, giving out that Harcourt
drevv near the City, and demanded that Monsieur Belgarde Montaspau, and of the
Advocate General Saut, that Fountenelle, and Giraut, who were Giurati, should
be delivered up unto them, and made the same desire to Monsieur Chavignack who
was come some few days before to Bordeaux with orders from the Prince to
appease them; and the meaner sort of people impatient of not being speedily
resolved by the Princesses; having assembled the field Corporals of both the
Fronda's, and the other prime Officers and Citizens came out of the Palace
publicly with two pieces of Canon, and about 2000 armed men, commanded by some
of Conde's Captains, and with an Elm and other Wood in a Cart, to fire the
quarter of the Chappreaux Rouge, and threatening to plunder it; at the noise
whereof the two Princesses desired Pichon, and Dasis, and others of the lesser
Fronda, to un-arm their houses, to the end that the people meeting with no
resistance, and finding the doors open, might want pretense to vent their fury:
but they continuing their opinion, that the people being naturally poorly
spirited would be quelled by vigorous resolutions, began to shoot at them out
at the Windows; whereat the people being more incensed, they brought their
Canon to before the House of Pay Paulin, where they were received with a shower
of shot from Pichon's house, and from another house where la Roche, Guionet,
and Vrest were with Ten of their friends who did so valiantly defend
themselves, as above One hundred of the Olmerists being hurt, they set fire on
both the houses, and barbarously plundered Pichon's house, who by chance was
then in the Princess her house. The fire was violentest in the house where la
Roche was, which was totally burnt, and he himself had much ado to escape.
Other houses were likewise plundered; the factiouspeople would have committed
greater disorders, had not the Princess and Duchess of Longueville interposed,
who caused the Hostia to be carried, which was conducted by Tobias Giurato, who
labored much for his friends the Frondeurs, some of which were gotten into
Counselor Thiebauts house, imploring the Princesses protection, and obtained
that the whole Company of the grand Fronda might come along with them, who with
Bows of Elms in their Hats counseled the people who were their friends to
retire; which they did, and carried back the three pieces of Artillery into the
public Palace. The next day they set three great Elms upon the Steples of St.
Michael, St. Eulalia, and St. Remigio, mixing red Standerds with them, which
was ill taken by the good French, as if it had denoted favor to Spain. The
Prince of County being returned from Libourn, found the City in such a
condition, as he was glad to make use of the Olmiera as of a Theater wherein
the peoples fury, and Princes interests were acted.

A certain Priest who was a melancholy Astrologer, imagined that City might be
made a Commonwealth; which he Communicated to President Hosteime, and held
intelligence with the English, to whom the Olmiera writ their design; but the
Prince of County being acquainted with this Caballe, and that a certain English
man, called Edward Sigisby treated hereupon incognito in Bordeaux; he forthwith
assembled the Olmiera, and made a discreet speech unto them, wherein he caused
them to resolve never to talk any more of a Commonwealth, nor of any thing else
with Foreigners without the Princes their express consent. A month after
Hosteime and the Astrologian Priest were expelled the Town, which had like to
have occasioned some uprore, had it not been for the Duke of Guise, who was
then come from Spain as you shall hear hereafter: whilst the Prince of County
and Duchess of Longueville were sick, the Olmiera met daily in the common
Palace, to the number of Thirty Counselors and Four Presidents, which were
every month changed. These treated of the civil Government of the City, whilst
the other Twelve judged Criminals; but nothing was binding, save in the general
assembly or the Lords day: wherein all those whose names were written in the
Catalogue of the Olmiera, which were about 1000 mean base people, who concluded
articles of Union, under the title of serving the King, Country, and Princes,
vowing to defend the meanest of them that had any deliberative vote in the
public meetings of Citizens, even to death.

For other things, little of remark was done by the Armies in these parts: for
both sides were equally weak. Their happened only two considerable actions; the
one near Roche Shirles, where the Count Mora being advanced with some of the
Prince his Troops, to surprise Monsieur de Folevilles Quarter: Foleville
repulsed him, and took many prisoners, amongst which, were La Mora himself, who
was wounded in the head, Count Chatelus, who commanded the Prince his Gens d'
Arms; and Monsieur Fourville. The other encounter was made by Colonel
Baltazar, near the Castle Montiresi; who foarding over a River with his Horse,
fell so vigorously upon the Kings Troops, that they abandoned the Marquess of
Montousie; who being wounded in the Arm, was forced to retreat, the rest were
all routed, many of the Nobles wounded and slain. Baron Montendre was taken
prisoner; Monsieur Nieull was killed; Baltazar took the Kings Baggage, and took
also the Castles of Montanse and Bordoilles, wherein he took much Stuff, and
put a Garrison into the White Tower.

Some Tumults happened in Provence, but they were soon pacified by Duke Mercures
vigilance.

All this while the Court ceased not to treat of peace with the Princes, and
particularly with Conde; nor had it been impossible to reduce him, had he not
been diverted by the Cardinal de Retz, and others, for whom Quiet was not good.
Retz kept Orleans continually of a contrary mind; wherefore Conde being
unwilling to countervene the Duke, with whom he had so often faithfully
promised to join, all Proposals met with difficulties, and were interrupted.
The Court used the best means it could to render these machinations invalid.
The best way was thought to make the Parisians aware of their error; which when
they should be, it would not be hard to stave them from off the rest, and the
Princes wanting the aid of Paris, would soon have all their machinations
destroyed.

Upon these considerations, the Court went from Melune about the end of May,
and came to S. Dennis, within a league of Paris, to encourage what was
undertaken by the Kings friends there: The King used universal clemency,
treating them all, as if they had been all equally affectionate. And to let
them see it was not his intention to block them up, as the Princes gave out, he
kept commerce open: The Kings Army which was conducted by Marishal Turenne,
followed the King, and being recruited with Three thousand men by Marishal dela
Ferte Senetre, who was joined with Turenne, in command of the Army, encamped
near S. Dennis, on the left hand, near the Seen toward Paris which was
environed beyond the River, on the West side by the Kings Forces; who might at
their pleasure block up the River, and reduce the City to greater straits of
Victuals then it was yet in. This was taken by the Kings Council to be the best
expedient: For the people, unable to endure Famine, and the Citizens being
debarred Traffic, which was their sustenance; and finally, being annoyed by
the ruin which was daily made in their Territories, as well by Friends as
Foes, they would resolve to free themselves from so long slavery. But for all
these inconveniences suffered by Paris, yet were the Inhabitants so obstinate,
trusting to the Princes and Frondeurs, as hoping soon to see all the
Mazarinians destroyed (for so they called all the Kings party) they thought not
of their own undoing, which made them the more willingly undergo their
sufferings. The King not being able by these ways to reduce the people who were
backed by the Army, and by the Princes, indeavored to destroy the Forces of the
Princes; which not being thought to be hard, their Camp not being fortified,
nor well seated, and not half so many as the Kings: Order was taken for all
things fitting for the enterprise, before the Spaniards should come with their
promised recruits. On the Twenty ninth of June, Turenne came to the River to
cast a Bridge of Boats over, beneath ^spenay, where passing over the Seen, he
might Assault the Camp at S. Clow. Which giving an Alarm to the Princes Army,
Count Tavannes dispatched away One hundred and fifty commanded Foot, and as
many Horse, under Camp master Goville, that he might interrupt the Kings Works,
till he might be ready to march thither with the rest of the Forces. Goville
went, and finding the Bridge already advanced to the Island in the midst of the
River between Argenteule and Epivalle, and that the Artillery was carried to
the opposite Bank, sent word presently to Tavannes, who was ready to get on
Horsback; and hastening his march came to the Bridge, accompanied by several
Officers, and sent to acquaint Conde with it. Tavannes retreated to a Village
near the River; and hearing that the Kings men past over returned to the
opposite shore to hinder their landing: Who finding the attempt not feasible,
was content to quit it. Then leaving Fifty Foot, and One hundred and fifty
Horse, to Guard the Station, he returned to his Quarter at S. Clow, the Prince
of Conde having this mean while gathered together as many of his Friends as he
could in Paris, gallopped to that place, and calling Tavennes and his Horse to
him, he fell upon the Kings Forces which were drawn up upon the Rivers Bank,
seeming, as if they would perfect the Bridge, and pass over to entertain the
Prince, whilst the rest should pass over beneath Poissy. But Conde discovering
the design, and fearing least the Kings Army would pass at Espeney, and Assault
him, he called a Council of War, and resolved to remove his Camp from S. Clow,
and carry it to Charenton, as a safer place, where he had the Marne on his
back, and was flanked by the Seen. He therefore on the first Monday of July,
went from S. Clow two hours before Sunset, past over the Seen upon the
Stone Bridge; and upon another Bridge of Boats, and marched toward Paris. But
finding Orders given at all the Gates, that no Soldiers whatsoever should be
suffered to pass, he made his Army march along the Ditch Richelieu, and
continued his march toward Charenton. About half an hour after midnight, the
Cardinal had news hereof from a Confident of his, that lay concealed in Paris;
who made his servant be let down over the Wall, and sent word thereof speedily
to Marishal Turenne; who, without loss of time, Horsed his men, and about five
of the clock the next morning, met the Prince his Rear, as they were entering S.
Dennis, and were so briskly charged by Count Navailes, las County his Regiment
suffered very much; and a Squadron of Conde which was with him, fared no better.

Conde being come to Paris, went to L'Hostelle d'Orleans to confer with the
Duke, and went presently again out of Le Port S. Martine, running like
Lightning through his whole Army, and sending diverse pa^^ies toward S. Dennis,
to inquire after the Kings men; he ordered Co^^t Tavannes to continue his
march, and sent Monsieur di Foruemont again with some Horse, to discover the
number of the Enemy; whom he discovered from the top of Mountmarter, to be
putting themselves into Battle Array. The Prince finding his design discovered,
and that consequently, whether he should advance or retreat, his loss would be
irreparable, ordered Monsieur Bea^^ean to send a Squadron of men to the top of
Mountsaucon, to observe the Kings proceeding; and that the rest of his men
should go to Pickepuses, and to the Suburbs of S. Antoine, thinking to defend
himself there; and the rather, for that he found part of: the same Suburbs
already fortified by Baracadoes made formerly by the inhabitants, for fear of
the Lorrainers. The Kings Camp, and all the Court, was already on Horsback,
being resolved either to conquer that day, or to end the War; not only in
respect of the superiority of their men, but by reason of the long way the
Prince was to go with his Baggage.

The Cardinal was so confident of this, as having given fitting orders to
Turenne, he brought the King to the top of Sarone, that he might be an eye
witness of so famous an action; and being upon the point of having the Prince
either dead or alive, he sent to his friends in Paris, wishing them to be of
good courage; and that they should by all means take care, that the Gates might
not be opened for the Enemy to retreat; nor for succor to be sent them from the
City. The Kings Army being come to Vilette, within half a league of Paris, and
knowing that the Army of the Princes was gone; from whence, if they could have
light upon them, they would undoubtedly have routed them. Marishal Turenne
going on the left hand, past by the Hills of Sarone, and came into the Plain;
the Fauxburg, S. Antoyne and Charenton, drawing all his Troops out in order,
whilst the rest stayed on the right hand with Marishal Ferte Senetre. And
though the Prince being got to underneath the Walls of Paris, had the advantage
of place; yet the Kings men knowing that he could not withstand them, and the
Court being assured that the Princes their Forces, should not be received back
into Paris, they having been kept out the night before, they resolved to
advance boldly, and to fall upon some Squadrons which were advanced into the
Suburbs, and who were pursued even into the Houses. Here the Prince, who with
unparalleld valor bore the whole weight of that important fight, made use of
his wit where his Forces failed; and gallopping on all sides, divided all his
Men in form following.

His Highness Brigade was placed on the left hand of the Suburbs, those of
Languedock, Vallois, and Ligueron, on the right; Conde and Burgondes Brigades
on the right hand; that of Languedock and that of Pelleins, at the Baracado, in
the way which leads to the Castle of Vincennes. And wanting Foot to furnish all
the stations, he ordered some of the Cavalry to back the Foot: The Artillery
was placed at the Heads of the Streets of the Suburbs; and all the Avenues were
Trenched and Baracadoed.

General Turenne having drawn out his Majesty's Army in good order, designed
the French Guards to Assault his Highness, and Languedock, and the Brigades of
Picardy; and Marine to Assault the Vallois. Two Batteries were placed against
the Baracado which was Guarded by Tavannes: One played upon the High Street of
the Suburbs, and the other on the Street which answers to the great Market.

Things being thus ordered, whilst the Prince was ordering his men how to
defend themselves, the Kings men came on furiously, charging the Ene^^ in two
places, and were valiantly withstood, and for a while repuls^^^: But the
Brigades of Languedock, Vallois, and Langueron, not being able to resist
longer, leaned with some loss toward the Marketplace; to whose relief, the
Prince himself came in the Head of his Horse Regiment; and of that of Anguie^,
accompanied by Nemeurs, Taranth, and Vallon: And here the fight grew hot, the
Prince gave high proofs of his skill in War, and of his incomparable courage,
he thrust himself, is he had been a Common-Soldier into the midst of the Enemy,
killed many with his own hands; and with his Sword repulsed many. To his
eternal glory, those who were formerly affrighted, were encouraged; and those
Brigades replaced in their former stations who were driven away; Marine having
lost, together with some that were wounded, forty men; here was Monsieur
Goville slain; but Tavannes and Languis did not play their parts so well. For
here Marquess S. Magrin gave on furiously on the Head of some Volunteers, and
others, upon the Princes Forces, which he did much indamage, and was likely to
have utterly routed them, had not the death of the s^id St. Magrine cooled the
courage of his men: he being slain, the Kings Forces were repulsed, but not
without much blood of the Princes men, who received here their greatest loss;
Marquess Rochecaufolt, and Count Bossue, a Dutch Colonel of Horse, were there
slain; and Count Tavanes, the Marquess of Ierse, Cavaliere la Force, Marquess
Cogna, Count Melune, Baron Lorese, with others of good quality were there
slain. In this interim the Count Navailes had taken the Street Rambulliet, with
some houses and two Barracadoes, though they were vigorously defended by the
adversary; to whose succor came Monsieur de Lauds with a Dutch Brigade, the
Prince of Conde made good the Street which leads from the Gate to a large
Piazza, where the Kings men had seized upon some houses; the Dukes of Nemeurs,
and Beaufort came just then to the Prince, and these two, who were not upon
very good terms, resolved to attack the Barracado which was taken by Navailes,
rather out of Emulation, than Military wisdom, though it were hard to take it,
(which was well sheltered) with weary and worsted men. Yet Conde, who though he
foresaw the mischief, did never forbear any hazardous bickering, was persuaded
by reason, that though things should not sort according to his desire, he
should by so generous an action afford the Enemy matter to think upon, and spin
on the business, which made most for his safety; so as Rochefaucolt,
Marsilliack, Flammarin, and many others of the Nobles coming in unto him;
Rochefaucolt, who saw Beaufort, and Nemeurs forwardness, joined with them and
fell to the assault, but the Soldiers being weary, and timorous to attack the
Barracado, marched along the Wall to shelter themselves from the Enemies shot;
and would advance no further; this mean while a Squadron of German Horse being
got into the Gardens, where they were much incommodated by shot from the
neighboring houses, retreated in disorder; the Prince taking them to be the
Enemy, who were come to take that place, and to charge him on the Flank; and
his Genreals finding that their Foot fell not upon the Barracado, advanced to
charge the same Squadron; but finding them to be their own men, they forbear
any further attempt: they, and those Horse being exposed to a shower of shot
which came from the houses and Barracado; and here were Flemmerin, Count
Castres, Monsieur Forneau, and others of quality slain. Which when the Generals
saw, they thought of themselves to assault that Barracado; and though they went
to engage themselves in an eminent danger, of desperate event; yet excited by
heat of blood, and glory, they considered nothing but their own boldness.

Thus did the Three Dukes and Prince Marsilliack, themselves alone, unassisted
by the Foot which staid behind, light from Horseback, and with their Swords in
hand advanced against the Barracado, with such boldness (not to call it
rashness) as the Kings men being astonished (were it either fatality, or that
the presence of great Personages have out of some hidden cause great
prerogative in difficult undertakings) did abandon it, and the Princes who did
so gallantly take it, would have kept it, had not the Enemy continually fired
upon them from both sides the Street, that it was impossible for them to tarry
there. The Duke of Nemeurs received Thirteen Musket shot on his Armor, and two
on his right hand; Rochefaucolt was wounded between the eyes; and Beaufort and
Marsilliack being bound to help the wounded, were forced to quit the place;
which when the Kings men saw, they made have to take those that were wounded
Prisoners, which they would suddenly and safely have done, had not Conde with
his wonted undauntedness come in on the head of some Gentlemen that followed
him, whereby he afforded them time and opportunity to retreat, as they did with
much wonder and applause.

Guitaut, Bercenet, Lullery and Martiniere were wounded; all the rest witnessed
what danger they had run by the shot which they received in their Armor and by
having their Horses slain under them.

At the same time that they were fighting without, the Parisians were at as
much strife in words within the Walls; some were for the going out of such
Citizens as had Arms to help the assaulted, and for opening the Gates that they
might retreat; others said that by suffering Conde to be lost, who was the
occasion of all their misfortune, there would be an end of their misery, and
the City would be put into her former quiet condition; but at last amongst all
these differences, wherein nothing was concluded in favor of the Princes,
Madamoselle came forth into the Streets, accompanied by the Dutchesses of
Rohan, Monbason, and Chastilion, and by the young Countess of Fiesco; and went
to the Townhouse, where she told the Citizens, that without any more dispute
or loss of time, the people were to take up Arms, and to assist the Princes,
suffering the Baggage and Forces of their friends to come into the Town. The
pressures of this courageous and generous Princess were so persuasive, as the
sad and horrid spectacle of so many Lords of high condition, who ever and anon
came into the Town half dead, wounded and besmeared with blood; amongst which
that of Rochefaucolt was most compassionate, whose eyes were well nigh shot
out: as it was resolved the Gates should be opened, and they should be received
into the Town, and every one with tears cried out that the Prince must be
relieved, who put his life, and the lives of many good French men into
apparent, and almost inevitable danger, for the public cause: whereupon about
300 Inhabitants went out, who by the Prince were put to Guard some stations;
and then Rohan causing some of the baggage to march by the Temple Gate, and
Beaufort bringing in the rest by that of St. Antoine; the Prince was told that
the Kings Army being divided into two parts, went by the way of Soronne, and
Neully; wherefore thinking that this might be with design to keep his men out
between the Suburbs, and the Gate, he placed Count Hollack with his German
Regiment, at the entrance of the Street of Saronne to assist the retreat which
was begun, and sent word to Monsieur Lovieres, who then commanded the Bastile,
instead of his Father Brussels, to let the Canon play upon the Kings men, which
being forborne as a thing unbecoming a Subject, Madamoselle came instantly
thither, and getting upon the Walls, with more than a man-like spirit, and as
if she her self would share in the glory, and danger, commanding that in her
presence the Guns might be fired against the Kings Forces; it was done. Then
orders being given for the retreat, the Horse and Foot marched speedily with
the Canon, the Burgundian Brigade keeping in the Rear, commanded by Marquess
Sasse whose Horse Regiment was then governed by Monsieur St. Mars. When the
Canon played first from the Battile, it was thought they played upon the Princes
Forces; for the Kings friends in Paris had promised as much; but being found to
play upon the Kings men, and that the Inhabitants falling of their promise, the
baggage was already got in, and the Troops began to enter Paris, those of the
Kings party were astonished, as were also the Kings General, being somewhat
blamed for their slovvness and negligence, and for being defrauded of their
hopes in the very nick of Victory; so as they returned toward St. Denis, not
less sad for the loss of so many gallant Subjects, whereof besides St.
Magrine, Marquess Nantalliet was one; and Count Maipos, and Mancini the
Cardinals Nephew were so mortally wounded, as they soon after died; and Count
di Tree, with diverse others of quality was taken prisoners.

The King did very graciously visit Mancini often, as he did also S. Magrins
afflicted Widow. The Princes Army, not without wonder, past through Paris, it
being unusual to see an Army with Baggage pass through those Streets. These
lodged in the Country about Tury, without the Suburbs of S. Marseilles, and in
two days plundered all the Villages and Houses that were within three leagues;
and brought what they had so gotten, to the Camp, where the Soldiers sold all
things, as if it had been in a Fair. Mademoiselle would see them pass, and
caused moneys be given to the wounded. Count Chavigny gave them store of
Victuals, not so much out of charity, as policy: And because it has always
been a custom in Military Actions to have some sign whereby to discern Friends
from Enemies: Mademoiselle put a straw upon her head, wherein being followed by
all that would not be accountred Mazarinians, you might in a moment see, not
only all the Inhabitants, but Foreigners of every Nation, yea, even the Friars,
and Agents of stranger Princes, do the same, to shun the insolences which were
done by the common people to those that bore not this Badge.

Thus ended the memorable Action of S. Antoines Suburbs, on the Second of July;
wherein the quality was more considerable then the number of those that were
slain. The Prince of Conde, not valuing his own life, but running like
Lightning, sometimes to one place, sometimes to another, where the business was
most bloody, and his men in most danger, performed the office of a private
Soldier, as well as of a Captain, was ofttimes upon the very edge of the Grave,
being miraculously perserved by Fortune, his Horse was killed under him, his
Clothes shot through in diverse places, his Feathers and his Hair burnt; and yet
was he miraculously kept unhurt. Marquess Turenne behaved himself no less
valiantly; who by his presence gave great proof of his valor, and experience
every where. And he was heard to say, That he had met with above six Princes of
Conde; for wheresoever he turned himself, he found the Prince in the Head of
the Enemy with his Sword in hand. All other Generals and Captains behaved
themselves undauntedly, and with extraordinary courage. This was numbered as one
of the noblest, and most worthy Actions that ever happened in any whatsoever age.

Conde having won more reputation in Arms, betook himself to think how he might
make Paris declare openly against the King, without which, he found he should
be too weak; for he wanted moneys, and other necessaries to maintain War: But
finding how little good he had hitherto got therein by fair means, he resolved
to use force, having failed of making the Parliament be assaulted in their own
House (as you have heard) he bethought himself, how to force the Citizens to
second his intents. The Members of Parliament, by reason of what was done on
the Twenty sixth of June last, had desired Le Marishal de l'Hospitalle, with
the Common Council of the City, to provide so for them, as they might sit with
safety, and follow their business. A General Assembly met to this purpose in
the public Palace on the Twelfth of July, to consider how they might put the
City in safety, as was desired. The Princes, and their party, resolved to
Assault the Assembly, and to force them to comply with them. When they were met
in the Townhouse by all the Officers of the Commons, which make up a Body of
about Four hundred of the best Men in the City: The Duke of Orleans sent
Marishal d'Estampes, to the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, who sat there as Governor
of Paris, to assure him, That no disorder should be committed that morning; the
Marishal answered, his Highness should be satisfied. So the Assembly began,
where the Duke came about half an hour after four in the afternoon; where the
Piazza of the Greve, where the Assembly sat, was full of seditious Armed Men
with straws in their Hats, an evident sign of some extraordinary disorder, and
of a preludium to the fatal Tragedy which followed. When Orleans was come into
the Assembly, the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, gave him his place, and sat himself
on the Bench of the Provost des Merchants and Sheriffs. But it is to be
observed, that the said Marishal who went to receive the Duke at the
Stair-foot, when he saw the Duke with a wreath of straw about his Hat; said
boldly, What means this Sir, does your Highness come with a Badge of Seditiou
into the Kings House? The Duke answered, That he had received that wreath, but
that he did not approve thereof. They went up Stairs, and when Orleans had
taken his place, he thanked the City for having suffered his Forces to pass;
asking, if upon the like occasion, they would do so again. The Prince was there
likewise, and spoke to the same purpose; the Marishal answered, That they would
always be ready to serve them; and that when they should be gone out, the
business should be taken into consideration. This mean while a Letter came from
the King, wherein he willed them to adjourn the Assembly till the Eight of that
Month. The Marishal caused the Letter to be read, and then asked the Princes,
and the rest, if they would obey it; the Princes said nothing, but went out,
not thinking their faction strong enough to effect their desires. And as they
went out to wait upon the Princes, an impertinent fellow presented the Marishal
de l'Hospitalle with a wisp of straw; who being touched to the quick with that
affront, told him, That were it not for the respect he bore to his Highness, he
should presently be thrown out of the Window and hanged. The Princes as they
went out said, that the Palace was full of Mazarinians, who sought to spin out
time, which caused so great a commotion, as diverse Soldiers and seditious
people began instantly to shoot in at the Windows.

The Princes to encourage this business, had set on diverse Soldiers, but in
vain, to raise a tumult in some other part of the City. At this time, one of
the Populacy happened to be with a Musket slain, which did more incite their
fury; for they all cried out, it was done by some Mazarinian; and that
therefore they must all be slain, pointing, that they were in that Palace, and
some were hard to say, Union, union, and down with the Mazarinians. So all of
them running with straws in their Hats, like so many Bacchanalians, they fell
to such insolences, as are usually committed by the rabble rout. Those who
guarded the Palace ran all away; whereat the factious people growing more
incensed, got wood and set the great Gate on fire, striving to get in: Admist
this danger, the Marishal, who was Governor, President Charton, Colonel Miron,
Vedo, and Barantine, with diverse others, resolved rather to die gloriously,
then weakly to yield. They therefore prepared to defend themselves; the
Marishal ordered Marquess Franes to make a Baracado of great Rafters on high,
at the entry into the great Hall, which opens upon the Yard, which was speedily
done, and was so well defended by the Marishals Guards particularly by Monsieur
Berry, as the Assailants surprised with the opposition, ceased their fury. The
Marishal commanded to spare Powder till night, that the means while they should
defend themselves with great stones; but the great Gate being at this instant
burnt down, they got upon the Baracado; where Blanchart, Commissary General of
Condes Army was slain, and some other of the Prince his Soldiers. The people
applied fire also to burn down the back Gate. The Marishal knowing that the
same fire would keep the seditious people from coming in, made more Wood be
applied thereunto, so to hinder the ingress of the furious people. Whilst these
things were doing, the Prince was in L'Hostelle de Orleans; where hearing that
affairs went otherwise than he intended; which was to infuse fear, but not to
bring things to extremity; he would have gone to the place, and by appeasing
the business by his own presence, would have obliged the assaulted, to have
acknowledged their lives, and safety from him. But Orleans, who thought it not
convenient, that the Prince should hazard his person amongst that enraged
rabble, were it either that he would not have the Prince to gain the peoples
love, and that he alone should be hated, by force withheld him, and would not
suffer him to go out of his house; where much against his will he was compelled
to suit himself to the Dukes will. Many the mean while, seeing the danger, and
excited by fear, would have saved themselves by making way through the rabble;
but many of them were slain, amongst which Monsieur Miron, though well esteemed
by the people, as being a Frondeur, Monsieur Gras, Master of the requests,
Monsieur Ferrand, Counselor of Parliament, six or seven noble Citizens,
besides many that were wounded; yet some escaped, as President Charton, the
Curate of St. John's, whom the Priests of his Church met with the Hostia, to
make way for him. Monsieur de Ponset, Master of the requests, Monsieur
Barantine, Beaufort, and Marquess Bella, who were in a neighboring house, came
forth and calling out aloud to some of the Assembly by name, said, They would
cause peace, and save the assaulted. The Marishal de L'Hospitalle thinking this
to be but a trick to save such as were of the Princes party, and to leave the
rest to the fury of the people, caused them to be asked whether there were
safety in it or no? saying, that they would all perish, or all be saved; the
assault lasted from Five after Dinner, till Ten at night, and now at last the
Marishal being come to the Barracado, found it free, and his Guards gone, upon
a false report that he had saved himself. The people entered, plundered, and
robbed all they met, who willingly permitted them, so to save their lives. The
Marishal not knowing how to get out unknown, mingled himself amongst them, and
went along with them into the next Chamber. He had wisely given his order of
the St. Esprite to his Page to keep, and changed Hats with him, and casting a
dark colored cloth Cloak about him, stood in the midst of them, who raging for
anger sought for him: This his safety must be attributed to divine providence,
who would for his great integrity, save him amidst his Enemies; in this
Emergency came Three persons, one of which was Monsieur Noblet, who bearing the
name of his friend Monsieur Croiset Mirebeau called upon by many, stepped to the
Marishal, and said Sir ^ you may do well to answer to the name of Croiset,
which being agreed on, he turned to him, and said you injure your self Monsieur
Croiset, not to answer when you are so often called upon, Duke Beaufort stays
for you, let us go; he said further to the contrary who knew not the Marishal,
you shall each of you have a Hundred Ducaoons, if you will help me to save this
my friend; which being heard by the seditious people, they thought he might be
some suspected person, saying, they saved a Mazarinia. Noblet replied, You
mock, we have been long seeking for this man on Beaufonti behalf, saying still
alloun, allouns, make have. These Four past through the crowd, not without much
danger to the Marishal, least he might be known, particularly by a Butcher
called Hon, who of all the rest had been the most insolent that day, and whom
Beaufort employed. Croiset, whom these men seemed to seek, lay in St. John's
Cloister near the Greve; which made for the Marishals safety, who entering into
Croiset's house, one of the house said, This is not Crois^t, who are you? he
answered in his ear, I am the Marishal de L'Hospitalle: whereat the other had
like to have Reverenced him; for he and his whole Family had been brought up
for above Thirty years in the house of St. Mesmes, which is la Maison de
L'Hospitalle; some came to the house, asking who it was that had got in
thither, for sure it was not Croiset; it was ansvvered, they were in the
right, for he was a Rogue whom they had driven out; the Marishal not being
yet secure of life, Monsieur Barratine, a Counselor of Parliament, and Colonel
of that quarter, came thither with a Squadron of his Soldiers, took him out of
that house, and not making him known to any of his Soldiers, brought him safe
to his own house, passing by above Forty Barracadoes, and armed places,
without any opposal, of such credit was Barratine with the people. At last
Madamoselle moved at this Massacre; though it were Three a Clock at night, and
that the horror and noise did confound even the most man-like spirits, went
with her accustomed courage to the Townhouse, and taking Beaufort with her,
appeased the uproar, and much to her praise sent all away unhurt. The Marishal
staid two days in his own house, not being able to get out of the City: but the
third day he went in a Coach of the Duke of Orleans, waited upon by a
Lieutenant of his Guard who was sent to that purpose, to a Villa of his own
called Beneis, and from thence to Court, from whence he was sent into
Champagnia, where he was Lieutenant General to serve his Majesty with his
wonted fidelity.

The confusion, and cruelty committed in this Riot, made Conde be held cruel,
and violent. So that as his Triumph and height of glory in Paris was on the
Second of July, so was the 4 th. day after the impulsive occasion of his
downfall, for the City could never be brought to lend moneys, nor come to open
breach with the Court. The Parisians did commonly complain of the Princes; they
therefore to moderate any sinister opinion, and to make it appear as much as
they could that they had no hand in what had happened, made two accomplices of
the sedition be imprisoned, and who were after executed, though one of them was
a particular servant of Conde's, whom he would not protect, that he might not
seem to approve of what he denied he had plotted, it may be because it did not
succeed well. Six days after the Assembly met at the common hall, but a few
went thither, and for all the entreaties and desires that Orleans could make,
who sent his Guard of Switzer^ to the Townhouse, none came thither but some
few who dependend upon the Princes.

The Provost de Merchants declared, that he would come no more to their public
meetings, till the Kings Authority should be there first established: wherefore
Orleans, and Conde caused the Counselor Brussels to be chosen in his place,
making him take the accustomed Oath, and the Marishal de L'Hospitalle not being
to exercise the place of Governor of the City any more, they conferred that
dignity upon Beaufort, this was the first effect of the aforesaid Riot, and the
first step by which the Princes mounted to attain their ends.

The Parliament being afterward called, though none of the Presidents thereof
came thither, the Duke of Orleans proposed Four things, which he said must be
speedily provided for. The first was to take order for Victuals, and
particularly for Bread, which was grown to an excessive rate; the second, the
safety of the City and Parliament, seeming much discontent at what had happened
at the public house; the third, how to detain those who went out of the City,
whereof were some of the Parliaments Officers, contrary to the decree which
inhibited parting from the Assembly. The fourth, that the Commissioners having
now tarried long at Court, not having received any answer, it behoved them to
resolve of what was to be done; upon which it was voted. That the decree of the
4 th. of that Month, and of others touching Victuals should be punctually
observed, that the Officers should be inhibited going out of Paris, and that
the Counselors should be desired to assist in their charges; that Lisne, and
Gilbert, both of them being Parliament men, should draw up Process against
those that had attempted the public Palace the preceding days; that no
public nor private Conventicles should be made or had upon pain of life; and
because the disorders of the Princes their Militia was intolerable, who
plundered all the neighboring parts, and all Passengers, it was likewise
ordered that Process should be made not only against such as should cut, or
sell grain of the fields, but also against those who had any hand therein, or
did buy any, which decrees were strengthened by an Ecclesiastical Monitory
against those that were Authors, or accessaries of the said Riot, these things
were done to appease the Parisians incensed with the said violences, whereat
they seemed all to be offended, there being few but were concerned either in
their alliance or friends.

Wherefore the Prince having but small hopes to subsist with his own Forces,
and that speedy remedy was requisite, he dispatched an express to Baron
Battevile at St. Sebastians, acquainting him with what had happened, and of his
great need of help, without which he could subsist no longer. Batteville sent
these Letters into Spain, which came thither in so happy a conjuncture, as the
Spaniards might easily assist him with some ready Moneys, whereby to accomplish
those enterprises, which could not be done without Money. The Spanish Gallions
came on the eighth of July that year from the Indies, which brought 250000
pieces of Eight for the Kings share, besides what came for particular men.

Conde sent also to acquaint the Spanish Agents in Flanders with his condition,
who finding the party of the Princes weakened much, since the Duke of Lorrain
departed out of France, fed the Prince again with large promises, resolving to
send him 6000 men under Vlderick of Wirtemberg, General of the German Horse in
Flanders; to which purpose Count Fuenseldaglia marched into the Field, and
passing between the Rivers of Some, and Owse, came to before Ethouny a Walled
Town upon the River, but not fortified, where he found the Duke de Elbeus,
Governor of Picardy, who had raised many men in the neighboring parts to keep
the Spaniards out of France, but not being provided for defense, he articled to
go out himself, and Monsieur de Maincampe his Lieutenant General, on the 24 th.
of July, with some other chief Officers, all the rest remaining Prisoners of
War, amongst which there were above a Hundred Gentlemen Volunteers, and about
500 Soldiers and Officers, with some Horse. Here the Spaniards staid some days,
as well to enjoy that fruitful Country, as to expect opportunity to advance
toward Paris; they notvvithstanding neglected the performance of assisting the
Princes, and Parliament, not meaning to strengthen them so as they might force
the Court to grant all they demanded, in which case, in stead of adding fuel
to the fire of civil War, they would have extinguished it with the ruin of
themselves.

From the second till the Twentieth of July, the Kings Army kept near S.
Dennis; and that of the Princes, without the Suburbs of S. Victoire, spending
all that time in Treaties of Peace on both sides; the substance whereof, was,
that the King did finally declare, That though he had always believed, and did
so still, that their desires of having the Cardinal sent away, were only
pretenses wherewith to color their ends; yet his Majesty, who desired nothing
more then his Kingdoms Peace, was persuaded to gratify the Cardinal, by giving
him leave to go from the Court, which he had long desired to do; but not till
the affairs of France were better established: To which purpose, he wished the
Commissioners to acquaint the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, that
they might send to negotiate the main points on their part; and that they
should tarry the mean while at Court, expecting the Princes their answer from
Paris. And because some doubt might arise, Whether the Cardinal should be
effectually retreated before, or after the establishment of affairs; his
Majesty declared, That he should be gone as soon as they had agreed upon the
manner; before the business were effected. The Parliament discoursed variously
hereupon. Orleans said the Answer was cunning, and ambiguous, to draw them to a
Conference, and spin out the business; that if the Cardinal did really intend
to be gone, he needed not have made their Commissioners wait fifteen days for
an Answer; and in the interim fall upon violent means, as was that of the
second of that Month, in the Suburbs of S. Antoyne, to destroy the Army, and
afterward to put all the Inhabitants of Paris to the Sword. That if he
intended to be gone, there was no need of any Conference, for nothing but his
absence was required; and that then the Princes would render all due respect
and obedience to his Majesty, That as touching sending of Commissioners in his
name, it was superfluous; since the Parliaments Commissioners being there, on
whom he totally did rely, he intended to do nothing without the interposition
of the Assembly: To which purpose, he would have written his mind to President
Nesmond; but he would not, nor could not send any other Commissioners on his
behalf. The Prince of Conde was of the same mind, and said, That he would write
his mind to Nesmond. It was then resolved, That they should thank his Majesty
for his gracious Message, desiring him to make good his promise, of sending
away the Cardinal as soon as he could: That the Princes would write to Nesmond,
or to some other of the Commissioners, that he might insist upon the
Declaration which they had made; that as soon as the Cardinal should be gone
out of the Kingdom, they would perform what they had promised; and would give
order to the same Commissioners to receive his Majesty's commands. It was
observed, that the Prince did not now speak with that sweetness he was wont,
but somewhat more rigidly, as if he were offended, that his desires were not
followed. Monsieur de Boust did discreetly move, that new Commissioners might
be chosen, to find out the best means how to dispose of the Soldiers, and to
use all possible means to have peace; and that when this should be agreed upon,
nothing should be done therein till the Cardinal were sent away.

Hereupon the Parliament ordered their Commissioners who were at Court, humbly
to thank his Majesty, for his promise of dismissing the Cardinal, to solicit
the effecting of it, and to entreat the Duke of Orleans and the Prince, to
write to President Nesmond, That as they had declared in the Assembly, they
were ready to lay down Arms, and to render all due obedience to his Majesty,
when the Cardinal should be gone. Orleans writ, that the Courts desire, that he
and Conde should send Commissioners to the King, could be understood no
otherwise, (the long time considered, that Audience was forborne to be given to
the Parliaments Commissioners) then as an usual trick of the Cardinals, to keep
the King from sending him away, and giving Peace to his Subjects; for his sole
desire was to agree with his Majesty, and obey him, as he should always do with
all respect and submission, according as by birth he was bound. The Prince writ
to the same effect, and charged Nesmond to give any assurance thereof; who
being brought to have audience before the King, spoke as follows.

Sir, Your Majesty's assurance given us, that you will send Cardinal Mazarine
away, has rejoiced the hearts of all your Majesty's vassals. Your Parliament
has charged us to thank your Majesty for it, and to desire the performance,
beseeching you to consider, That the evils of France increasing daily, so as
they can admit of no delay; Your Majesty will be very gracious in not
deferring, to make us enjoy a good so much desired. The Duke of Orleans, and
the Prince, have commanded us to confirm their former Declarations to you, and
to tell you, That they cannot satisfy you otherwise by Commissioners of their
own, but will obey your Commands, as soon as the Cardinal shall have obeyed
your Majesty's Declarations. It now lies in your Majesty, Sir, to abbreviate
all these evils, by dismissing the Cardinal. We can say no more to express the
grief which does even suffocate our words.

The King answered, That he would advise with his Council, and would give them
his Answer, as he did the next day in writing; as was read unto them by Count
Brien to this effect.

That the King had granted their desire of sending away the Cardinal, though he
clearly foresaw it was nothing but a pretense to trouble the State. But if his
Majesty did believe that this answer would occasion another Decree in
Parliament, he would not have given it, knowing, that in the condition the
Parliament now was, by the absence of so many of their leading Members, and by
the violent Authority usurped by the prime Rebels, they could do nothing but
execute their wills; since by their own Decree of the first of this present
July, they had resolved not to treat or resolve of any thing touching public
affairs, till Justice and the City might be secured. But that instead of
providing for such security, when the Assembly were met for that purpose,
Justice, and the City, were oppressed with fire, violence, and slaughter: So as
his Majesty could not build upon the resolutions of those, whose Votes were not
in their own free power.

The Kings intention in this Answer, was to afford means to the Princes to send
some with Authority, to receive orders concerning the Articles which they had
accepted of, and to agree upon the time, manner, and security of their being
performed.

The King for several Reasons, resolved to go from S. Dennis to Pontois, on the
Sixteenth of July, the Cardinal remaining still in his Administration by the
Kings express command, though he still desired to be gone; but affairs were so
well governed by his Council, as the good effects which you shall hear
hereafter insued thereupon: But the Princes and their party complaining still
upon the Actions of the Court, saying, That it sought only to delude the
people, and that it had no mind to have Peace, which depended solely upon
dismissing the Cardinal, they redoubled their detractions, both in private and
in public against the Cardinal, and other Court Officers.

When the Court went from S. Dennis, the Parliament Commissioners were ordered
by the King, to tarry there, to expect what word his Majesty would send unto
them; for they refused to follow his Majesty, pretending, That they were not in
equipage, and that they must needs return to Paris, to discharge their duties.
The King lay in Pontois, and his Army was quartered about the River, to watch
over the proceedings of the Spaniards, who overrun those parts, to the great
prejudice of those who had any goods there. The news of the King and Armies,
being gone from S. Dennis, coming to Paris, it was whispered, that the
Commissioners were detained Prisoners, which made Conde get on Horsback with
Four hundred Cavaliers, and go speedily thitherward to inform himself of the
truth. He found the Commissioners free, and offered to carry them back to
Paris; but they excused themselves, saying, They had given their word to
Monsieur S. Tor to stay at S. Dennis, till they should receive further orders
from the King. But when the Parliament met, which was the next day, they
resolved to send for them back. Wherefore Orleans, Conde, and Beaufort, with
above Two hundred thousand common people went thither, and brought them back to
the Parliament, with as much applause, as if it had been a glorious triumph,
notwithstanding, that the King sent express order for them to come to Pontois,
for affairs of great consequence which had happened since his going from S.
Dennis: Yet they gave out, that this was but a Court trick, which uses to
weary with delay, when it means not to comfort with effects, and to spin out
time; wherein they thought they might reap advantage by the sufferings of the
Parisians, who are accustomed peacefully to enjoy their rich Traffic.

To provide against all which, the King and his Council of State did Decree on
the Eighteenth of July, after a long debate of all that had been done; that
Information should be taken of the horrible and scandalous attempt that was
made upon the public Palace, upon the Fourth of the present Month; and that
the circumstances should be sought into, and the Authors and abettors of the
massacres, and violences committed, should be proceeded against according to
the rigor of Law; and in the mean while revoked, and nullified the pretended
Election of Brussels to be Provost de Merchants: And the King forbad him upon
pain of life, to act any thing therein, saying, That he and his posterity
should give an account of the disorders which had happened, and which should
happen after his pretended administration. He declared also, all the
resolutions void and null which were made in Parliament on the first of July;
as also in the Common Hall, concerning public Affairs, till such time as the
Governor of the City; and the lawful Provost de Merchants, and the other
Magistrates which were forced to absent themselves, were taken in again; and
that sufficient provision might be given for the security of Justice, and of
the City. And the King did further expressly inhibite all the other Cities of
his Kingdom, and all his Subjects and servants, to take notice of any thing
that should be written to them, or ordered from Paris, since it was
tyrannically possessed by Rebels; and to the end, that the Moneys which were
intended to pay the Rent of the Communalty, might not be disposed of by the
Enemy to make War, and pay the Spaniards whom they had called in; he ordered,
that they should be brought to the place of his abode, to be put into the hands
of those that were to pay the Rents, whom he commanded to come to Court, with
all other Consuls and Sheriffs of the City, within three days after this Decree
should be published.

The Princes, Parliament, and Frondeurs, were mightily troubled at this
departure, believing, that the Court laughed at their pretentions. Count
Servient had told the former Commissioners in his Majesty's name, That if
Orleans and Conde would not name new Commissioners, but would employ the
former; the King would be contented, and would agree with them, touching the
Propositions contained in the aforesaid answer; promising to send away the
Cardinal before the Princes should perform their part, when they had agreed
with their Commissioners, or with those of the Parliament. But the Princes,
instead of accepting this offer, not suffering the Commissioners to stay at S.
Dennis, and expect an Answer brought them back, as has been said where
continuing to say, The Court made merry with them; they resolved, the Cardinal
should be dismissed before they would do any thing. The Parliament seeking how to
make valid their pretended authority, chose the Duke of Orleans to be
Lieutenant General of the Crown, and Conde to be General of the Forces under
him; but this was to little purpose, for the other Parliaments of the Kingdom
refused to do it, and reprehended them for it. But Orleans, thought how he and
Cardinal Rets, who managed the whole business, should be able at last to drive
away Mazarine, without ruinating the Court; which Rets did, least the Court
being too much abased, his irreconcilable Enemy Conde should be exalted too
high. Thus Rets his particular interest, who longed to be the sole
Administrator of Government, by Mazarines expulsion, and then by Condes ruin,
through the Union of the Queen and Orleans, was judged the true cause of the
ruin of that whole party; and finally, of his own imprisonment. The Parliament
did further Decree, that the sale of the movables, and of all things that
belonged to Mazarine, should go on; and Fifty thousand Crowns (as has been
said) was set upon his head.

The Duke of Orleans went the next day to Parliament, and accepted of the place
of Lieutenant General of the Crown, as long as the King was ruled by the
Cardinal, and desired he might have a Council chosen by the Parliament: To
which, reply was made, that they referred it wholly to his Royal Highness. He
went afterward to the Exchequer, where he made the same request, and had the
same answer. He took for his Council of State, Conde, Chancellor Segniere,
Count Chavigny, Nesmond, and Longuevile, Aubry, and Archiere, Presidents of the
Exchequer; and of the Court des Aids, Dorieux, and le Noire; and all the Dukes
and Peers of that faction, which were the Dukes of Rohan, Rochefaucolt,
Brisack, and Sully; their first Consultation was had on the third of August:
But all this vanished into smoke, for the whole Kingdom, and even Paris it
self, being well wishers to the King; there was not any that would obey the
Lieutenant General: Nay, the Parliament of Tolouse, which was the Metropolis of
Languedock, Orleans his proper Government, though it professed much devotion to
him, declared, The Decree of the Parliament of Paris, to be null and void, all
which things proving contrary to the expectation of the Princes, Conde grew
almost desperate. Wherefore not caring to please others, since he was almost
ruined for want of Moneys, he assembled some of the Inhabitants, by means of
some of his adherents, and persuaded them to furnish him with some Moneys, and
though other means might be used to get Moneys from the people with less noise;
yet this was made use of, which seemed more specious and feasible, but in
reality harder. A Tax was laid upon all Gates of Houses wherein a Cart or Coach
might enter, of Twenty five Crowns; upon the middle sort, and Shops ten, and
upon lesser five. This Imposition caused great rumor and aversion: So as not
above Twenty five thousand Crowns were gotten by it. The Prince foresaw the
unsuccessfulness of this and diverse others; but he failed of his design, which
was to make the Court believe, that he could command Paris at his pleasure. But
this did little good at Court, aad less in Paris: For instead of disbursing
Moneys, the Parisians they broke forth into great complaints against his
violence, which did much increase the hatred of the Inhabitants against him,
and his adherents, and caused the alterations which insued; and not only the
Prince but Beaufort began to grow less in the peoples good opinion, for
behaving himself too arrogantly in this Tax, and the Parliament lost Reputation
also.

Conde enlarged his quarters in the Village Iouise, Four leagues from Paris,
since the King's were gone to Pontoise, but wanting Victuals, and forage there,
he brought part of them to Charinton, and part to St. Clow. Emulation and
hatred continued all this while between Nemeurs and his Sisters Husband
Beaufort, not only for what had formerly past between them, but through other
disgusts occasioned by Ladies jealousies; upon occasion of the sitting in the
new Council which was contrived by the Duke of Orleans, wherein Beaufort strove
for precedence before Nemeurs, no remedy being to be found, and the business
growing hotter, Nemeurs challenged Beaufort, who accepted the defiance. They
went toward Evening to the Horse market on the 30th. of July on foot with
Sword and Pistol, having each of them four seconds. Count Burny, Messieurs Ris,
Herecourt, and Brillet were for Beaufort; and Marquess Vallars who carried the
challenge, Messieurs Champ, Vseck, and Chasse for Nemeurs, Nemeurs discharged
his Pistol, which missing, Beaufort discharged his, which hit and killed
Nemeurs. Beaufort went to part the seconds who were wounded already, and ran
half mad to his Brother in laws house, bewailing bitterly what had happened;
Herecourt dyed of his wounds, as did also Ri^. Orleans and Conde were much
troubled at this sad accident.

Conde, whose great friend, and confident Nemeurs was, would not see Beaufort
in many days: nor would his Sister, Wife to him that was slain, see him; but
complaining bitterly on her Brother, went from Paris, to bewail her self at her
Country house. Nemeurs was a young Prince, of an high spirit, and
extraordinarily valiant, of a courteous, affable, and generous nature; as are
all those of the house of Savoy, which is reckoned amongst the antientest, and
Noblest of all the Families of Christendom; he dyed without Heirs male, there
remained no more of that house but the Duke of Omale Archbishop of Reims, who
was his only Brother. Touching precedence in this unfortunate Council of State,
another dispute arose between the Prince of Conde, and Count Rieux of the house
of Lorrain, second Son to Duke de Elbeus. For Rieux disputing with the Prince
Taranto, eldest Son to the Duke of Tremaglia, Kinsman to Conde, Conde would
have appeased the difference; but Rieux thinking that he leaned too much to
Taranto, did by injurious words provoke him, to give him a blow with his hand,
whereupon Rieux drew his Sword, and worse would have happened, had not the Duke
of Rohan, and President Viola parted them; and because Rieux in this action
transgressed the terms due to a Prince of the blood, Orleans sent him Prisoner
to the Bastile, not so much for punishment, as to keep them asunder till his
anger was over; from whence he was set free the next year at the desire of the
Duke of Lorrain, and went to the Duke his Father, having past his word that he
would forget what was past.

The King tarried at Pontoise from the 17 th. of July, till the 19 th. of
August, in which time great sickness grew there by reason of the straitness of
the Town, and the scarcity of all things. Many dyed, amongst which the Duke of
Bullions death was lamented; and this malignant influence dilated it self even
unto Paris, where a great many men of all sorts dyed in a few days; the Duke of
Vallois, the only Son to the Duke of Orleans, being about two years old dyed
also this September, to the great grief of his Father and Mother, by his death
Conde returned to be the first Prince of the blood, as he was before the other
was born, for the Sons, nor Brothers of the King, are not called Princes of the
blood, but Sons of France.

Whilst affairs went thus in these parts, Count Harcourt keeping still with his
Army in Guienne, to observe what the Princes Forces did, went to besiege
Villaneus upon the River Lot, which was fortified only with old Walls and
Towers; but well garrisoned under Marquess Theubon; wherefore he was forced to
raise his siege after two months attempt.

The Kings men had ill fortune also in Flanders, for want growing hourly
greater in Dunkirk, the Plague, and dysentery grew so violent amonst the
Soldiers, as above a thousand of them dyed in eleven days; and the rest were so
weakened by continual watching, as the Archduke resolved to approach it with
8000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, and Ten pieces of Canon, there were not above 700
Foot in the City who were fit for service; of which 200 of the Inhabitants who
wished well to Spain, did still keep Guard, and the rest defended the
Fortifications, who were continually in Arms without being misled; whereat
there was such murmuring, as they were thrice ready to revolt, had not the
Governor by hopes of speedy succor, and by his much reverenced Authority
detained them. The Spaniards fell upon the Counterscarp on the sixth of
September, upon three sides with a Thousand men on each part, the Spaniards and
Italians won it, and lost it again with some prejudice: but being assaulted a
second time with fresh men, they won it, wherefore Monsieur de Estrades,
finding that his men had given back, and that the Enemy began to lodge upon the
same Counterscarp, fell upon them with 500 Foot, and 40 Officers, and charged
them so furiously, as after a bitter, and bloody bickering, he recovered the
Counterscarp, losing Seven Officers, and Twenty five Soldiers, and he himself
was shot with an Harquebuse on the Thigh. After this unfortunate, but glorious
accident, followed treachery framed by three Soldiers who were bribed by the
Enemy, which being discovered cost them their lives; and the Governor was
commended for discovering, and punishing it, for six weeks past the Soldiers
had but six ounces of Bread the day, wherefore Estrades, and all the chief of
the Garrison thought it fit to yield to necessity, and to parley; wherein it was
concluded on the 12 th. of September, that if they were not relieved within six
days, the place should be surrendered; that in the interim there should be a
cessation of Arms, and that the besieged should be permitted to send two
Captains, one to Callis to the Marishal de Aumount, and another to the Duke of
Vandosme at Diepe, to acquaint them with the condition of the place, and in
what need they stood of speedy succor. Rivilliers went to Callis, Rouvie to
Diepe, and they arrived so luckily, as Marishal de Aumount began the same day
to lade six months Victuals in several Barks, and 1500 Foot at Callis, to
attend the Fleet which was gone from Diepe, wherein they were to go to Dunkirk,
which being blocked up by some few Spanish Vessels, it had not been hard to
have fought them, and to have made way through them.

But before we speak of the going of the Fleet, we must acquaint you with what
past in the Seas of Britanny: before it went from thence the Duke of Vandosme,
who was Lord High Admiral of France, was gone into that Province, and had
armed some Frigates about Rochel, against Count de Ognons Fleet, which was
reinforced with some Ships from Spain, which threatened Rochel not a little.
When he had gathered together Twelve Ships, Three Frigates, one Gally, and some
other Vessels in Breast; he went from thence on the 19 th. of July, and coasting
along Eiavet, and other places, some other Ships and Galleys joined with him;
so as being about Twenty Ships and Frigates, Four Galleys, and Twelve fire
Boats; he went toward Olone, and from thence to the Strand of Pallisse,
overagainst the Fort Preda, where Monsieur Souches, Commander of the Isle of
The, furnished him with some French Foot.

The Spanish Fleet consisted of Seventeen Frigates commanded by Admiral Antonio
Misnell, and by Antonio Dies, who being drowned between Blavet and Grois,
Cornelius Meigne succeeded him; to this Fleet was joined Twenty five Vessels,
and five fire Ships; when news came of the Arrival of the French on the Ninth
of August two hours after Sunrising, they were at a competent distance to begin
battle with their Canon, which roared on all sides; they advanced warily, not
to engage themselves in danger; a brisk wind blowing a little before night, the
Fleets were severed The Nativity a Spanish Ship was burnt, and taken, Commanded
by Antonio Gonsales a Dunkirker, a Ship of the Neapolitan Squadron was sunk
afterward; Vandosme would have done more, but vvanting necessary provisions,
and moneys, he was contented to have driven them away, sent his Ships into
Haven, and he landed at Rochel, went toward the Court, which was then at
Campaign, vvhither he came on the Fourth of September, from whence he was
suddenly sent with orders to relieve Dunkirk; to which purpose expresses
were sent into Britanny, and the neighboring Provinces; at the nevvs brought
by Monsieur Rorur of Dunkirks capitulating, the Commanders of the Fleet made
that vvays presently, hoping to relieve the Town; But the Parliament of
England at the desire of the Spanish Ambassador in London, and the rather for
that they liked not that that important Haven so near the Thames mouth should
remain in the French men's hands; they applied themselves to divert their
succor; wherefore that Kingdom being strong at Sea, by reason of the War
declared against the Hollanders, when the French Ships appeared before Callis
to receive in provisions and necessaries for the relief of Dunkirk; as soon as
they had cast Anchor, Blake, the English General fell upon them with many of
his Fleet, with such fury, as they prepared rather to fly, than fight, though
in vain; for unless it were Three Ships which held out at Sea, and got into
Flushing, all the rest were taken, but that the Parliament of England might not
appear an open Enemy to France; now that they were at War with the Hollanders,
they sent all the people that were in the French Ships to Callis (for they were
not free from some new convulsion amongst the people) and detained only the
Ships and Goods in lieu of the Reprisal made by the French Pirates, of Shipping,
and goods belonging to their Merchants; whereby they had much prejudiced the
Nation upon the Mediterranean. The preparations made at Callis, remaining thus
of no use, Dunkirk wanted its expected succor; and the Court of France being
much troubled at this unexpected accident, fearing least England might break
peace with them; when it learnt what was true, was aware that not only the
reprisals, but the loss of Dunkirk was that which they intended. Thus in
performance of the Treaty of the 18 th. of September, Monsieur de Estrades
marched out with 600 wounded, and sick men, and with but only 500 that were
whole, and in health, with every one of them a course Loaf in their hand,
which was all the livelihood that was left them, in the time allotted them
to go to Callis, which was but two days, above 300 sick Soldiers dyed; they
marched out with Arms, and baggage, Four great Guns, and one Mortar piece; and
a years time was allowed to the French that inhabited there to alienate any
goods they had gotten there, or to remove them with safety.

The Archduke having reposed his Army till the 27 th. of September, sent some
of them toward Terrowan, seeming as if he would enter into the Bolognese, but
went elsewhere; and the Prince of Ligne, with 4000 fighting men, advanced
toward the Frontiers of France, to second the Princes their interests, whose
Forces lay about Paris: where such as were better minded than the rest to the
Kings service, remembered how they had been used on the Six and twentieth of
June last, as they went out of Parliament; and how unsafe they were in Paris,
where the burning of the Commons House, taught them how violent the
Malcontents designs were.

Monsieur Fouchet, the Kings Attorney General, who had long before desired,
that the Parliament might be removed from Paris, making use of the present
favorable time, was one of the chief that occasioned his Majesty to remove the
Parliament to Pontois, by a Decree of the Sixth of August, wherein he declared
why he did it, and made void all the Decrees made in Parliament; as also in the
Townhouse of Paris, particularly those of the Twenty and twenty fourth of that
Month; prohibiting all men to acknowledge Orleans as Lieutenant General of the
Crown, or Conde as General of the Forces. He also charged the Counselors, and
Officers of Parliament to come to Pontois; whereupon, most of the Presidents
came thither, and five or six Masters of the Requests, and about twenty
Counselors; whereunto diverse honorable Counselors, and Dukes, and Peers of
France, who were at Court, being added, an Assembly was made, able to overthrow
the Princes their factions. When this new Parliament met, the Cardinal
bethought himself of retiring, since his tarrying was the only pretense of the
Princes and Frondeurs; so as when he should be gone, they would lay down Arms,
and do their duty. So the King would be absolute Master; or, if they should
continue their disobedience, the World would know their lewd intentions; all
good men would be weary of adhering to them: And the Parliament of Pontois,
which was already acknowledged lawful by the other Parliaments of the Kingdom,
would give our Decrees against the Princes and Rebels: And when their Majesty's
should have made it clearly appear, that the Cardinal served only as a mere
pretense to the Enemies of the Commonwealth, they might when they pleased recall
him, and the people would be satisfied.

The Cardinal declared his sole endeavors were to serve the King, and with much
willing zeal prepared to be gone, contrary to the opinion of most of his
Friends, and of the King himself: It was added, that at this the Cardinals
retreat, the Parisians were for receiving the King, and driving out Conde; in
the management whereof, Father Forts, Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut, a
Franciscan, and Counselor Pevost, employed much affection and fidelity. And
the wisdom of this advice prospered, for the people who did not discern so
much, did verily believe he would return no more thither.

Upon these Reasons, their Majesty's were persuaded to let the Cardinal go,
though they needed his presence then, more then his departure: But before we
pass further, it must not be forgot, that the Privy Council being much troubled
at the Parliaments rash resolution in choosing Orleans for the Lieutenant
General of the Crown; and for their declaring the King to be a prisoner to the
Cardinal, they declared not only all that till then was done in Parliament, to
be void and null, but whatsoever else they should do; and that no Parliament
should be acknowledged but that which was lawfully removed to Pontois.

Upon which, the greatest part of the Counselors, who remained in Paris,
debating, (amongst which were the most seditious) diverse Declarations were made
contrary to those of the King: As that the transferring the Parliament to
Pontois was unvalid, and illegitimate, protesting against it, and maintaining,
that the Parliament was never kept out of Paris; though Charles the Seventh,
did for some occasions of his own, remove it once to Montargis; they also
damned all that was done in the Privy Council, touching the prohibiting of
Taxes upon the Gates of Houses in Paris: They farther ordered, that the
Salt-Farmers should make their payments to the Parliament, and that the goods
of such Presidents and Counselors, as were gone to Pontois, should be
confiscated, if they should not forthwith return to Paris to do their service:
And they would have proceeded further, had their power been equal to their
will; but that failing, all their determinations were ridiculous. The day
before the Cardinal went, he caused the King to give Patents of Dukedom and
Peerage of France to Monsieur de Crequi, first Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, Son to Monsieur de Canaples, who was Son to Marishal Crequi; as
also to the Marquess of Mortmar, of the House of Rochefaucolt, Knight of the
Order, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and to Marquess Rochelaure, Master of
the Wardrobe.

The Cardinal did afterward give unto his Majesty in writing, particular
instructions touching Government; and amongst the rest, that he should never
agree with the Parliament of Paris, unless it should first render obedience by
coming to Pontois; which was impossible, since all would never consent
thereunto, which proved the welfare of the Kings party. For those that remained
in Paris, wanting means to maintain War, and to hinder this removal to Pontois,
they were forced to give way to all conditions that were prescribed them by the
Court. He left Prince Tomaso of Savoy, Count Servient, Count Tillier, Secretary
of State, to succeed him as chief Ministers of State. Moreover, he left with
the Queen for Director in her most important and private interest, Abbat
Vndedey.

Thus taking leave of their Majesty's, he went from Pontois toward Sedam on
the Ninteenth of August, passing first by Turennes Army, which advanced from
Lagny toward Brie; and pursuing his journey he came to Bedam, and from thence
to Bovillon, where he stayed. Conde hearing that he was gone, whereby all
pretense of War ceased, sent Marquess Ierze to the Lorraine Army, whither was
come the Succor which Wirtemberg brought the Princes, with orders to fall upon
the Cardinal in his journey, and take him prisoner: But the Spaniards, who
liked it not, acquainted him with it, so he escaped the danger. The very same
day the King went from Pontois, and that he might win the more upon the
Parisians, when he came to Campaigne, he published an Act of Amnesty; wherein
after a short account of all that had past from One thousand six hundred forty
and eight till then, he granted a General Pardon and Abolition of all that had
been done against his Majesty's service, nulling whatsoever had been done by
his decrees upon occasion of the present troubles, from the first of February,
One thousand six hundred fifty and one till then; as also his Majesty's
Declarations of September, and the eight of October that year; upon condition
that Orleans, Conde, County, and their whole party, should lay down Arms within
three days after the publication of the said Amnesty, and to that purpose
Orleans should within three days send a writing to his Majesty subscribed by
himself, wherein he should renounce all Treaties, Confederacies and Leagues,
with any whatsoever without the Kings leave; and that Conde and County should
do the like; and that they within the same time should put necessary orders
into the Kings hands, to make the Spaniards who were in Stenay, Burg, or in any
other places, to go from thence; as also to make the Enemies Ships depart from
the Coasts of France: that Orleans and Conde should cause the Foreign Forces
which were about Paris, to march directly toward the Coast of Flanders, and
join their Forces to them of Turenne and Ferte Senetre; and also all Forces
that were farther off within fifteen days, declaring that who should not do
what was contained in this Amnesty within three days, should not partake
thereof, wherein the King did only except such faults as had been committed
between particular people of the same party, which he left to the due course of
Law.

This Amnesty with this bundle at its breech, seemed a piece of cunning to
those who liked it not, saying that those not being therein comprehended who
had fought Duels, or assaulted the public Palace on the fourth of July; the
King might punish whom he would, under color of this Riot. It did not
withstanding make impression upon those who liked not the cavil of the Princes,
and Frondeurs, but had thought that when the Cardinal should be gone, the
Princes and Parliament would throw themselves at the Kings feet: But though
neither the Princes nor Frondeurs had any thought of accepting the Amnesty; yet
they appeared zealous of the general good, seeming very well pleased that the
Cardinal was gone. Orleans and Conde went to the Parliament, where it was
decreed that thanks should be sent to his Majesty for dismissing Mazarine, all
the chief Companies, and the whole body of the City did the like. And soon
after the Parliament resolved to entreat the King to return to Paris, and the
Princes declared they were ready to lay down arms, when a good Amnesty should
be granted. Orleans sent an express to the Duke Anville, who was a friend of
his, and one whom the King loved, and who was very faithful to the Queen, to
get Pasports from his Majesty for such Commissioners as were to negotiate a
final Peace: But Anville having detained the Messenger three days, sent him
back without an answer, for it seemed not decent that the King should enter
into other Treaties, having supplied all things with an Amnesty, and intended
that the Princes should presently lay down arms, (as they had offered to do)
when the Cardinal was gone from Court. Anville writ therefore back to the Duke
of Orleans, telling him that he thought his request would be granted, if his
desire were made directly to the King; which being done, Marishal de Estampes
had a Pass sent him to come to Court, not as a Commissioner, but as a Courtier;
and at the same time certain private Treaties were renewed between Secretary
Goulas, Marquis Chasteaneuse, and the Duchess of Aguillon, the contents
whereof was to slave Orleans off from joining with Conde, whose declarations
made in Parliament, and to the Court, were clearly found not to be real, since
at the same time that he said he was ready for Peace, he protested at Madrid
and Brussels, that he would always join with the Crown of Spain and continue
war, and did negotiate in England for assistance in his designs; that therefore
all assistance in France should be taken from him, without which he would be
but a bare Captain of the King of Spain, and would be able to do but little
against so powerful a Kingdom, when it should be wholly obedient to the King.

The Prince his Forces lay this mean while behind the River between Surene and
St. Clou, expecting Recruits from Flanders, and those fruitful hills being
full of Vineyards, and grapes beginning then to grow ripe, the Soldiers did
very much prejudice the people in these parts, at whose requests they were sent
to St. Victoire, where some Soldiers quarreling with the Citizens upon the
Guard, five or six of the inhabitants were slain, and twenty of the Soldiers,
which seemed to set them at variance.

But because the Cardinal knew that the welfare of the Royal party consisted in
reducing the Parisians to a necessity of Peace, which they began to wish, the
people, Merchants, and all others being weary of the ruins which they
underwent, he advised the King to go Campaigne, as being more commodious for
the Court than Pontoise, and that he should never be allured to go to Paris,
without undoubted security of not being once more detained there; and this was
one of the chiefest Maxims which he recommended to the Queen in his absence,
which he gave in precise charge to Abbat Vndedei; he added, that the Kings
Forces should go to oppose those of Flanders which were marching to assist the
Princes, and that if they should be too weak, they should go to Villeneufe,
upon the Seen, and fortify themselves, and have Provisions from Corbeile,
Melune, and other neighboring parts, by means of the River, where, whilst they
should tarry, the Enemies Forces would be necessitated to keep there abouts
also, so as the Country being sacked, and plundered by the Soldiery, and
Travelers slain, the Parisians would without an open breach, be in a manner
besieged, whereby the Princes would become odious, as thought the chief
occasion thereof, that thus keeping corrispondency with their friends that were
faithful to them in Paris, the Parisians might easily be brought to resolve
upon fitting means to free themselves of their miseries which could not be done
without a King whilst there was a King. This was the best thing the Cardinal
could do; for this Maxim well observed, fomented the Prince his ruin, since
not being able to free the Parisians from the ruin wherewith they were
threatened, without his withdrawing, he would be undoubtedly undone, for by
staying there he would increase their miseries, whereby he would draw on the
peoples hatred; and if he should go away he would loose the assistance of so
rich and powerful a City, and would be forced to retire to his Towns upon the
Maax, forsake the Kingdom, and cast himself into the Spaniards hands.

The Spaniards were much confused when they heard the Cardinal was gone from
France, for they foresaw that by his removal, all pretenses which did any ways
cloak the Malcontents reasons, ceased, and wisely weighing how they might
maintain, but not advance the Princes party, two ways were thought upon; the
one to advance with their whole Army, and drive the King from about Paris, and
so keep the Citizens true to the Princes: the other to feed the Princes, and
Parisians with hopes, but without effects, to the end that by appearance of
their aid they might keep fast to their pretentions, and redoubling their
disobedience, might at last be necessitated to declare against the King; and
becoming unworthy of pardon, and afraid to be punished, they might strive to
continue their usurped Authority. The first was gainsaid by suspicion, that
the Court being reduced to straits, should grant the pretentions of the
Princes, which were still hotly pursued by their well-wishers. The other seemed
not fit for the present conjunctures; for when the Princes, and Parliament
should be void of all hope, and promise made by the Spaniard, they must be
ruled by necessity, and be contented with such terms as they could get. They
therefore chose a third way; which was to cause their Troops to advance, that
they might thereby soment Conde's unquiet thoughts, who making War in France;
as first Prince of the blood, and one of the valiantest, and best esteemed
Commanders of the age, was likely to disturb the whole Kingdom long. Wherefore
after having staid a while at Fimes, and thereabouts; and having changed
Fuenseldaglia's Forces, for those of the Duke of Lorrain, who had again taken
pay for his Army for two months from the Spaniard, they marched toward the
Seen; it was thought better-to send the Lorrainer, then Fuenseldaglia, for
that they had rather put Foreigners to hazard and sufferings than their own
Soldiers, as also because if Spaniards, and Italians who differ so much both in
habit, and face, from the French should come into France, they would rather
provoke the hatred and aversion than civilities of the French toward them, who
do naturally abhor Nations of another Climate. This Army consisted of 3000
Horse, the most part Germans, under the Duke of Witemberg, of Six Regiments of
Horse, paid by the Country of Liege, and the parts adjacent, in the name of the
Princes, commanded by the Chevalliere de Guise, and Count Pas; and of 6000
Lorrainers, which in all made between Ten and Eleven thousand good fighting
men, and well in order. This Army being come on the first of September, almost
without any obstacle to Sessene, a little Town in Brie, Fourteen leagues from
Paris, thought to approach the Seen, and to come to Villeneuf St. George, in
the same place where some months before the Duke of Lorrain lay when he came to
relieve Estampes; but he was prevented by Turenne, whose Army being much
lessened by their continual labor entrenched his Army there, and threw two
Bridges upon Boats over the River, to succor the other side, and to provide
forage for the Horse. Lorrain kept therefore higher up, and falling down
afterward into the Plane, encamped on the East side of the River; the Army of
the Princes going the next day from St. Victoire, past over the Seen at the
Pontneuf of Paris, and over the Marne at Charinton, and joined with Lorrain;
the Princes Forces consisted of about 3500, what Horse, what Foot, the one
commanded by Baron Cleinchamp, which were the remainders, which came from
Flanders with Nemeurs; the second was Orlean's own Forces Commanded by General
Beaufort; the third were Conde's men, under Prince Taranto the General, and the
Lieutenant General Tavanes. For Rochefaucolt was not yet cured of his wounds;
These three bodies of Armies, and the other two of Lorrain, Wirtemberg, and
Duke Charles, having assigned over their Spanish Forces to Conde, Lorrain
declared he was no Enemy to France, nor to the King thereof, but that he was
only obliged by the Spaniards to bring those men to Conde, which being done he
was free. He went the same day, being the Sixth of September, to Paris, where
consulting with Orleans in Orleans his own Palace (wherein he was lodged) with
Conde, and the rest of the party, they resolved to draw near the Kings Camp
with all their Forces, and either to fight them, as occasion should serve, or
to incommodate them, chiefly in their forage, in performance whereof they made
diverse quarters about Villeneuf St. George in safe places, and well fortified,
from whence sending out great parties of Horse to plunder, and get Victuals,
their past several skirmishes between them and Turens men, with Reciprocal
success, but of little moment; the Soldiers being thus encamped all about,
Paris was besieged by its own Friends; the King was desired daily to come to
Paris, who answered he was vvilling to do so, but that the Parisians must
first get Orleans to cause Conde to return to his Government of Guienne, and
Beaufort to Annet, a Castle of his Fathers, and all Foreigners out of France.

The Cardinal of Rets, Duchess of Chevereux, and Chasteauneuf, who were all
three Condes Enemies, made use of these favorable conjunctures, and were not
wanting to stave Orleans off from joining with Conde; and to reunite him to
the Court, for the reasons already alleged.

Notwithstanding all these troubles of the Court, the siege of Montrond
continued; and Count Palau, who commanded there in chief, knowing how few the
besieged were, and what scarcity they had of Victuals, resolved to open his
Trenches and hasten the taking thereof, but meeting with more opposition than
he expected, he fell to finish his line, the circumvallation whereof being but
small, it might the more easily be kept. Marquess Persau who commanded therein
for the Prince, to keep from being reduced to such necessity, as he must
surrender upon discretion, articled on the 22 th. of August, that if he were
not relieved by the 30 th. of that month, he would deliver up the Castle to
the King, and would match out on the first of September with Arms, and Baggage.
That Hostility should cease on both sides, and that daily Victuals should be
given by the King's men to the Soldiers and Inhabitants, they being paid for
it; that no Fortifications should be made on neither side, and that if relief
should come, Persau and his men should be Newters, and do nothing whilst the
Line was fought for; that all lives should be saved; that Tallon, la Cost,
Ballet, and Marselly, who were come thither from Dunkirk to serve the Prince
should enjoy the same articles; but as for the Officers, and their places, they
should be at the King's disposal, to whom Count Paluau would write in their
behalf; that those that came out should be convoyed to the Princes Camp near
Paris, and that Pasports should be given to those that would return to their
own homes. That an Inventory should be made of all the Prince his goods, part
whereof should be safely conveyed to Chasteaureux, and delivered to the
Governor thereof, and that the rest which could not be conveyed, should remain
in the hands of the Prince his Agent, who was to have leave to tarry there, and
have a care of them, that Monsieur Hautaeville should keep in his place of
Farmer as all the rest of Conde's Farmers in Berry.

The Prince hearing in what danger this important place was, sent Count Briole
from his Camp on the 19 th. of August with 500 choice Horse, ordering him to
pass over the Loire suddenly in Boats over against Sully, and to join with the
Marquess Levy, and Count Colligny in Berry with 300 Horse.

Briole past over the Loire, but not finding his friends so provided as he was
made to be believe, and the line not to be mastered, he retreated speedily to
Paris; for Count Maipas marching toward him with 800 of Turenne's Horse,
traced him; but Briole got safe to the Prince his Camp, and Montrond according
to articles remained in the King's hands.

The Kings affairs beginning to better, and all wise men knowing that affairs
would at last prove favorable to the King, the Lord Chancellor being sent for
by his Majesty, went to Court; who by leave from the King had staid in Paris as
a private Gentleman; but the Princes desiring to Authorize, and give Reputation
to the new Council, Orleans sent to him to come and assist therein, as had been
intimated to him by Parliament, threatening that in case of refusal, he should
be forced to come upon worser terms; the Chancellor being thus necessitated to
come to that Council, did undauntedly, and with such wariness behave himself,
as not at all wavering from the King's service, but moderating those who were
swai'd by passion, and interest, did by his wisdom much advantage the
Court-affairs; but though it was known he did the King good service there, yet
it was not thought fit that the unlawful Authority usurped by Malcontents
should be authenticated by one that was honored with so conspicuous a charge;
he was therefore sent for back by a Capuchine Friar, whom he presently obeyed,
going out of Paris in a Priests habit, and came to their Majesty's the Third of
September at Campaign, where he was very much welcomed; but the seals remained
with the first President.

A novelty worth the relating happened in Brisack, for the better knowledge
whereof we must take the business a little higher, and search the beginning. In
the beginning of the year 1650, did Monsieur Eclack Governor of Brisack dye, a
man of great fidelity, and honor. Monsieur Charlevois, who commanded a
Regiment of Ten Companies there, and was the Kings Lieutenant, sent the Major
of his Regiment to acquaint the Court with it, and assured their Majesty's that
no novelty should succeed in the Fort, till they should send another Governor,
which he did believing that the Court would send none. But about the end of
next February, the King chose Monsieur Tiliadet, Camp-master, and Governor of
Beaupames to be Governor of Brisack, which when Charlevois heard, who hoped to
have been chief Commander there himself, he treated with Colonel Eclack, Nephew
to the dead Governor, who Commanded a Brigade of Germans in that Town, by
which treaty they bound themselves to join together, and not to admit of any
Governor. They forthwith sent Monsieur de Blois le Shelle, one of Charlevois
Captains, and Cousins, to tell Tillier, the Secretary of State, and Tilliadet,
that he should not be received into that Government, the Cardinal, who about
the same time was with the Court in Burgundy, hearing this, sent Messieurs
Bausant Fruart, and Millet to Brisack, to wish Charlevois to obey the King, and
to receive Tilliadet, and writ to the Marishalless Guebrian, who had great
power with Charlevois to will him to obey. Charlevois listened to these
Gentlemen, and to the Marishals Wife, and resolved to receive the said
Governor: upon promise that he would not innovate any thing in the Garrison,
and that he would keep his Brigade in the same condition it was in; which was
granted him by Letter from the King. Colonel Eclack finding that Charlevois had
conferred with the said Gentlemen, contrary to agreement, was displeased;
Charlevois, that he might be of greater power in that Fort, persuaded Eclack to
go to the Switzers, for which he had a Thousand pound sterling paid him. Soon
after, Tilliadet went from Paris, and came to Brisack in May; Charlevois
received him with all the Regalities due to a Governor, they lived Four or
Five Months very well together. At last Tiliadet proposing to reduce
Charlevoi's Brigade from Ten to Five Companies, intending to put the other Five
into his own Brigade, and so to be stronger than he; Charlevois laughed at the
proposal, and showed the King's promise, that no innovation should be made; but
Tilliadet persisting in his design, Charlevois acquainted his friends at Court,
wishing them to acquaint the Cardinal therewith. Charlevois, who thought the
Cardinals pleasure had been not to innovate any thing (though the truth is he
intended to reduce them from a Thousand to 750 Foot, and to add the overplus to
Tilliadet's Brigade, so to keep them equal) took courage, and declared he would
not yield to the Governors desire; whilst things went thus, the Cardinal
withdrew from Court; wherefore Charlevois suspecting that Tilliadet might
conspire his ruin, by making him be detained by the first Troops that should
come into Alsatia, resolved to secure himself from surprise, and acquainted his
friends with it who were at Court, desiring them to preserve his concernments
with the Queen, assuring her of his fidelity, and desiring her to withdraw
Tilliadet. Her Majesty finding that Charlevois his Authority in Brisack was
greater than Tiliadets, resolved to remove the Governor, as she did, to
Besanzon in Burgundy; but Charlevois knowing that some Officers of his Brigade
adhered to Tilliadets interest, put them out of the Fort, together with some of
Tilliadets particular friends, and kindred, amongst which his Nephew the Baron
of Serigliack.

Wherefore the Queen knowing that Charlevois was a Creature of Marishal
Guebrians Wife, wished her to admonish him of the respect, and loyalty Loyalty
he ought unto the King, which she did, sending Monsieur Rotra to him to
acquaint him with their Majesty's minds. Charlevois seeming to correspond to
the good opinion which was had of him, writ to the Queen that he would keep
within the bounds of duty, and that the Marisha^s wife, his Patroness and
Benefactrix should be his caution. He also writ to the Marishals wife to assure
her of his fidelity and obedience, desiring her to answer for him. But the
Court considering afterward that Brisack was not safe during the troubles of
France, they went about to make it secure. Wherefore knowing what the
Marishaless was able to do, the Queen sent her to Brisack to content Charlevois
with 10000 Crowns sterling, and every Captain with a thousand Crowns, besides a
whole pay to all the Garrison. Charlevois had no mind to quit that Place,
hoping by means of the troubles of France to fix himself there, wherefore he
forgot his promise, and his gratitude to the Marishals wife, finding out cavils
to retract the agreement; and at the same time that he sent to assure the Court
of his fidelity, and to desire the Marishaless to engage for him; he sent also
treat with Conde. The Marishals wife went from Paris to see these orders
performed, and sent Rotra before to dispose Charlevois to accept of the
proposals, who when he came to Brisack, found his mind altered, and not
answerable to what he had said in his last Letters; wherefore he returned to
acquaint the Marishaless with it in Montebilliarde, who not discouraged, went
to the Fort, where he met her with all obsequionsness two Leagues out of the
Town, she endeavored to reduce him to his Devoire; he seemed to be willing to
secure her, and to depend upon her; but in effect was averse, and found
difficulties in all the proposals: But that he might not appear contumacious to
the Court, nor make that Lady suspect collusion, he said he would never accept
of any Governor, unless he were of the house of Guebrian, or her self, in
which case he would be ready to submit, and to receive all her commands: she
who desired only to secure the King, proposed the Marishal de l' Hospital for
Governor, who was void of all exception, but Charlevois stood firm to have one
of her family, or else her self: so as finding him inflexible, and that he went
about to thrust her out, she went to Moret near Fontenbleau, where she spoke
with Monsicon, who traveled to and fro for the Cardinal, by whose means she
informed Mazarine of all that had passed. The Court was at this time at
Poictiers; and the Cardinal, who though he were now out of the Kingdom, minded
still the Kings service, writ to the Queen, that she might rely upon the
Marishaless, whom he knew to be affectionately zealous to the Kings service:
wherefore full authority being given her, she returned to Brisack she found
Charlevois ready to render her all due respect, but having advised with his
Officers, he cavild at the Kings Letters, saying, those were not convenient
provisions for a government, and added that his confidents would not give way
that the Marshaless should enter upon that charge, but that for his own part he
was her eternally obliged servant, and always ready to obey her commands; yet
at the same time sought how to be rid of her.

The Marshaless discovering Charlevois bad meaning, advertised the Cardinal
therewith by Monsier Le Toache, who presently detained Le Cost, and Heruart
two of Charlevois Captains, whom he had sent to the Cardinal to negotiate about
the affairs of that Government, which he did to prolong time, and that these
men might not return to Erisack, to counsel Charlevois amiss, the Court sent
orders then to the Marisheless to take Charleuois Prisoner, and seize upon him
dead or alive, wherefore she making use of the love which he bore to one of her
Gentlewomen, feigned to go recreate her self out of the Town, and agreed which
Siron, who was then at Brisack, to be at an appointed place, and to arrest him,
the hour being come when they were to take Coach, the Lady seemed somewhat ill
disposed, and wished them to go without her. Charlevois went out in the Ladies
Coach, with the said Gentlewoman, which Ferneut and la Toach, thinking upon
nothing but his amors. Sicon made him Prisoner, and not being able to bring
him to Nancy, as was designed, being the Lorraigners were beyond the Rhine, he
carried him to Philipsburgh, which proved prejudicial as shall be said.

This the Ladies blow, was not only remarkable for it self, but for other
consequences; for had not he been taken, that important place would have been
lost for Charlevois had agreed with the Duke of Orleans; the Archduke of
Flanders, and the Prince of Conde, to sell it to the Duke of Lorrain for 100000
Crowns to himself, and 10000 sterling to the Garrison, for performance whereof,
Fuges the Dukes General, staid only for money to disburse.

The news of Charlevois his imprisonment being divulged, his friends and family
in Brisack began to rage; the Garrison rose, running through the Streets, the
Lady ran hazard of life; nor hab she escaped, had it not been for the love
which many of the Soldiers, and inhabitants bore to the memory of her late
Husband Marishal Guebrian, being told that they meant to detain her there, to
exchange her for Charlevois: Wherefore having taken fitting orders, and brought
the Kings affairs to such a posture as she should be able to do his Majesty
more service elsewhere. She went to Basil, a Canton of the Switzers, and sent
la Touch to Court to let them know what was done; wherefore the Cardinal sent
his Nephew Count Moret to her with Letters Patents to the Governess; whilst the
Lady was in Basil, a conspiracy was made against the seditious Officers, to
put the Fort into the Kings hands, by three Italians, which being discovered by
a Frenchman, they were executed.

Charlevois being come to Philipsburg, instead of being kept safe, whereby he
might have been brought to treat with the Marishaless upon the first
propositions; he was suffered to walk freely up and down the Streets; for being
in Alsatia, where Count Harcourt was Governor, and who had often desired the
Government of Brisack, but had still been denied it, Monsieur Moireux, a
servant of his, thinking this a fit opportunity to make his Patron obtain what
he so much desired, treated of himself with Charlevois, that if he would
promise him to put Brisack into Harcourts hands, he would set him at liberty,
and Harcourt should protect his interests. Charlevois agreed hereunto; so as
the aforesaid Moret, and Monsieur Besemaux going to Philipsburg to treat of an
agreement, they were denied entrance, as if they were the Kings Enemies. Count
Lermy, who commanded that Town, and who together with Moirous had treated with
Charlevois, went to Brisack, whether he came just as the aforesaid three
Italians were executed. The treaty being thus broke which was introduced by the
Marishaless, she made War against that Garrison, with the Kings Forces that
were in Alsatia, under Lieutenant General Rosa, reinforced by 1500 Foot, and
200 Horse sent by Marishal de la Ferte Senetre by order from the Cardinal, and
by 600 Horse more which the Marishaless had raised; wherefore those of Brisack
being straightened, offered to come to composition so as the Forces might retreat
from those parts.

The Count which was then troubled with Civil Wars in Guienne, and being to
provide against that which was kindling about Loire, and in Parish least the
Garrison of Brisack, might bring in the Lorrainers, or Spaniards; dissembled,
and gave way to the agreement, set Charlevois at liberty, and re-placed him in
that Government. Harcourt was this mean while in Guienne, more intent than ever
according to his wonted valor and fidelity, to the War in those parts. The
report that what Count Lermy, and Moirous had done, was by his consent,
occasioned those who sought to bereave the King of so gallant a Commander, to
give out, that he being disgusted for having been denied that Government, and
the Title of Marishal General of the Armies; knew of the treaty, and had
approved of Charlevois his articles; insinuating into him, that the Court not
being well pleased with his proceedings, had ordered to have him made Prisoner.
Though this was false, yet the least shadow of suspicion prevailing in so nice
a business, the Count feared some hard measure; Wherefore when he had settled
the King's Authority in Guienne, he by their Majesty's leave went for the
Court, where he would have appeared, had he not received advertisement again,
that orders were given out to stop him on his way? Wherefore he changed his
course, and went to Brisack with only Five of his followers, protesting that he
did it only to secure himself, and that he might the better justify his
actions; but the Cardinal knowing him to be a Prince who was infinitely jealous
of his honor, knew he would never do any thing that should blur the Reputation
which he had wone by so much valor and fidelity; and that he would do
whatsoever his Majesty should command him, wherefore he applied himself not too
hotly to the business, and the treaties were proceeded in leasurely, as shall
be said in the ensuing Book.

THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The NINTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The Parisians begin to resent the Miseries of War; wish the King's Return;
have diverse Meetings in the Pallace-Royal, and Town House. They send several
times to his Majesty, to desire him to return to Paris. Marshall Turenne
removes his Camp from Ville Neuse St. George, and goes toward the Marne. The
Duke of Guise being freed from Imprisonment in Spain, comes to Paris. Conde and
Lorrain with their Troops march (...) a Campaign; their Proceedings. The King
returns to Paris, with general Applause. Re-unites the Two Parliaments; passes
some Decrees, and banisheth diverse Councillors. The Duke of Orleans will not
see the King; he goes to Limburs, and from thence to Blois: Uproars continue
still in Bourdeaux: where the Olmiere predominates. The Spaniards continue the
Siege of Barcellona: The French make many attempts to relieve it, but in vain.
Marquess St. Andrea' s Forces revo^ts, and goes toward France: The Proceeding
of the Kings Army in Guyenne. Marquess Plessis Belliere sent by the Court to
Catalonia; his Attempts, and Proceedings in Guyenne. Barcellona Capitulates
with Don John of Austria, and Surrenders. Cassall is threatened by the
Spaniards: The Duke of Mantua presses the Court of France for Assistance: He
Negotiates with the Spaniards and agrees. Count d' Argenson endeavors to
desturb him, but in vain; Forces are brought before the Town, the French are
driven away, and the Town is put into the hands of the Duke its Master. The
Courts resentment for the loss of this place. A Treaty between Poland and
Sweden in Lubeck. Count Quince is sent into Piemont: Treaties with the Duchess
of Savoy, whose Ambassador is received in France, as those of Crowned Kings.
Cardinal Retz is Imprisoned. Mazarine returns to France. The rise of the Wars
between the English and the Hollanders; and what occurred between those two
Nations.

THE Armies this mean while faced one another near Ville Neufe St. George; the
Princes intended to straighten the Kings Camp so as they might force it to
rise, and might fight it; and being more in number might destroy it. The Kings
men stay there though they suffer much, thinking to weary out the Parisians, to
reduce them to their duties, and to make them drive all Foreigners out of the
City; yet nothing of moment is done, for both sides proceed warily. So as the
Country try being overrun on all sides by the Soldiery, Paris is the only
place which is incommodated, none being sure to Traffic without the Gates,
though with Guides or Pasports, without danger of being plundered or slain.

It was resolved on the First of September in the Townhouse, to send to their
Majesty's the two Sheriffs, six Common-Councellors, three Quaterineri, four
Citizens of every Quarter, and two of every one of the six Corporations of
Merchants, whereupon Monsieur Pierre the Kings Solicitor was sent to Court, to
procure Pasports for the said Commissioners. The Clergy of Paris were also
desired to send Commissioners to Court, to desire his Majesty to return to his
Metropolis, and Mazarine being gone, Cardinal Retz took that occasion, to
receive the Cardinals Cap from his Majesty, and caused himself to be chosen the
Clergy's chief Commissioner; the Commissioners were twelve Canons of the Church
of Nostre Dame, four of St. Chapelle, many Curats, and two of every
Church-Commonalty. He arrived at Compiegne on the 10th of September, with a
great Attendance; he made an Eloquent Oration to his Majesty, exhorting him to
return to Paris; but the true Motive of his going, was said to be, to gratify
the Parisians in their desire of his Majesty's return, and to be the mediator
thereof himself, so to win the merit of so universal a good; and making
advantage of Mazarine's absence, renders himself necessary to the Court; but in
a particular Audience with the Queen, he strove to excuse and justify himself,
that he never had any thought of being chief Minister of State, as had been
laid to his charge: Her Majesty after having civilly received him, replied,
That she held him to be of too high a spirit and understanding, not to have had
such an intention; that she had never listened to those popular Speeches, since
that Employment depending only upon the King, and her, neither of them had ever
had any such thought, there was therefore no need of his justification on that
behalf. The Cardinal being sufficiently answered, and finding himself to be
thought a cunning companion, sought by all means how to become considerable; to
which purpose he applied himself chiefly to two things, the one to insinuate
himself more into the favor of Orleans, that he might rule him as he lifted;
the other to mar all secret Treaties of the Prince of Conde with the Court,
which was privately managed by Monsieur Goucourt, and Aiselin, by intelligence
with Marquess Mortmar, working it so as that Conde might abandon Paris, and
Orleans be the sole head of that party; whereby he thought to keep Mazarine
away, or to reap his ends, which were to put himself into such a posture, as
that he might keep his Employment, and reimburse the Moneys which he had spent
in these Troubles, whereby he had incurred a great Debt.

The Kings Answer was general as formerly, That he was ready to come to Paris,
when the Enemies to the common good were driven out. This was the Courts
Maxim, to excite the City against the Princes, who though they labored to
make men believe that the Amnesty at Pontois was but a piece of cunning, it was
notwithstanding accepted of by the generality, not only in Paris, but in
Bourdeaux, though the Court being far of, and the Princess of Condy, Prince of
Conti, Duchess of Longueville and others being in Bourdeaux prevailed by their
presence, and authority in that City. The new Council of the Olmiere resolved,
That the Parliament should not accept thereof, without the Prince of Conde's
consent.

The Burdelois were the more obstinate herein, because the Kings Army wanted a
General in Guyenne when Harcourt was gone from thence, hoping according to the
intimation given them by Marsine, to recover the Towns lost by Condy's,
especially since the King's Forces were grown so lukewarm, as they suffered
Marsine to do what he would. Wherefore it being requisite to provide a new
Chieftain; the Command of that Province was committed to the Duke of Candale,
the only Son to the Duke of Espernone, a young, lively, and generous Prince,
and very valiant. Marsine advanced in the mean while to take the Castle of
Ieloux in the Province of Albret, within three Leagues of Bazas, and entering
the Town, which had neither Walls nor Garrison, he assaulted the Castle, which
was yielded up unto him the first day, upon Discretion, Monsieur di Carbonsieux
remaining Prisoner there. He left a Garrison there Commanded by Monsieur de la
Magdalene, Captain of Conty's Brigade, who holding Intelligence afterward with
Monsieur Trassy the King's Commissary, was discovered by his Lieutenant, and
wounded twice by him as he sought to escape through a Window, and was shot to
Death by order from Marsine: He then besieged the Castle of Chasteau di Masnes
in the Sandas, wherein the Mistress being absent who was Wife to the Marquess
of Villa frank, it was notwithstanding for some days defended by Monsieur
Trajane, till having no hope of relief, he was forced to yield. Here was much
good Household Stuff of Espernouns, and above 10000 Sacks of Corn; Monsieur St.
Micant, Governor of Bazas was left Commander thereof; Marsine went then to
take Mas d' Agenois, a City seated upon the Garomne, above la Reolle, not far
from Marmanda, begirt with Walls and Towers after the ancient fashion, he
assaulted it bravely, but it was stoutly defended by Monsieur de la Bar, till
not being able to sustain a second assault for want of Men, it was taken by
force, many of the Soldiers and Citizens being slain, and not a few of the
Prince his Men, amongst which Monsieur Ligier, a Guiarate of Bourdeaux. Being
puffed up by these prosperous Successes, Marsine past over the Garomne, took St.
Basile, and hearing that Marmanda, and Again were ready to compound, (for after
Harcourt was gone, all the people thereabouts were at their wits end) he
advanced thitherward: Monsieur Galapian showed him how easy it was to prevent
the King's Men, by taking the aforesaid two Cities; but this Opinion was not
followed; but that of Monsieur Bavias prevailed, or rather particular interest,
which invited him toward Perigont, a rich Country, and not ruined by War: He
came before Sarlat, a Town in the bottom between two Mountains, one League
distant from Dorgona a great River, where having made a breach in the Walls, he
could not notwithstanding make an assault, being hindered by a subterranean
Cave; from whence several Soldiers sallying out the Enemy was repulst, and the
place would have been preserved, had not the Citizens been divided among
themselves, but many of them inclining unto the Prince's party, they forced the
others to come to an Agreement, and receive their Garrison, which Marsine left
there under Monsieur Lavagniack Onderdieu: He advanced from thence with his
Horse, and got good Contribution from the neighboring parts. When Candal was
come with the King's Forces, he repulst the Enemy, Marsine being gone toward
Perigord, so as the Forces being divided were the more easily destroyed. This
Prince made much progress, wan many of his Father's Enemies by his generosity,
and got estimation at Court.

At this time Duke Mercure kept in Provence, as Governor thereof, but without
Angolesme's dismission, who was the true Governor, who by Order from the King
was made Prisoner in Bern by Monsieur Guialotiera, and brought to the King's
Camp before Montrond. The Duke had promised the King to go no more to Provence
without his Majesty's leave, and to stay at Paris; but pretending to go to his
own lands, he was detein'd by the way, it being thought that he meant to go to
Tolon, the chief Haven of that Province, to foment the Sedition which was begun
there; which imprisonment, joined to the diligence used by Mercure, reduced
Tolon to obedience, and rendered the whole Province peaceful. Angolesme was
Prisoner about three Months, but the Queen being assured by the Duchess his
Wife, and by Duke Ioyeuse, of his good intentions, he was set at liberty in the
beginning of October, and was by his Majesty permitted to tarry at Paris, and
at the Court, keeping still the Letters Patents of Governor of Provence.

When Cardinal de Retz, and the rest of the Clergy's Commissioners had
delivered their Message to their Majesty's at Champaigne, the aforesaid Pierre
was sent back with the Answer, which was this:

That his Majesty bearing still a good affection to his good Town of Paris, and
being well assured of its sincerity, was exceedingly grieved to hear how it had
been oppressed, particularly on the 4th of July last, when all things were
perverted which he had applied to make his good intentions known; Firing,
Massacres, and other strange things being practiced to divert his faithful
Subjects from their duties, lawful Officers and Magistrates being banished, the
Governor Provost of Merchants, and others forced to flee for safety of their
lives; in whose Places the Authors of these Outrages were put; that new
Sheriffs were chosen contrary to the King's Prohibition; Taxes laid upon the
People, whilst those of the Country-Towns were barbarously plundered; that his
Majesty had done what was possible, yea, many things to the prejudice of his
Dignity, to restore them to their former Liberty, and to preserve them from the
miseries of War; affording the Princes honorable means to lay down their Arms,
and to return to their due Obedience; instead whereof they had made an Assembly
of the City (the Chief Magistrates whereof had neither lawful Title nor
Character) under a specious pretense of demanding Peace to delude the People,
when they themselves refused it, and declared they could not accept thereof,
though the Conditions were the same that they desired: that thinking of nothing
less than of laying down Arms, they had called a Spanish Army to Paris. with
which they joined theirs, intending to maintain their violent usurped
Authority, and to divide the poor Subjects Substance amongst themselves: that
they had given a sinister Interpretation to what he had done, and did do for
preserving the Lives and Liberties of his Officers, and Magistrates; that he
longed to see that noble City in that splendour, and abundance it was in the
first years of his Reign; to re-establish Commerce, and his Parliament, and to
honor it with his Presence, not only for his own content, but for that of all
his good Subjects; that the mean while his Majesty would be well satisfied to
see a good many Officers, and Inhabitants visit him: but considering that the
Body of the City was then commanded, guided, and composed by the Adherents of
those Princes, who contrary to Custom, were come into the said Assembly, to
hinder any thing that might not make for War: That he ought not to Authenticate
any thing that was done in their presence, specially in that of Beaufort and
Broussell, who were the chief Authors of all the present Disorders, that
therefore he declared that Assembly to be null, invalid, and unlawful, and
consequently he could not grant the desired Pasports; but that he would grant
Passes for any particular men that were desirous to see him, were they either
lawfully chosen Magistrates, or other public Officers, Merchants or Citizens,
who should be graciously listened unto in any thing they should represent.

Pierre returning with this Answer to Paris, where all things grew worse, not
only in Commerce, but in Damage suffered by the Neighboring parts by the
depredations of both Armies, now that the season of sowing Corn, and planting
Vines came on, wherefore they began more openly, and with more fervor to
resume treating with the Court by means of the Cardinal de Retz, Chasteaneuf,
and other persons who desired Conde's ruin, no less than Mazarine's.

The Duke of Orleans seeming to have the same sense; and weary of these
Combustions, reiterated his desire of quiet to Anville and others; and on the
20th of Sept. writ to the Queen, That having to his great joy by Marquess
Ioyeuse Sambert understood, how graciously his Majesty was minded to Peace, he
thought himself bound to assure her by these Lines, that he and Conde did
passionately desire it also: But that though the first Object of his Prayers to
Heaven ought to be the welfare of the State, yet he protested that the
inclination which he always had perfectly to honor her Majesty, was one of the
chief Reasons thereof, and that nothing could ever happen, should alter the
zeal and respect, whereby he declared himself her most obedient Servant.

At this time la Corte d' Aids resolved to go to Pontois, in conformity to his
Majesty's Orders; and his Majesty's other good Servants sought how to
withdraw themselves out of the slavery of the Frondeure: At last the Bishop of
Amiens, Father Bertaut a Franciscan, and diverse others who shall be hereafter
named, held an Assembly on the 24th of September, consisting of about four or
five hundred men in the Palace-Royal, where the Counselor Charles Preuost
appeared, who was totally upon good terms with the Court, and presented the
Assembly with a Letter from the King, wherein his Majesty said, He had a great
desire to return to Paris, but that he could not do it so long as its seditious
Masters were there; wherefore he propounded, that all faithful Citizens should
take up Arms, should throw straw away, put Paper in their Hats, go into the
Streets, and cry, Vive le Roy, and jointly possess themselves of all the Chief
Places of the City, drive out the Disturbers, and fall upon as many as should
oppose their Design, which being done, he would then return. The Chief Authors
of this Assembly, after the aforesaid Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut, and
Councellor Preuost, who had the whole management of the Business, were,
Monsieur Barby the King's Maistre d' Hostella; Luines, Councellor of the
Parliament of Mets; Monsr. Borgon; Monsr. de Fay; Messieurs Bidal, and Villars,
both of them great Silk-Merchants; Monsr. Brun, Merchant of Tapistry; Monsr.
Farin, the King's Secretary; Monsr. la Mare; Monsr. St. Michael, all which had
many who sided with them. All these declared, that they had no other design in
this their Assembly, than to find out the best means how to bring the King back
to his Metropolis, which was upon the brink of ruin, without his Majesty's
presence: They took a Solemn Oath to observe religiously all resolutions that
should be taken, and therein if occasion should serve, spend their lives and
livelihoods; taking upon them to defend, each of them in particular, and all in
general, who should be injured by the contrary Party. The same Oath concluded,
that they had no other end in this their meeting, but the Glory of God, and the
Re-establishment of the King's lawful Authority after the manner of his
Predecessors.

Though not above four or five hundred men met in this Assembly, yet had they
many Adherents, and the six Corporations of Merchants concurred with them, most
of the Colonels of Quarters, with almost all the Commissioners of the
Townhouse, their true end was to let the people see that there was in Paris a
strong Faction for the King; and to oblige the Duke of Orleans to grant Passes
to the Commissioners of Merchants, and of the Colonels to go to Court, and
treat with his Majesty, which was refused as prejudicial to the Interests of
the Princes. This Solemn Oath being taken, some one proposed the Cardinal of
Retz for the Head of this new Party; but those who considered that this was
proposed only to make him necessary at Court, and to bring him by degrees into
the chief Administration of Government, opposed it mainly, saying, That they
ought to receive no other Head, but he who should be sent and chosen by his
Majesty.

The Princes, and all their Faction were much astonished at this News,
foreseeing the downfall of their Designs, and began to think how to reduce
disorders, and how to keep off the current which was coming upon them.
Marshall d' Estampes went with Orders from the Duke of Orleans to the Palace
Royal to dissolve the Assembly, but in vain. Madamoselle thought to go thither
her self in person, to break off these Negotiations, by her presence, and
authority; but when she considered that her Reputation might be concerned
therein, she forbore doing it; and she was wise therein, for the Assembly had
prepared a bunch of white Ribbon for her, instead of Straw which she wore.

Thus the Morning of the 24th of September was spent; the Assembly was
adjourned till the next day, when every one was charged to bring with him as
many friends as he could get. The same day Monsieur de Pois, one of St. Mark's
Knights, (an Honor which he received at Venice, for some Service done to that
State) was sent to acquaint their Majesty's how the Loyal Inhabitants were
affected, touching their return to Paris; he followed the Court, which was then
gone from Marine to Mantcs; from whence he was sent back with such Instructions
as shall be said hereafter.

The first good Effect which this Assembly produced was, That Counselor
Broussell knowing that the place of Provest di Merchants, which was conferred
upon him by the violence and fury of the people, was unsubsistant, resolved
voluntarily to lay it down, lest he might be forced to do so: He declared that
since this was a Reason which kept the King from returning to Paris, he parted
the more willingly with it; the two Sheriffs, Gervas and Otry, who were put
into the place of the others by Orleans, were advised to follow Broussell's
Example, but would not, saying, They were lawfully chosen, being loath to lose
that Honor; but upon second thoughts, finding that they must be forced to
relinquish it, said, They were ready to forgo it, where they should know it to
be the King's Pleasure.

The n^xt day Monsieur Vieux, the first Sheriff, and Pierre the Kings Attourny,
were sent from the Townhouse to the Court, to keep the business on foot, and
to manage their Majesty's return; which these in the name of the Public,
beseeched them to do, the more to authorize and authenticate their Resolutions.
The Parliament of Pontois Decreed in favor of the aforesaid Provost, and of
the whole Assembly in the PalaceRoyal, taking all those that were come, or that
were to come into the said Assembly into the King's protection; prohibiting all
Men of what condition soever, to acknowledge Beaufort for Governor of Paris,
Broussells for Provost di Merchants, or Gervas and Otry for Sheriffs; and
ordered these upon pain of Rebellion not to exercise their Offices: It
commanded moreover, That no Victuals, or Ammunition should be brought to those
who served under the Princes against the King.

This Decree was read, and published in Paris on the 27th of September: And a
Manifesto of the said Assembly was also fixed upon every Corner of the Streets,
the Contents whereof were, That the good Subjects and Servants of his Majesty
assembled in the Palace-Royal, had no other end, but to reestablish the Peace
of the City, which could no ways be had but by the presence of their lawful
Lord, and by driving away Foreigners, and the disturbers of public Peace. To
this Manifesto was annexed an Edict made by the King at Compeigne on the 7th of
the said Month, which contained, That his Majesty being informed that his good
Subjects in his good Town of Paris, did continue their good Intentions to his
Service, he did permit all, and every of the said Inhabitants, and in case of
need, did command them, to take up Arms, join together, and possess themselves
of such places as they should think fit; fight those that should oppose them,
imprison the seditious, and to do whatever they should think fit, to establish
quiet, and entire obedience to the King; and to cause the said City to be
governed according to ancient manner by lawful Magistrates, under his Majesty's
Authority, who granted them full Authority to that purpose.

In pursuance of these good Intentions, it was agreed by the six Corporations
of Merchants, to choose ten out of every Company, which were Clothiers,
Grocers, Mercers, Skinners, Goldsmiths, and Bakers; and to send them to the
Court, not only to witness their faithful Service to the King, but to desire
his Majesty to return to Paris. The Assembly met again on the 26th at the
Pallace-Royal, wherein the Resolution of the aforesaid Merchants being
represented, they Treated of nothing but how to Guard the City, that no more
Foreigners might be admitted thereinto; nor that no Victuals or Ammunition
should be sent out to the Confederates Camp, whereunto the Colonels were
desired to look; and the Assembly was adjourned till the said Merchants
Commissioners should be returned from Court, whereby they hoped they should
acquire Peace. The same day Cavalier Pois returned from Court, with a new
Amnesty granted by the King only to the Parisians, excluding the Parliament and
Princes, who by sinister Interpretations had abused the former.

He also brought a Letter from the King to the Colonels, with express Orders
to guard the Gates well, not to let any of the Spanish, Lorrain, or Princes
Armies enter, nor to suffer any Victuals or Ammunition to be sent out to them;
to search all Towns where any of the adverse Soldiers might be lodged, and to
put them out of the City, to the end that every one doing their duties, nothing
might be left which might keep his Majesty from returning; assuring them, that
he would particularly consider what they should do herein.

The Princes, and Parliament, hearing of all these Proceedings, the very day
that they met to Treat of the Duke of Beaufort's Duel with deceased Nemeur's,
they were not a little troubled, and the more for that there was no answer yet
come to the Letter which Orleans sent to the Queen; though Duke Anuile had sent
word it was well received, and that it should suddenly receive a gracious
Answer. They Treated upon the prejudice which their Party might receive by
these public and secret Conventicles, tending to Sedition, and how they might
be remedied. But all things meeting with many difficulties, they pitched upon
sending Talone, the Advocate General to Court, to reassume the Treaty of Peace,
and all Meetings were forbidden, and the carrying of Paper or Straw about
people. And Mesieurs, Manyere, and Lesne, were deputed Commissioners, to
inquire who were the Authors of the Assembly in the Palace-Royal; some were of
Opinion to send for the Provost to give an account to the Parliament, for
having assisted in the said Assembly, but it took not, the major part thinking
that it was too nice a thing to be touched upon.

This mean while Monsieur de Veaux and Pierre, came to the King at Mantes,
whither it was removed from Champeyny, as well for the inconveniences which
the Court began to feel there, as that it might be nearer Paris, for the better
encouragement of Treaties: The Deputies delivered their Commission, showing the
universal good will to his Majesty's Service, and to the re-establishment of
and restoring of his Authority. They were graciously received by his Majesty,
and were sent back on the 28th of September to Paris with this Answer:

That his Majesty approved the Resolution taken by the Commonalty to establish
the ancient Orders, and of bringing every one to their due Obedience; He
praised the Decree made in conformity to his Commands, of not suffering any
Victuals, Arms, or Ammunition to be carried out to the Enemies Camp; and of not
permitting any of the adverse Forces to come into the City: He said also, He
was very well pleased to hear that Brussels had willingly laid down the Provost
de Merchants Place, whereinto he had intruded against Law, and to the prejudice
of the Legitimate Possessor; but as for the pretended Sheriffs, who made it
still lawful to execute those Offices, pretending to quit them when they should
know his Majesty's pleasure to the contrary; they could not but know; that
their Election was greatly displeasing to him: wherefore he again commanded
them to forgo the said Places immediately, upon pain of such punishment as was
due to Rebels, and disturbers of the Public Peace. As for his return to Paris,
the pith of his Answer was; That when his Enemies should be gone out, he would
suddenly return thither: He concluded, That as he was much satisfied with the
Expulsion made by the Commons House of those who were entered thereinto unduly,
and contrary to his Majesty's intention; so he could not approve, but did annul
whatsoever should be done in the said Assembly, whilst the Rebels and their
Adherents should be there.

Whilst things went thus at Court, they forbear not to solicit the effecting of
their intents at Paris, and the Parisians troubles increasing still, by the
continuance of the Spanish Forces about that City; part of the Duke of
Wirte^berg's Baggage was sacked in the Street St. Honor, whilst the Conductors
of them were busy in carrying Vine Muscade, and Spanish-wine from the Taverns
to the Confederates Camp; and strickt Order was taken that no more of the Army
should enter; whereat the Parliament and Princes were much astonished, finding
that their power grew less and less; and they were yet more amazed, when they
saw their straw outdone by the white Hatbands, and Girdles which were worn by
many of the King's Friends.

The Assembly at the Palace-Royal being advertised that Beaufort's Guards were
to convey Bread, du Pois wished Gandry Captain of the Guard at Paris, to throw
away his straw, as a mark of Sedition, and to take white Ribbon, the Loyal
Color, and threatened that he should be assaulted if he did not, for the
Assembly had resolved to attack those who wore no white Ribbons, or Paper, and
this was to begin at St. Martins Gate, where his Guard was to be: These words
prevailed, so as not only this Captain, but all his Soldiers put on white, and
drunk the King's Health, and Mazarine's, and made Monsieur Vaugrimaux and
Beaufort's Guards do the like; who as they would have gone out at the Gate were
hindered by Chassan, Ligny, and du Pois, who told them, they were not to pass
without Pasports from the King, or his Generals; and that they might be known
to be the King's Servants by wearing white. Vaugrimaux answered, That he had
the Princes Pass: Answer was made, They doubted not that, but that they must
drink the King's health, and return back; which they did in their Hats, for
want of Bowls. Beaufort hearing this, got on Horseback to hinder it; but
understanding the other Gentlemen's resolution, he forbear. This beginning was
followed by great and happy advantages to the King's Party, many others vying
who should follow the Example. The King being satisfied with these
demonstrations, Commanded on the 29th of September, that passage should be open
for carriage of Corn, Wine, Wood, and all other Necessaries for the livelihood
of so numerous a People. The Answer that he afterward gave to the Merchants
Commissioners was: That his Majesty was very sensible of the new testimonies of
Affection and Fidelity showed by his beloved City of Paris; that for his return
to Paris, he would say no more to them than he had done to the Commissioners of
the Townhouse, a Copy whereof he gave them. He only added, That they needed to
send no more to him for Peace, since he had already granted it by his Amnesty,
declared in his Parliament at Pontois. The Form or Words whereof were, It
became not Subjects to censure, since the most Guilty found therein Pardon for
all their Faults; but that they were to apply themselves to those who caused
the War to continue; because they thereby reaped advantage; that they were only
to complain of them, since his Majesty had without any condition granted what
was desired; yet they, going from their words so solemnly given, disposed still
of the Royal Authority to the great prejudice of his Majesty, and of his State;
keeping themselves joined in Arms to the declared Enemies of the Crown,
contrary to their promise: keeping the Chief City of the Kingdom in continual
apprehension, by continuing Violence and Sedition, whereby the French were
sacked and ruined by Strangers. Wherefore all men being concerned in putting an
end to such disorders, He hoped they would use their endeavors to put Paris
into her former condition, notwithstanding the Enemies to Peace. He ended his
Answer with a desire of a Testimony of their good intentions, and as that which
was more necessary than any thing else, that they would re-establish the
Provost de Merchants, and the Sheriffs who were driven away, to their Places;
which when it should be done, he would send such Orders as he intended should
be observed by the Townhouse; assuring the Merchants of his satisfaction,
goodwill, and Patronage.



The Chief of this Commission was Monsieur Pratin, Ancient Consul of the City;
who spoke first of sending the Soldiers away, desiring his Majesty to favor
Paris with his presence, and to give Peace unto his Kingdom; assuring his
Majesty of the Parisians Loyalty and Obedience. When Pratin had done, Monsr,
Brun, a Mercer, declared the affection of his heart, mingling tears and sighs
with his words, protesting that he was ready to sacrifice his life for his
Majesty's Service, and that he spoke for a hundred thousand men that were of
the same mind: Yea, turning to the Queen who was present, he desired her to
move the King to satisfy his People with Peace.

The King appeared very well disposed thereunto, and to give his Subjects all
the satisfaction they could desire. Then Monsienr Perichon, a Mercer, and a
Master of L' Hostella de Dieu, represented the public Miseries, the great
number of sick people, the small Revenue, that the Houses in the Countries were
plundered, the Farmers ruined; that there was no remedy for all these evils but
his Majesty's presence at Paris: All the rest spoke to the same purpose. The
King replied, He would shortly give them all satisfaction: and Monsieur St. Tot
wished them all to withdraw; and they were conducted by Count Nogent to the
Convent of the Franciscan Friars, where they were lodged and defrayed.

These passages did greatly move the Princes, Parliament, and all that Faction;
and finding that Paris was altered, and desired Peace, which destroyed their
designs, they applied themselves to think how they might beat the King's Army,
and become Masters of the Field; which was thought to be the only means for
them to keep in Paris.

The Duke of Guise labored his freedom in the Spanish Court, and after several
Treaties it was offered, That if the Queen Regent of France would change all
the Prisoners she had upon the account of Spain, they would set the Duke at
liberty. Guise acquainted the Christian Queen herewith, humbly desiring this
favor from her Majesty; who, though the number of the other Prisoners were
above 4000, whereof were some of Quality, willinglingly exchanged them all for
the Duke; and would have exchanged as many more, had she had them, to ransom a
Prince, who had with such hazard of life, and at so vast expense, done so great
Service to the Crown. Reciprocal promises passing; by Order from the Queen, the
Duke of Orleans sent the Baron Verdirone, Gentleman of his Bedchamber, with
power to make the Exchange; or else to offer the 500000 Crowns, which the
Spaniards owed France, for other Treaties concerning Prisoners: but the
Business being delayed some months by reason of the long way, and the abovesaid
Novelties happening the mean while, as also the freedom of Conde, Conti, and
Longueville, the Spaniards went from their words, thinking it not fit to send
back the Chief of the House of Guise, who was so obliged to the Queen:
Wherefore they declared, that Conde being at liberty, they would proceed no
further therein, unless he were first acquainted with it, and should like it.

This was cunningly done, to free the Duke from Obligation to the Queen, and to
make him side with Conde, who began then to Treat privately with Spain; and the
Spaniards thought it better for them, that the Duke should have his freedom
without any Obligation to the Court, and should turn to Conde's party, then the
exchange of so many Prisoners.

Conde, who at that time had got the exchange of the Government of Guienne for
that of Burgundy, endeavored also to get the Government of Champagnia, held by
Conti, for the Government of Provenze; found that no man could be well
established there, without winning the good will of the friends of the house of
Guise, who having formerly had that Government had won so much upon those
Inhabitants, as no other Governor could ever please them. Conde making use of
this occasion, sought to make the Duke favor him in working this his desire,
by making him hope for liberty, if he would be a means that his friends in
Provenze should declare for him.

The Duke soon found the trick, which was, That Conde might make use of this
present conjuncture, to work his own ends, which when he should have obtained,
he would mind his liberty no longer; wherefore he dexterously made his friends
and servants be desired, not to declare for the Prince, till he were at
liberty. To which purpose all the Dukes friends desired Conde to beseech his
Catholic Majesty, to declare that he would free Guise if Conde should desire
it.

In this interim the aforesaid accidents happened; and the Prince going to
Bourdeaux, sent Monsieur Lenet into Spain to Treat of joining his Interests
with those of the Catholic King, which Conde did much desire; and upon this
occasion Lenet had leave to go Segovia, and to see, and speak with the Duke.

Many Proposals were made between them, at last Conde was persuaded out of mere
honor, wherein he thought he should suffer much, if he should refuse a favor
to a Prince, who was his friend, which would cost him but a word.

The Prince being thus resolved, begged the Dukes liberty of the Catholic King;
and yet he retarded it for some Months, to see if when it should be known,
Guise his friends in Provenze would do his brothers business; but failing
therein, for they all resolved they would first see the Duke at liberty, he
indevor'd it in earnest. The Spaniards being allured by the same hopes, easily
granted it; and resolved to deliver up the Duke into Conde's hands, and sent
him with usual Guards to St. Sebastian in Biscay, where he stayed a while,
according to the Spaniards Custom, who always spin out time, when they think
they may get any good by delay.

The Duke, though a Prisoner, and not likely to acknowledge his Liberty from
any but Conde, forgot not his gratitude to the Queens good Intentions toward
him; and therefore told Marshall Grammont freely (who was Governor of Bearne,
and Bayonne,) That he might assure their Majesty's of his Fidelity, and that he
would never upon any whatsoever consideration undertake any Service, which
should link him to the Spaniard; with whom he was ill satisfied, as having
broken their word, and that they would free him only for their own Interest.

He was afterward brought from St. Sebastian to Bourg, where he was delivered
over to the Prince; he resolved to go straight for Paris, intending to
recompense the Prince by interposing with their Majesty's in making his Peace
at Court; but to the misfortune of all men, he found the Court so far advanced
in Treaties with the Parisians, and Conde so engaged with the Spaniards, as he
soon failed in his hopes.

He declared himself eternally bound to the Prince, and that he would serve him
in any thing, if he would forego the Interests of Spain, refusing (much to his
praise,) whatsoever was offered him by the Spaniards, or by the Prince who
affectionately embraced him.

The Court seeing him in Paris, and that he conversed much with the Prince,
feared least he might engage on the Prince's side, as the Chevalliere his
brother had done. Abbate Oudedei indeavor'd to keep the Duke from doing so,
which was needless, for he found him wholly devoted to the Kings Service. He
went afterward to St. Germains, where he was graciously received by their
Majesty's, and made one of his Majesty's PrivyCouncel.

But to return to Mazarine, and to the Court: When Mazarine was come to Sedan,
and gone from thence to Bovillion, three Leagues out of France, there were
those, who indeavor'd Orleans his reconcilement to the Court. Cardinal Retz,
and Chasteuneufe were persuaded, that if his Highness were once with the King,
he might by degrees get into his favor, and reassuming his place in Council,
they should not be left out; wherefore by the consent also of the Duke of
Lorrain, Marquess Lambert, of the House of Ioyeuse, was sent to Court, to
introduce the Treaty.

The Queen, and Court, who applied themselves not only to Mazarine's return,
but also to provide for their own safety, could not consent that Orleans, who
was altogether a friend to Conde, now joined with the Spaniards, should have
any thing to do in the Government. Conde who was engaged with Orleans by
promise of Marriage between his Highness Daughter and Duke Anguiene, thought
that although he were left out of the Treaty, he might yet in time by Orleans
his means, make his Peace; so as these being nice respects, and reflecting much
upon the wisdom of the Agents, that was found to be bad counsel, which exposed
the Government to the arbitriment of others, which in an absolute Monarchy will
admit of no Companion.

It was conceived that the Prince had no mind to make his Peace then, for his
great Soul being in love with glory, which was not to be severed from his
Valor; and from other hopes given him by the Spaniards, designed at the same
time to make his Name famous, and to get good store of Money from the Spaniards;
and that if he should fail of the appointed payments, he might at all times
make his Peace with the King upon advantageous Terms; and that enjoying the
Wealth gotten by War, which far exceeded what he lost in France, he should make
the World know, that Troubles being the advantage of a Soldier, they ought
never to be fore-gone by one who professes Arms.

These Treaties being over, the Princes and Parliament stood still upon the
point, That the Amnesty granted by the King, and pardon for all that had been
done the last five years, was not as was desired, to wit, not general, and
without condition; but that it reached only to the Parisians, bearing but
little respect to the Princes and Parliament: they therefore pretended* that
his Majesty should give ample, and unretractable Authority to the Duke of
Orleans, to frame another, without any exceptions, and that it should be
Authenticated by his Majesty in the Parliament of Paris, whither the
Counselors that were gone to Pontois should come. Many meetings were had about
this; his Royal Highness writ some Letters to Court: Duke An^i^e, and Marquess
Ioyeuse negotiated with the Privy Council, and did many other things which
would be too tedious to relate: But the Court finding that it would be
prejudicial to the Kin'gs Authority, Pasports for the Parliaments Commissioners
were absolutely denied; so as Affairs remained entangled as before.

The Parliament being met on the third of October to hear what News Marquess
St. Lambert brought, who was returned from Court: Two Boatmen were imprisoned,
who cried, Vive le Roy, e Mazarino, and many more were led to the Concergeria,
and Process was ordered to be made against them, and it was said that this was
done of purpose by some that gave them money, that they might move the people to
Sedition: This being brought to Court, and that the Parliament continued to
proceed against some of the Assembly in the Palace-Royal, the King with his
Council passed a Decree on the fifth of October, Whereby, He annulled all the
pretended proceedings of the Parliament of Paris, which were, or were to be
published; imposing severe punishment upon such Commissaries, or Judges as
should act any thing further therein; and commanded all his Majesty's People in
Paris, to see his Orders executed.

The King's Army lay this mean while at Ville Neuf St. George, much straightened
by the Princes Troops and those of their Confederates, being more than they in
number; and were in danger to be beaten out of their Quarters, and fought with
in their Retreat; for not only many of their men, but many of their Horses
perished for want of Victuals, and Forage: The Court was much troubled hereat,
fearing some sinister accident; for the Victory consisted in that Armies abode
near Paris, whereby the endeavors which made for the King were fomented.

The Princes, who knew the importancie hereof, and that if the King's Army were
preserved, all their Plots were ruined, did what they could to overcome it by
Famine; but the neighborhood of Paris, and the sickness which besell Conde,
Wirtemberg, and many other of their Chief men, (which may truly be attributed
to an effect of Divine Providence) caused the ruin of their Party. Together
with these sick Princes, Lorrain and Beaufort; and almost all the Chief
Commanders were come to Paris with a considerable number of their best
Soldiers, for fear of some Conspiracy amongst the Inhabitants, and to advise
upon what was best to be done in this the Peoples tottering condition, who were
weary with the length of these troubles. Turenne, a no less wise than valiant
Commander, after a short consultation had with his Colleague Ferte Seneterre,
resolved to get out of these Straits, and to remove his Army elsewhere, where
it might be safe, and have whereon to live.

The 4th of October he past his Baggage and Artillery by night over the Seen
by a Bridge of Boats; by break of day his Army rise in such order and silence,
as they past undiscovered by the Enemies Sentinels.

Tavanes was the only General that was left in the enemies Camp, who being
aware of Turenne's march, though too late, sounded to Horse, and put his Army
in order to follow, and fight him. But Turenne being sheltered by the River,
got soon to Corbeile, a place which was guarded by the King's men, where
crossing the Seen upon a Stone Bridge, he escaped danger with much honor, and
quartered upon the Marne, between Meie^x and Lagny, raising Victuals from all
the neighboring parts, for the maintenance of his Troops. The Princes were
mightily amazed at this, Conde in particular was scandalized; complaining of
his Officers carelessness, saying, That had he been well, he would not have
lost so favorable an occasion. But what is past being past remedy: On the 7th
of the next Month, the Prince's Army advanced to the head of the Suburbs of St.
Antoine, and for the defense of the City, incampt near St. Vincents-Castle. The
King and Court went from Pontois to Mantes, that they might pass over the Seen
there, and so come to St. Germains, intending to come to Paris, when things
should go as it was hoped they would do.

The Parisians were resolved to withdraw themselves out of those miseries
wherein they were plunged; and being all of the same mind, accordingly as
Fortune forsook the Princes, they sided with the King: wherefore Conde finding
the storm ready to fall, bethought how to save himself and his Army, by
removing quickly from Paris; and because by his going away, and the King's
return, the good of Paris, and the Cardinals return was foreseen, many sought
to follow the Cardinals re-rising Fortune; and some of the Prince's Friends
began to wheel about, and particularly Count Chavigny.

Being much vexed in mind at these changes of Fortune, Chavigny fell sick, and
died on the 11th of October; and this was the end of Lion di Boutelliere, Count
of Chavigny, aged 44 years; one who at 19 years old was admitted into the
King's Council; and at the age of 21, and 24, was made Secretary of State; and
in 1642 had the care of all the important affairs of the Crown committed to his
charge; and when Lewis the Thirteenth died, was made Plenipotentiary at the
Peace of Munster: He was quick-witted, of a lively spirit, ready counsel, and
ambitious of Glory and Greatness.

The Parliament and Townhouse met often touching the present occurrences; and
all good men being grieved to see the poor Country people so wasted by the
Soldiers, especially by the Lorrainers, who left nothing unransackt; diverse
Commissioners were chosen in the Townhouse on the 9th of October to go again
to Court, and to desire their Majesty's to return to Paris. But because the
King intended not to admit of public Addresses from that Assembly which was
held illegitimate since Beaufort, pretended Governor of Paris, contrary to his
Majesty's Command, was there; it was propounded and agreed upon in Parliament,
That Beaufort should be desired to renounce that Place willingly, and so not
obviate that Peace which was so generally desired.

The Duke, who was absolutely absolved by Parliament for having slain Nemeurs,
was willing to do it, and gave it back to Orleans, from whom he had received
it. The Militia of Paris also was resolved to have Peace, to which the presence
of the King being requisite, they chose 250 persons, to present their Duties to
his Majesty, and to desire that he would honor his good Town of Paris with his
Return. The Colonels acquainted the Court herewith, and desired wonted
Pasports, which were soon granted, and the King writ unto them to come to St.
Germains on the 14th of October, where he intended to be that night. Besides
this Letter written to all in general, he writ to every particular Colonel,
wherein he thanked them for the good will they showed to his Service; he also
writ to the Commonalty, willing them to call a general Assembly in the
Townhouse, and to put the Provost de Merchants, Monsieur le Fevre and the
Sheriffs Guilois, and Philip, again in their places.

Conde finding by these novelties that his abode in Paris would be to no
purpose, and that all were resolved to receive the King, and peradventure to
affront him, resolved to haste his departure; in pursuance whereof the Duke of
Lorrain took his leave of the Duke of Orleans on the 11 th of October, and went
toward his Army, which was not far off. But as he went out of St.
Martin's-gate, the Guards stopped him, as not having a Pass from the Commonalty,
and some of them imputing all the Miseries of France to his fault, would have
imprisoned him, till such time as his Forces should be out of the Kingdom; and
till he should have given satisfaction to the parts adjacent, for the wrongs
which they had received by his men; but this was not done in respect of the
Duke of Orleans, but he had a thousand injurious Words given him. The next day
he went out by his Highness Authority; two days after parted Conde,
Wirtenberg, Rochfaucaute, Taranto, with many Gentlemen, who would follow the
Prince his Fortune; and as he went through the Streets, he was heard to say,
That the Parisians hoped the King would return, but that should not end the
War. He marched with his Army toward Reims the chief Town of Champagnia,
thinking to winter there.

At his departure he left a Manifesto in Print at Paris, wherein he avowed all
that he had done was for the Public Good, and particularly for the Parisians;
exhorting them not to trust the Court, and to believe that he by force of Arms
would constrain them to Peace, and to make all due satisfaction.

Paris being thus abandoned by Conde, and by all the chief Officers of his
Army, the aforesaid Colonels, and Officers went to St. Germains, accompanied by
above 200. Citizens; they haulted at Ruell, being the half way, where the first
Colonel Monsieur Seen Chastenoville, received Letters from Secretary
Guenegaude, saying, That the King would be at St. Germains, on Thursday- night,
and that they might come thither on Friday- morning, as they did. They were met
at the Park-Gate, by Monsieur St. Tote Master of the Ceremonies, with four of
the King's Trumpeters, who brought them between the two Castles, where they
lighted, and went to the Lodgings that were provided for them: They then had
Audience of their Majesty's, where the aforesaid Seen kneeling down with all
the other Commissioners, having in a handsome Oration represented the general
desire of his Majesty's Presence; assured his Majesty in the Names of them all,
of sincere Loyalty, and of entire Obedience, with their plighted Faiths, that
they would be all ready, upon all Occurrences to spend their Lives and
Livelyhoods in his Majesty's Service. That they desired him not to refuse this
favor, but to suffer himself to be persuaded by the Tears, and Sighs which
proceeded from their cordial Desires, protesting, That he should find nothing
but due obsequiousness, and perfect propension to perform the parts of humble
and faithful Subjects.

The King himself answered them, That during Life he would remember the Service
they did him upon this occasion; that he desired them to be always assured of
his good Affection; that though what those had done, who had revolted against
him, might have made him go some whither else, yet since they were so desirous,
he would go speedily to Paris; and that he would let the Provost des Merchants,
and the Sheriffs know what he thought fit to that purpose.

The Queen added, That she had always loved Paris, and to live there; that she
never doubted the Citizens Loyalty; that she would always seek to keep the
King in the good Opinion which he had of Paris, and in his resolution of coming
thither speedily. After this the Commissioners were carried to a Sumptuous
Dinner, provided for them by the King; Dinner being done, they took their
leaves of their Majesty's and returned to Paris, where the people hearing what
had been said unto them, flockt about in the Streets, and welcomed them with
great Jubilee.

Before his Majesty went from Mantes, he answered the Duke of Orleans his
Letter, which Duke Anuille delivered him, touching the amendment of the
Amnesty, which was to this purpose, That his Majesty desired not a new
Declaration from him, but would be satisfied if he would make good his word,
which he had so often given, of laying down Arms, and sendding Foreigners to
the Frontiers, so to free Paris; that his Majesty had no more to do, having
published a general Amnesty; and such a one, as the most Seditious could not
add any thing unto it, for their safety, nor yet pretend that it might be
registered in Paris, since it had been already done in the Parliament at
Pontois; so as his Majesty having anticipated his desire, there remained
nothing but that the Duke should perform his promise; that his desire of having
Pasports sent him was superfluous, since it tended only to gain time, till the
Spanish Forces commanded by the Duke of Wirtenberg were come to Paris, to join
with Conde's men, and to hold the people in hand, till an other Army of
Spaniards commanded by Prince Ligny, might come into the Kingdom, whereby they
designed to keep Paris in slavery still, and keep his Majesty from thence. He
concluded, That he hoped by God's assistance, to preserve his Subjects from all
mischief; and exhorted him to return to his Obedience.

When the said Colonels were gone, the resolution of the Courts returning to
Paris was variously disputed in the Privy Council; those who feared that some
scandalous novelty might fall out yet, there being many Malcontents still
there, said, The people were not to be trusted, who forgot what they had
promised, upon any novelty; that therefore they should consider well, lest they
might fall upon new Rocks. The Chancellor, Guarde de Seaux, Tilly, and almost
all the rest were of this Opinion, saying, That they ought never to believe,
where they had once deceived; nor think to find truth in those who had been so
foully false. But Prince Thomaso of Savoy, who had a chief hand in the
Government, and who as a Forreigner desired what might be most serviceable to
their Majesty's, wisely weighing the prejudice which might be received, by
suffering favorable occasions to escape their hands, was for entering Paris
without delay, for driving the prime Seditious out; and as the Princes had made
use of the popularity to strengthen their party, so the King ought to serve
himself of the same to overthrow the contrary faction. Turenne was of the same
Opinion; who considering that the parts about Paris were totally ruined, and
the King's Army consequently but ill maintained, said, It was requisite to be
Masters of Paris, in respect of the abundance of all things there, and that
without that City, the King might be called a Prince without a Crown. This
Opinion was embraced.

In pursuance hereof, the Marshall de l'Hospitall, the Provost des Merchants,
and the Sheriffs, being restored to their places, went with the said Colonels
into Paris, to the great satisfaction of the people: Those of the contrary
party endeavored to keep them from coming into the City, saying, That they
would find but little safety there, amongst a people that hated them. And
Orleans said in particular, That he not being able to promise them any thing;
they ought to think what a hazard they should run. But these Threats did no
good, for being informed how well the people were disposed to receive the King,
they were also assured to be made welcome.

The Marshall de l'Hospitall presently took possession of the Bastile, and of
the Arsenal, putting out Louvieres; and order was taken through all the Corners
and Streets of the City, that the people might rest quiet: His Majesty ordered
his Parliament at Pontoise, to meet on the Two and twentieth day afterward, at
the Louvre, where he intended himself to lodge; and the King of England, who
lived in the Cardinal's Palace, withdrew himself, he moreover writ to the
Commonalty, that his Majesty would make his Entry the same Two and twentieth
day; that therefore Soldiers should be removed from the Gates, and that all
Inhabitants should exercise their Professions; which was speedily done, and all
the Guards were taken off. Mademoiselle was made acquainted that the Duke of
Anjou being to lie in her Lodgings at the Louvre, she was to leave them; which
she unwillingly did, retiring to the House provided for extraordinary
Ambassadors in the Suburbs of St. Germains, near the Duke her Father's House.

On Monday Morning the Parliament met, whither Orleans, Beaufort, Estampes, and
other Lords met; President Nesmond told them, He had received a Letter from the
King, and that the like was sent to every particular Counselor, willing them
to be the next Morning at the Louvre, to understand his Majesty's will touching
the particular Affairs. Orleans, and twelve other Councillors, said they had
received none, which they seemed to resent much, and were greatly abashed,
finding that their ends were utterly ruined: the business was debated. The
King's party being called to speak their Opinion, were for the Parliaments
Meeting in the Gallery at the Louvre: Those who had received no Letters,
knowing thereby that they were in disgrace, opposed it, showing how harmful
such a president might be to the privilege of Parliament. Nesmond said, The
King might keep his Parliament in what place of Paris he pleased; alleging
that the like had formerly been done in the time of Henry the 2d. and Henry the
3d. He moreover said, That la Camera delle Vacationi had resolved to carry the
Cloth of State, and the King's Seat of Justice into the same Gallery, and that
it behoved them to obey; the major part agreeing herein, They resolved to be
the next Morning by Sunrising at the place appointed in red Robes. Yet the
Councillors Meusniera, and Refuge, were appointed to acquaint the Chancellor,
and Guard de Seaux, how prejudicial this would be to the King's Service, and to
their Authority.

The same 21 of October their Majesty's, and the whole Court went from St
Germains toward Paris, whither about noon came the Chancellor, and Guard de
Seaux, and after them, the Presidents Noyon and Cognieux. The King dined at
Ruell, in the Duchess of Aiguillon's Palace, where he was nobly entertained by
the said Duchess; from hence he sent Count Noget, one who was very zealous in
the King's Service, to acquaint the Duke of Orleans with his Majesty's coming,
and to wish him (as from himself) to meet, and complement his Majesty, assuring
him that he should be graciously received. The Duke was strangely surprised,
not thinking that the King would come so unexpectedly to Paris, where the
unquiet disposition of those yet remained, who had so much outraged his
Authority. He answered the Count coldly, That he asked eight days to give his
Resolution, since he could not do it without acquainting the Prince of Conde
with it, with whom he was engaged in friendship. The King being come to St.
Clous, and hearring no news of the Dukes coming, sent the Duke to say the same
thing unto him. His Highness was much beset with two weighty considerations; on
the one side he was troubled to think he must deny to pay his due respects to
his Nephew the King; on the other side he feared to fail in his friendship to
the Prince of Conde, which might make the World doubt whether he did it out of
necessity, or out of any other respect: At last he resolved not to go; and it
was thought he did it by the advice of the Cardinal de Retz; who thought if the
Duke would tarry in Paris, he might enable him against the Court, by many who
depended upon him.

The mean while, the Marshall de l'Hospitalle, the Provost de Merchants, the
Sheriffs, and others, who were met in the Townhouse, prepared to meet the King
with all Magnificency, and to Welcome him, as became faithful Subjects to do.
They met his Majesty with a great number of civil People, besides Magistrates,
and Officers, and returned that night with him to Paris; 'twas late ere the
King arrived, for he lingered by the way, expecting Orleans his coming, not
thinking it fit to enter the City whilst he was there, or that he would promise
to go out the next morning; for it became not Regal Dignity that he should
tarry there, without seeing his Majesty.

He was met by a great number of people, without the Gates, of all Conditions;
above 300000 persons came to see his Entry; which he made on Horseback,
accompanied by the King of England, Prince Thomaso, by a great number of
Princes, Dukes, and Mareschals of France, and other Lords, who were then in the
City.

The Queen came after the King in Coach, together with the Duke of A^^ jou; she
entered by Port St. Honor, and went by the Cardinal's Palace, where the King of
great Britain lighted from Horseback.

His Majesty was met at the Louvre-gate by the Cardinal de Retz, together with
a great number of Prelates; at night Fireworks, and Bone-fires were made, the
Bells rung, Cannons went off from the Bastile, and Arsenal; and you might read
Joy in the Faces of all honest men, for this return, whereby that City was
quieted, which had been so much disturbed; and so it did succeed, for his Royal
Presence dissipated all turbulent Clouds, as does the Sun. Some Malcontents
said, notwithstanding, that the Court came to Paris only for refuge, That Conde
might return who had a great Army; that the design was to raise Impositions,
that therefore it behoved them to keep in Arms, and to keep better Guards than
before; for the King beguirt the Louvre with Guards, and his Army lay not far
off. The night of the King's Arrival, Monsieur Saivin was sent to the Duke of
Orleans, to will him from the King to retire to his House at ^imo^^s. He
answered somewhat sharply; and Beaufort, who was present, said, That he should
contain himself within his Quarters: But they consulted again what Orleans had
best to do; some were for his not obeying, but that he should tarry in his
House at St. Germain's Suburbs, from whence he could not be so easily driven
out by the King's bare Guards; for it was thought the people would not take up
Arms against a Prince so near a kin to the King: and besides many Parisians
depended yet upon him, and upon others of his Party, whereof Cardinal de Retz
was one, and who was much favored by the Parisians; he insisted, that if all
the well-affected people would repair to those parts, they might withstand the
Court, by the help of the Inhabitants of the Suburbs; and that making Conde
return with his Army, and with the Spaniards and L^rrainers, it might be, that
the King, unwilling to live amongst such confusion upon the foundation of
Citizens, who were subject to change, might return to St. Germains* or else,
that the business falling to a Treaty, wherein Retz might become necessary to
the Agreement, he might be well with the Court, and assisted by Orleans, might
be taken in to have a share in the State Government, which was ^^s main end.

The Duke would not follow this advice, but resolved wisely to obey, and to
withdraw the next Morning to Lymours, accompanied by Beaufort, and Rohan, and
many others of their Party. His Daughter Madamo^selle went also out, and lived
at Fargeaux, a Castle of hers, by the Loire, toward Briara.

It was happy for the Court that Orleans would not agree, and that he withdrew
from Paris; for the King being now in full Authority, and the Duke refractory,
and out of Paris with all his adherents, happy events might easily succeed.

The same day the Parliament met at the Louvre, all save those who had not
received particular Letters from the King, which were the Presidents B^llieule,
Thou, and Violet* the Councillors Brouselle, Salement, Genoa, Pertaile,
Brisack, Croysy, Fouquet, Machault, and Martinau; and all of them having their
places in the great Hall, near the King's Lodgings, the King being underneath
his Cloth of State, said, His Guard de Seaux, should acquaint them with his
will; who after a short, and Eloquent Oration upon the present Occurrences*
acquainted them with Four Declarations; the Reunion of the Two Parliaments, the
general Amnesty, the Prohibition that the Parliament should meddle in nothing
but in things Civil and Criminal, according to Law* and the Names of those who
by the King's orders were to withdraw, which were the forenamed, who had
received no particular Letters from the King; to whom Counselor Bitaut was
added, who by mistake had a Letter sent him, all these were willed to withdraw;
as also Beaufort, Ro^an, Rochefaucau^, Frontailles, Bulley, Penis, the
Domestics of Conde, and of the Duchess of Longueville, President Per^ult, the
Wives, Children, and Domestics of all that served then under the Princes, and
in any Towns held by them, as well in Guienne, as elsewhere; who were not to
return to Paris without the King's leave; it being laid to their charge, That
they were those who had always subverted the Parliament, and made the People
seditious. Express Orders were also made against all things contained in the
third Declaration.

The Queen of England, and the Duchess of Chevereux went the same day to visit
the Duchess of Orleans, who s^aid in Paris by reason that she was with Child;
to whom Chever^ux said in the Queen of France her Name, That her Highness had
leave ^o stay in her Palace, or to go whither she pleased.

The Duchess was very much affected with the novelty of this Action, and
answered modestly, That she could not abandon the Duke her husband; and th^^
not being able to do otherwise, in the condition she was in, she would be
carried in Men's Arms; but she did not so, for she had express Orders from her
Husband, not to hazard her self being so near her being brought to bed, as she
was some few days after, of a Daughter.

Prince Thomaso went to visit her; and said, That he was never of opinion that
the Duke should go from Court* whereunto if he would have come, he should have
been received with all cordial Affection by their Majesty's.

But because it was not thought fit to suffer so conspicuous a Prince to remain
an Enemy to the King, Duke Anuille was sent to him to Limours on Wednesday, to
Treat of Agreement* wherein the King desiring that Mazarine might be
comprehended, nothing was done. The Duke was resolute never to be reconciled to
him, nor never to come at Court whilst ^e was at the Helm of Government; for
all things else he would have complied with the King.

A while after Secretary Tilliere, and some others, went to win him over, but
they could not prevail; at last, having acquainted Conde with what had past, to
whom he sent Camp-master Godovi^^, and being answered, That he agreed with him
in all things; it was agreed, That he should go (...) quietly at Bloyse; that
he should send for his Forces from Conde's Army, and join them to those of the
King; on Condition that they should not be employed against the Prince, to whom
professing himself a friend, he could not fail him in any whatsoever condition.
The Duke's Affairs being thus adjusted, he performed what was agreed upon, and
withdrew himself wholly from the care of the World, applying himself to live
quietly, and free from trouble. Beaufort retired to Vandosme, and all the
others that were banished went to their Country-houses, mightily grieved, and
much more mortified that Mazarine should triumph over their Miseries.

President Nesmond, and Counselor Vedau propounded the meeting of le Chambers
of Requests, to think how they might protect their companions, who were in
disgrace, saying, They would rather quit their Employments, than suffer such a
prejudice. But the major part being of another Opinion, the Chambers met not;
and Nesmond being sent for to Court, received a sharp reprehension, accompanied
with some Threats, which were afterward put in execution, for he and Vedau
were exiled, as well as the rest. Some were unwilling to go from Paris, but
were forced, for fear of greater violence; only Brousels, being old, and poor,
and wanting a Country House, went not from Paris, but kept concealed there,
fomented by his Neighbors, who did not only desire him not to go, but promised
to defend him against all Violence: He constantly affirmed, He feared nothing,
for he was guilty of nothing; that if the Court desired his Life, let them take
it, for he valued not Life now, that he had one foot in the Grave, which
commonly gave life to good Men's praises. These Expressions wrought upon the
hearts of many Men, whose minds were not yet quiet.

Many people, and in particular the Letters of Lodgings came before the King,
whereof there are an innumerable number in Paris, telling his Majesty, That
they had got nothing during his Majesty's absence, wherefore they desired his
Majesty that he would absolve them from what was due by them to their
Landlords, at our last Lady Day, and Mid-summer; Their Landlords opposed it,
affirming, That that was their Livelihood, and that their Allegations were
false; for most of those that complained had got more in the time of War, than
in Peace; Wars making all things lawful in troublesome times.

The King had respect to their Demands, and granted six Months abatement to all
that let Lodgings, and to all Artificers, who could not work, for want of
venting their Ware; but as for those who during the War, had made advantage of
their Merchandise, as Bakers, Butchers, Armorrours, and such like, he declared,
That they should pay. Orders were afterward given for the Civil Government of
the City; for to assure themselves of Paris, was to please the people; which
having succeeded happily by their means, who governed when the Court was under
Hatches, it was little less than miraculous, to see their fury cease so soon,
of themselves, and to see the scorn of a multitude mittigated, who boasted,
That they would maintain their extravagancies, though the Frondeurs were
broken, though the Parliament should be obedient, the boldest sort of people
confounded, and though his Majesty should Triumph more by Justice, and
Innocence, than by Force and Power.

Whilst Affairs went thus at Paris, extravagancies continued in Bourdeaux. The
Council of the Olmiera had amongst other things, past a Decree, That all
Castles, and Towers in places near the City should be slighted; and
particularly that the Walls of the Castle of Budose should be thrown down,
which was seated on high upon the Banks of the River Chiron, which coming from
the Sanda, falls into Garomne over against Cadilliack; this place being
environed by strong ancient Towers upon the Walls, was surprised by a Captain
of Horse, of Baltazar's Regiment, who put it and himself afterward into the
King's Service.

The Prince of Conti to favor the Counselor Spagnet, took upon him to
preserve it, to which purpose he desired the favor of the Olmiere; who met
often to advise whether or no they should gratify Conty; some were for the
yea, some for the nay; but having no mind to content Spagnet, nor yet to
displease Conty, they sought how not to satisfy the one, and yet not
discontent the other: but as it often proves that the occasion proves worse
than the effect, they unadvisedly fell to dismantle the Walls of the Castle of
Ha in Bourdeaux, and to commit diverse insolences in the City. Conty was
surprised at the Rabbles strange, and licentious darings, but finding the
peoples rage grow too hot, he fought how to assuage it, spinning that out at
length which he could not hastily procure; at last he did a little moderate
their fury, and kept the great Tower from being demolished.

The Parliament, though Frondeurs, were no less astonished at the Olmiera's
rash attempt; whilst Command being sweet, they thought it hard that their
Authority should be eclipsed by the popularity, which they formerly had
worshipped: They therefore thought it good to dissipate this new union as soon
as might be; which by unlawful pretenses went about to derogate from the
Parliaments Authority, and to strengthen themselves by the Authority of the
Princes, who to become grateful to the people, sought to satisfy them; so as
the great Frondeurs grew more incensed; and not contented with an Assembly,
wherein every Sabboth-day the Finances were treated of, and where Gurguel was
Chairman; they listened to Proposals made by more mature, and well-minded
Citizens; and agreed how to surprise the place of the said Olmiere's meeting,
which sometimes was not very well guarded. At this time Father Berteau a
Franciscan, was at Bourdeaux, sent thither by the Queen, who was often seen
with the Rector of St. Peter's, who was well affected to his Majesty's Service,
and reverenced by all Men for his singular Piety.

He showed him how great a shame it was, that the scum of People should give
Laws to so famous a City, so full of gallant Freemen; how that neither for*
Conscience nor Honor they were not to withdraw themselves from lawful
Obedience, and to submit to the yoke of Slavery: all the Councillors were
almost of the same Opinion; either for that they were weary of their past
extravagancies, which had brought them to a Precipice, or for that they envied
the increase of the Olmiest's Authority, which drew unto them the liberality of
the Princes, and Spaniards. They therefore conspired to destroy the Olmiere;
whereof the chief men were, Duratesta, Villars, Giraut, and others. Maisot, who
at first was a great Frondeur, acquainted Blanc, Mauvesine, Tarang, and Mirate
with the business; they agreed all to get as many armed Men as they could into
their Houses, wherewith to surprise the Public House. This Maisot, by his
Wives means, who was very devout, had an inckling of some things that he was to
do by the Rector of St. Peter's, and Father Bertaut: He was likewise promised to
have the Parliament Re-establish't with advantageous Conditions, if he could
reduce Bourdeaux to its former Obedience. But he, who had an unquiet spirit,
glib tongue, talking indiscreetly with every Citizen, afforded matter of a
suggestion, which was made by some of the Olmiere, (whereof Land B^^ratino,
and St. Angelo, were two) to slay the chief of that Council at a Banquet, which
was to be made them by Iurate Robert; Maisot promised them 1500. double
Pistolets, to be paid unto them by Rux, a rich Citizen, if the business were
effected.

One thousand five hundred Men were therefore placed behind the public House,
to make themselves Masters of it, and to ^ry through the Streets, Vive ^e
Parliament, and were to carry the heads of the chief Olmerists, who were to be
slain at the said invitation, upon the heads of their Pikes. But L^^de, and St.
Angelo^e accused Maisot before the Prince of Conty; who causing him to be
brought unto him by Villars, told him, He had discovered his Practices; Maisot
said, He would prove himself to be an honest Man, and went to the Hall of
Justice; where being questioned by Sault* the Vicar General, touching what he
and others had plotted against the Life of the Prince of Co^^y, to betray the
City; he answered, That for any attempt against the Prince his person, be put
it to the Vicar-General^^ Conference, whether he had ever dream^^ of any such
thing, or no; but that he did confess, That to free his Country, and the
Parliament from being oppressed by the Olmiere, he had conspired* and had listened
to Proposals which were made, of killing the chief Men of that Faction: Having
said this, he was led to the Common Hall, where fearing that the enraged
Multitude might kill him, the Prince of Conty, left the Captain of his Guard
there with diverse Soldiers. The good Citizens were sorry to see disorders
increase, so as advising daily amongst themselves what they were best to do,
they could find no better way, then to seem as if they would join with the
Olmerists, and so coming into the Common Hall, under color of Friendship, to
drive out the Ol^^rists, and then do as occasion should serve: Upon this
occasion above a hundred of the ablest Merchants met upon the Exchange, making
as if they did so to subscribe the Union; but at the instant of effecting it,
they were betrayed by their Consuls, who acquainting the Princes with the Plot,
Co^^t More was sent by them to hinder it; but he being confused amongst the
indiscreet Multitude, Conty himself got on Horseback, and by his presence made
the Merchants return to the Exchange, whether Monsieur L^net coming, h^ beg^n
to drink the Prince's Health to the people, and appeased the Tumult.

The Consuls who betrayed the Merchants, discovered that the Rector of St.
Peter's, had the chief hand in these Affairs, accusing him moreover of having
made a Sermon a little before to the people, exhorting them to put an end to
their vexations, by reconciling themselves to God, and the King, who offered
Peace. The Olmiere were so incens^d hereat, as they went one night to his House
to make him Prisoner; when they came in they found him on his knees, praying
before a Crucifix, and without any respect taking his Writings from him, they
delivered him to Villars, to carry him to prison: His Servant going into the
Street, acquainted some of the chief Inhabitants with it, who sounding to Arms,
all the neighborhood armed themselves; the Olmerist ran away, and the Rector
saved himself, and kept himself a while concealed, not slackning his good
intentions, nor forbearing to Treat sometimes with one, sometimes with another,
secretly, how to to bring his Country to Peace, and to make the Princes either
to accept of the King's Amnesty, or to go elsewhere.

Marsine returned this mean while from Peregort, (having quartered his Forces
there) as well to remedy this Novelty, as to keep the Duchess of Longueville
from going from Bourdeaux; for she falling out with the Prince her brother, was
about to withdraw, and to accept of the Amnesty. The occasion of these
distasts, were, for that Conde had suffered Guionet, M^rigny, and other of his
Favorites, to use licentious Actions, and Words, which were prejudicial to her
Authority, taking the Government of Affairs from her, and her brother Conty,
which did in right belong unto them.

In this interim the Court had sent the Marquess of Ch^^b^ret to Bourdeaux, Son
to the late General of the Burdelois, who was slain at the Action before
Libourne, whose presence, both in Memory of his Father, and for his own worth,
was thought might have been acceptable to the people: He did notwithstanding
insinuate himself into the O^^erists, and found credit with them; so as the
Prince of Cont^ growing jealous that he might make himself Head of that
Faction, to the prejudice of his Authority, though he seemed willing to depend
upon him, did under color of honoring him, offer him the Command of a Brigade
in the Country, and good WinterQuarters, that he might keep him from Bourdeaux;
and the same time framed a Complaint against him by the means of one called
Pesche, one of the chiefest of the Seditious, who m the Olmiere accused him of
Treason; Chamberet who thought himself wrongfully calumniated began to make an
uproar; whereupon Conti taking pretense that such contentions ought to be
obviated, made Chamberet retire, and the Princes, and Olmerists began to manage
their Affairs with more circumspection; their distrust of the people did
afterward so increase, as that the Princes were more intent to keep themselves
from Conspiracies, than to manage War against the King.

But to return to Catalonia, those of Barcellona desired to do somewhat which
might facilitate their desired succor; wherefore they resolved to fall upon
the Fort Rey, which the Spaniards had built upon Mongeuick. Don Iusippe di
Pinos^ was destined hereunto, who put himself in order presently; and taking
400 Commanded Foot along with him, and 100 Horse, went privately out on the
16th of July by night, and undiscovered by the Enemy, entered the Mountain, from
whence joining with Cavalier Austrin, and Monsieur Varron, he advanced, having
forced the Palisadoes, past the Di^ch, and made so gallant an Assault, as the
Spaniards, not able to resist the French, they were forced to yield; at the
noise whereof the Horse which were quartered at Sans beat to Arms, and
squadronized themselves near the Fort St. Francis: The Catalonians, who were
marched out with 2000 Musketeers, and 600 Horse, made their Foot retreat to
Fort Mong^uick, and their Horse into the Trenches; which the Spaniards
observing, and arguing some weakness, or stratagem by this sudden Retreat, they
advanced to from whence the Frenchmen were gone; whereby dividing the Fort from
the City, they fiercely assaulted it, which Cavalier Austrin defended
valiantly, and was slain there; Seignior Iayot succeeded him, defending himself
no less valiantly, repulst the Enemies second Assault, and forced them to
retreat with some loss: But they kept their first Station still, where whilst
they should keep, they were likelier to take it by Famine, than Force, for they
within had but one days Victuals.

Marshall della Motta being very sorry to hear that his men were retreated
from their Station, before he had provided necessaries for them; and there
being no other way to save it but by opening the Pass, and conveying in
Victuals, he resolved to do it himself: And though he was not yet well healed
of his wound, yet he caused himself to be carried in a Chair to Fort Monge^^^;
and sent away twenty Soldiers, with each of them a sack of Biscuit on their
backs, that they might relieve it on the side next the Sea, whilst Marquess
Marcelly should endeavor to get in on the other side with 500 Horse. But the
Spaniards being advertised of all things by such Catalonians as were their
friends, they doubled their Guard where Marcelly was to pass, and placed a good
Body of Foot on the other side of the Mountain, to keep those from entering on
the other side, who carried the Biscuit; the Marshall Commanded Captain
Leonardo, a Catalonian, to see whether he could get in with 40 Horse, with each
of them a sack of Biscot en croupe: But the Fort having neither bread nor
water, Capitulated before he came, to surrender upon good Warlike Conditions,
which were not observed afterward. For some Spaniards giving out that there
was a Mine within the Fort which was to play, the Horse fell upon these poor
people, and not listening to any thing, ^lew some of them, took some Prisoners,
whilst but a few escaped by those craggy Mountains. When that was heard at
Barcellon^, it put them all in fear, as well for the extravagancie of the News,
as for the moan which was made by the Parents of the dead; the loss was great,
which had it been foreseen, and had the Fort been Victuall'd, the Passes might
have been kept open, and the City maintained. But were it either negligence or
treachery in the Catalonians, who as it was known afterward, held ^ntelligence
with the Spaniards, the Error was unexcusable, for it ruined all the rest.

Cervera was in no less danger thon Bellaguer had been; but the Ammunition and
Artillery of the French being in that Town, Marquess St. Andrea went thither,
and fortunately preserved it: But because it was impossible to preserve the
Fort St. Peter in his absence, he by Order from the Marshall caused it to be
burnt, and went himself to Villa Franca, where he could not tarry for want of
Bread.

The General resolved again to make a general Assault upon the Spanish Camp; he
acquainted St. Andrea with it, that he might draw near the Line; in order
hereunto St. Andrea came on the 9th of August to Pal^ve not far from the
Enemies Camp; but finding neither Victuals, nor any thing that was promised
him, fit to make an Assault, after he had tarried there three weeks, he
undertook to Assault la Montagna St. Ierolino, being recruited with 1500 armed
Country people, and 400 Pioneers. He appointe^ to do it by night, on the 4th of
September; but did not do it: For the Gui^^^ had not brought his men to the
place appointed in a fit time; so it was deferred: and it was well it was so,
for those of the City had not received the Signs of his arrival. The next day
he gave out Orders to all in Writing, and his Forces marched that night toward
St. Reale, to fall upon the Spanish Trenches on that side: But the Horse that
were led on by Monsieur d^ Alleigre loitered so long, as the last Squadrons
came not thither till it was day; when those that were upon the Guard at St.
Reale hearing the noise, gave an Alarm: St Andrea finding the day draw near,
made the Assault; and his Foot falling headlong on, won the Line near a little
fortified House, where the Spaniards repulst the French. Some silly People
would have taken the Fort that was near the House, but were forced to retreat.

The French kept the Line they had taken till it was day, thinking that those
of Barcellona should have come out according to Agreement; which they did not
till the Sun was up: when the Spaniards finding there was no danger of losing
the Fort, fell upon those that were come out of the City* and beat them back to
the Town Gates, with the loss of some Officers* and diverse Soldiers; so St.
Andrea was forced to return to his former Quarters.

Cavallier della Ferriera, a well-experienced Seaman, was already gone with his
Ships, without attempting to relieve the City, nor would he tarry three days
till the Assault might be given; so as the Spaniards might easily land some
Soldiers out of their Ships, and use them, which they to their advantage did.

The Court of France was no less troubled with the keeping of Cassalle in
Monferrat, a Place of greater importance, than of Barcellon^; the Spaniards who
know how to make use of favorable conjunctures, prepared at the same time to
fall upon that place; which wanted Money* Victuals, and Commanders in Chief. The
King writ to Marshall de la Motte, to send St. Andrea's Forces presently to
Piemonte, not having then conveniencie to provide for it elsewhere, but so as
he might leave Barcellona in a posture not to be lost for some time: toward
the relief whereof the same Ferriere had 15000. double Pistols given him,
wherewith he was to Rigg out Twelve Frigates, whereby to bring all things
necessary to the besieged City, whereinto little Barks entered ever and anon
with some Victuals, from the neighboring Coasts.

This order for marching into Piemonte, was kept concealed from the
superintendent Alligre; but being smelt out by the Officers, they thought it
was done to cosen them; wherefore they together with the Commander of the
Cavalry desired that they might come out of those miseries, which were grown
insupportable in Catalonia, threatening to do it themselves, if it were denied
them. Monsieur Alligre, (not the aforesaid superintendent, but another of the
same name) who led the Horse in their March toward Gariga, treated hereof with
St. Andrea, and protested together with the Officers, that they would tarry in
Catalonia no longer then the 15 th of September, relying upon Promises which
had been made them, and they spoke as if they were jealous that this St. Andrea
held Intelligence with La Motte, and cared not though they should all perish,
who were now reduced to 500. Horse, and 200. Foot.

They therefore came to Gariga, where the Horse-Officers had often Meetings
with the Foot, to Treat how they might be gone without Andrea's knowledge; who
being therefore informed by the Horse-Captains of Boisack's and Rivalet's
Regiments, sent for the Commander Ferra, and for a Commander of ^^ince Maurice
of Savoy, who were his particular Friends, and Confidents, and desired them to
keep their Soldiers obedient, and those of Boisack, and the others of his own
Regiment, which were more in number, and more considerable: These promised to
do their best, but went from their word the next Morning, saying, They could
not force the wills of the other Officers, and Soldiers, who were
extraordinarily incensed. Andrea went to Alligre, and desired him to keep his
Forces from departing till the 15 th of that Month, as they had promised, that
he might give notice thereof to La Motte, who was in Barcellona; who with much
a^o, said, He would.

St. Andrea returned to his Quarters, and whilst he was about to go to Gironne
to Treat with the superintendents d' Alleigre and Pinose how the Forces might
be diverted from their Resolution, Alleigre with diverse other Officers came in
have to him, to acquaint him, that the Soldiers would not be quieted, but went
from their Word: the General made them contented to tarry three days; and he
went himself to a certain Castle to speak with Pinose; by whose Approbation he
sent Monsr. Clerg, superintendent of the Victuals, to receive the King's
original Letters from superintendent Aleigre, that he might show them to the
Soldiery, and convince them that the Orders were conditional, and not such as
they imagined: He carried a Commissioner of Horse, and another of Foot, to be
Eyewitnesses that he did not this to deceive them, but that things might go
well.

The Marquess gave out, that it would be two days before he would return, but
he dispatched his business so as he returned the same night; which made the
Soulders believe he meant to stop them, wherefore about midnight they went
toward Gironne; St. Andrea being mightily discontented hereat, went presently
to Gironne, carrying his Equippage with him, because he knew not where to leave
it safe. The Inhabitants hearing that the Soldiers had revolted, stopped him in
the City, saying, That he being a Hugonote, it might be he held some
Intelligence contrary to the King's Service. He was much troubled hereat, not
so much that he was crossed in applying remedies to this evil, as that he was
branded with a Title that the Hughenots had no ways deserved; for during all
these Troubles, none had been more obedient and faithful to the King than they.
The Marquess supposing that Aleigre had been the occasion of all this Disorder,
sent an Order to him in Writing, to discharge him from meddling any more in
Command, and to forbid the Officers to obey him.

But since being stopped in Girone, he could not by his presence bring such
Remedies as were necessary to stop an incensed and jealous People, and fearing
least the Soldiers might commit some Insolences in their march to the Country
people, the revenge whereof might fall upon him, he the next night slipped down
the Wall, and went away, leaving his Baggage, and diverse Officers in the City,
and marched toward his men, who were advanced three Leag^es; he found his own
Regiment not far off, which tarried for him. From whence he sent a Trumpet to
Girone, complaining of their usage, and demanding his Baggage, and the freedom
of his Officers, and Servants, or else he would be revenged. The Baggage was
presently restored; they excused what they had done, and asked pardon for it.

The News of this sudden and unexpected Revolt of the Forces in Catolonia,
which happened when the Court was in the greatest disorder, did not only
discompose the Besieged Barcellonians, but all other Places that were for the
King; and did much afflict the Court, and finding the loss of that Place
irrepairable, and therewith the like of the whole Province; the preservation
whereof had cost France so much Gold, and weakened the best Forces of her
Armies; but to take some order for this, the King desired Marquess Plessis
Belliere, Lieutenant General of St. Onge, to set aside all other things, and
march with some of his Forces presently into Guienne, and join with Harcourt,
and go from thence to relieve Barcellona, unless the Count should like better
to go thither himself, and leave the Marquess to Command the Forces in Guienne.

As soon as he had received this Order, he went to Rochel, to take his leave of
the Duke of Vendosme, who was come thither a little before with his Fleet; and
having acquainted him with what Orders he had received, the Duke pressed him much
to stay, till an Express should return whom he had sent to Court. But the
Marquess being unwilling to be put to give an Account of any bad Accident which
might happen by his delay, took his leave of the Duke, and marched thitherward.
And hearing by the way that Harcourt was gone from Guienne, he sent to Court to
know in this case what he should do; and the mean while advanced to Aubeterre,
the Master whereof had a little before turned to the Prince's Party. Being come
near to Perigorde, he heard that Marsin was come to oppose him with all his
Forces, to stop his passage, and to fight him. The Marquess, though he were
inferior to the Enemy in Horse, would not give back, but resolved to meet him,
and give him Battle: He quartered near a place called La Valette, from whence
he marched to Rochbeaucourt, where he foorded the River, and prepared to fight;
which as soon as Marsin heard, he presently retreated to Libourne, leaving the
whole Country free for the King's Forces, except some Towns and Castles
whereinto he had put Garrisons to incommodate the Enemy in his march.

Brantosme, a little City well fortified with strong old Walls, seated upon the
Drogne, and which as yet had received no Garrison, but pretended Neutrality,
sent Commissioners to the Marquess, desiring him that he would permit her to
remain Neuter still; but he answered, He came not to capitulate with the Kin'gs
Subjects; that he would treat them as such if they would obey, otherwise he
knew what he had to do: Whereupon they sent to present him with the Keys of the
Gates. So on the 18th of September he past the River Lisle without obstacle,
under the Castle Bories, which yielded as he past by, as did also L^rdemesia,
though it were Garrisoned by the Prince's men; and meeting here with Marquess
Saufbeufe, Lieutenant General of Guienne, and with Monsieur Crequi, with 400
Horse, he foorded over the Drogona; he then called Count Illebone, Marquess
Saufbeuf, and the other Officers of the Guienne Army to Council, Whom he
acquainted with what Orders he had received, and desired part of their Forces:
They excused themselves, saying, They were not sent to him* but to Harcourt;
That the Regiments, which were to go, were not specified; nay* that his Orders
were to take only such as had their Winter Quarters paid, whereof they had
received little or none, and that they had received no other Orders from his
Majesty since Harcourt's departure; wherefore he might do well to send to Court
for more precise Oorders; as was forthwith done: That moreover he should wish
Monsieur Tracy, in Mont Alban to provide Monyes to pay the Soldiers in
Catalonia; and that in the interim he would go about to reduce all those Towns
to their Obedience, which were in these convultions revolted.

Which things being agreed upon, Plessis Belliere, marched on the 24th of
September to Beaumont, which had refused to receive in Marquess Saufbeuf, which
he took; from thence he sent to another little City (which Saufbeuf had
besieged three or four days) wishing the Inhabitants to yield, and to drive out
the Prince's Garrison, which they prepared to do: But a Captain who commanded
there, withdrew with 50 Foot into the Belfrey, saying, That he and all his
would die there, rather than yield: Wherefore they blew it up, burying all that
were in it in the rubbidge, except the Captain, who though he were covered six
foot deep with rubbidge, was taken out alive and seven other Soldiers.

This Example terrified most of the Towns which were in Rebellion, so as one
after another, they all swore Allegiance.

Yet St. Pastore a little ungarrison'd-Town stood out, which made Plessis
Belliere, send Cavalier Crequi thither, with part of his Horse to reduce it;
but were it either that those Townsmen had dealt hardly with the King's
Soldiers when they retreated from the Siege of Villa Nova Agenois, or that
they themselves had indammag'd the Neighboring parts, they refused all offers,
kept them out, threatening to shoot if they came nearer. The next morning
Plessis Belliere went thither himself with 400 Foot, 200 Horse, and two small
Guns. He used fair means first, but in vain; after three or four shot of the
Artillery, some of the affrighted Inhabitants came forth to demand mercy,
offering to open the Gates; but as they re-entred the City, one of the Heads of
the People with some others, made opposition, and began to shoot at the King's
men; which obliged the General to dig a Mine under a Tower, whereat the
Defendants being terrified, their Courage failed, and they called for mercy,
which they obtained; only the Chief of the Seditious was hanged.

The same day that Plessis Belliere went to St. Pastor, Count Ilabone, and
Marquess Saufbeufe went with some Horse to Lauson, to know if the Master of the
Place had received a Garrison of the Princes; at which time Monsieur
Monpullion, one of the contrary Party, was come thither with a considerable
Body of Horse besides the Garrison, who hearing of the coming of the King's
men, fell upon them at unawares, and forced them to retreat.

This News coming to Plessis Belliere just as he parted from St. Pastor,
forced him to make use in his passage of Castle Montbahus, situate upon a rise
of some consideration, whereinto those of the neighboring part had removed all
their movables; this Castle belonged to the aforesaid Count Lauson; who
hearing what was past, made Plessis Belliere acquainted with the wrongs which
he had received by what had befaln his Town; saying, That he was the King's
faithful Servant; and that the fear of Marquess Saufbeufe, who was his
particular Enemy, had forced him to receive in the Prince's Garrison; to
witness the which, he offered to put out the said Garrison; and in case the
Commander thereof should refuse, he offerr'd to open him a Gate, provided that
he would protect him from Saufbeuf's threats; and he did really drive out the
Garrison within two days, and the General graciously put him in possession of
his Castle.

All the Troops marched from thence to St. Basil near Marmande, wherein were the
Regiments of Conti and Galapian, who had been worthily to be praised, had they
done that for their King, which they did against his Service; for they defended
themselves stoutly, and had never yielded had not necessity forced them, after
having sustained the Siege twelve days; this place being taken, the King^s men
past over the River, and marched toward Montalban, where the Soldiers were to
receive their Pay, and then to march for Catalonia.

This was what was done in Guienne after Harcourt's Retreat, and whilst
Barcellona was daily more and more straightened, and re-iterated her desires of
succor, whereof she needed the effects more than the hopes, which were
continually given her: But Force wanting through the iniquity of the time,
which put all in confusion, all things languished. Wherefore the Spaniards, who
knew all this, did not only continue this famous Siege, but employed themselves
in the taking of diverse Towns which the French had in that Principallity. They
took all the Towns which stand along the Sea, from Palamose to Barcellona,
thereby bereaving the besieged City of that small relief which was brought from
thence by night in little Boats, as has been said.

When it was known in Barcellona that the Court had given order that the
Guienne Army should march into Catalonia, it was thought fit by a Council of
War, that Don Iuseppe Marguerit, with diverse other Catalonians should go into
Rosiglion, where by their valor and knowledge of the Country, they might
^acilite the relief from France: In order whereunto, he went on the Second of
October in a Feluca out of the Town, and past with no little danger through the
Spanish Fleet by night, and came to Begur near Palamose, from thence he went to
Armentera, to find out Marquess della Farai Governor of Roses, and Baron d'
Ales, Commander of the Cavalery, to confer touching the Victualling Roses,
which was in great need thereof. From whence he went to Girona, whither
Marquess Mortara was come, where he tarried three days, to convey some Victuals
into Roses, as he did, and then went with Baron d' Ailes to Perpignian,
thinking to have found Plessis Belliere there, that they might jointly endeavor
to relieve the afflicted Country. But he was quite discouraged when he found he
was not there, nor heard no news of his coming yet a while: yet in this his
coming thither was good; for he discovered that Thomaso Bagnol, Governor of
Rosiglion, under color of besieging his Enemy Doctor Sagara in Sardinnia, had
raised a Militia in that Country, intending to betray the French, and to
surprise Perpignan.

When Marguerit was gone from Girona, Marquess Mortara came thither and took it
without much opposition, as also all the other Castles and Towns thereabouts;
wherefore Barcellona having no hope of relief, and compelled by Famine,
Marquess della Motta, by consent of the Governors, and of all the Commanders,
on the Eleventh of October agreed with Don John of Austria, upon these
Articles, which we will here recite; since it is a City of such importance; and
in the loss whereof so many other consequences did concur, as for what may
hereafter happen, it will not be displea^ing to relate upon what Conditions it
returned to the obedience of its first Master.

His Highness agreed, That the Marshall de la Motte, Lieutenant General to the
most Christian King, together with all the Lieutenant-Generals,
Camp-Mareschals, Officers and Soldiers, and all other Persons of whatsoever
Nation, Quality, or Condition, who would willingly follow the said Garrison,
might march out unmolested with their Arms and Baggage; to wit, the Foot with
Drums beating, Colors flying, Bullets in Mouth, Match lighted at both ends,
with six Pieces of Artillery, three great ones, and three little ones, such as
belonged to the King of France, with three thousand weight of Powder, three
thousand weight of Lead, four thousand weight of Match; and that the Soldiers
of whatsoever Nation that had gone from one side to another, might not be
molested: As for the Horse, They were to march out with Trumpets sounding,
Colors displayed, Arms and Baggage, Warlike Ammunition, with all Horses and
Mules that had been taken, without it were such as had been taken 24 hours
before the Capitulations should be subscribed.

That all Persons of whatsoever Birth, Quality, or Condition, as well
Ecclesiastical as Secular might be permitted to go out with the same Equipage;
journeying with all Movables, Goods, and Baggage, without molestation, nor
that any one should pretend to recover any of the said Movables,
Confiscations, or things taken, till within 24 hours of subscribing these
Articles; and that such as could not carry their Goods or Movables along with
them, might leave them to be sold by whom they pleased within six months, and
have a Pasport for conveying the moneys safely into France, or elsewhere, where
the owners should be; and also that they might call in any Moneys or Debts that
they had in Banck at Barcellona, or in any other place within six Months space.
That the Marshall la Motta should cause it to be proclaimed 24 hours before he
marched out, that none should carry out any Movables which were not his own,
or did not belong to some of the Company; and that if any fraud should be found
herein, they might be recovered within the aforesaid six Months. That all the
Inhabitants of Catalonia of what Quality or Condition, that would retire into
France, might enjoy the same Conditions with those of Barcellona.

That all Prisoners of all sides which were taken after the War began in
Catalonia, should be s^t free without Ransom, to wit, those that were in
Catalonia, Rossiglion, or Cordona

That his Higness should agree, That any French Barks, or those of any other
Nation that were in the Haven, or Wharf of Barcellona, might sail out when
their Masters should please, and go into France uninjured: But on condition
that they should not carry away any Artillery or any Warlike Ammunition, save
such as abovesaid: That the French and those of other Nations should go out by
St. Anthonies-Gate; that they should go the first day to St. Fileau, the second
to Martereile, the third to Pieere, where they should tarry one day; the fifth
to Igolaude, the sixth to Capoux, the seventh to Calat, the eighth to
Linalinge, the ninth to Pont, where they staid one day; the eleventh to Folk,
Monmagaltre, and Co^illy, the twelfth to Coques, the thirteenth to Pouplo, the
fourteenth to Sot, the fifteenth to Libournes, the sixteenth to Esteris, where
they might tarry one day; the eighteenth to Lover, the nineteenth they were to
pass over, Sailack, or Piere Blanca, and to go into France: That the Commander
of these Troops might make his Marches longer or shorter as he pleased: That he
should have a Convey of an 100. Horse, to bring them to the Bay of France; and
that his Highness should furnish both Horse and Foot with Victuals and
necessary Moneys for their Voyage.

That no Officer, nor Soldier might be detained for Debt; Carriages, Mules,
and Horses might be provided for the Cannon, Baggage, Ammunition; for such as
were Sick or Wounded; and that the Sick, or Wounded that should be left behind
in Catalonia, should be sent into France when they were well.

That Marshall de la Motta, the Lieutenant Generals, Camp-Master, and
aforesaid others, going out of Barcellona with their Arms, Ammunition, and
Baggage by Port St. Anthony, the Spanish Army should be put into Battalia, on
the side of the Gate Lanye, and that his Highness should have Notice of this,
the night before; that the Hostages for performance of public Faith, should be
sent to Roses, and delivered to the Governor, or to him who should Command in
his absence, who should keep them, till he should be assured by Letter from the
Commander of the Garrison in Barcellona, that all the Forces were arrived in
France; and that the Governor of Roses should acquaint the Governor of the
said Garrison when the said Hostages should be come; which were to be Don Carlo
d'Aragon, one Horse Captain, and two Captains of Foot.

That the Hostages, when these Articles should be performed, should be sent
into France by the Rode-way that leads to Rosillion, with a Pasport and Guide;
as also all Prisoners that were in the power of the King of Spain in Catalonia,
their Bread, and Tappe being paid for by the King of Spain till they should
come into France; and as for the Garrison of the Castle, and City of Cardona,
it should join with that of Barcellona, at Callis.

That as soon as these Articles were subscribed, the Soldiers of the Garrison
should be furnished with Bread for as long as they should tarry in the City;
and that they should March out on the Twelfth of October; and that though
within that time the Town should be Victuall'd either by Sea or Land, the
Articles should notwithstanding be observed, unless it were a Royal Succor, or
the quantity of 10000. Quarters of Corn.

That no Warlike Ammunition should be taken from the Magazines: That Marshall
de la Motta should cause all the Artillery that were in the aforesaid places,
as also those that were in Montegivick, or elsewhere, belonging to the
Catholic King, to be delivered unto Don Joyan Pallavesino, General of the
Spanish Artillery.

That his Higness, and Marshall de la Motta, should promise to observe and
keep all these Articles, without any reservation.

Affairs being thus adjusted, about 2700. French and Swisser's Foot, all choice
and veteran Soldiers, and 800. Horse, with 700. Catalonian Foot, Marched out of
Barcellona the next day after Dinner, and about 200. Officers, and Volunteers
of that City, and Principallity; they went by the way appointed, toward the
Perineans, to go for Rosillion, which they did, observing their Articles
punctually.

The Crown of France was very sensible of the loss of this City, which was
followed by many other Towns, and almost by that whole Principallity, in the
preservation whereof so much Treasure, and so many People had been lost.

The taking of Barcellona filled the Spaniards with vast pretenses, and made
them aspire after greater things. By this loss the French were the more incited
to revenge, and to raise greater Forces to maintain the punctillio of Honor.

The taking of Barcellona was at first sight a sweet bit to the Spaniards, but
of bitter digestion; for they did not only consume the flower of their Malitia
in so long a Siege, but spent so immense a some of Money, as the gain might be
rather held destructive, than advantageous; for the Catalonians being naturally
bitter Enemies to the Castelians, the latter were obliged to keep their Armies
entire, to guard themselves rather against their own Subjects, than against
their Enemies; and as Catalonia was judged by many, to be one of the worst
acquisitions that ever the French made, so was the recovery thereof ascribed by
many to the ruin of Spain.

Whilst Affairs past thus in Catalonia, Plessis Belliere was come to Again,
whither Monsieur Trassy came to speak with him, and promised to see the Forces
paid that were designed for Catalonia according to the Court^ intention; and
soon after Orders being brought by Monsr. Nevile, one of the King's Gentlemen,
who came thither on the 5th of November, those that were to March were
immediately divided from the rest; and the Marquess marched with those that were
designed for Catalonia, who had part of the Pay that was due, paid upon the
place, and were promised the rest at their coming to Mont Alban.

There was much ado to make them resolve upon this Voyage; the Captains and
Officers met together, and writ things of dangerous consequence to the
Generals; but at last Cavallier Crequi, and Marquess Bellefons, who were to be
Field-Mareschals of this Army, having assembled the Officers, spoke so fairly
to them, as that they quieted them, and persuaded them to follow them
cheerfully, so as they might be paid, as they were promised, before they should
go from Mas Verdune, whither they marched all, save the Regiments of
Champagnia, and Lorrain, who obstinately said, They would rather be cut i^
pieces, than March.

That of Champania, came notwithstanding some few days after, and joined with
the rest at Mas Verdune; from whence it was afterward sent for back by the
Duke of Candale, who commanded the Forces of Guien, when these were gone.

These Soldiers staid at Mas Verdune eight or ten days, expecting Pay; but
for all the diligence that could be used, they could not be wholly paid off, for
want of Moneys; which made the Soldiers begin again to murmur; yet the
Commanders used such efficatious Speeches to them, as they resolved to foord
over the River at Mas Verdune on the 20th of November.

During their abode here, Plessis Belliere, that he might loose no time, went
with Marquess St. Luke, to Beaumonte, and Grenade, which till then held for the
Princes; he made them demolish their Fortifications, turn over a new Leaf, and
turned out some of the most Seditious: So continuing his March he went to
Carcasoun, and taking order for refraining the Soldiers Licentiousness, he
came on the first of October, to Segean.

This little Body of an Army, composed of many several Regiments, made about
1200. Horse, and 3000. Foot; at Segean he met with Mercure's Regiment, which
was sent thither to incommodate Leucara, and to hinder the In-rodes of St.
Aunais, which was revolted over to the Princes: the very day that he came
thither, he heard that the Marshall de la Motta was to come thither, having
made an Agreement with St. Aunais; who was much confounded at the News of the
arrival of these Forces. The Marquess went to meet the Marshall, and after
some discourse upon the present Affairs, he went toward the waters of Belerue,
for Cure of the Wound which he received in Catalonia; and advised the Marquess
to go to Constans, and drive the Enemy from thence, and to possess himself of
all the Towns, and Castles which the Spaniards held there; which Plessis
Belliere did punctually observe, though his intention was to enter Lampourdan,
and relieve Roses which wanted Men, and Victuals.

The Army entered into Constans; Thomas Bagnole, a Rebel commanded some
Soldiers there for the King of Spain, as he had formerly done for the King of
France; he seemed as if he would dispute the Pass at Terne; but instead of
doing so, he left his Men in Garrison in Corbera, Rhodes, Ria, Lock, and in
other places advantagiously seated, and with much ado, saved himself on foot
through the Mountains, leading his Horse in his hand.

The French presently besieged Rhodes, which held out for four or five days,
for the Spaniards did desperately defend it; and being brought to extremity,
and not able to get such Articles as they desired, five or six of their chief
Commanders saved themselves over the Wall by night, and got to the Mountain:
They furiously assaulted the Town, stormed, and sacked it; the Garrison which
was 300 natural Spaniards, and 50. Horse, got into the Castle, that they might
come to some composition; but wanting all conveniences, they yielded upon
Discretion, and were all made Prisoners of War. Those of Boule, and other
neighboring places, ran rudely in to plunder; and notwithstanding all the
French Commanders could do, it was impossible for them, to keep them from
firing the Town, when the Forces were gone, so great was their hatred thereunto.

The Army went from hence to Prades, and Bagnolle, withdrew to Villa Franca;
Corbera, Ria, and Iock were taken, and all that little Country was reduced to
the King of France his obedience.

Plessis Belliere, and Bellefons went to discover Villa Franca; to do which,
they were forced to grapple hard with those craggy Mountains two or three
days; they went with 250. Horse, and 300. Musketeers, by continual narrow and
hard ways, by which no Horse was ever known to go; the pitiful Bagnolians
thought to dispute the Pass in several places, but were ever put to the worst
by the French: Their last Squadron was gathered by Bagnols in Oletta,
consisting of about 400; they were led on by one Gras, a man of much fame
amongst them; the taking of this place would certainly have been very hard, had
they not bargained, and had not their Commander been slain at the first firing;
the French Foot advanced courageously, the Enemy were afraid, and were chased
down the Mountain, at the bottom whereof they thought notwithstanding to get
into Oletta; but the French got thither so soon, as they had not time to get
into Bagnols; instead, of relieving them, as he had promised, was the first
that went away with some Foot. The French staid two days at Oletta, not
hearing any News of the Enemy; all those of the neighboring Villages, came in
to render Obedience, and to swear Fealty to France. Plessis visited Castle
Niers, famous for what had been formerly done there; this Castle belonged to
Bagnols, who had abandoned it; after this having found out the Avenues to Villa
Franca, he returned to from whence he was come.

He could not assault this place at this season, which was so cold and rainy,
that he would have lost more than half his Army; besides, there were many
Soldiers in the Town, with sufficient Provisions to defend it; nor could
Cannon be brought thither; he therefore returned to Prades, from whence he sent
account of all things to la Motta, who having taken his leave from the King,
was already gone from Bellerue.

Cavallier Crequi was this mean while advanced with a great party of Horse, to
convey 500. Foot into Roses, which he luckily did, though the Enemy had built
some Forts about it; after which the King's Forces being still more
incommodated for want of Victuals in the Country of Constans; and nothing else
being to be done, by reason of the bitterness of the Weather, without apparent
danger of wasting all the Army to no purpose, Plessis Belliere, with the
consent of all the Field Marshals, resolved to Quarter his Soldiers that
Winter in Languedock; where he had order to tarry, together with Marquess
Bellefons, to watch over the preservation of Roses, and the other Towns upon
that Frontier; and his abode there, was to purpose; for hearing that there was
a Bark laded with Corn, belonging to some Merchants which lay at Agde, he used
means by the Bishop of that City, and by his own Credit, to convey the Bark of
Corn into Roses; which afforded the Garrison means to wait for the relief of
Men and Moneys, which was sent them a while after from Provence, to preserve it
from being betrayed by one Ganot, as shall be said in its proper place.

But because the loss of Cassalle, a place maintained so many years by the
Crown of France, at the expense of so much Money, and loss of so many men, was
this year added to the other misfortunes of France, we will resume those
Affairs a little higher, that they may be the better known.

It is already sufficiently known why Charles the First, Duke of Mantua, put
Cassalle into the King of France his hands; and it is also known, That the
Mantuans not being well pleased with the French-mens too high carriage of
themselves, made them bear with what was not answerable to their expectation.
The business went on therefore without any notice-taking, till by reason of
Civil Wars, that Crown began to be less fit for Foreign Affairs, the Spaniards
making use of the same Conjunctures, made great progress in Flanders,
Catalonia, and in Italy, whereby they became dreaded. Wherefore Duke Charles
the Second of Mantua, found himself bound to have a care of preserving that
place which he had recommended to the Protection of France.

Affairs standing thus in the year 1651, the King of France Commanded Count
Argenson to go immediately as Ambassador from him to Venice; in order whereunto
Argenson took his Journey in the beginning of May; but soon after his Arrival
at Venice he died of a Fever.

His Son succeeded him in his Embassy in November, and in his passage
negotiated in Piemont, Parma, and Mantua; but as soon as he had had public
Audience, he returned to Mantua to manage the Agreement between that Family and
Savoy.

It is long since known, that the Treaty at Chierasco, was the chiefest cause
of discord between these two Princes; Savoy did always demand the performance
thereof, which Mantua always opposed: Yet this Treaty was confirmed by many
other Treaties which were had ^fterwards; and is much strengthened by the last
Treaty which was held at Munster.

The Emperor, and King of France are bound to maintain it by Arms; so as Mantua
c^n hardly withdraw himself out of it, yet till now; by reason of his near
Alliance with Caesar, he has staved off the blow, and kept Savoy out of
possession, which he continually pressed for: At first the Mantuan Agents said,
the Emperor could not give it, because the Christian King had not done what he
was by the same Treaty obliged to do, to wit, he had not paid the Money which
was promised on the behalf of Savoy.

This made it be believed that Duke Charles would end the business; and to this
purpose Argenson had order, That as soon as he should be come to Venice, that
he should go and let Mantua know, that France was ready to make payment, so as
he would yield to Savoy's pretended Investure: The Ambassador performed his
Order about the end of the year 1651, but he found Mantua to be otherwise
minded than he was said to be in the French Court.

The Dukes Answer was, That the refusal which he made at the Emperor's Court,
was not to the end that they imagined; but that he was resolved never to yield
to the Treaty of Chierasco, till he had been righted for the great wrong which
had been done him; yet he would advise with his Council how to give his Majesty
all possible satisfaction. Not long after Marquess Francisco Rolando della Val
Monferino, the Dukes Chief Minister of State, went to acquaint the Ambassador
with the Dukes resolution; which was, That his Highness did not oppose the
desired In^^stiture so much for the non-payment of the Moneys due to him by the
Treaty of Chierasco; as for the prejudice he should receive in the Execution
thereof, that he had oft-times made his Reasons known, and made his
Protestations at the Meeting at Munster: And this was all the Ambassador could
get concerning this. The Mantuans offered many things to find some way to an
Agreement, but never could hit upon any; for it was of too great consequence to
part from the Treaty of Chierasco, whereof no one point was to be altered.

The Ambassador was contented to carry the Copy of the Orders, and the Proxy
which the Duke had sent to his Agent at Vienna, to oppose the business which
was in hand. Argenson was not only sent for the abovesaid business, but for
another thing which did much trouble the Court of France; which was, to keep
Cassalle from falling into the Spaniards hands, promising to restore it to the
Duke upon some Conditions, viz. To remove all the French out of it, to put a
Garrison of Swizzers into it, which w^^e to take an Oath to the King, and to
the Duke; That his Majesty should pay half the Garrison, the Duke a fourth
part, and that they should endeavor to engage the other Princes of Italy for
the rest, to the end that they might all have a share in the preservation of
that place, which was of such importance for the Common Liberty. All these
Proposals were agreed upon, and they would have been fully effected, had it not
been for the Disorders which happened in France.

The Ambassador being returned from Mantua, desired the Commonwealth to
contribute to the perfecting of the business, and received great demonstrations
of good will toward the quite of Italy. But withal, how impossible it was for
them to mind the preservation of other men's Estates, she being to defend her
self without any assistance from others, against so potent an Enemy as the
Turk: Wherefore the French not being able to rely upon the Venetians, Affairs
were suspended. Argenson writ to the Court, that they must begin some new
Treaty to put the place into the Duke's hands, to keep the Spaniard from
besieging it. But the King's Council found it not necessary to do so; and their
home Disorders made them not mind foreign Interests.

This mean while the French Forces parted from Piemont, as has been said, with
Marquess St. Andrea Monbran, which was followed with the loss of Trino, and
Cressentino, which facilitated the like of Cassalle. The Duke of Mantua did
again and again desire the King of France that he would put on some resolution
for the maintenance and preservation of that place, which wanted Victuals, Men,
and Commanders, and in such a condition, as though the Spaniards should want
sufficient Forces for such an Enterprise, they might notwithstanding think upon
it now, that France was so weak. Wherefore he cunningly held the Spaniards in
hand, that he might afford the French time to accommodate their Home-Affairs,
and to relieve Cassalle, or to restore it handsomely.

He made his desires first known by Girolimo Pirandi, a Gentleman of
Montferrat, his Agent in France, when the Court was at St. Germains; where the
Cardinal weighing the importance of the business, caused presently 15000
Doubloones be assigned over, to the end that Victuals being thereby provided,
and the Militia paid, the City might not need fear the Enemies attempts; but
through the misery of those times, the Payments were so neglected, and
diverted, as Cassalle languished still more, and the Spaniards were daily more
encouraged: Pirandi did therefore reiterate the same desires, to whom the Duke
sent express Messengers when the Court was at Pontois; where the Cardinal
caused another Assignment be made, besides the first of* 8000 double Pistols,
and another in Compeigny of 10000. But of all these three Sums there was much
ado to get 2000. For the Cardinal's Persecutions being now at the height, and
he ready to go out of the Kingdom, they were rather desirous to cross his
Orders, and to make his Government appear ill, than to think of the Kingdoms
concernments.

Duke Charles found where the shoe wrung him, and therefore thought fit to
provide for his own Affairs; and some Proposals of Agreement being made between
him and the King of Spain when he accompanied his Sister into Germany, which
his Highness had refused, he wrought it so with his Aunt the Dowager Empress,
and with the now Regent, his Sister, as that the Emperor held the Spaniards so
in hand, as that either the French might recruit Cassalle, or else that they
might resolve to put it into his Highness hands, who was the lawful Master
thereof.

The Spaniards listened willingly hereunto, and promoted the Treaty with the
Duke of Mantua, by the interposition of Prince Bozzolo; and of Father Don
Augustine Guazzone Sommasco.

By reason of this backwardness which appeared in the Duke, Argenson received
Order to return again to Mantua, to discover the Duke's real intententions, and
once more to offer at effecting the Treaty of Chierasco. The Duke kept constant
to his Negative; but that he might not recede from his constant observance of
his Majesty of France, but give him what satisfaction he could, he sent him a
Breviate of the Reasons he had to oppose that Treaty, and answered the King's
Letters with great respect.

The Ambassador would have entered upon Discourse touching what was said of his
Highness treating with the King of Spain by means of the Empresses, and upon
the Marquess of Caracene's threats, upon his refusal to treat; wherefore he
spoke thereof to Marquess de la Vall: Who assured him, There was no Treaty by
his Master with Spain; and that if there should be any, it would only be to
re-invest him in Cassalle.

The Ambassaduor was surprised at this Answer, and added; That the Duke his
Master would run great hazard in trusting the flatteries of his ancient
Enemies, and greater shame for having thrown off France at such a time; that he
was sure the Spaniards would never meddle with Cassalle, without the good will,
nay, without the request of his Highness: But all this prevailed nothing with
the Marquess, who desired to see his Master free, and absolute Master of his
Dominions, which made it be suspected that he held Intelligence with the
Spaniards.

The Ambassador in the Marquess his absence, resolved to feel the Duke's
Pulse, upon what he had discoursed with Marquess la Vall; he went to visit the
Duke, and plainly acquainted him with the jealousy he had of treating with his
State-Minister: He told him, That it was publikly said, that there were
Treaties in hand to drive the French out of Cassalle: That he could not
conceive what advanage his Highness could receive thereby: That he feared some
particular concernment might make him side with the Spaniards against his own
inclination and real good: And that if Marquess de la Vall had been wrought
upon by the Spaniards, it behoved his Highness to correct him for it.

The Duke answered, That he had no Commerce with the Spaniard; that he had made
no Agreement with them, and that if any thing should happen, he would acquaint
him presently with it; that he was not ignorant of what Obligations his Family
had to France which he should never forget; but that he hoped his Majesty would
not take it ill, if he should use all possible means to keep Cassalle from
being lost.

The Ambassador replied, His King had set his heart too much upon this City,
to suffer it to be lost; but that his Highness ought to have a care that he
lost it not, out of too great a care of preserving it; that the frequent
conferences of Marquess de la Vall with Prince Bozzolo, and diverse other
Spaniards, promised but little good; that he beseeched his Highness not to be
deceived; to look into his Affairs with his own eyes, and to prevent all
inconveniences which might arise from a rash resolution.

The Duke took all well that the Ambassador had said, and did again assure
him, That he would be always gratefully devoted to the King: Thus Argenson
returned to Venice, from whence he informed the Court of all that had passed;
and how that diverse Cabals had been held to re-enter into Cassalle, which had
been treated upon with all secrecy by Prince Bozzolo, and Father Guazzone;
adding, That the Spaniards desired nothing more than to bring the Duke over to
his party, to stave him off from the protection of France; to recompense him
with exchange of Territories, and to re-intigrate him for what he should loose
in France; that the business was near at an end, and stuck only upon the Duke's
pretentions, who would enter free, and absolute Master into Cassalle, as he was
before the War; and desired to be helped by Moneys in some sort or other, to
maintain the Garrison; and chiefly not to break with the King of France.

The Duke, when the Ambassador was gone, reflected more upon what had been by
him said, and found much to his grief, that the Court of France had an ill
opinion of his actions, whilst he knew that they tended only to the
preservation of what was his own, without any prejudice to that Crown, where he
intended to keep his ancient good corrispondency.

Nor did he less wonder, that not only France, but Italy should judge amiss of
the Marquess de la Vall's Actions, and that he held Intelligence with the
Spaniards; and thought to abuse him with passionate representations, since he
knew that the Marquess was only concerned in his Service, and minded nothing
but the making him absolute Master of all his own Towns, being he (who contrary
to what was given out) stood stiffest against the Spaniard's Proposals;
wherefore he humbly presented his constant Devotion to his Christian Majesty,
and to his State Ministers, and sought to take from them the bad Opinions which
might be insinuated into them by his envyers, and by those that loved not the
Marquess.

And because the Governor of Millan, after having had conference in
Serravalle, with Marquess Spinola, and other of his Catholic Majesty's
Agents, had carried the Spanish Army into Montferrat, and taken Pontestura,
Corniolo, Ozano, Bossenguano, St. Georgio, Ocimiano, Mirabello, Borgo
Ticinetto, and Frascine, whereby Cassalle was blockt up on all sides; so as
after a long want of Moneys, the Garrison was reduced to great extremity; the
five Swisser's Regiments ready to lay down Arms, and be gone; the French but
few, and not in a condition to do Service: the small Montferrat Militia went
out to get Victuals for the Camp; the whole Garrison grumbled, and were ready
to put the Town into the hands of any that would give them advance Money, or
their Arrears; Iona Clava, who with some others had Munitioned Cassalle, could
provide the Garrison no longer with Bread, as they had done; nor yet particular
Gentlemen, who had maintained it with Corn for five Months; the Duke renewed
his desires to the Court, and propounded that if by reason of their Civil Wars;
they could not send it convenient Relief, they would be contented that it might
rather fall again into his hands upon requisite caution, than to the Spaniards,
who protested, that if they could get it from the French, they would never
restore it to the House of Mantua. St. Andrea did at the same time hold the
Spaniards in hand, with Hopes, and Negotiations, to keep them from falling upon
it by force, to afford time to the French to settle their Affairs, and to
relieve it.

President Mirandi made these Proposals, but finding the business was still
delaid, and that there was no means to bring back the Governor of Cassalle,
Marquess Monpessat, who was in France, without being furnished with Men or
Moneys, went to the Court himself, and propounded, That if they would make
Marquess Tavanes Marshall of France, and General in Piemont, he should at his
own expense within a Month space, raise 3000. Foot, and 1500. Horse, and
relieve Cassalle with them.

This Proposition though it appeared fair, yet was not accepted for diverse
reasons, and perhaps, because the Marquess was Brother to Count Tavanes, who
fought for Conde.

The Duchess of Savoy, who was no less troubled than the French, that Cassalle
should fall into the Spaniard's hands, solicited the French by her Ambassador
the Marquess Abbate of Aglie, to come to some speedy expedient, protesting,
That otherwise his Highness would be forced to seek an Agreement with Spain;
and she sent Marquess Villa to Cassalle, to offer Monsieur St. Angelo, who
commanded there, to send him in 400. Horse; St. Angelo, fearing that the
Monferrians, who were not great friends to the Piemontesse, would not be well
pleased with this, and not daring to accept the offer without the King's order,
refused it, which caused some scandal, and murmuring in the Court at Turin;
which grew greater when it was known, that Marquess di Penes, Governor of
Pinaralle, who had order to send 800. Foot of Tault's Regiment to Cassalle,
excused himself for the present, pretending that he could not conveniently
weaken that Garrison, whilst the Spanish Forces were so near.

The Spaniards who were fully advised of all that past, and who feared that any
the least succor, which should be put into Cassalle, might make head against
their Forces, which were not in a condition of making that Enterprise, but by
reason of the French-men's weakness, continued treating with the Duke, and told
him freely, That unless he would join with them, they would take Cassalle,
since the French were not in a capacity to relieve it, by reason of the War,
which was now in its greatest height; so as to avoid losing it, there was no
means left for him, but to join with them, drive out the French, and enter
himself into his City.

The Duke, who is whole aim was to save that City, and to be therein
independent, as well from Spain, as France, proceeded warily therein, for it
was a nice business; and not confiding wholly in the Spaniards, he carried the
business so as if he would gratify the one party, and not disgust the other.

At last the Governor of Millan, fearing lest delay would hurt his Designs,
sent Marquess Verullino Vicconte, one as valiant in War, as wise in managing
State Affairs, with order to find out the Duke at Rouera, and to continue
Prince Bozzolo's Negotiation, and to end it, as was done; for the Marquess
overcame all difficulties, and ended the Articles, which were kept secret,
though diversely reported: But it was true that the Duke was sufferr'd to put
2000 Foot, and 300 Mantuan-Horse into Cassalle, and 1500 Monferrians, who were
raised out of the Militia of the Country, all under Don Camillo Gonzaga,
Brother to Prince Bozzolo; all these were by means of the said Gonzaga, and of
Conte Ottavio Brabanti, received into the City. St. Angelo was forced to
capitulate, and to put the Citadel into his Highness hands, who placed a
Garrison there of his own Soldiers, not depending upon Spain; and the Empress
obliged her self to furnish the Prince her Brother with Moneys to maintain the
Garrison, with which Moneys she was furnished by the King of Spain, by
Agreement made between them (as said the French) as an expedient by which the
Duke might excuse himself to the Court of France, as not having concluded any
thing with the Spaniards.

Count Argenson being advertised of what past at the Court of Mantua, and that
Marquess Visconte had concluded the Treaty, and that the Mantuan Militia was
preparing to march, acquainted the King into what extremity the Affairs now
were brought; and considering that by reason of the Troubles which the Kingdom
was in, so speedy a remedy could not be taken as was requisite, he acquainted
the Commonwealth with the bad condition which Cassale was in; He told them,
That their Senate would lose more thereby than France; and that if they should
quit so weighty a Concernment, it would be no wonder if his King should also
think upon what touched him nearest; that he would be much displeased if the
Spaniards should take Cassalle; but that their Commonwealth would find the ill
effects.

The next day, before the Senate had resolved what answer to give the French
Ambassador, the Marquess de Fuentes Ambassador from Spain came before them, who
desired them that they would permit him to give them an account of those
Proceedings: He acquainted them with the Dukes and the King his Masters
resolutions; he endeavored to make his Masters intentions appear clearly to
the Senate, and to free them of all jealousies.

The Senate answered the French Ambassador, That the Commonwealth had had long
War with the greatest Enemy of Christendom; wherefore they could undertake
nothing in the troublesome conjuncture they were in; howsoever they would
contribute their good will to the preservation of Cassalle, to which purpose
they would do all good offices with the interessed Parties.

They told the Spanish Ambassador, That as his Catholic Majesty had always
witnessed his desire of Peace, so the Commonwealth was confident he would do
still, to the entire tranquillity of Italy, so much desired by the Senate: But
that they could not mind him, that his King should do well to consider before
he drew on worser humors, and renewed a fierce War in Italy in a time when the
Commonwealth was incommodated with the Common Enemy of Christendom. They also
by their Agents spoke to the same effect to the Governor of Millan, but the
Spaniards forbear not to prosecute their Designs, pretending not to let slip
an occasion so propitious to their Interests; believing that the business would
not end as it did.

These Treaties with Mantua, and this advancing toward Cassalle, though they
might give an Allarm to all the Princes of Italy, there being none who did not
think but that the Spaniards would put a Garrison into that place, and that the
Mantuans would not have governed their Affairs so advantageously, and to their
much Glory, as beyond all men's expectation they did, yet by reason of an
inckling that was had of an Agreement which would not be prejudicial to any,
every one stayed expecting the event.

Argenson knowing that he could not work upon the Commonwealth, further than
to make her intercede between the Parties concerned, thought fit to write a
Letter to the Duke of Mantua, wherein since it may be thereby known what the
French-mens sense was, it will not be amiss to relate the Letter; which was as
follows:

Most Excellent Sir:
I Have received so many favors from your Highness upon several occasions, as
it is very fit in some sort to make my acknowledgments; which I cannot do
better than upon this occasion: I beseech your Highness to read it with as good
a heart as it is written.

I take my self to be bound by the Employment, wherewith I am honored, and by
the confidence which your Highness has put in me; I will pay these two Duties
with sincerity: and I shall tell you that France is not concerned herein but as
it relates to your Highness; wherefore it is a Service which I pretend wholly
to you Sir, wh^^^in I am sure to please the King, since his friendship to your
Highness considered, he will be pleased that I inf^rm you aright, and I
passionately desire that your Greatness may re^eive advantage thereby.

All Italy is full of the News of Treaties between your Highness and Spain; I
do not here discourse upon the manner how, neither do I desire to find out
whether they be in your own Name, or in that of the Empress; but be it what it
will, it is your Interest that is handled, and your Territories that are Treated
of: It Is positively said, that your Highness has concluded what was propounded
to you in your Voyage to Germany, and consented to what you then so vehemently
denied, to wit, That you will forgo the Friendship of France, renounce the
great Estate you have there, drive the French out of Cassalle, and willingly
assubject your self to the Spaniard. Four considerable things which ought to be
well weighed.

I doubt not but that those that have made your Highness put on these Resolves,
have cloked them with fair appearances; but they must be sounded to the bottom,
and your true and real Servants cannot permit that your Highness be so
surprised.

As for the first Point, Of foregoing France; Your Highness may do well to
consider, whether it will be your advantage to deprive your self of such a
leaningstock; you think no more peradventure upon the vast Obligations you owe
to that Kingdom, and may peradventure have forgotten that had it not been for
the King of France his Protection, you had neither had Mantua, nor Montferrate.
Examine, I beseech you, how much you will suffer in your Reputation by so
easily abandoning a Party, from whence you have received such assistance? by
renouncing their Friendship, who in your greatest necessities spared for
nothing to sustein you; and declare your self against a Nation, so often called
in to relief, whereof it never failed. Does your Highness peradventure think
that the Spaniards will confide in you, when they shall find so sudden a change
in you; say they should not observe their Promises, whither would you flee for
refuge.

The Fame of the surprisal which your Highness intends to make your self in
Person, makes all your Party suspected. Do you think that the King will not
interrupt your Design? and if it succeed not, how unfortunate will your
Highness prove? you will be abandoned by both, because you can be useful to
neither.

France will uybraid you with ingratitude; Spain will be aware of your
weakness; Italy will accuse you of somewhat more than misfortune in this your
sinister event. In what esteem will your Highness be in throughout all Europe?
who will restore you to that City which you would willingly lose?

These are general reflections upon your State and Honor; and in the next
place be pleased to reflect upon the state of your Domestic Affairs.

If your Highness break with France, you must resolve to lose all your
Territories which you possess there. I know the Spaniards will promise you
Dominions in the Kingdom of Naples, and that those who shall treat with you,
will not fail to propound entire satisfaction upon this important Article. But
mark, I pray, what you leave, and how little the Reward is which you are
promised. Your Highness loses a large succession of the best Towns that are in
France, and wealth sufficient for a Cadet of your Family; on the contrary you
are offer^d Possessions, the true value whereof is not known, in a Country
which you little understand, the possession whereof is as little safe, as is
the Catholic King's Authority in that Kingdom; those who have been forced to
be paid in those Moneys, may give you a better account of it. Your Highness may
enquire of the Prince of Parma, how he has been treated, and by the little I
have said, you may resolve.

For what concerns driving the French out of Cassalle, I well know that is the
Cause of your Highness change; but beware it cause not your ruin, the
Spaniards have so often attempted in vain to take it, as at last they despair
to compass their (...) by force; now they will use their cunning to bereave you
of it. And whilst they pretend to repossess you of your own, they intend to
take it from you; could they have done it of themselves, they would not invite
you to join with them: But because they know their own weakness, they will
fortify themselves with your Highness Credit in that City, and think they may
easi^y make themselves masters of it, when it shall be in your Highness hands.
You consider not that their chief aim is to make the French distrust you:
Consider what violence they used at first to invade the Marquisate of Finale.
Think how they Treated the Proprietories. See what they have done to preserve
Sabionetta, and Piombina; and believe they are always of the same mind. They
think Injustice glorious, so it may serve their Greatness. They have neither
Faith, Word, nor Sacrament which they do not violate when concerned. Your
High^^sse must not think they will alter their former Policy for your sake.
Your Highness is upon the very brink of falling into their Tyranny. You lose
your self insensibly, and will not be able to get out so easily as you get in.
I will grant they may let you enter into Cassalle, but are you sure they will
suffer you to tarry there? Will not you be forced to have recourse to them
often for maintenance for your Garrison? Who makes such have to recover a
thing* will not so easily part with it. I have often protested to you on my
King's behalf, that his Majesty expects only a favorable conjuncture to do it.
The birth of the new Prince which God has granted unto your Highness, may
serve for a new security.

I speak with the freedom of a Frenchman, accompanied with the Zeal of a
passionate Servant of your Highness, as a man wholly unconcerned. I write these
lines out of gratitude, for the many Favors I have received from your
Highness, and I write them for the good of all Italy, whereunto that of Mantua
is striatly annexed. I humbly beseech your Highness to accept of my good will,
to reflect a little upon these discourses, and to believe that I am, etc.


But all this wrought no effect; the Duke's Answer to the Letter was full of
respect to the King, complaining, That the present conjuncture of times had
thrust him upon this resolution, to save Casal from being lost; and he thanked
the Ambassador for the good will which he had showed to Mantua.

The Duke sent away the Marquess Don Camillo Gonzaga with the Mantuan Militia,
and diverse Gentlemen his Subjects toward Casal; and the 23th of September writ
from Rivere a Letter to the Judges, Officers, Ministers and Subjects of Casal,
and of the state of Monferrat, the Tenor whereof follows: Faithful and
Beloved, etc.
SInce the Divine Majesty was pleased to call Us unto the Government of Our
Dominions, We have not applied Our Self with more solicitude and care to any
thing than to the procuring of the Quiet of Monferrat; grieving for those
Miseries you have for this long time with so much constancy suffered for
complying with your Duty toward Us; but the Condition of Affairs hitherto have
not enabled Us to perform a thing so just and with so much Passion desired by
Us.

We have notwithstanding never omitted to improve any opportunity which Time
has offered unto your advantage; and having heard what was for several Months
past publicly reported, That the Marquess Caracene was to mar^h with the
Forces of his Catholic Majesty unto the prejudice of that Our Fortress, We
were most earnest Suitors to his Christian Majesty, That he would be pleased to
send with all expedition Money and Forces for the security and defense thereof;
or that his Majesty would in his great Wisdom pitch upon some Exped^ent which
might hinder that Place from falling into other hands than Ours, according to
the Consignation made thereof by the Duke Charles Our Grandfather, unto his
Majesty's late Father of glorious Memory: And perceiving that Ou^ Applications
^^o^ duced nothing but promises and hopes, We were willing not to be wanting on
Our part to give all demonstrations possible of Our continual Respect and Duty
toward that Crown; and being sensible of the difficulty in sending necessary
Supplies during the present Troubles of that Kingdom, We have exceeded both
Our own Power, and that of you Our welbeloved Subjects in maintaining the
Garrison there for a long time, to our no small damage, and the total
exhausting of our Treasure: And we could heartily ^ave wished we had been able
to make a larger demonstration of our affections; but finding our selves unable
longer to support the charge, and our apprehensions of the Marquess Caracene
(who drew near to the said Fort with his whole Army) daily increasing, We did
by advice of our Council persuade him to decline always of force, and to be
content that we might enter and possess it with our own Subjects: And his
Excellency being satisfied in the Justice of our Demand, We resolved (before
the executing of it) by an express Courrier to the Court of France, to second
our former Applications thither, with remonstrating the imminent danger in
which Cassale then stood, humbly beseeching his Majesty, That in case a more
fit Expedient could not readily be found out to prevent those mischiefs, we
might with his Majesty's good liking take course our selves for our
Indemnity, by placing there our own Forces, with the exclusion of all others:
And we have in the mean time Treated with the said Marquess touching the Terms
upon which 'twas to be executed, and have received sufficient assurance from
him, that in case we find no opposition, he will permit us freely to enter and
enjoy it; that he will suddenly draw off his Army from Monferrat: and that in
case of opposition, he will employ the Forces of his Master in compassing so
just an end.

We were resolved in order hereunto to have come Our Self in Person, confiding
principally in your fidelity, and the devotion you have unto Our Service,
whereof We have had so many trials; if after the favor of a Son granted to us
by the Divine Majesty, (which adds unto Our Obligation for preservation of Our
Dominions, and must increase your zeal in the cooperating toward it) we had
not fallen into a Tertian Ague, from which although we are at present (God be
thanked) free, yet we are not in a condition to perform it, without apparent
danger of a Relapse; and doubting that a longer delay may bring with it some
irreparable prejudice, we have resolved to send thither Don Camillo Gonzaga our
Kinsman, to whom (by reason of his singular worth) we have entirely confided
the dispatch of this Affair, whereof We have thought fit to give you notice,
that you obey and assist him in all things he shall think fit and conducing
thereunto, as you would do Our proper Person.

And we have hereby thought fit further to give you notice, That as we shall on
all occasions make demonstration of our bounty and gratitude to such as shall
upon this pressing occasion comply with their natural obligation to our
Service; so we shall without mercy use the extremity of a rigorous Justice
toward all those who forgetting their Loyalty shall show themselves herein ill
affected toward their Sovereign Lord, and careless of the Honor of their
Country.




The Duchess of Savoy having notice of this, and that Sault's Regiment which
was at last commanded to march from Pinarol into Casal, had been ill treated by
the Spaniards, so as of 800 Foot, there were but 40 that entered; They
endeavored with 1500 Horse, and 2000 Foot, to succor it; and the Forces
drawing near the City, which is seated by the Po, under the Conduct of the
Count of Verna General of the Horse, the Marquess Monte his Lieutenant General,
writ into the Town to have provision made of Barks to pass the River; and that
such of the Inhabitants as were devoted to the French, should put themselves
into a posture for the assisting of the Enterprise.

But those of Mo^ferrat suspecting that the Savoyards entered once into Casal,
might during the French broyls seize the Town and keep it for themselves,
refused to furnish any Barks, hindered them from drawing near the Town, and were
the occasion that the Spaniards pressing the Citadel without intermission with
their Approaches and Artillery, the Baron de St. Angelo who commanded there,
was forced to a Capitulation; which was made the 21 of October, with Honorable
Conditions; putting the Citadel it self into the Duke of Mantua's hands, who
placed therein a Garrison of their own Soldiers, to the derision of such as
imagined, and would needs afterward affirm, That not the Mantuans, but
Spaniards were Masters of it.

The Governor of Milan observed Religiously what he had promised to the Duke,
insomuch as his Highness having thought it convenient, that for the safety of
the place a German Garrison should be placed in it, drawn out of ^uch as served
under the Spaniard, being first discharged, and after taken unto his Higness
Service, with an Oath to be faithful to him; Caracene refu^ed to consent unto
it, suspecting that 'twould be thought a collusion be^ween them: Neither would
he permit any of his Soldiers to enter the place, nor go himself into it, but
in company of the Duke himself, who came thither some few days after.

The Generals of Savoy having not found in those of Monferrat that inclination
toward them which they imagined, and knowing there was now no means for saving
of Casal, that they might not lose all that preparation, resolved to attempt
the recovery of Crescentino, before which they came the 13th of October, and in
seven days carried the place, because the Spaniards being engaged before the
Citadel of Casal, could not relieve it.

The news of this loss flying abroad, and the fame being not in Italy alone,
but also throughout all Europe, That the Duke of Mantua being joined with the
Spaniard, had delivered into their hands that most Important Place, gave no
small Jealousy to those who feared the Spaniards greatness, and made the Duke
to be ill thought of in the Court of France, where they censured his Actions
with much bitterness, and threatened upon the first occasion to make their
resentments ^^own by an exemplary punishment.

The Duke of Ma^^ua notwithstanding protested, That he compl^ed with all due
respects to France, and with all submission fit to demonstrate his devotion and
gratitude toward that Crown, and protested, That he would still continue
obsequious and dutiful toward the most Christian King. But his Professions
were not in France regarded in such manner as he expected, and having therefore
published upon this occasion a Manifesto in the Month of September this very
year, just before his agreement with the Spaniard, it will not be amiss to set
it down, that so upon comparing thereof with the Declaration made after by the
French, when the Lord Plessis Besanson was sent unto the Princes of Italy, the
Prudent reader may be able to make a judgment touching the whole matter. The
Manifesto was as follows: THe Obligations wherein the House of Mantua stands
bound upon several occasions to the Crown of France, publicly owned by my
Predecessors, and which I have inherited together with my Dukedom, have
always maintained in me an inviolable affection toward his most Christian
Majesty, promising unto my self by his Royal assistance a most powerful
Protection, whereby my state of Mon^errat, and my Town and Citadel of Casal
should be defended from loss or prejudice, and at last restored unto me with
the same freedom as they were for their preservation and defense deposited
into the hands of the late King of glorious Memory by the late Duke Charles my
Lord and Grandfather. And although that Country has for many years last past
been daily ruined, not only by the Quartering of Soldiers, but also by the
plunder of my poor Subjects, pillaged continually as well by the Forces of
Piedmont united unto those of his Majesty, as by the Armies of his Catholic
Majesty; the one upon pretense of defending the Country; and the other with
design to drive their Enemies out of Italy, and particularly from a Town so
considerable for i^s neighborhood unto the State of Milan, and thereby free
themselves from the continual jealousy it gave them; yet having always
constantly refused the Propositions and offers made unto me upon several
occasions, I have rested firmly confident of the just Intentions of his most
Christian Majesty, and that I should with his good liking, and without the
interposition of any other, obtain from him that which belonged unto me,
without any d^smembring of the Country: but forasmuch as after having several
times represented unto his Majesty the urgent and pressing necessities of my
Towns altogether unprovided, and the condition wherein they stood, being
exposed unto the danger of falling under the Command of any who should have
designs upon them, my Applications full of duty and respect have brought no
other return from his Majesty, but remote hopes of feeble Succors, which could
bring ^o security unto the places; whether it were by the advice of some person
ill affected toward my Family, or some other particular consideration, or by
reason of my ill fortune, the Kingdom being then engaged in other Interests,
which were perhaps esteemed to be of greater consequence. After I had
reiterated my Addresses, and petitioned by my Agents in that Court to have some
speedy supply, or that some other expedient might be thought on for my
preservation, since just means were not wanting to do it gloriously, and with
immortal Reputation to the Crown of France, I resolved to give new proofs unto
his Majesty of my affection and zeal unto his Service, by maintaining the
Garrison many Months at my own charge: But this expense becoming insupportable
to my Revenues, very much diminished, and to my Subjects who are totally
destroyed, and did continually solicit me to take some course for easing of
those burdens under which they have long groaned; and perceiving that my
suspicions were increased by a new march of the Spanish Army into the Field,
besides the report spread abroad that they would certainly attempt the place,
the Governor of Milan being encouraged to it by reason of the weakness of the
Garrison, the taking of Tri^o a place very important toward the facilitating
of the Enterprise, and the intestine Troubles wherein France was involved,
which rendered him secure from a diversion thence; I suffered not my self to be
for all this overcome with fear, or gained with those Propositions and Promises
were made unto me, but sent an express Courrier to his most Christian Majesty,
beseeching him that he would please to order either some speedy supply of men
and money, or take some other resolution suitable to the necessity, or that
otherwise he would not take it ill, I should my self take such Expedients as
might be best, to gain the possession of the place for my self, who am the
lawful Sovereign thereof, to the exclusion of all others, and keep it with a
Guard of my own Soldiers, so as it might not longer be exposed unto the danger
of falling into the hands of the Spaniard, or others, who may have Designs
upon it; the which they have sufficiently demonstrated, not without being
listened unto (as I am certainly informed) and their success therein would have
proved to my irreparable damage, besides the other wrongs and injuries I
suffer, which are not of small importance, but are acted contrary to the good
and just intentions and the great disservice of his Majesty. Finally, Seeing my
self reduced to an extreme and pressing necessity, and to avoid the greater
evil, I have endeavored to persuade the Marquess Caracene to grant me together
with a Cessation of Arms, the convenience of taking the possession of that
Place and City, with the exclusion of all others, who assented thereunto; and
that I might with ease and without let compass the Design, offered me in case
of opposition all the Forces of his Catholic Majesty, that I might with more
security compass my intention, engaging himself not to enter into those Places
upon other occasions, and that in case he were necessitated to it, that he
would leave them freely and without reserve under my absolute command.

And forasmuch as the Season does advance, and that the said Marquess the
Governor presses and protests that he will lose no time of this Campaign, being
unable (by reason of the sickness wherewith I am much weakened, and of that
which the Arch-duchess my Consort, fell into since her lying in) to go in
person as I had resolved, I have been forced to make use of Don Camillo Gonzaga
for execution of this Design, to whom by reason of his near Relation, being of
my House, and of his Valor and Prudence I have entirely trusted the execution
of this important Design, whereby I have at the same time provided for my own
Preservation in the peaceable possess^on of my Dominions, for the ease and
relief of my own Subjects, and the general repose of Italy: Protesting
nevertheless, that I shall notwithstanding still preserve (as I have ever done)
an inviolable affection toward his Most Christian Majesty, and endeavor with
all industry to give Testimonies thereof to the whole World, hoping in his
Majesty's goodness, that when he shall be pleased to make reflections upon the
present state of Affairs, he will not upon this occasion lessen his good
opinion of, and kindness toward me, which I so highly prize and value. And I
doubt not, but all that with sincere eyes and minds disinteressed shall
consider the resolution I have taken, and shall examine the beforementioned
important Motives which have induced me to it, will perceive they were no less
just than necessary, and will find no occasion to blame me, that in the
extremity of my Affairs, I have rather chosen to give a Remedy unto my
Misfortunes, than to augment them, by declaring my self an enemy unto a
Neighbor Nation more powerful than my self (and whose Dominions do divide
mine) at a time when they offered to assist me.



The Duke then came to Casal about the end of October, where he staid till
Christmas following, at what time he returned to Mantua; drew off the
Mantuans, and left there only those of Monferat, with some French who were
married in the City: the Marquess Don Camillo returned to Bozolo with great
glory, having highly merited from the Duke: the Marquess de la Val staid some
days at Casal to give such Orders as were necessary, as General of the Duke's
Forces; and conferred the Government of the Citadel upon the Marquess
Sigismu^^ Gonzaga, and that of the City upon the Count Ottavio Brambati, Son to
the late Count Francisco, who had so worthily served the house of Mantua, until
his death at Paris, whilst he was Extraordinary Ambassador there for the Duke.
After the departure of which Brambati, who was by his urgent Affairs called
home into his own Country, there was placed to Command in it, first the
Marquess Bonifacio Fassali Casalasio, and afterward Count Giouanni Emilis
Veronese.

There followed also the change of diverse of the Officers and Ministers, some
of them being brought away to Mantua, and in their places several others sent
to succeed them.

The Duke after gave an assurance unto the Ministers of France. That as soon as
the Country of Monferat should be restored unto the pristine state, and put
into his peaceable possession without disturbance, he would renounce the 3000
Crowns monthly which the Empress was obliged to furnish him for payment of the
Garrison, and would maintain them at his proper costs; which he did, for taking
away of all color or pretense the French might have formed upon that point
unto the prejudice of his Declarations, it being a thing certain that he had no
imagination to let go that noble Town out of his hands, which rendered him
considerable to all Italy, and valued both by the one and the other Crown, and
these were always the true thoughts of the Marquess de Val, with whom the
Spaniards (notwithstanding they dissembled it) were in truth highly
dissatisfied.

But all these Declarations of the Duke and his Ambassadors were little worth,
because things being represented in the Court of France different from what
they were, the suspicion had so much force, that things were sinisterly
interpreted neither could the Kings Ministers be satisfied with the loss of a
place of that importance, and which gave so much luster over all Italy to their
Authority.

The other Princes of Italy were in a manner all of them jealous that Casal
would finally fall into the Spaniard's hands, and were therefore sorry the
French had not in time provided for it, which it was said they might have done
with a small matter, if they had not applied themselves rather to persecute
Cardinal Mazarine and overthrow his Designs, than provide for the concernments
of the Crown. And these Jealousies and Apprehensions were much increased by the
Report was spread, That the Spaniard, after beating the French out of Casal,
negotiated earnestly a Peace with Savoy; insinuating into the minds of the
Ministers there, that the King of Spain would restore Versellis, drive the
French out of Pignaroll, and the Citadel of Torino, adjust their differences
with Mantua, and probably Marry the Infanta of Spain unto the Duke of Savoy,
whereby they endeavored to gain that Family, and chasing the French beyond the
Mountains, to restore Peace unto Italy, and their own Authority unto the
Pristine Splendor.

These Treaties were listened unto by those of Piedmont with no small
attention, and the rather because they suspected that (the most Christian King,
being engaged in a Civil War, and not able to contribute unto the defense of
Piedmont,) the Spaniards might with ease be able to make some powerful Invasion
upon them, so as if they deferred the remedy until another time, they should
perhaps find no means to compass it.

The Court of France, and most particularly the Cardinal, was highly jealous of
this Treaty, who being mindful of the prejudice it might bring to the King's
Interests, in case the Spaniards (having secured all things in Italy) should
employ all their Forces in Catalonia and Flanders; labored with all industry,
as well by means of the Ambassador Servient, as of the Abbot of Aglie, who was
well disposed toward France, to uphold the Savoyards in hope of a ready and
secure Assistance; an^ the Cardinal having a great credit and confidence with
the House of Savoy, his only word prevailed more than all other means to
overthrow the Artifices of the Enemies unto the Crown of France; but in regard
the Intestine troubles gave them not liberty to furnish Supplies as the Affairs
required, that he might have the Court of Piedmont constant to their Union with
France, he encouraged them with putting Verna and the new Town of Asti into
their hands, and with the Honor of Treating their Ambassadors after the
manner of those sent from Crowned Kings at their first Audience of his Majesty,
and that the Guard should receive them in complete Armor, which was a thing
long pretended unto, and much desired by those of Piedmont.

Besides these Honors the Count de Quince, a bold Cavalier, and one ready for
the executing of all Designs was sent thither with the Title of General of
Piedmont, who, being in France with Title only of Lieutenant General, that he
might command in chief accepted this Employment, which was before refused by
many others, not for hazard of their persons (because the French Cavaliers are
generally bold and daring) but for Interest sake, as doubting that by reason of
the divisions in the Kingdom, they were not like to receive Money, which is the
Life and Soul of all Affairs.

This Count came to Turin the 6th of December, accompanied with a good number
of Gentlemen of Quality, and amongst others the Marquess of Richelieu, Brother
unto the Duke of the same Name, who having consummated a Marriage with
Mademoiselle Beavois, and representing to have done it contrary to the liking
of his Relations, went into Italy with an intention to break it; but the Design
took not, because the Queen being unwilling the Lady should be abused, declared
the Marriage valid, and treated her publicly as Marchioness of Richelieu, to
which the Marquess after some few Months acquiesced, and returned to Court.

Quince was shortly after followed by a good body of French Horse, and quitting
the Court went into Piedmont, by which recruit the minds of those in Piedmont
were quieted, and the Designs of the Spaniards grounded upon the Civil Broils
in France were broken.

In the mean time the happy News of this Success touching Casal, being brought
the 16th of November unto the Catholic Court, Te Deum was the next day Sung in
the Royal Chapel, and the same day toward night their Majesty's accompanied
with the Duchess Margaret of Mantua, and all the Grandees of the Court, went
to our Ladies of Atochia, to give due thanks for the accomplishment of a
Design, which had ever before been fatal to that Monarchy, and may be said to
have been the sole impediment unto the fortune of the Spanish Arms; although
perhaps it is probable the troubles of Italy will not so end, because the French
being enforced thereby unto a greater care of the Affairs of Italy, it may so
happen that the humors declining one where, will elsewhere gather, and be
followed by those ruins in Lumbardy, which are used to be the consequents of a
change in people.

They thought after (according to the wonted generosity of that great King)
upon the demonstrations of esteem and gratitude due to the Marquess Carracene,
who by Arms and Policy had accomplished an Affair of that importance, and they
considered also the Merits of the Marquess of Mortara, who after so much
suffering, and hardship in a Siege of Fifteen Months, had restored Barcelona,
and Catalonia unto the Monarchy, but the rewards were below the expectation,
because Carracene, who pretended to the Honor of a Grandee, could not obtain
it, (the number of persons of merit being so great, that making one, it was
necessary to confer that Title also upon many others,) by reason whereof, the
first Minister being more sparing in the conferring of that Dignity than was
the late Lord Duke his Uncle, it was forborne, honoring him instead thereof
with the charge of a Gentleman of the King's Chamber; a Dignity conspicuous,
and of much esteem amongst them.

To the Marquess of Mortara was granted an increase of some yearly Rent, and to
both hopes of larger acknowledgments hereafter in time convenient.

There was in the mean time a fierce War between the Cossacks and Polanders,
whereupon many foreseeing what prejudice mig^t thereby happen to the Kingdom,
(engaged also in a War with Muscovy,) when the Truce with the Crown of Sweden
should be expired, and Hostility renewed with that Kingdom, (powerful by a
numerous Militia enured to War* and rich in Money, amassed together by the
Plunder of the Empire) desired to interest three neutral Potentates in the
Treaty of Peace between the Polan^^^, and Swede, that in a Meeting to be
appointed in some indifferent place, they might be Arbitrators touching the
Equity of what was in dispute between them; these were the most Christian King,
the Republic^ of Veni^^, and the States of Holland, who willingly undertook the
Charge, and appointed for the place of Conference the Hans Town of Lubeck.

Pol^nd dispatched thither four Plenipotentiaries, persons of Quality; the
principal of which was the Count of Lesseneh^s, and each of the^ having a
distinct Train, appeared with a noble and splendid Equipage.

Sweden also sent four of theirs, the principal of whom was the Lord of
Rofe^a^t, with an Equipage nothing inferior to them.

The King of France sent for his Extraordinary Ambassador and Mediator the
Lord of Chenut.

The State of Venice the Cavalier Michael Morosini; and the United Provinces
three of their Deputies.

The Elector of Brandenbourgh dispatched thither ^ person of Quality his
Kinsman, who not being able (by reason of a Sickness happened to him) to supply
the place, there were surrogated in his stead three of his confidents, who
became altogether useless there, by reason of some Ceremonies pretended to by
the Elector equal to that of Sovereign Princes, whereby they remained excluded
from all Conferences or Visits from any other than the Polanders.

The Cavalier Morosini Ambassador from the Republic of Venice, was then in
France, and by the arrival of the Senator Giovanni Sagredo his Successor at
Court, ended his Employment, with the entire satisfaction of his Majesty and
his own Prince; toward whom (although France were at that time grievously
afflicted with an Intestine War) his Majesty gave testimony of his gratitude by
extraordinary Presents, and affectionate Expressions of his esteem.

As soon as he had notice of the safe Conduct for the Plenipotentiaries of the
Crowns, he left Paris the 22th of September, and after a troublesome Voyage
came to Lubeck, with a Train of Threescore persons, which he increased there,
that he might not appear inferior to any in the Splendor of his Retinue, as
he was equal to them in his knowledge.

The Baron of Chenut followed him some few days after, and about the beginning
of December all parties being met at the place appointed, (although the
Hollanders were not yet come) they entered upon the matters that were
Preliminary to the Treaty.

The first Pretension of the Swedes was, That they would by no means enter into
a Treaty, unless Poland would raze out of their Writings, and Commissions, the
Title of King of Sweden before used, and would also reform their great Seal, by
leaving out the Three Crowns, which are the Arms of Sw^den.

The Polanders, by persuasion of the Mediators, agreed to raze it out of their
Commissions, having first made a Protestation apart, wherein they declared the
same was not to prejudice their right; But as to the Seal the same being the
particular Arms of the King's Family, not of the Kingdom; this pretense was by
the Arbitratours esteemed very slight; and therefore Morosini together with the
Deputies of Holland, who arrived there about the end of January, 1653. (because
the French were of the Swede's party) endeavored of themselves to persuade the
Swedes that they would quit the same, and fall upon the Treaty; but they being
positive to have the Commission changed with the omission of the Title, and the
reformation of the Seal, the matter stuck so as no persuasion of the Mediators
was able to advance it; whereupon the Affair becoming desperate, because the
Polanders could not alter their Instructions, without a new Diet impowering
them to do it, the business fell; and in the Month of February the Meeting was
dissolved, without coming to any resolution.

The S^edes showed themselves little desirous of this accommodation; because
they hoped (seeing Poland engaged in a great War) to find a time more
favorable to their Interests, that they might either make a Peace upon their
own Terms, or breaking it, advantage themselves extraordinarily, during the
weakness of that Kingdom.

The French adhered unto their sense (for which they were much blamed) whereby
'twas manifest it concerned them the Swedes should continue armed, that in case
the face of Affairs should alter, and the French Arms should gain any advantage
over the Spaniards, the Emperor (standing in doubt of the Swedes) might not be
able to assist them.

The Polanders therefore parted for their own Country, and the like did all
the other Plenipotentiaries, and Mediators, only the Hollanders staid some days
after, having received Orders to negotiate with the Hans-Towns, and draw them
to some Declaration in their favor against the English:

Mean while the Ministers of Spain were not negligent in their prosperity, but
prosecuting their good fortune, sent Orders to their Fleet in Biscay, to
attaque Blage, a most important place, situate at the mouth of the G^ronne*
wherein was Governor (as you before heard) the Duke of San Simon, a most
faithful person to his Prince.

The Spaniards had fancied this Enterprise not to be difficult, because the
French Armada being taken and destroyed by the English, they supposed it could
not be in a condition speedily to relieve it; and they believed the Forces of
the Bourdelois, joined with those of the Princes in Guienne, would be
sufficient to block it up by Land: Battevile therefore solicited the execution
of the King's Orders, and with all diligence possible appeared with his
Shipping in the Garonne; but he found things in a far different condition from
that which diverse discontented French had represented to the Court of Spain; so
as 'twas necessary for him, without any attempt made, to return, and winter in
the Port of Passage; where he discovered the Artifices of some, who to
ingratiate themselves with his Catholic Majesty, and obtain rewards from him,
represented things very different from truth, magnifying small matters, and
lessening those of greater consequence.

Thereby it happened that discords and unkindnesses grew shortly after between
Battevile, Marsin, and Lenet, which were followed with Calumnies and
Accusations* exhibited by those French Commanders against Battevile himself,
that they might get him removed out of Guienne; they blamed him, that there
were not in Bourg 1000 of the 1500 Irish paid by the Spaniard, that his
dispatches had been altered, and accounts given of exorbitant expenses, and
that having changed the Spanish money into French he had thereby gained 25 in
the hundred.

Don Lewis who loved and protected Battevile, ordered him to retire to St.
Sebastians, declaring, That he was obliged not to give any disgust unto the
Princes.

But in the Court of Spain it appeared not a thing blameworthy (although it
had been true) that this Lord (continuing faithful to the King's Interest)
should be so cunning as to make his own particular advantage, because it
declared him to be a man of spirit, which was a thing displeasing to the
French, and principally to Lenet, who having used to domineer without control
in Bourdeaux, could not endure to have any dependence upon the Ministers of
Spain.

In execution of the abovesaid Orders, Battevile having first embarked upon two
Vessels the most trusty of his Officers, and diverse of his best Soldiers in
the Garrison at Bourg; the ninth of December began his Voyage with no less
bitterness than indignation, against Marsin and Lenet, who he pretended had
wrongfully slandered him, for no other cause but that they found him a faithful
and useful Servant to the King; from whose favor he had easily fallen; had he
not been supported by the same Don Lewis D'aro, who protected him with that
sincerity and justice, which are the But of all his Actions.

To Don Joseph Osorio was confirmed the Command of the Forces in Bourg, and the
manage of the Treasure was conferred upon the Governor of St. Sebastians.

C^ntelino at that time returned unto the Catholic Court, and was sent back
with a Present of Jewels to the Princess of Conde, valued at 40000 Crowns; and
a Bracelet of Diamonds for himself.

But the Cardinal Mazarin, who during all these Blustering storms had preserved
the Royal Authority from the eminent danger of a Shipwreck, and showed himself
to all the world to be one of the most expert and daring Mariners that ever
sailed upon the Sea of Politic Affairs; as soon as he perceived the
troublesome Commotions and storms which had so furiously agitated the whole
Kingdom, to be dispersed by his Majesty's presence, and access to Paris, gave
himself wholly to the study and practice of such fit Expedients, as might not
only calm the intestine Motions, but also raise up the lost credit and
reputation of the Royalty; and he believed the way to make the ^ame more
reverenced and observed, was rather by Pardon than Chastisement; it being a
Maxim fixed in the Cardinal's mind, That the generous spirits of the French
Nation were sooner to be gained by courteous usage, than by the violence of
Arms; which was the cause he set on foot Treaties with each one of the
contumacious Persons; holding that love unto the King ought to be the fifth
Element, and to preserve that concord between Subjects, which is not
interrupted, but by the apprehensions of hatred, or revenge. He revived new
Treaties and Propositions of Peace with the Prince of Conti, the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, with the Counts of Harcourt and Ogran, and with all the other
Princes, great Lords, and men of Spirit, who possessed rather by jealousies and
suspicions, than natural passions, had estranged themselves from their
Obedience to his Majesty; the first effects of which wise conduct were seen in
the Pardon, which the King by the Madiation of the Marshall De la Motte,
granted unto the Baron of Sant Annes, Governor of Leucata, who had forsaken
his Majesty's Service, upon several sinister impressions, till by this way of
sweetness he was otherwise convinced and satisfied.

This Cavalier had revolted by the suggestion of some unquiet Spirits, and some
distaste taken unto the Court, by reason his pretensions were discountenanced;
but he was quieted and sweetened by the dextrous management, and civil means
used toward him by the said Marquess, a person of great abilities, with whom
the last of November he made an Accord, That pardon should be given to him and
all the Inhabitants of Leucata; his Sons who were Prisoners in Paris should be
released; the goods belonging to himself, or his friends restored; the Castle
of Terms to be put into the hands of the Archbishop of Narbon* to be restored
to the said St. Annes after six months, or otherwise in case his Majesty should
not be pleased to ratify this Article, the two Troops of Horse raised by the
said St. Annes, should be put into his Majesty's Service, and there should be
paid unto him 860 Doubloons for his Charges in the said Levy, and 415 for the
Losses of the Inhabitants of Leucata, and the Ransom of Poder his Cousin; all
the Prisoners to be freed; all Treaties with the Spaniards, or the Princes,
recalled, and an assurance upon his Honor, and Parol given never to swerve
again from the obedience of the King.

The Cardinal had caused also a strict negotiation to be made with the Prince
of Conde, by means of some Confidents of his, to pacify him, and make him quit
the Spaniards Service; offering him the Sovereignty of some Country out of
France: But whether it were that the Prince found himself too far engaged with
the Spaniard, or that the generosity of his Mind would not permit him to
falsify his word without some apparent cause or pretext, or that he thought
this Dignity too mean, or were taken with the pleasant gust of those advantages
he received from Spain, and in particular with the great Assignations made unto
him, or whether he were led by other Suspicions, Reasons, or Respects, amongst
which probably that which held the first place, was the desire of the occasions
to use his Sword, his great heart being unable without trouble to return into
the calm of Peace, the Propositions vanished without effect. The Prince
declared, That he was no ways ambitious of being a Sovereign Prince,
contenting himself with the Quality he had of being first Prince of the Blood;
that he knew not how again to trust a person that had once deceived him, nor
believe that person would be faithful to him, who had before showed himself not
to be such; that these Offers were like those Gifts which had formerly passed
between Hector and Ajax; that we ought to give least credit unto those things
which appear most probable; and that we must consider that how much more is
promised for necessity, so much more likely are we to fail thereof when that is
over; That he knew the Cardinal sufficiently for a person as apt to promise
much, as he was afterward industrious to perform only what suited to his own
ends: And he protested in fine, That he would never consent to any
Accommodation wherein the King of Spain should not also be included; to whom he
professed himself highly obliged: The person employed endeavored to take from
him all sinister Impressions, and represented to him that he should call to
mind he was a Frenchman, and one of the Blood Royal, that he had too much
Reputation and Glory, not to be made the Butt of Envy and Jealousy, to a
Nation that had so much emulation with France, and were ambitious to have no
dependence but on themselves; that to build his hopes upon those who proposed
to themselves ends different from his, was to make a ruinous building; That
Friends follow the Fortune not the Bodies of their Friends, and that in
quitting France he should be abandoned by all the Frenchmen; that ones
Country ought to be as dear unto a prudent Man, as his Shell is to the Snail;
and that being his true and faithful Servant, he took the freedom to tell him,
It was much more honorable for such a Princes as he to be Cousin to the King
of France, than Servant to the King of Spain; He added hereunto many
efficatious reasons, but all in vain, because the hatred and disdain of the
Cardinal, were prevalent in the imagination of the Prince, and the opinion he
had firmly conceived, that he should be the next Campaign too powerful for the
King's Forces, and be enabled thereby to return to Paris.

The Cardinal therefore not being able to prevail with the Prince, thought of
the means how to divide his Brother Conty from him; He caused advantageous
Conditions to be proposed unto him, and thought that having once gained him, he
should thereby restore Bourdeaux, and Guienne to their Pristine Obedience;
because the Factions of this Prince were very powerful in that City, and
Province, and the effects thereof were likely to be very advantageous to the
King's Service; and the reduction of his Brother, by reason of the Jealousies,
which peradventure the Spaniards might upon that occasion have of his Person,
and the ill usage which it was probable he should receive from them, when he
should be deprived of that support, which rendered him so much the more
considerable. But although Conty were not a friend unto his Brother, and that
his mind was much more apt to receive satisfaction, yet he was so fixed not to
disoblige the Duchess of Longueville his Sister, that without her he would
resolve of nothing, and she remaining firm in the good Intelligence she held
with Conde, and the hopes which the generosity of her own mind suggested to
her; all those attempts proved useless, and consequently all the other
attempts, and practices of those in Bourdeaux, who were affectionate to the
King's Party, fell to the ground, their endeavors tending only to bring
things unto that pass, that the City should second such resolutions as should
be taken by the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess.

The Cardinal therefore took in hand other expedients, and since he could not
gain the Princes, endeavored by new Orders to deprive by little and little,
both them and the Town of Bourdeaux, from those Subjects, and Places which
fomented their pretensions; and therefore the Duke of Vendosme was ordered to
Sail with the Fleet into the Garonne; unto the Duke of Candale (who was already
departed to Govern the Forces in Guienne) were dispatched all the Troops which
could be got together in the neighboring Provinces; and the Negotiations with
the Count D' Ognon and others to divide them from the contrary Faction were set
on foot, thereby to render (as it after happened) the King's Party in that
Province the more powerful.

In this mean time the Prince of Conty sojourned with his Army in Champaigne,
where having failed in his Designs upon Reims, Soissons, and other great Cities
full of People, Warlike, and Faithful to their King; he came at last unto
Vervins, a feeble Place, without Garrison, or Fortification, and having left
there two Regiments of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse, sat down with the gross
of his Army before Rhetel, which in a short time was rendered to him by Monsieur
di Kale, who was Governor, by reason of the weakness of the place, and want of
things necessary for defense of it, as also did Chasteau Porcien, which is but
little distant from it; but St. Merhaud, another walled Town with a Castle not
contemptible, situate upon the head of the same River Aisne, which passes to
Rhetel, held out until the 13 th of November, and being not relieved by the
Marshall Turenne, was then forced to a Capitulation, which was honorably
granted unto the Baron of Saint Mor, who was there Governor; and because this
Town being situated between the Mose and the Marne, and between the Cities of
Verdun, and Chalons, was of some consequence, principally because it was not
far distant from Clermont and Stenay, places held by Conde; he left there a
great Garrison, under the Baron di Montalt, and gave them orders to fortify,
pretending by maintaing of that, and Rhetel, to winter all his Troops in
France, and thereby not only to trouble all the neighboring Frontiers, but
also to ease Flanders, where (had not this been) he must have quartered, and
also to give life thereby to the Cabals in Paris, which though they were much
weakened, were not so totally extinguished there, but that many of his friends,
and of the Duke of Orleans his Partisans, endeavored by underhand practices to
raise some trouble.

After which, having licensed from his Camp the Troops of his Royal Highness,
who, under the Command of the Baron of Valon their Commander in chief passed
into Picardy, to the Service of his Majesty, but upon engagement not to accept
any Employment against Conde, he marched into the Barrois, he took Barleduc,
with the loss of the Baron de Fougges, Lieutenant General to the Duke of
Lorrain; and after that Lagny, and the Castle of Voet, all of them places of
small strength; after which the Winter being far advanced, and his Soldiers
unwilling to begin any new Enterpise, he licensed the Troops of Flanders and
Lorrain, and gave Winter Quarters to his own Soldiers, upon the Mase, and the
adjacent Country.

The Cardinal on the other side, exercising his thoughts indefatigably, about
these so imbroiled and troublesome Affairs, considered that it was absolutely
necessary before putting of the Army into Winter Quarters, to dislodge the
Prince's Forces from their new Lodgings, and to recover the places they had
taken, he therefore caused the King's Camp to be reinforced with ^000
Combatants drawn from the Duke of Elbeufe in Picardy, and by others from
Normandy, and the bordering Provinces, and in lieu of coming to Paris (whither
he was by his Majesty earnestly invited) went into the Army, to redress by his
presence those matters there, which by the late divisions were much weakened,
and in great disorder, and which without him could harldly have been executed
by the Generals, because bringing along with him many Friends and Dependents,
he stopped all those, who wearied with the past toyls, thought rather of retiring
to their Houses, than tarrying longer, and encouraged the rest to continue in
the King's Service, being had in great veneration and esteem among the
Soldiery, by whom he was as much loved and reverenced, as he was hated and
abhorred by the seditious and base Plebeians in Paris; neither was he at all
deceived therein, because the Soldiery being revived by his presence, and the
Military Councils being thereby quickened, he gained those advantages, which
caused him shortly after to return glorious, and as it were Triumphant into
Paris, more than ever in their Majesty's favor, and the Authority of his
Ministry.

The Marquess de Chasteauneuf continued notwithstanding all this while in Paris
without Employment, discharged of his Officers, with that resentment which is
usual unto a great and generous heart like his, accompanied with an
accomplished knowledge and experience in matters of State, and a professed
inimitable Loyalty toward his Majesty alone, independent of all private
interest whatsoever; and being therefore unable to contain himself (being in
conversation among some Ladies) from the expression thereof, nor from mingling
in his Discourse, together with his sighs against his own ill fortune, some
censures touching the persons that then were at Stern; he was by the King upon
the 12th of November banished from Paris: the next day his Majesty appearing in
the Parliament, caused to be there verified and registered the Decree made in
his Council of State, against the Princes of Conde, of Conti, the Duchess of
Longueville, the Duke of Rochefoucunt, and others who were all of them declared
guilty of High Treason against the King.

The Court continued after to give fitting orders and redresses for the good
Government of the Kingdom, and the avoiding of these new Machines which had
been lately raised in opposition to the Royal Authority; and the King's Council
above all things applied themselves to find out fitting means for the quieting
the mind of the Cardinal de Retz, who being full of lofty thoughts, and eminent
pretensions, was much troubled to see the Cardinal Mazarin re-established quiet
in Paris, and the Kingdom, to which he was much adverse, by reason of his
particular designs. He gloried so much in the luster of his Purple, and the
value he put upon himself, that hoping with the same Arts he had gained them,
to overthrow also the glory and the fortune of the other, and reimbu^se himself
the vast expense he had been at during the Broyls, whereby he was run far in
debt, he went continually seeking the means to compass his intent, and as he
had thrown down the greatness of Conde, to ruinate also that of the Cardinal
Mazarin. He therefore solicited the Parliament to meet, and consult upon the
means of restoring their secluded Members, pressed the Partisans to demand the
Moneys advanced by them from the King (though they had all the time before
never mentioned a word of it) to hold correspondence with the Seditious and
Malcontents, to renew the Troubles, and compass his desires. And although
remorse of Conscience made him at times suspicious, yet he f^ared not to be
imprisoned by reason of his Dignity of Cardinal, as he was used to publish
amongst his Confidents. And if he went not to Court it proceeded rather from
the Maxim, that he would not be esteemed gracious there, and preserve thereby
the favor of the people, whom he thought apt enough to a Commotion, than from
the fear of receiving an affront; so highly did he over-rate the esteem, he
thought was set upon himself: and remaining therefore in the middle of the City
amongst the Citizens his friends and neighbors, he continued still impugning of
the King's Authority, and hoped that by this means they would be forced to make
application to him: Whereupon this being known by his Majesty's good Servants
to be a pernicious action, which was by all means to be speedily redressed;
there was a long debate between the Prince Thomaso of Savoy (who then exercised
the Charge of Principal Minister of State) and diverse others well-affected to
his Majesty's Service, touching the means of removing him from Paris; and in
case that should not succeed, to find some other fit expedient to take from the
loose people this Temptation, which might perhaps engage them in new Disorders.

The Cardinal had in confidence acquainted the Princess of Guymeny, that he was
willing to retire to Rome, and that coming to the King's knowledge, the
Princess was charged in some dextrous manner, to let him know, That if we were
resolved upon it, his Majesty would assent thereunto: And at the same time
there was proposed unto him a specious Title, with a considerable Aynde de
costa, That residing in Italy, he might protect the Interests of the Crown, as
well in the life, as after the death of Innocent, in the Conclave: But when it
came to the point, the effects were found very different from his Expressions,
for he then answered, That the face of Affairs was changed, and that he could
not now abandon his Friends to the discretion of the Court.

The Negotiation of the Princess having failed, there was employed therein by
the Queen, the Princess Palatine, who was of a ready Wit, and lively spirit,
and very fit for the undertaking of any knotty business. The Princess saw him
several times, and failed not to represent unto him with much efficacy what
was imputed to him by their Majesty's, Adding, That 'twas too much for him to
pretend to make use of that Dignity (which he had by his Majesty's favor and
bounty) in a matter repugnant to the gust and satisfaction of his Majesty,
against whose good pleasure, it was a vanity worthy of blame in Subjects to
oppose themselves. That he should not harbor in his breast these thoughts of
trouble and disturbance, which by many were imputed to him; and that besides
there were offered unto him besides Honorable Ayndas de Casta, and Assignations
sufficient to maintain him at Rome: But the persuasions of this Princess
availed nothing, because he strongly conceited his Reputation was concerned in
the Voyage, in respect it would be thought he was driven out of France, and
parting should abandon many of his Friends, which by the Rules of gratitude he
could not do. Finally, being convinced by the strong Reasons of the Princess,
he delayed the time upon the pretense of expecting the Cardinal Mazarine's
coming to Paris, with whom alone, and no other, he was resolved to treat of
that Affair; and refusing the Queens interposition therein, which much
increased the suspicions against him: And he began then to demand a Government
for one of his Dependants; a Secretary of States place for another Friend of
his, and other Employments for diverse of his Confidents, and discovered his
pretensions to be very high and exorbitant. The Queen who had refused such
things to the Prince of Conde, who was at the Gates of Paris with an Army, was
resolved not to grant them unto a man who had nothing but a tongue to stir up
fickle people, and such as were desirous of a change; the jealousies had of him
being therefore much augmented, it was thought necessary (for securing the
Government against his sinister and vagrant thoughts) to take a resolution to
secure his Person.

The difficulty of the thing rested in the manner how to execute it, because it
was not practicable in his own House, and both dangerous and full of peril to
do it in the Streets of Paris, which his Majesty desired to avoid, and to do it
without tumult, as well in regard of his Dignity of Cardinal, as because his
principal aim was to do all things with great quietness, and without confusion.

But whilst the King's Ministers busied themselves in fitting of such things as
might facilitate the execution thereof, which they found always full of
difficulty, fortune, or rather the divine Justice, offered a means for the
effecting of it much more favorable than was expected.

His friends did represent unto him, that the King was resolved to be observed,
and that it was his duty to pay his Majesty the ordinary Visits, or to abandon
Paris; they told him this manner of proceeding was too scandalous, and de Retz
being persuaded thereby, and Christmas now drawing near, was resolved to Preach
himself in the Church of St. German of Auxerre, whereof the Queen having
notice, sent word unto the Curate, that she intended to be there in person.

The Cardinal took this for a favor, and thought himself obliged to wait upon
her Majesty, and thank her for the Honor she intended to him, in persuance
whereof upon the 20 th of December, beyond all their hopes, or expectations, he
went unto the Lo^vre, trusting upon his Dignity of Cardinal, wherein he so much
confided, that he said publicly, That although he had formerly been in some
apprehension from the Court, yet since he was a Cardinal he dreaded nothing
further from thence.

Being entered within the Court, he found the Queen was not then fully dressed,
and therefore going up the great Stayres to see the King, he met his Majesty
about the middle of them, by whom he was with great courtesy received, and
brought into his Mothers Lodgings, with whom whilst de Retz complemented and
discoursed, the King whispered to Monsieur de Tillier, and gave order for the
Arresting of him, which a while after was executed by the Marquess of
Villequier, Captain of the Guard, who seized upon him at the door of the Anti
Camera.

The Cardinal was very pale, and much confounded; and said, What me? for what
Cause? Villequier with some Soldiers conducted him into the great Gallery, and
from thence into the Duke of Anjou his Apartment, where he was shut up about
two hours, until the Guard to conduct him was put in order, and a Coach wherein
he was after some time by the Porta del Conferenza, carried unto the Castle de
Vincennes; no Tumult or Disturbance being all this while among the people, who
discoursing of the News, applauded the King's resolution in it.

There were presently many and various discourses touching this extraordinary
Accident happening as 'twere by chance: Those of the Court said, That the King
began now to make himself known for such, and that this resolution was a thing
suddenly taken by himself, without the advice or persuasion of his Ministers,
only for the public repose and quiet of the Kingdom.

The Prisoner's Friends on the other side, gave out, This was a blow proceeding
from the Cardinal Mazarin, who neither would, or knew how to return to Paris,
whilst he had so considerable a Rival, that was supported by so many Friends,
who were Enemies unto him: That he kept aloof from Paris, on purpose that he
might not be known for the Contriver of this business, and for fear lest the
people rising in favor of the Prisoner, should make him feel the effects of
their long continued hatred and rancour against him. But whether it were so, or
otherwise, the Cardinal Mazarin declared he had no part in the action; and for
proof thereof writ unto his Majesty a very favorable Letter on the Prisoner's
behalf; he represented to his Majesty, That by reason of the Character he bare
of the most Christian King, he was obliged to defend the Immunities of the
Church; and therefore he m^st earnestly besought him that he would have in this
case such regards as were fit for his Royal Piety, and the Title he had of
being firstborn Son unto the Church, recommending unto him with all
earnestness the Interests of the Prisoner.

Upon this Letter several Judgments were made; Many were of opinion he dealt
not therein clearly from his heart, but endeavored to palliate the Crime,
whereof himself was the sole Author, and that this was an Artifice which had
been long before premeditated: Others who knew the execution thereof to be
un^oreseen and causual, were satisfied that Mazarine was in his nature rather
obliging than revengeful toward his Enemies, thought it to be an effect of his
good inclination, proceeding from a desire to oblige that Prelat by so
remarkable a benefit, to a reciprocal return of kindness, and to a generous
emulation of corresponding to so noble and ingenuous a carriage: These were not
any way mistaken, because it appeared after, that Cardinal Mazarin had used his
utmost endeavor to gain Re^z, and to remove those sinister conceptions which
he had of him; and that he failed in the Design, was an effect of the
incorrigible nature of Cardinal de Retz, envious of the glory and good fortune
of Mazarine.

Many others of the most considerable Persons amongst the Clergy, employed
themselves in his favor; but Politic respects prevailing before the
satisfaction of particular Persons, made it evidently manifest, his Majesty had
no other ends, but the happiness and quiet of his Subjects.

And because the Court of Rome should have no occasion of offense thereby
against France, for having done an Act so much abominated by the Canon Laws,
there was a Courrier dispatched unto the Pope, to give him an account of the
whole business.

The Friends of the imprisoned Cardinal sent thither also another some few
hours after, to complain unto his Holiness of that violence, and to engage him
in the Prisoner's protection. The News in a few days after reached Rome; and
the Pope, who had little affection for the French (and least of all for
Mazarine) was wonderfully nettled at it, and if he had power equal to his will,
possibly some things of consequence had been resolved, and put in execution: He
assembled forthwith Congregations of the most able Cardinals his Confidents,
and although there wanted not some moderate Persons amongst them, who failed
not to represent that in a matter so delicate much circumspection ought to be
used; Orders were notwithstanding sent to Monsieur Marini Archbishop of
Avignon, That he should (together with the Officers of his Court) transport
himself to Paris, and there framing a Process touching the Crimes whereof the
Prisoner was accused, should require to have the Judgment of them left unto the Sea Apostolic, to which only belongs the power of giving Sentence against
Cardinals.

But as at Rome they were most certain, That having formerly refused to receive
Monsignor Corsino Nuntius Elect into France, only because he came without first
giving notice unto the King, or his Ministers of his arrival, they would much
less receive the Archbishop with his Commission; and that therefore they
resolved a thing which could not take effect: So it was plainly understood at
Paris that this was the advice of those, who desired to furnish the Popedom
with pretexts of blaming France, for want of respect t^wards the Sea
Apostolic, and to give the Pope occasion to join with the Enemies of that
Crown; there being some in Rome, as well as Paris, who beli^ved the King would
not have dared to contradict the Pope in that unhappy conjuncture of Affairs,
and that therefore this bold resolution of sending the Archbishop Marini into
France, would add very much to the reputation of his Holiness, and splendour of
the Ecclesiastical Authority. The Prince Cardinal Trivultio (who was then in
Rome, as the Person entrusted with management of the Interests of Spain, and as
Ambassador to his Catholic Majesty) wisely foresaw the vanity of this
resolution, notwithstanding that he endeavored always (as a good Minister of
State) to continue in his Holiness the sinister impressions against France, yet
he approved not this advice; showing plainly the ill success was likely to
attend it: This Prince had executed this Function but from the 25th of November
the year before, which had been put upon him in the manner, and for the Reasons
following. The Cardinal of Arragon being dead shortly after his Promotion
(which was very much delayed, either as not cordially solicited by the
Cardinal Albernaz (who desired not that a Competitor of such a Quality and
Kinsman of Don Louis d' Aro should prevail) or to facilitate the Promotion of
the Count d'Ognate;) the Cardinal di Cuena was at the same time sent, or called
back unto his residence at Malega, whereupon his Catholic Majesty ordered
Trivultio to leave the Government of Sardinia, and repair suddenly to Rome, to
supply the Cardinal of Arragon's place who was destined thither, and gave him
all the Spiritual Promotions in Italy, which became void by his death. But
Trivultio being unable to go the Voyage so speedily, because he was first to
quiet the Kingdom (which by reason of some private accidents was in commotion,)
the death of Don Anthonio Ronchiglio happened, (whom Don John of Austria at his
parting from Sicily had left President there) whereupon the Duke Dell.
Infantado, who was Ambassador at Rome, being appointed Viceroy there, the
Cardinal Trivultio received new Orders to hasten his Journey, that he might
enter upon the charge of his Embassy.

The Affair happened directly according to Trivultio his Presage, because the
proceedings of the Roman Court which had no other foundation but the opinion
and desire of those who promoted it, was suddenly quashed, when the entry of
the Archbishop Marini into the Kingdom was stopped by Mazarine, who knew the
nature of the French, very easily inclined to pleasing Novelties, but
inflexible to such resolutions as threaten them; in which they consider nothing
but to maintain the King's Authority: And the French showed themselves to be
ill satisfied with the Court of Rome, reproaching it for partiality, for that
whereas there had been several applications made unto it the year before, to
represent the Injuries done by the Parliament of Paris to Cardinal Mazarine,
against all Humane, and Divine Laws, without any legal accusation, or just
authority, contrary to the King's Pleasure, who justified and owned him for his
Faithful Servant, when a reward of 50000 Crowns was set upon his head, besides
the Confiscation of all his Goods, the Pope had not concerned himself at all in
his protection, who had then no other support but his Holiness (the King's
Authority being trodden under foot and violated;) whereas there was now so
great a Noise for the Imprisonment only of the Cardinal de Retz, to which his
Majesty was necessitated for the Public good, and maintenance of the Royal
Authority, against which Retz was accused to have long plotted; and the rather,
because his Christian Majesty had no other intention but to hinder his
proceedings therein; not to make his Process, and much less to judge him, as
knowing well the same belonged only unto Christ's Vicar; Although the
Parliament had arrogated to themselves an authority to do it against Mazarine,
without any of those cautions, necessary to be used by any who bear Reverence
to Holy Church.

These and the like Reasons were given by the French; who also urged the
President of Lewis the 11 th King of France, that imprisoned, and kept the
Cardinal Ballua many years in restraint, holding correspondence with his
Majesty's Brother, and the Duke of Burgundy; and yet the Pope interposed only
by Fatherly Admonitions, and Requests for his delivery, although the things
whereof he was accused, were nothing in comparison of what de Retz was charged
withal. They said farther, That the King had procured this Dignity for his
Subject, to oblige him unto a greater diligence in his Service; not to protect
him in any thing prejudicial unto his Crown: That all things necessary for
maintenance of their Kingdoms, were lawful unto Sovereign Princes; but all
things were not permitted to Subjects which conduced unto their satisfaction:
That none engaged himself in the defense, or gave a more entire obedience unto
the Popes in matters of the Church, then the Most Christian King, for which he
had been always willing to expose his Crown; but he ought likewise in the
Interests of State, to take to heart the good and quiet of his Subjects, unto
whom he was a most indulgent Father.

The disgust which the choice of Monsieur Corsino gave to the Court of France
sprang hence; his Majesty's Ambassador at Rome having received some inckling
that the Pope intended to send another Nuntio in lieu of Monsieur the Marquess
of Bagni, gave notice to his Holiness, That in case he intended such a thing,
'twere fit he should first declare what Prelate he intended to entrust with
that Employment; that he might know whether he were a person would be grateful
to his Majesty. The Pope pretended to have no such thought; but ^ome few days
after published the Election of the said Monsignior Corsino. The Ambassador
gave present notice of the disgust his Majesty would take at the manner of this
Election, rather then for the quality of the person, who was in himself very
considerable, and one to whom his Majesty had no other exception. But the Pope
insisting, That he had no obligation to send only such Nuntio's as should be
pleasing to the Princes unto whom they went, as he obliged not them to send him
only such Ambassadors as he approved, continued positive in what he had
before resolved, as conceiving that to alter him, would prejudice the
Reputation of the Holy See; and commanded the Nuntio to prosecute his Voyage,

The Kings of France pretend (chiefly in time of War) not to receive any
Nuntio's or Legate from the Pope, but one that shall be to their satisfaction,
for a reason which obliges no other Prince besides the Popes; viz. Because it
happens often, that those Prelates who are sent are not Subjects of the Church,
but of some other Italian Prince (as this Corsino was, being a Florentine); and
because (although they were the Churches Subjects) they might be Pensioners to
other Princes, therefore France has not thought fit to accept any, before an
Information given of his quality, lest they might otherwise receive into their
house, one who was an enemy, or of their party; For this cause therefore and no
other, the Kings of France have used to require that they may be advertised
before a Nuntio be chosen, and therefore Monsignior Corsino was stopped in
Provence; but afterward upon Treaty, it being known that this Prelate was
independent of any but the Pope, he was admitted, and had been certainly
received, had not the accident of Cardinal Retz, and sending of the Archbishop
of Avignon, given a stop to the whole Business.

The Imprisonment of this Cardinal, who was one of the principal supports of
the Faction Della Fronda, did break and totally destroy it, because although
there remained yet some relics of this fire, they were such feeble sparks as
of themselves could raise no flame; and therefore the King's Authority growing
more vigorous, proceeded in the Execution of all those Councels which were
esteemed proper for restoring the Kingdom into its pristine splendor.

The King's Revenues were by these Troubles very much diminished, and therefore
the business for Money was very pressing, vast Debts being contracted, and the
Credit of the Court being reduced unto the utmost extremity, notwithstanding
that his Majesty's Annual Revenue amounted to more than Eight Millions of
Dobloones of Gold. There were therefore many Decrees for raising Money made by
his Majesty, which were the last day of December verified, and Registered in
Parliament in his Majesty's presence, with all readiness, although they were
Thirteen in number; To which was added one Clause to sweeten them, viz. That
this Relief should be employed in the most urgent Business of the Kingdom, and
particularly in payment of the Soldiery. And those Edicts the 7th of January
following were also verified in the Chamber of Accounts, and the Court of Ayds,
in presence of the Duke of Anjou, who was sent thither by his Majesty to that
purpose.

Together with these good Reliefs unto the Civil Government, the Martial
Affairs began to be managed with a new vigor, and good success; considering
the loss and ruins which had happened to the King; and the whole Kingdom, not
only in the parts of Flanders, and Guienne, but also in Italy, and Catalonia,
in which Province Cardinal Mazarine (having resolved to maintain a brisk War,
that the Spaniard might be thereby diverted from sending great supplies to
other parts) had caused the Town of Roses to be seasonably relieved with some
Barks of Provision, sent thither from Provence by the Duke of Mercoeur, and
with the Regiment of Foot of Anjou, commanded by Monsieur Friquembaut; by whose
arrival there was discovered a notable Treason plotted in the place, by one
Ganot an Intendant, married to a Catalonian Woman, handsome enough, and wanton,
and therefore much frequented by the Garrison.

She with her blandishments, and arts, prevailed upon her Husband to treat with
the Spaniard, made a great progress therein, and wrought so powerfully in the
minds, not only of the Officers of the Garrison, but of the Household Servants
also of the Marquess de Fara, Governor of the place, that even his most
ancient, and reputed most faithful Servants, were engaged in this amorous
Frenzy, and became accomplices in the Treason; by a wonderful and almost
incredible example, wherein 'twas seen, that the allurements of a lascivious
imagination, prevailed against the obligation of their vowed Loyalty, unto the
loss of their Reputation, and the destruction of their Lives and Fortunes.

The design of this Conspiracy was to kill the Governor at a certain Post, one
Night as he went the Round, and then to open the Gates unto the Spanish Troops,
who under the Command of the Baron of Sabac, were entrenched near unto them.
The coming of this new Recruit cooled the Affair, and drew it out at length,
because the Officers of this new Succor were to be treated withal, and gained,
whereby it came to be so long delayed, that the Plot was discovered in this
manner:

There was a Spanish Drum used to go, and return, for Exchange of Prisoners,
and other Occurrences of War, by whom Ganot used to communicate all things
with the Enemy; it came into the Governor's Mind one day to have him searched,
and see what Letters he carried, whether they were the same which he showed as
he went out of the Port, the Governor's Brother a young Cavalier took them
from him; and the Drum growing first pale, and then blushing upon the taking of
them from him, put the Cavalier into some suspicion of him; he brought the
Letters unto the Governor, who finding them the same which had been at first
showed, thought no farther of it; but as he was upon the point of restoring the
Letters, and discharging of the Drum, it came into his mind that Ganot himself
had taught him to write with a certain water, the Characters whereof could not
be seen but near the fire; he thought therefore to review these Letters, and
try it, perhaps they had the secret of this water; and by that means the whole
business came to be discovered.

Ganot was forthwith called, and strictly examined, whether he knew any thing
of the Conspiracy, which the Spaniards had about the betraying of the place,
and desired if he did, he would discover it, promising him pardon, and ^ecrecie
in the Affair (this the Governor did to make him serve as a double Instrument,
that he might countermine the Enemies Designs) Ganot denied it absolutely; but
being afterward convinced by these Letters, he suddenly abandoned himself unto
that baseness which is usually the companion of guilt, confessed the whole, and
all his Accomplices; who being seized upon, and tried by a Court-Marshal, to
the number of above twenty, were cast, and suffered deservedly an ignominious
death; amongst whom (to the admiration of all) was one Giardeni Secretary to
the Governor, a person who had long served him, and had in many occasions by
experience been found trusty, and of an unblemisht reputation.

In Guienne the King's Armies began to prosper, by degrees, as those of the
Bourdelois grew weaker, who were divided amongst themselves, and governed by
particular Interests and Passions. The Duke of Candale, who (as has been
already said) was sent to Command his Majesty's Forces in that Province in
lieu of the Count d' Harcourt, took presently the Castle of Piniols, and seized
upon Marmanda and Arguillon Towns fortified after the ancient manner, situated
beyond Bourdeaux and Again on this side of the Garonne; and being afterward
informed that the Count Marsin had caused the Colonel Baltassar to pass the
Garonne with five or 600 Horse, to gain some advantage by the division of the
Cavalier d' Aubeterra's Troops, which were placed in Garrison, and that he had
also made Monsieur di Bas, Marshall de Camp to march toward Granada; he sent
Orders to the said Cavalier d' Aubetterre to be watchful unto the preservation
of the Town, as a Post which would be of great advantage to the Enemy, because
it not only hindered their entrance into the Country of Chalosse and Armagnac,
but made him Master of the River of Adour, which is the principal Stream of all
that Province, the which having for its Head a Fountain called Cap Adour, in
the Mountain of Tourmalet, in the Barrois, washes the Soil of Bigorne, the
Cities of Turbe and of Air, and after receiving into her self the Rivers of
Isle, Leckez, Larras upon the Confines of Bigorre, and Gascoigne, and after of
Lons and Douse, passes to Mugron, where growing Navigable, with a less rapid
course it discharges it self into the Ocean near to Baione.

To hinder this Design Aubeterre rallied his Troops with so much diligence and
so good fortune, that in less than thirty hours he had gotten together more
than three hundred Horse, and better than four hundred Musketeers, with which
he forthwith marched against the Enemy, but finding him possessed already of
the said Post of Grenada, he advanced notwithstanding to the Banks of Douse, in
a place called San Mauritio, where had already passed 100 Horse, and as many
Foot, whom he set upon, and charged so briskly, that almost all their Foot were
lost, either by the Sword, or by the River, the Horse saving themselves by a
hasty flight, and rallying behind the River with a Squadron of Horse as great
as the other, and five hundred Musketeers.

The King's Troops forthwith passed the River with so much fury, that those of
the Princes terrified with fear, after they had given one Volley of Shot with
their Firearms, all fled, recommending their safety unto the swiftness of
their flight. Monsieur D' Avennes who commanded a Squadron of d' Aubeterre his
Regiment, with the Monsieurs de Troe and Villeneuf, Officers of the Regiment of
Crequi, following them with extraordinary diligence, attacqued them so
furiously, that amongst the dead and Prisoners, were accounted more than one
hundred and fifty Irish, and amongst them was taken Monsieur Faget, eldest
Captain; and Sergeant Major of Baltassar, and Monsieur de Danansin mortally
wounded; those who escaped shut themselves up into Grenada, against which place
the same Cavalier d' Aubeterre forthwith advanced with some Recruits come unto
him from Mont de Marsan, being a Town with a Bridge upon the said River of
Douse; but he was not expected by the Enemy, for they escaping privately in the
night time, escaped to Tortas, the most important place they had in all that
Quarter, standing upon the same River of Douse, and fortified with strong
Walls, ancient Turrets, and a numerous Garrison.

The Duke of Candale after these fortunate Encounters, having first assured
himself of Mont de Marsan, and other Towns in those Quarters by sufficient
Garrisons, and banishing such of the Inhabitants as he found ill-affected, left
there Aubeterre with part of the Cavalry, and himself returned toward the
Garonne, unto another Body of his men commanded by the Marquess de Camilla
Lieutenant General of the Army. Some few days after being advertised that
Monsieur de San Mico marched toward Roquefort, a place in the Country d'
Albret beyond Mont de Marsan, and Prazas, with the Regiment of Conti,
consisting of 400 Foot, and with 100 Horse, to possess that place by means of
the Intellgence he had with some of the Inhabitants corrupted by Monsieur de
Pruque Captain of the Regiment of Guitaur, he marched to encounter him with the
greatest force he could draw out of his Garrisons, and overtaking them as they
were taking up their Quarters in the very Suburbs of Roquefort, he commanded
the Cavalier Birague to make an attempt upon them with the Forlorn-hope,
assuring him that he should be relieved and seconded; which being punctually
executed, more than forty Soldiers of the Enemy were slain, and the rest
enforced to shut themselves up in another Suburb, which was entrenched; at the
same time there appeared beyond the River a Squadron of Horse, which was
violently pursued even to the Town-gates; into which Aubeterre sent a Trumpet
unto the Baron de Marsan who was Governor of the Town, to offer him relief,
which he refused; assuring him, He was in a condition to defend himself with
the strength he had, and that he need not doubt his fidelity to the King's
Service.

This good Answer made Aubeterre get to Horse, that he might find and fight the
Enemy; but having notice by the way that they came with de Mico from facing San
Justin, a place within the County d' Albret, situated between the Rivers
Gelixe and Douse, pursued by the Cavalier de Paris, and Monsieur de Serigeux
with so good fortune that the Commander of them had hardly saved himself with
only five Horse of threescore that he had with him; he resolved to pursue the
Run-aways, and clear that Country from the Prince's Forces.

But being at the same time advertised, that the Town of Roquefort, and the
Baron of Marsan against his Parole given, instead of defending the Town for the
King, had received Colonel Baltassar with the Princes Forces, he marched
forthwith thitherward with those few Horse he had then with him, that he might
be revenged upon them; but hearing upon the way that Baltassar had taken San
Justin, and la Bastida shamefully rendered to him, where he was fortifying to
make himself a Winter-quarter, he forthwith changed his Design, and thought it
better to march against Bastida, within which were the Regiments of Leran and
di Guitauld, with 200 Foot and 100 Horse of Conti's under the Command of the
said Leran, who was a Marshall de Campo.

He joined himself for this Design with the Monsieurs Dalidor and ^eilch, who
had with them a good Body of Horse; and upon the 26th of January they drew near
unto the place* D^^idor with some Horse that dismounted, attacqued the Gate*
and forced i^* giving entrance to Aubeterre and his Companions, but finding a
strong B^^ricado notably defended by de Leran and his Soldiers, the King's
Forces were with some loss repulsed, and forced to seek ^ better way to gain
their purpose.

They caused therefore the Barricado to be attacqued on three sides by a false
Al^arm, and in the mean time the Soldiers entered into some Houses upon another
side, from whence firing upon the backs of those who defended the Barricado,
they forced them to quit it, and retire into the great Church, which standing
in the middle of a large Piazza, they fortified themselves within i^; Dalidor
forthwith without loss of time advancing under the Wall, gained with great
Valor the Breast-work drawn by the Enemy before the Doors, and then the
Cavalier d' Aubeterre gave sudden notice to Leran, that he should lay down
Arms, and yield, or otherwise he should have no Quarter.

Leran made Articles, That liberty being given to himself and the
Staff-Officers to retire themselves where they thought good, the Soldiers and
the other Officers should remain Prisoners of War: Which being executed, there
remained Prisoners with the Kings Forces more than 200 Foot, and about 300
Horse, with all their Baggage.

The Enterprise was Noble and very Honorable to the King's Commanders,
although they lost therein about forty of their own men, together with Monsieur
della Chappelle; and this fortunate encounter facilitated also the gaining of
Mas d' Aginois, which presently rendered it self without much resistance; after
this Action the King and Princes Forces scouring every where over that fertile,
and late peaceable Campaign, rendered the Inhabitants thereof as unhappy, as the
Bourdelois had showed themselves imprudent, in drawing on their own shoulders a
War, only to please others, whereby they could reap nothing but an irrevocable
ruin, an eternal infamy, and in case the Arms of the Malcontents should have
prevailed, a slavery to themselves, instead of the mild Government of their
lawful and most gracious Sovereign.

These Maxims were notwithstanding understood by some, and had possibly been
followed with effect, in case the wavering multitude without cause o^ reason
had not suffered themselves to be governed by a blind fury, and inconsiderate
ambition.

In this mean the Sc^nes for the Ballet were preparing in Paris, and the Prince
of Conti in Bourdeaux, together with the Princesses, his Cousin, and Sister,
being invited by the Carneval-Season, that they might win upon the minds, and
please the simple People, and especially the rude multitude, greedy of
Novelties, and delighted with pompous Shows, celebrated the Solemnity of the
Christening of the Prince of Conde his Second Son, born the Sept. before;
wherein (according to the Prince of Conde's Orders) were Godfathers, the
Jurates of the City, and the Duchess of Longueville his Sister, who adorned
pompously with all her Jewels went to the Cathedral of the City, attended by
the Cavalier Todias, first Jurate, and the Count Marsin, (who held the Infant)
the Prince of Conti, the Duke of Anguien, and all the Principal Cavaliers and
Officers of the Party being also present.

The City after made a magnificent Feast and Banquet, which was scrambled at by
those of the Olmiera; and there were also made for some days following other
Balls, and Bonfires, with Justs, Tiltings, Comedies, and Masks, as if that
Country had felt nothing of War or Misery.

In the mean time diverse secret Plots were driven on for the reducing of
Bourdeaux to his Majesty's Obedience; and it was a matter of difficulty to
reduce that powerful and warlike City, so they made use of Industry and Art for
the effecting of it. The Father Faur, a Franciscan, who was after made Bishop
of Glandeues, a man subtle and zealous in his Majesty's Service, who had much
contributed to the reduction of Paris, proposed also the forming of some
Intelligence in the City of Bourdeaux it self, by means of the Fathers of his
Order.

To this effect there was sent thither Father Bertaut, Guardian of Breda, to
settle an Intelligence with the Father Ithier Superior of the Franciscan
Convent in Bourdeaux, who carried with him several Orders fit for advancing the
Design, according as Accidents should fall out. Bertaut being discovered by the
Prince of Conti, escaped from his hands with great dexterity, having upon
pretense of kindness told him many falsehoods to conceal from him the true
knowledge of the Design, and of the persons acting in it; but the Father Ithier
was not at all moved therewith, because knowing himself to be gracious, and
welbeloved by the Citizens, he hoped, That although his Designs should be
discovered by some accident, yet he should be protected by them; and the
rather, because he was assured that there were many, who groaned under the
Tyranny of the Olmiera, who with inconsiderate precipitation, went on, and were
upon the point of ruining the Country, and Religion, by Treaties with the
English to give them entrance into Guienne. They concluded therefore, that
there was no better or more secure a way, than to gain some of the principal
persons of the Olmiera.

The Mother Angelica, Abbess of the discalsed Carmelites, gave occasion thereof
to the Father Ythier, and discovered to him that one of her Convent, Sister
unto Villars, had told her how* well he was disposed to return unto his
Majesty's obedience, touched with remorse of Conscience, and the apprehension
of a miserable end, due to his crimes; and he had therefore prayed his Sister,
That she together with her company, would pray to God to give him strength, and
courage, to amend his life.

The Father Ythier doubted not to discover himself unto the Nun, and to
persuade her to keep her Brother fixed in his good purpose. Villars undertook
to restore the City to the King's obedience, provided his Majesty would grant a
General Act of Oblivion to all, to himself the charge of Procurator, and
Syndiche to the Community, and the sum of 40000 Crowns to be distributed
amongst those, who should be instrumental in it. The Court assented to the
Proposition, and upon the Father's request gave order, That no violence should
be offered unto the Prince or Princesses within the Town. The design proceeded
hopefully, and would easily have been effected, if Villars (unconstant in his
resolution) had not revealed the whole Plot; which happened upon a bare surmise
of Signior Lenet, who gave out that he knew there was a new party framing in
Bourdeaux, wherein many that professed great Service to the Princes had a hand:
Villars believing that some one of the Conspirators had discovered it unto
Lenet, and fearing that he should be ruined, cast how to save himself by
revealing the whole Treaty unto the Prince of Conty; he said, That he had not
engaged himself therein, but to obtain thereby a clearer knowledge of it, and be
able to make a f^^ler discovery unto the Prince, which was the cause he had not
given him an earlier knowledge of it. The Prince told him, That he was well
assured of his fidelity, and should never believe other of him; and therefore
gave him Orders to continue his intelligence with them, that he might observe
them better, and discover all the accomplices therein. That he might have the
stronger proof against Father Ythier, he obliged by solemn Oath Blaraut, and
Giuraut, Gold^miths, that they should go to receive the Money promised by his
Majesty, whereof 1500 double Pistols were consigned. So as upon their
Examination, and Depositions, the Father was imprisoned, and brought before a
Council, in which Marsin Presided, and where were present many of the Olmiera,
and some Officers of the Army, there a contest rose, Whether Secular persons
might sit in Judgment upon Clergymen? but 'twas not there resolved.

The Prince of Conti and Duchess of Longueville gave positive Orders he should
not die, but be kept Prisoner; Marsin, and Lenet, whose endeavor was to make
the people furious, caused some Carters to cry out, Toll, toll, Crucifige;
wherewith some of the Judges being much troubled, with incensed Countenances
said, They were not Jews, and if the others were not Christians, they might go
look them out a Pilate; for their parts, they intended not to dip their hands
in innocent blood. Whereat Marsin was much troubled, and to end the Dispute,
caused him to be condemned to be publicly Carted; which caused a Spectacle of
great compassion through the City, and brought much blame and hatred upon the
Princes Party, because the Father being carried about, shouted at, reviled, and
suffering a thousand insolences from the rude multitude, went undisturbed, not
moved either with the apprehension of death, or any injuries were done unto
him, as if he had been going to a glorious Triumph. This his demeanor and
fearless, yet full of humility, and patience, so moved the People, that they
were forced to return him forthwith unto the Prison, from whence he came; and
because they had taken away his habit, the Duchess of Longueville misliking
such barbarism, gave order to have it restored, and that the insolency of the
People should be repressed. There was after this a Cousin of the same Father
apprehended, who was privy to all his Transactions, to whom was given a strange
Torment; but he, as if it had been nothing, suffered the same with a wonderful,
and incredible patience, never opening his mouth of any thing touching the
matter. The same morning that Father Ythier was taken, there were also arrested
the President Dafis, and the Councellor Board, and Castel^are, and committed to
the Castle du Ha; who were after released on their Parols. Dafis, that he might
free himself from all intrigues, took a Pass to go unto his Brother.

At the same time there was a Treaty by another Friar, called Land, together
with a Gentlewoman called de Lune, to gain the Colonel March, who gave ear
unto the solicitations of the Frier's Brother, and communicated his design
with this Widow, which was to make use of 100 Light Horse that he had hard by
the Town, to put a Gate thereof into the Duke of Candale's hand, praying her to
write unto him touching the same, and to desire he would direct the means fit
for the putting it in Execution: This Plot was also communicated with the
Jurate Rubert, but at last March himself discovered it unto Marsin, and some
few days after Land acquainted the Prince of Conty with it, whereupon the
Gentlewoman was imprisoned, long examined, and confronted with Land, who
justified it to him, that himself was the Author of the whole Plot, and
therefore was a Traitor and a Villain. The ingenuity of this Lady was more
favored than the Accusers Information, who was afterward arrested and
banished by the Olmiere, and the Gentlewoman released, and permitted to return
to her own house in the Country.

Mean while the City of Monsegur, wherein was garrisoned the Marquess of
Monpruilla^'s Regiment, was given up to the King's Party, together with their
own Officers, upon pretense that they owed them 2000 Doubloons of their Pay,
they put themselves into his Majesty's Service; imprisoned the Commissary of
the Quarters, from whom they took a good sum of Money, which he had raised upon
the Neighborhood; but they released him after, together with some of Marsin's
Officers, who at that time besieged Saint Fermo a little Town hard by: This was
the Prologue unto the ruin of the Princes Party, who were forsaken by the best
of their Troops, wearied with living in perpetual action, without any hopes of
profit or reward, wherewith the Princes had endeavored to sweeten all the
Travels and hardships of their Party.

There followed after this diverse other Accidents that much weakened the said
Party, which having no other foundation but the hope of bettering their
Fortunes, in lieu thereof met with unlooked for violences and oppression: A
certain Ingineer was imprisoned, and 3500 Doubloons taken from him, under
color that he had blamed the new form of Government; from another called de
Tuches, they took 500 Doubloons, upon pretense that he had written to Paris the
News which past at Bourdeaux; there was a Vessel seized, and 25000 Crowns
belonging to some Holland Merchants confiscated, which she was carrying to
Rochel, being raised by Corn sold in that City, declaring the same to be
Counter-band Goods; by which and suchlike proceedings, Merchant-strangers, and
the most able Citizens were extremely exasperated, seeing that without shame or
Conscience, they stopped at no unjust or barbarous action: About this time,
that is, upon the first of February, the Duke of Vendosme appeared with his
Fleet in the Garonne, and presently began to build a Fort in the Isle of
Cazaux, situated in the midst of the River, and therefore of great importance,
and no small annoyance to those of Bourdeaux, amongst whom there being many
inwardly affected to his Majesty, it was necessary the r^st should be watchful
and vigilant against Stratagems and Surprises, which in such occasions are
often practiced. And because the Curate of St. Peter's Church had in a public
Sermon exhorted those of his Parish to shake off the yoke of that slavery they
suffered under an unjust Authority, usurped over them by the base Council of
the Olmiera, he was by order of the Prince of Conti arrested, and committed to
Prison; but the people of his Parish rising in a tumult upon his carrying to
Prison, he caused him to be released, and sent away, fearing that something
worse might happen; because such Persons as are admitted to teach the Word of
God have great influence upon the people when they persuade unto peace, and to
a quiet life; and for this cause were also banished the Curates of St. Simon,
and St. Ramy, together with the Priors and Guardians of the Dominicans and
Capuchines, diverse Counselors of Parliament, and several Citizens, who chose
rather to suffer any persecution, than to run along with a Faction which was
directly contrary unto the the Service of his Majesty; so as the Parliament
(which at that time was by his Majesty transferred to Again) lessened so fast,
that there remained in Bourdeaux only nine Counselors, most of which were so
terrified and confounded, that they knew not well what they were doing.

The Parliament transferred, began their meeting in Again the third of March,
the Signor de Lane second President presided at the opening of it; in the
presence of the Duke of Candale, the Bishop of the City, and several other
Persons of Quality, who assembled upon that occasion: But in Bourdeaux the
suspicion of some new Conspiracy still increasing, all diligence possible was
used to prevent it, and maintain the Prince's power: Public Proclamation was
made, That all strangers without employment should depart the City; all Hosts,
Taverners, and such as let Lodgings were forbid to lodge, or receive any,
without a billet from the Magistrate, or his Deputy. All Conventicles were
forbidden, and all Night walking after the Tap-too, and vigilant Guards being
set every where, they were very watchful against surprises; and the rather,
because the Soldiers and Captains of the Royal Party, drew more and more down
into the neigbouring Towns and Provinces.

And forasmuch as the taking of Sarlat, Sallagnat, Tetrason, and other walled
Towns of Perigord by the Prince's Forces, gave them the means of scouring all
the Neighboring quarters unto the great damage of the Province, the Marquess
Pampadour, Lieutenant of the Province of Limousin, gathering together some
Gentlemen, and diverse Troops garrisoned at Nontron, and other adjacent places
under the Command of Monsieur de Brusquet Savagnac, Marshall de Campo, and
diverse others drawn out of the Marquess de Montbrun, and Count de Pardillian,
their Regiments, under the Command of Monsieur de Baradas, Maistre de Campo,
took a resolution to march against the Enemy who kept at St. Roberts, in the
County of Again, and by cutting off their way to Terrason, to oblige them unto
an engagement. This design was no sooner discovered by the Enemy, but they
resolved to expect the coming of the King's Forces upon a rising ground, where
they drew up being 600 Foot, and as many Horse, commanded by Monsieur de la
Roche.

Pampadour being well pleased to see the resolution of his Enemies correspond
with his desire, sent Monsieur de Brusquet with the Regiment of St. Andre, to
engage them, and himself with the other Squadrons followed to relieve him. The
Prince's Troops made some resistance; but after the first charge, being
frighted with the fury of St. Andre's old Horse, and not accustomed to such
fierce engagements, suddenly turned their backs, and fled: The Foot abandoned
by the Horse, casting down their Arms, cried, God save the King; and without
moving yielded to the discretion of the Conquerors, who by this Victory,
besides the gain of all their Baggage, freed their Country from the continual
trouble of these Soldiers, who were so much the more licentious, by how much
they were straightned in their pay, and displeased with the Princes, whom they
served. The Town of Montignac, situate upon the Bank of the Dordogne,
belonging to the Marquess of Hautefort, gave testimony of an Exemplary Loyalty,
when instead of subscribing the Accord with the Count Marsin, as did the other
Towns of Perigord, they took Arms, and did not only maintain themselves in the
obedience due to His Majesty, but also did all the hurt they could unto the
Prince's Troops, as they did also in this Action of St. Roberto, where Monsieur
de Boulon issuing out with some Firelocks by Order of Monsieur de Radon
Governor of that Castle, they presently gave them chase, and took several
Prisoners.

The Castle of St. Surin was also besieged, and taken by the Royalists, it was
rendered at discretion, and the Captain Trinquet who commanded there, was
carried prisoner to Blaye: There followed also the taking of diverse other
Castles, and Walled Towns, which with some small dispute either rendered
themselves, or were taken by force of Arms, whereby the Prince's Troops came to
be straightned into a narrow compass, and the greatest part of the Inhabitants
by their example were persuaded to return unto their duty, by submitting to his
Majesty's Authority.

These good Successes in Guienne were seconded by other Accidents which were of
great advantage to the King's Party; for the News came, That on the 28th of
February there had been a great Fight at Sea between the English and the
Hollanders, wherein each Party taking themselves to have the better, and the
loss of Ships being almost equal, the Victory remained undecided: And this
Engagement of the English in a War against the Hollanders, hid^red them from
being able to embrace those resolutions against France, which otherwise they
might have done, by assisting those of Bourdeaux to the great prejudice of the
Crown of France; which would have run great hazard, being attacked on the one
side by the powerful Forces of the King of Spain, and on the other by Intestine
Broyls, if at the same time it had been also assaulted by the English: But the
good Fortune of France, subordinate unto the Will of God, which disposes all
things according to the order of his Providence, preserved in that conjuncture
this most Christian Kingdom, from receiving prejudice by that Nation different
in Religion, and Customs, which at that time met with the fairest opportunity
that might be to have wrought her ends; it being governed then by a violent
party, had she not undertaken Enterprises different from what was expected, and
being confounded within her self, had not given leisure to the King's Authority
to gather strength, and to destroy the force of those who being disobedient
themselves, endeavored by their Cabal to bring all the rest into confusion.

This was by the War with Holland, of which I shall only touch the principal
Motives, because I would not with long digressions break off the thread of that
Narration I have prescribed unto my self.

After the Parliament of England had made it self Master of that whole Kingdom,
and overcome with its Victorious Arms, the Realms of Scotland, and of Ireland,
they cast about how to maintain themselves in Arms with Forrainers, having no
Enemy at home; because in times of quiet, Factions use to arise, and Armies
weaken, which brings ruin to Commonwealths, especially in the beginning of a
new Government, when their minds are wavering between the hopes of settlement,
and fears of falling.

It happened then that no just cause appearing for a breach with France, they
took a fair pretense for a War with the Hollander, as being those who having
gained a considerable reputation at Sea, seemed to eclipse the luster of the
long feared, and unresistible force of the English, on that Element.

These Jealousies, between them (besides the natural Emulation usual amongst
bordering States) were heightened by the art and industry of the neighboring
Crowns, who observing with a jealous Eye, two Commonwealths by their sides,
grown powerful, by War and Violence, could not but suspect from them some of
those inconveniences, which are usually offered by those who are strongly
provided with Sea Forces: The cause of difference was the Herring Fishing about
the Orcades, (Islands on the North of Scotland, and Members of Great Britain)
to which the Hollanders send yearly a vast number of Ships, and draw from it an
excessive Profit. The English pretended, That the Hollanders possession of this
Fishing was an effect only of the negligence of their Kings, accompanied with
so great a loss unto the Commonwealth by the Hollanders usurpation, and
therefore not to be longer suffered by a Nation that, before Holland was so
much as known, enjoyed without contest the principal Dominion of the Ocean. To
this the States General pleaded, That their Right was sufficiently established
by their long continued possession, and Prescription.

This was the Motive upon which either party beginning first to raise Forces at
Sea, the one for recovery of this loss, and the other for the preserving of it,
fell afterward to an open breach, with so great a prejudice to both parties,
whose principal subsistence and strength depended upon Trade, that the same
being hereby interrupted, produced all the effects of a miserable, and
destructive War; but principally to Holland, which being straightened by the
smallness of their Territory upon Land, had no means of subsisting, but by the
Sea. To these Reasons which were derived from profit, and interest of State,
were added others touching the punctilio of Reputation. The English pretending
themselves to have been slighted by the Hollanders upon several occasions, and
principally in the killing of their Ambassador at the Hague, who was against
the Law of Nations assassinated there, by some English of the King's Party.

And the Hollanders (who by their fresh and frequent Victories obtained against
the Power of the King of Spain, had already gained so great a Reputation, that
they were generally much esteemed and feared; and had besides concluded so
advantageous a Peace with his Catholic Majesty) not daigning to give way unto
the threats of England, wherein the wounds of their Intestine Broyls were yet
fresh bleeding, took little care to satisfy the Parliament therein; but sent
to Sea a numerous Fleet, and either Party falling to Acts of Hostility, many
Merchants Ships were lost on either side. And their Fleets who were above 100
Sail strong on either side, meeting at last, there passed the said Battle, and
many other Fights at Sea, with loss on both sides; but in such manner, as each
Party pretending to have the Victory, it could not be well told which side had
got it, the loss consisting only in that of one or two Ships more or less than
the Relations which were published, and therefore each Party failed not to put
to Sea afresh, with an intention of fighting for it; the Hollanders
notwithstanding were very sensible of the loss of Van Trump, their General, a
Person of great Valor and extraordinary Experience at Sea. And we may well
believe, that as there is no comparison between the Greatness and Power of
England and Holland, which is far inferior to it in richess, in extent of Land,
and Bodies of men, so without doubt the English would have prevailed, had they
not been distracted by new intestine Broyls and Troubles.

The Court of France therefore considering how fit it was to make use of this
favorable conjuncture of time to assure themselves of Guienne, and Bourdeaux a
City so disposed to risings, resolved to make all fitting preparations for the
reducing of them; and therefore besides the Fleet sent into the Garonne (as
has been said) and the advance of Soldiers from all parts into the Province,
the Cardinal Mazarine continued the Treaties of Agreement with several Parties,
to see if he could give an end rather by Composition than Arms unto that War,
which being against Subjects, renders the Victory weak and languishing; whereof
reserving the Account to the next Book, I will resume the Relation of what was
done during this time in Champagne, where all persons being encouraged by the
arrival of the Cardinal's Army, and the Recruits sent from him after the taking
of Barleduc, and passing of the River Aisne, they besieged Chasteau Porcien, in
which Monsieur de Boisson commanding with a strong and numerous Garrison of old
Soldiers, rendered the place very considerable, especially being in the heart
of Winter, a time very unfit for Armies to keep the field.

This difficulty was overcome by the Cardinal himself, by whose presence (the
Soldiers having an extraordinary love for him) all dangers seemed light, and
were endured with a patience equal to that affection wherewith he was served
and followed.

The Regiment d' Espagny, Commanded by its Colonel, attacqued the said Town of
Chasteau Porcien by Orders from the Duke d' Elbeuf, and Marshall d' Aumont;
and the second of January at night possessed themselves thereof without
resistance; the Enemy being retired into the Castle, from whence they fired
fast upon the King's Forces, who had made there a Barricado, and taken up their
Quarters, and some time after fell to mining; but because the besieged defended
themselves obstinately, and threw great quantity of wildfire into the Town,
wherewith many Houses were burned, this work was hindered. The Count de St.
Aignan first Gentleman of the King's Chamber, having Commanded in Chief the
Body of an Army, was come as a Voluntier there to wait upon the Cardinal, as
did also many other Lords and Great Persons; this Count with the good liking of
the Duke d' Elbeuf, and Marshall d' Aumont the Generals, began a new Mine,
together with the Marquess d' Espagny, and Monsieur de Layeux, and St. Aignan
being busied at the work where he wrought indefatigably with his wonted
Courage; one night about five a Clock, as he returned, he was shot with a
Musket in his left arm, and received a great Wound; but this accident hindered
him not from running presently with Sword in hand before he was dressed to make
Head against a S^lly, where the Besieged were valiantly received, and beaten
back: At the last the Mine being completed and ready to be fired, and another
also of Monsieur de la Fronde, being in a good forwardness, the Enemies seeing
the works very much advanced by the assistance of the Cardinal, who (neglecting
all thoughts of dangers) was never from the Work, yielded upon Articles, and
marched out after six days respite, which were willingly accorded to them, to
see if Conde would advance to relieve them, which he gave out that he would do;
but he not appearing, they then issued out, and the Town was restored unto his
Majesty's obedience.

The Prince of Conde knowing that without stronger succors it was impossible
to give a stop unto the Cardinal's proceedings, and much troubled to see his
Designs crossed, which were (as he told the Ministers of Spain) to winter in
France, and maintain the War in that Kingdom, without Charge to Flanders, being
much grieved, and perhaps repenting that he had put himself into that Action,
began to cast away those hopes, which till then had born him up, and
represented in time, not only to the Ministers of Flanders, but also to the
Catholic King's Court, the necessity there was of a greater Force for the
carrying on of that Affair: Writing (besides the Orders sent to Monsieur de St.
Agolin his Agent in Madrid) unto the Favorite Don Lewis d' Aro, a Letter to
the ensuing purpose.

MY LORD:
I Cannot possibly forbear longer to give your Excellency an account of the
wretched condition wherein my Affairs stand, for want of those things which
have been promised me; your Excellency knows with what patience I have seen
(for want of Money) all my Concerns in Guienne to go to ruin; Paris, Montrond;
Dijon, Bourges, and many other considerable places to be lost; and with what
constancy I have refused all the advantages have been offered me by the Court
of France, for the observance of my promise; but I must now declare unto your
Excellency, that I find my self reduced to the last point. The Cardinal
Mazarine is returned into the Kingdom, has got together all the Power of
France, and is now come to drive me from my Winter Quarters; the Army of
Flanders, and the moiety of that of Lorrain have abandoned me, and the Duke
Charles speaks of calling the remainder from me. The Count Fuensaldagne, who
makes open show of an aversion to assist me, has let me know there is no Money
for me, nor no hope of it; in the mean time the Enemies establish themselves,
possess my Quarters, and in case they establish their Design, will settle an
Authority which as yet France never knew, and put themselves into such a
condition, as will be very troublesome, not to me alone, but to your Excellency
also. My Friends have lost all hope of being succored, and perceiving me to be
thus abandoned, do make their peace one after another, and quit my Party. I
beseech you my Lord, to take some good Order herein, Commanding these Ministers
expressly to assist me with all their Troops; when all those of the Enemy shall
come against me, or with part of them when I shall be assaulted only with a
Party; and also to send me forthwith Money which has been with so much
asseveration promised me. I shall then be bold to promise, that we shall
quickly force the Enemy to quit the Field, or consent unto a just and
honorable Peace.

This I expect from his Majesty's Justice, and your friendship, and shall
endeavor to let you see, I am most Affectionate to serve you, etc.


He added a Postscript to the Letter, whereby he desired him to give credit
unto what should be declared unto him touching this matter by St. Agolin, by
word of mouth, or by Monsieur Lenet by Letter, to whom he had recommended the
care of his Affairs in Bourdeaux.

The Prince's design was by all means to keep up his party in Guienne, and
thereby to assure the City, and Parliament of Bourdeaux, and by that diversion
(employing a good part of the Catholic King's Forces in that Province) he
thought with the Flanders Army to enter France, and give new life unto the
fickleness of the Parisians, and the bitterness of malcontents; and therefore
all his desires were reduced unto two points, One, That the King of Spain, with
Men and Money speedily dispatched into Guienne, would add new fuel to the War
which was there kindled: And sending the Money promised into Flanders, would
permit him to increase his Army, and march upon those designs he had projected
independent upon any other.

But forasmuch as the Spaniard by the exorbitant Expense he had been at in the
Sieges and Enterprises of Barcellona, Gravelin, Dunkirk, Trin, and Casal, was
very bare of Men, and Money, and the Kingdom of Naples could not now furnish
those great Recruits of Men and Treasure, in which consisted the chief strength
of the Spanish Forces, but rather appeared likely to fall into despair, by
reason of the oppressions it had suffered under the King's Ministers; the
Provisions of Guienne were so slow and feeble, and the Preparations in Flanders
so short of the hopes and expectations of the Prince of Conde, that it was
evident the Victories obtained in the Year 1652, were rather a weakening, than
a strength, unto that Monarchy. The Prince therefore being disabled to perform
things whereof he had given hopes unto the French that followed him, was forced
to dismiss the best part of them, and to permit them with his good leave to
return to the obedience of his Majesty, which was done by many of them for that
only reason; And the Duke of Rochefaucaut, being disabled by the Wounds he
received in the last Fight at the Fauxbough of St. Anthony in Paris to serve
farther in the War, accepted by his consent of a Pardon, and quitted the
Prince's Party with his entire good liking and consent.

The King's Council in Spain did notwithstanding what it was able in those
straits, for Provisions both for Guienne and Flanders, and was not wanting by
means of their Ambassador at London, to try all means of engaging the English
against the French; but 'twas observed, that in the Propositions for their
sending of Men into Guienne, the Catholic Ambassador moved very warily; he
was willing Spain should have a footing in that Province, but 'twas against his
Maxims, That the English should nestle there, whose power ought to be
suspected unto the Spaniard; their Dominions not only in Europe, but also in
America, being exposed to the Invasion of their formidable Fleets. manned by a
Nation ill affected to the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion.

And because the Neapolitans, and particularly the Nobles, complained, and
every one cried out against the rigours of the Count d' Ognate, Viceroy there,
murmuring that Pardons were not sincerely kept, so as there was no end of
punishment; the Catholic King resolved (his three years being long since past)
to recall him into Spain: The King's Council considered, that 'twas hard (not
to say impossible) that Minister should be persuaded to act with more
sweetness, because it appeared manifestly, that the Maxims of his Government
tending only to depress the Baronage and secure the People to him by good
turns, and a rigid Justice, he would make use of his Majesty's Authority upon
all occasions to put the same in execution, principally against those who were
suspected or accused to have had hand in the late Revolutions: Those who were
his Enemies at Court, had also the better means to do ill offices, not only by
reason of the small correspondence he held with Don John of Austria, and his
part taking with the Brothers of Cardinal Barberin; but most especially by
reason of his Wealth, and the absolute Authority he exercised in his
Government; which increased the Envy and Emulation against him. To all this was
added, the ill satisfaction of his Holiness, who protested, That he was cause
of the small correspondence between him and the King of Spain, by reason of
those continual prejudices the matters of the Church received, by the Discords
he entertained with the Archbishop Cardinal Philomarini, the nature of which,
though they were such as of themselves might be some Motives of distrust
against him, yet they were reported to have had another cause, the said
Archbishop being charged not to have dealt sincrrely in the beginning of the
Tumults, and in the progress of the Treaty, so as if he had encouraged the
People, covering his partiality under the pretense of maintaining that
confidence with them, which might render his interposition the more useful:
That he had done many Actions esteemed prejudicial, and such as showed no good
intention, particularly in receiving the Duke of Guise, in a manner refused
unto Don John of Austria, with the Ceremonies only due to lawful Princes: That
he had discovered many Councels, and Designs to the Enemy, and in particular
(although too late) the last Plot, whereby the City was recovered by the
Viceroy; That nourishing Factions without regard unto the danger of the Times,
he had bred Troubles, and prosecuted all his Actions and Designs with violence.
To the Count d^ Ognate was appointed Successor the Count of Castriglio, either
to remove him from Court, or to sweeten the Rigours of Ognate, he being a
Cavalier very dextrous, affable, and full of courtesy.

In the mean time Cardinal Mazarine being encouraged by the good Success of his
Enterprises, undertook also the Investing of Rhetel, and St. Menhou, and
rallying together all the Troops of Marshall Turenne, and de la Ferte
Seneterre, marched that way, hoping to perform this before the Soldiers went
into Quarters; but by reason of the strong Garrisons wherewith the Prince of
Conde had reinforced these places, and the sharpness of the Season, he gave
over the attempt, and in lieu thereof, sent the Marquess Castelnau, and the
Count Broglia to attack Vervins, which they did the 27th of January, forcing
the Garrison which was 300 Foot, and 200 Horse, to quit the place next day
toward Night; And the Cardinal leaving there for Governor Monsieur de
Rinville with a strong Guard, dismissed the Troops into their Quarters, and so
ended the Campaign of 1652; In Chasteau Porcien was left for Commander the
Count de Grand Pre, and the Frontiers of Champagne being provided with
sufficient strength against the attempts, might be made by the Garrisons of
Mouson, St. Menhou, Clermont, and Stenay; the Cardinal accompanied with a great
number of Noble Persons, and Officers of the Army, went to Paris, whither he
had been invited by frequent Courriers from their Majesty's.

The Marquess Pallavicin Treated at the same time the Affair touching the
Restitution of the Galley, taken by the Count d' Harcourt from the Genoueses,
and the Justice of that Commonwealths Demand appearing to the Court of France,
his Majesty, whose intentions were to preserve Friendship, and good
correspondence with them, overcame all difficulties, and with great Equity and
Justice, gave order for the restitution, commanding that the Galley fitted up,
and fully armed, should by a Gentleman sent expressly for that purpose, be
brought unto the Town of Genoua, and there restored, as it was the August
following, where the Senate in acknowledgment of his Majesty's generous
goodness, caused the Gentleman to be Treated at the public charge in the said
Marquess Pollavicin his House, and dismissed him with a Present of 1000 Ducats
in Plate.

This Galley had been thus taken, in the Encounter which past in the Year 1638.
between 15 Galleys of France, and as many of Spain, as has been elsewhere
said; There were 5. taken by the French from the Spaniard, one of which in that
long Fight having lost all her Men, and Tackle, it was impossible for the
French General to bring her into Provence, and therefore putting some few
Mariners and Soldiers into her, he left her in the Fosse D' Arrassi, himself
following on his way toward the Islands of St. Margaret, and St. Honorato;
Notice hereof being given unto the Spanish Garrison in Final, and to the
People of Loano, Subjects to the Prince Doria, the same Night with certain
Barks, and Filoukes from the Creeks in the said places, they surprised the
Galley without resistance; the rather, because she lay off the Castle, so as
she could not be thereby defended, and brought her safe into the Port of
Genoua, to which the other Spanish Galleys were retired: This Accident was
falsely reported to the French General, suggesting that those of Arassi, and
others Subjects of the Republique, had concurred to the recovery of this
Galley; which being also confirmed by the common discourse at Thoulon, and
Marseilles, and reported in the French Court, gave occasion unto the Count d'
Harcourt, being Admiral, to engage himself in demanding the restitution of this
Galley; to which purpose coming with his great Ships near Genoua, he sent with
much Civility and Courtesy to request of the Republic, that they would put
into his hands this Galley, which being gotten in a just War from the Enemy,
was possessed by their Subjects. The Senate gave order, that a relation of the
truth of the fact should be given unto Harcourt, that she had been taken, not
by their Subjects, but by Spaniards; and that for the satisfaction of France,
they would make strict enquiry to see if any of their Subjects had hand in it:
Harcourt passed in show well satisfied with the ingenuous proceeding of the
Republic, who failed not to use their best diligence to be informed of the
truth; and it was found, that among so many who joined in the recovery of the
Vessel, there were three poor Mariners who were Genoueses, whom they caused to
be severely punished, and sent due information thereof unto Gio. Baptista
Salazzo their Ambassador in France, that he might satisfy the Court, and
thought they had given sufficient satisfaction, and made it to appear that
'twas far from their intention, the least damage should be done by any of their
Subjects. But on the contrary, that two Galleys being in the same Fight taken
from the French by the Spaniard, and brought into Genoua, wherein were many
wounded persons, and Prisoners, the common Soldiers were forthwith taken into
Hospitals, and the Officers, and Persons of Quality, by particular Gentlemen
into their Houses, where they were treated with much magnificence and
Courtesy; amongst them two Captains of the Galleys lodged by Gio. Battista
Raggi, confessed that they had never found any where so much Courtesy as they
had experienced in Genoua. This Raggi was Nephew to the deceased, and Brother
to the living Cardinal of that name, who after he had for five months defrayed
their charges, got them their liberties without Ransom. But as there is never
wanting in great Princes Courts envious persons, and back-biters who do ill
offices, and turn the sweetest, and most obliging actions into poison, it was
insinuated to Harcourt, that he had been abused by the State of Genoua in his
demand, under color of taking information touching the manner of the recovery
of the Spanish Galley.

This Prince fierce by Nature, and apt to resent Injuries, the year following
being at Sea with the Fleet under his Command, sailed to the River of Genoua,
passing within two miles of St. Remy, and two Senators of Genoua being there
about Public Affairs, upon the notice they had of the appearing of the French
Fleet, sent a Gentleman with a Galley, and several Provisions to refresh, and
Complement the French General; but after the usual Salutes coming aboard the
French Admiral, without the least suspicion of Hostility, the Galley was
surprised whilst the Gentleman was aboard of Harcourt's Ship, performing of
his Message to him.

The Senators were much astonished and surprised with the unwonted strangeness
of this Action of the French Admiral, who sailing as a Friend upon the Seas of
the Republic, aad being saluted as such by them, the Hostility committed by
him could be nothing else but an apparent breach of Public Faith, and a
violation of the Law of Nations. The Gentleman and Captain of the Galley
complained to the General, charging him with a Fact so detestible, and unusual:
He replied sharply to them, That they being of the Republic of Venice, who had
taken a Galley, which on the King's behalf he had demanded, but could not get,
he was bound to take satisfaction himself where he could find it. He caused the
Galley to be plundered, released the Captain and Mariners, and brought the
Vessel with the Tackle to Thoulon. The news of this Accident coming to Genoua,
was the more sensible to the Senators, and the whole City, by how much it was
known to be less just, and reasonable; and the rather, because in this Action,
and other occasions, the Republic had always showed a good correspondence
with France; so as if the great wisdom of the Senate had not showed it self in
regulating the Motions of the People, and City, not suffering them to fall
tumultously upon those resolutions which must be undertaken upon mature advice,
there was some danger left the Genoueses should have fallen upon the French,
and deprived them of their Goods and Lives, in revenge of so apparent an Injury.

The Commonwealth failed not amongst other Provisions to dispatch presently a
Courrier to their Ambassador in France, with orders to represent unto his
Majesty this Accident so unexpected, without reason, and contrary to all Laws
of Hospitality, letting him know, They hoped from his Majesty's Justice, not
only restitution of the Galley taken, but satisfaction also for the Injury,
which with so much violence was done unto them: The Ambassador espoused the
cause, declaimed against the strangeness of the Action, and set forth the
injustice of it with so much evidence of Reason, that the Cardinal Richelieu
after he had excused it, upon pretense of reprisal, by reason of an injury of
the like nature received from the Genoueses, told him, That if the CommonWealth
would by their Letters to his Majesty desire a Restitution of the Galley, he
doubted not but that his Majesty would please to do it. But this Business, the
dispatch whereof was thought so easy, by reason of the delays used in it,
which are proper to great Courts, took not effect but at the time, and in the
manner above rehearsed.

The Marquess Pallavicin ceased not at the same time to make continual
applications unto his Majesty's Ministers at Court, Anno 1653.
That they would give order to have the Commonwealths Ambassadors treated
with the same Ceremonies are usual unto those of Crowned Princes. He showed
that this Demand was founded upon Justice; Forasmuch as besides that Liguria
had been often called a Kingdom, this Commonwealth had for many Ages past
been Owners of that of Sardinia, conquered by force of Arms, and that of
Cyprus, rendered it Tributary for many years, and taken from the French that of
Corfu, which it still holds; besides so many Glorious Conquests in the Levant,
which rendered it formidable unto all its Enemies, and especially the Infidels,
against whom the Christian Princes never almost undertook a War, without
receiving powerful assistance from this Commonwealth: Which has been
therefore Honored by many Popes with the Title of their Protector. And the
Commonwealth thought it self here^n obliged to challenge the same Respect with
other Potentates, because the Bull of Urban the 8 th. for conferring the Title
of Eminence upon the Cardinals, with pain of Excommunication to all that should
refuse to use it toward them, Excepting Kings; that Exception, upon the
instance of the Venetian Republic, was declared to extend unto all Potentates
who had Royal Dignity; whereupon the Commonwealth of Genoua for preserving of
its Dignity declared it self by a particular Decree to be comprehended in the
number of such Potentates, requiring the same not only from Pope Innocent the
10 th, unto whom they sent Raffael de la Torn a particular Envoy for that
purpose, but also by others in all the Courts of the prime Princes of
Christendom.

Pallavicin found a great disposition in the King to gratify them with this
Honor; the Ambassador of this Republic being the year following received
with the same form used toward those of Crowned Princes, as in the continuance
of this Story shall be declared.

It will not also be amiss to give a short touch of the Affairs treated at this
time in Germany, and particularly in the Diet at Ratisbone, concerning the
strengthening of the Peace concluded the Year before in Osnaburgh, and Munster,
because both French and Spaniard had some share in it; in regard the Spaniards
following the Maxim, To have the effects of things which were likely rather to
be seen, than felt, endeavored under the plausible pretense of Religion to
delay the restoring of those Places they possessed in the Lower Palatinate, to
discompose that Peace from which they were excluded with their so great
resentment, if at least they may be said to be excluded who are neither
principal, nor accessory, it being manifest by the Declarations of the Swedes,
and Protestants in Germany, that they never pretended to have any open Enmity
against the King of Spain.

But finally, by the care and solicitude of the Emperor, and his Negotiation
full of Candor and Clemency, the restitution of Frankendale (held and refused
to be given up by the Spaniard) being obtained, and the differences of the City
of Hailbrun, and others adjusted, the Meeting of Nuremberg was concluded,
whereby those Obstacles which were referred to their Decision by the Imperial
Diet, and which might have ministered matter unto new differences, and
divisions, were smoothed in the end of the Year 1652, unto the satisfaction of
the Resolutions taken in the said Diet, the occasions whereof was in appearance
to determine the Points reserved at the Treaty in Munster, but in substance to
proceed unto the Election of the King of the Romans; a thing wonderfully
desired by the Emperor, that he might establish the King of Hungary his Son,
in the Succession of the Empire.

His Imperial Majesty was loath to put this to the trial, unless he were first
assured of the undoubted success of his designs. He knew the Electors were
almost all of them particularly obliged to him in point of gratitude, and the
Prince Palatine more than the rest, being by his means restored to the
possession of Frankendale; but he was very suspicious in his mind of the Hans
Towns, swelling with pretensions, by support of the Swedes, and animated by
their good intelligence with France, and therefore thought they would with
their whole Power, give what disturbance to it they were able. The Emperor
therefore thought fit before summoning of the Diet in Ratisbone, to sound the
minds of the Electors by his Letters, that he might inform himself whether they
approved the coming now to the Election of his Successor.

He wrote therefore very Affectionate Letters to each of them unto that
purpose, and made them to be accompanied by the person who had charge to
present them, with those reflections were fit to make them jealous of those
States in the Election, and to animate them not to suffer that any other should
partake of that Prerogative, which was due only to themselves, independent upon
any other person whatsoever.

The Electors took in good part the Advice given, and much more the gracious
Expressions of his Imperial Majesty, they returned Answer therefore in Terms
full of Reverence, and particular Devotion, and most especially the Prince
Palatine endeavored to express his Gratitude; because he well knew that
although his Catholic Majesty out of his Natural Generosity had condescended
to the restitution of Frankendale to gratify him, without any other condition;
yet the Emperor by the cross management of the Spanish Ministers, had been
forced to quit the City of Besanzon in the Franche Comt^, and to promise
payment of 25000 Dollers from the Circles of the Empire unto the King of Spain,
to get possession of it.

The Emperor being therefore certified of the good inclination of the
Electors, summoned a Diet to meet at the end of the Year 1652, and in the
month of August advanced to Prague, whither under color of doing him
reverence, and confirming the good intelligence between them, came all the
Electors in person, excepting only he of Cologne who was sick, and sent
thither in his stead the Count of Fustembergh; and the Elector of Bavaria, who
in his place deputed thither his Mother Anna Maria of Austria, Sister unto the
Emperor, who came accompanied with a Train of 200 persons, and upon the 29th
of September, was by the Emperor himself met out of the City at the White
Mountain, in which place all the other Electors were also encountered by him,
with so much show of Love and Kindness, that there was none who did not think
himself highly obliged by the Emperor's Courtesy, who gave order that the
King of Hungary should give the first Visit unto every one of the Electors.

There followed afterward in Prague the mutual declarations of a constant, and
sincere intelligence between the Parties, and the ascertaining of the Articles
necessarily conducing unto the common intention of electing a King of the
Romans.

Upon these assurances, the Emperor accompanied by all his Court went to
Ratisbone in December following, whither came the Electors of Moguntia, Treves,
Cologne, and the Prince Palatine of Bavaria sent thither with the Title of his
Ambassador and Plenipotentiary, the Count Maximilian Curtio, a Cavalier of
rare parts, and singular abilities; Brandenburgh dispatched thither Ioachino
Frederick, Baron of Plumenthall, a Person of very clear repute, who dyed there,
and Saxony had the young Schonfelt and Sesen, a person of great Dexterity, and
profound Learning. In the first opening of the Diet there grew several
differences by reason of the pretensions to Titles, and precedencies, which
spent some days, and delayed the making of the Propositions; the Emperor was
not able to make his Cavalcade according to the ancient usage, but made his
Entry in Coach, because that he was ill disposed: The States opposed themselves
to this, pretending that the ancient Form should not be altered; but they gave
way at last therein to satisfy his Majesty: The Emperor intended also that
the Meeting should be kept in his own Palace, upon the same ground of his want
of health; but the States were so positive against this, that he could not
obtain it, but the same was in the public house destinated unto such occasions.

At last the Assembly met, and the Marquess de Buda, after a fine Elegant
Oration made in praise of Caesar, and of the Assembly, opened the Propositions
upon which they were to Treat, being these:

First, Concerning the manner whereby to establish the Peace gained with so
much Labor, Trouble, and Expense, between the Head, and Members, and between
them, and Foreign Princes, to cherish the ancient, and sincere confidence was
heretofore, and in what manner their common Country afflicted with so many
passed Wars, might for the time to come be preserved from any ill
intelligences which might arise, and that what remained to be done, and
concluded in the Treaty of Peace, might be executed as was just and fitting.

To consider touching the Expedients whereby without long delays (which are
always hurtful) those things may be decided, which are remitted to the Diet by
the said Treaty.

His Imperial Majesty showed himself ready to subscribe all these Propositions,
promising to continue in a Fatherly and Cordial Affection toward all in
general, and every one in particular.

The Meeting therefore at first went on with general Propositions, touching the
Policy of the Empire, and the things which were reserved unto the Diet by the
Treaty of Munster; but afterward they entered upon the Treaty, touching the
Election of a King of the Romans.

The Hans Towns then set on foot their Pretensions to be admitted to the said
Election, whereunto they were privately encouraged by the French, and Swedes;
whereat the Electors were offended, that others should intrude themselves into
a business appertained solely to them. And the differences at last grew to that
height, that there being no means to accord them, the Electors resolved to
divide from them, and to meet in Augusta; where in the month of May following,
they proceeded to the Election of Ferdinand the Fourth, King of Hungary, for
King of the Romans; after which they returned to Ratisbone, to perform the
Ceremonies of his Coronation. The said States protested against it, pretending
it to be invalid; but in vain, because it was approved by all the rest, and the
King was lawfully enthroned and settled in that Dignity.

The Ceremony of the Coronation was performed, in which there grew a difference
between the Elector of Brandenburgh, and the Palatine, either of them
pretending, that it belonged to him to carry the Imperial Crown; which was at
last adjusted by the Emperor, who caused the said Crown to be consigned unto
the Palatine as Treasurer of the Empire; the Count of Hohen Zollern carried the
Scepter, the Count of Papenham the Sword, and these with the Elector Palatine
went before the Emperor, who was carried in a Chair into the Church, where
solemn Mass was sung, and all Ceremonies performed which are usual in such
occasions.

The Hans Towns seeing their pretensions to have a vote in the Election
insufficient, declared, That they intended to take into consideration the 49.
Articles which used to be solemnly sworn by a new King of the Romans, that is
to examine, add to, or take from them. The Reformed insisted, That they should
be ratified, and sworn by the King, according to the Form they had appointed.
This Dispute continued for some time with obstinacy, but the Emperor's
Authority, and the Reasons alleged at last prevailing, they acquiesced, and
this difficulty was overcome.

The Meeting continued after, and debated upon the Points already mentioned,
but with so little success, that the Diet was at last dissolved with little
satisfaction, by reason of the difference in Opinions which rose amongst them.

The Protestants pretended that in all things which were to be decided, they
might give their Votes apart; alleging, That forasmuch as the Catholics were
more in number, it was convenient, to the end things might be indifferently
carried, that their Voices should be equal to the Catholics. The Emperor was
much against it, and stood firmly in the negative; but being above measure
desirous of Peace, and that the Diet should end with an entire satisfaction to
all Parties, he at last consented to it, with this reservation, That the same
should be only understood to extend unto those things which were to be
decided, not to such as were already settled, and that it stould be for this
time only.

The Protestants having advanced this step, were not content, but pressed
farther, in regard the Assembly being to break up, and the matters which were
not determined, being to be referred unto another Meeting in Frankfort, a free
City situate near the Lower Palatinate upon the River Maine, they pretended
also to have the same liberty of voting apart as was granted them in this
Assembly at Ratisbone.

The Catholics showed themselves resolute not to give way unto this Innovation
of the Protestants; They had therefore secret meetings apart, and took a
resolution to oppose it vigorously. The Protestants also had their meetings,
and resolved to insist upon this demand, and go through with the obtaining of
it, if otherwise they could not compass it; by force of Arms; declaring to be a
matter just, honest, and convenient. These their Propositions were backed by
the Swedes, and the French also, who were glad to set Division between the
Parties, and to render the party which depended upon them, equal in all
advantages with those who they believed would not run their way, so as the
matter tended to a new Rupture, and breach of the Peace, which had been gained
with so much trouble.

The Emperor wisely foreseeing the ill effects which this division might
beget, by the Advice of his Council, and particularly of the Count of Ausbourg,
a Person of great Integrity, Abilities, and Experience, (who was after made a
Prince of the Empire) gave notice by the Count Curtio, Vice Chancellor of the
Empire, unto the Elector of Moguntia, That he should endeavor by all means to
adjust this Difference.

The Protestants having by some means got notice of the Emperor's inclination
to adjust this difference, grew more positive in their Resolutions to have it,
so as the Archbishop of Moguntia being not able to gain any thing upon them;
that he might accomplish the Emperor's desire, endeavored to persuade the
Catholics to comply with them; and therein labored so effectually as he
persuaded those who were the most averse, to consent unto the satisfaction of
the Protestants, that is to say, that they should also have an Equality of
Votes in the meeting of Frankfort, upon condition it should be for that time
only, and should extend only to the three Points, which were there to be
discussed, and ended, which were:

First, Touching the Arming of the Circles of Germany, and the Provisions fit
to be made for the Public Safety. Secondly, The settling of the Policy, and
good Orders of the Empire. Thirdly, Touching the manner of making restitution
of Goods and Estates, upon the Articles of Oblivion, and Religion.
These things being obtained by the Protestants, they pressed farther, and
demanded in lieu of the Deputation appointed at Frankfort, a sub-deputation,
that is, an incorporating together of all the Three Estates; in which
sub-deputation, a determinate number was to be chosen, that is, so many
Protestants, and so many Catholics; and this to avoid a crowd, that but few
only might be present at debates, whom they knew to be firm, and unbiassed to
the Common Interest; the multitude of persons being suspected by them, as more
easy to be wrought upon by the contrary party, and gained by gi^ts, and
favors bestowed upon them by the Catholics.

But these new Demands of the Protestants being full of arrogance, and which
evidently showed they were not to be satisfied, gave so much offense to the
Emperor, that losing all patience, he gave them notice, He intended absolutely
to part, without staying to perform the Ceremonies done at a Recesse. In order
whereunto he caused all the public Meeting-Places to be unhanged, and all
things to be taken down wherewith they were adorned, for performing the
Solemnity usual at the dissolving of the Diet, which consists in the Singing of
a solemn High Mass by the Bishop, Prince of Ratisbone, at which his Majesty is
present in a Pontifical Habit.

This resolution being perceived by the Protestants, who foresaw that in case
the Assembly should break up abruptly, the same would be of great prejudice
unto them, they went carefully to the house of Prince Drictestain, the
Emperor's Major Domo, a Cavalier of great Wisdom, and an unspotted Faith, and
there having given many Reasons, and made many excuses, they declared, That
they would submit unto his Majesty's Pleasure, and waive the pretensions
aforesaid. The Prince went presently unto the Palace to acquaint the Emperor,
how the Protestants had changed their Obstinacy into Reverence, and that they
resolved to give his Majesty full satisfaction.

The Emperor was pleased with this humble carriage, and laying aside all
displeasure, gave order that the places should be again fitted up; and so the
Solemnity was performed with the usual Ceremonies: After which at the time of
publishing of the Recesse in the Great Hall, the Emperor obliged himself to
maintain sincerely all that was agreed on; and by an Elegant Discourse gave
satisfaction to all persons of his Incomparable Kindness, and Affection toward
the Public Good.

The Elector of Moguntia in the name of all the States, gave him great Thanks
for the Trouble he had suffered by so long a stay, and wished unto him a good
Voyage: And in this manner ended the Diet, being reduced unto a Deputation
Extraordinary in Frankfort, and the adjourning of all other matters discussed
in this, unto another Diet to be held in Ratisbone, within the term of two
years.

There were at this Meeting diverse other Affairs treated which belonged to
Foreign Princes out of Germany, amongst which one was, the Investiture desired
by the Duke of Savoy, of the Lands of Monferrat, according to the Treaty of
Chierasco, 1631. To which purpose the Count Bolyer, one of the Lords of
Lucerne, was sent expressly from the Court of Piedmont to Ratisbone, who
solicited the matter with all earnestness, and by all such means as were to be
expected from so dextrous, and capable a person.

The Duke had the Year before sent the Marquess of Lullin, a Cavalier of great
Quality unto Vienna, with the Title of his Extraordinary Ambassador, upon the
same occasion, where he appeared with a numerous and splendid Retinue, suitable
unto his own Generosity, and that of the Prince who sent him; but his
Negotiations were fruitless, and met with some disgust, because besides his not
prevailing in what he came for, the Emperor caused to be expunged from his
Writings, the Title of Royal Highness, declaring, That it belonged solely unto
him, to confer Titles upon the Princes of Christendom.

The Pretensions of Savoy in the Diet, were favored by Monsieur de Vautort,
Ambassador Extraordinary unto his Christian Majesty, a Person greatly
experienced in the management of Affairs, and thoroughly acquainted with the
Interests of Germany; They were also countenanced by the Elector of Bavaria,
newly allied with the House of Savoy, having contracted Marriage with the
Princess Henrietta Adalaide, Sister of this Duke Charles Emmanuel, but what
diligence soever was used, and what reasons soever were alleged, they could
never bring it to a conclusion, it being ever put off, upon one pretense, or
other, because the Emperor was diverted by the earnest solicitation and
endeavors of the Duke of Mantua his Agent, who opposed it openly by reason of
the prejudice it would bring unto his Master's Interests; to which was added
the Affection his Majesty had for his Cousin, and the great care he took to
satisfy the Empress Leonara Gonzaga, a Widow, the Duke's Aunt, who was a
Princess of great Understanding, and diverted him from coming to a
determination in this Affair.

The Marriage of the Elector of Bavaria with this Princess of Savoy, was in the
Year 1650, which was in the lifetime of Duke Maximilian his Father, who died
after in September. 1651. in a good old age, with the Reputation of being the
greatest Politician, and the most Prudent and Pious Prince in our Age. He being
a man of a most accomplished Experience, had not taken his Measures ill, in
this Alliance with Savoy, and consequently with the King of France, to whom he
had always a particular inclination, foreseeing with much Wisdom of what
consequence in progress of time upon several Accidents the good correspondence
with, and protection of the King of France, might be unto his House, who had
always a particular Esteem for the Elector.

The Count Maximilian Curtio, first Minister to his Electoral Highness, a
Cavalier of Extraordinary Capacity, and replenished with all Good, and Virtuous
Qualities, was he who passed into Piedmont with a Proud, and Sumptuous Equipage
of Gentlemen, and Servants, to be the Proxy for the Marriage, who in the Year
1652. went also thither, to wait upon the Bride, and conduct her into Bavaria,
where he arrived in June the same year.

This Princess parted from Turin the 16th of May, 1652, and was accompanied by
the Duchess her Mother, the Duke her Brother, and all the Principal Persons of
that Court to Moncallier, from thence by the way of Ast^, and Alexandria, she
came to Milan, being received with all due Respect and Honor, through all that
State, and her hcarges defrayed by the King, the charge whereof was committed
to Don Girolamo Stampo. Don Pietro Gonzales, Governor of Alexandria, a Person
of great Valor, met her upon the Borders with a Brave Retinue, and Treated her
Splendidly in that City, whither came to Complement her in the Marquess of
Caracene his name, (himself being at that time engaged at the Siege of Trin)
Don Gasparo de Thebes, Captain of the said Marque^s his Guard: From Milan she
went into the Territory of the Venetians, where she was received upon the
Confines by Anthonio Bernardi, Captain of Brescia, Royally served, and her
Charges defrayed through all that State: From thence she continued her Voyage
through Tiroll, where she was generally Treated by the Archduke Charles
Ferdinand; and in the Month of June following, came to Monaco, the Residence
of his Electoral Highness, where she was received by the Elector her Spouse,
with such tender Love and Affection, as is peculiar to one who had long wished
for and expected her, and as was due to the Rare Beauties and Perfections of
such a Princess.

When the Coronation of the King of the Romans was to be performed, the
Emperor caused Notice to be given unto the French Ambassador, That he might,
if he pleased, be present at the Ceremony; but that in case he came, he must
needs give the Precedence to the Ambassador of Spain. Vautort answered, That
as for coming thither he would do as he saw best; but as for the Precedence; he
knew not any person who could take it from his King, who was undoubtedly the
first of Christendom. He forbore notwithstanding to go thither, because he
would not stand in an ill posture with the House of Austria, but might apply
himself to those Affairs for which he came, which were to continue, and
increase the good intelligence between the States of the Empire, and the Crown
of France, that he might be watchful to prevent all prejudice might come unto
the Interests of that Crown, or its Friends and Confederates, by the
Resolutions which should there be taken, to get the investiture of the places
held by the French in Alsatia, and to countenance the Interests of Savoy, in
the investiture he pretended unto of the Towns in Monferrat, according to the
before mentioned Treaty of Chierasco.

After the Coronation the Ambassador Vautort going for Audience unto his
Imperial-Majesty, he was received with shows of great Esteem, and courtesy,
the Emperor excusing himself modestly, That he could not do otherwise. The
Ambassador replied with all Civility to his Complements; but defended the
Interests and Prerogative of his King, with all freedom, and boldness.

The Crown of Sweden sent to this Diet the young Count Oxenstern, with the
Title of Ambassador Extraordinary, to have the Investiture of the Towns of
Pomerania, assigned unto the Swedes by the Treaty of Munster; but the Emperor
refusing to receive him under that title, because he came to perform the Office
of a Feudatary, some differences arose, which notwithstanding were after laid
aside.

There were also in this Diet great Controversies between the Emperor, and the
States, who set on foot a bold and a very distastful Pretension, which was,
That they conceived there ought to be an Election of Judges, who might Censure
and Judge the Actions of the Emperors themselves, with power to revoke, and
adnul all Decrees which they conceived to be contrary to Justice, or the
Constitution of the Municipal Laws.

This Affair as it pressed hard upon the Emperor was very warmly impugned, and
rejected, it being censured as an audacious boldness, to go about to prescribe
Laws unto him, who had the power of making them.

The Contest was long, as being full of knotty Points, and tedious
difficulties, and was solicited with great earnestness and fervor, by a person
depending on the Emperor himself, who having had a Judgment passed against him
before his Majesty, feared he should not be able to find a good dispatch
hereafter of his Causes there; but the Endeavors and Artifices of those who
labored therein, found such opposition, that the Pretenders were finally
enforced to give it over, without being able to make a farther progress in it.

At this Meeting the Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, Ambassador from the Catholic
King, a Person of great Virtue, and deep foresight, managed diverse things
advantageous to the Interests of his Master.

He endeavored by all means to engage his Imperial Majesty in some Treaty with
the Count d' H^rcourt; who was in Brisac, being upon ill terms with the Court
of France, to gain out of his hands that most Important Fortress, which he said
was the Gate by which the French might at their pleasure pass the Rhine, and
come into the heart of Germany; and a Key which would keep them shut up in
their own bounds. That France shook hands, by means thereof, with the States,
Princes of the Empire, and Protestant Cantons their Friends, so as the Circles
of the Empire having always at hand, the assistance which upon all occasions
they might draw from that united Kingdom, so well armed, would by consequence
swell with such high Pretensions, as must necessarily either disturb the
Public Quiet, or much weaken and eclipse the Imperial Authority.

That Caesar being so highly concerned for the general Good, ought not to let
slip an occasion presented him by Fortune, to regain by Art a Place which was
never to be won by force of Arms.

He showed farther, That Lorrain being beyond Burgundy, and Alsatia, (although
the Duke should be restored by the General Peace) it would (instead of being
what it was formerly a Knot that united the Low Countries with the Franche
Comte, and the Austrian Countries) be rather a bar, and partition to continue
them divided from each other; which was the greatest prejudice could happen to
the Dominions of his Catholic Majesty, and of the whole House of Austria,
whose weakness consisted principally in this, That their Countries being
dis-joyned, they could not without great difficulty, communicate those Succors
to each other, which are necessary for their subsistence in time of War.

Besides, that the French being freed from all Iealousies on that side, would
with more confidence employ their whole strength in other places.

But all his Endeavors were without effect, as well by reason of the noble
disposition of the Emperor, who was resolved to observe inviolably the Peace
of Munster, as of the Ingenuity of Harecourt, who would never give ear unto the
Propositions reiterated to him from the Spaniards, who used their utmost
endeavor to make him enter into a Treaty with them, by their own, and by the
Duke of Lorrain's means, whom they made sensible what advantage the dislodging
of the French out of Alsatia, would be unto the Interests of his House; and
particularly out of Brisac, which would always be a bridle upon Lorrain, if he
should hereafter recover it by any Treaty. But Harecourt preferring his Honor,
and Reputation, before all other advantages that might befall him; although he
might perhaps give ear unto some Propositions, and Invitations to a Treaty,
refused notwithstanding to enter into any, or to negotiate touching this Affair.

Castle Rodrigo sped notwithstanding well touching the Imprisonment of Charles
Duke of Lorrain; with whom the Spaniards were ill satisfied, because they found
not in his actions, that correspondence which they expected from his gratitude.

They represented therefore to his Imperial Majesty, That the said Duke was
not sincere, and cordial in his union with Spain; that he held private
Intelligence with the Court of France, retarded with the difficulties he cast
the execution of those Enterprises, which had been well designed; That being
altogether intent upon his own particular advantage, he had ill treated the
Subjects, ruined the Country, exasperated the Neighbors, and caused every
where a huge aversion, and hatred, not only against his own Forces, but also
against those of his Catholic Majesty, who being united with the Lorrainers,
had their share also in the Countries Curses; so as they were in a continual
apprehension, that he joining with the French would bring an inevitable
prejudice upon his Majesty's Affairs in Flanders; or if he were still let
alone, would put the People in desperation.

The Emperor at last persuaded by these Reasons, and assured that this
aversion was not unto the House of Lorrain, but only to the person of the
Duke, by reason of his deportments, gave his consent that he should be
Arrested, and writ about it into Spain, where a while after the resolution was
taken to secure themselves of his person; but in such manner, as that the same
might be dexterously put in execution, for avoiding of those Inconveniences
might happen by so scandalous and unexpected an Accident, whereof we shall
hereafter Treat more at large, and give relation of the most Remarkable
Passages in that Action.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The TENTH BOOK.
The CONTENTS.
The Cardinal Mazarine returns to Paris; Is Received with great Applause: There
follows a distribution of several Employments, and particularly that of the
Great Almoner of France unto Cardinal Antonio Barberini. Great Preparations are
made for War. The Cardinal Francis Barberini declares himself no Friend to
Mazarine: Gives order to his Nephews to leave France; and Marries Don Maffeo to
a little Niece of Pope Innocent the 10th. Several Encounters pass in Flanders,
wherein the Prince of Conde's Forces are worsted; Monsieur Croissy Fouquet is
taken Prisoner. The Count Quince goes to Command the French Forces in Piedmont.
The Savoy Ambassador is received in France with the Ceremony due to Sovereign
Princes. Monsieur de Plessis Besanc^on is sent by the King of France into
Italy; And his Negotiations with the Duke of Mantua, and other Italian Princes.
The Count d'Ognon agrees with the Court; And the Count d'Harcourt submits unto
his Majesty's Obedience, after several Treaties. The French Army under the
Command of the Marquess Plessis Balliere, marches into Catalonia, succors
Roses, and makes diverse Progresses. Gironne besieged by the French, is relieved
by the Spaniard. The Marshall d'Oquincourt is sent to Command the Forces in
Catalonia; And his Marches. The War in Guienne continues. The Burdelois have
recourse to England for Relief, but without effect. The King's Forces make a
progress in that Province. Preparations are made in Spain to Relieve it: New
Divisions, and Factions spring up in Bourdeaux, upon several Designs, and
Interests. Many of the French do quit the Prince of Conde 's Party. The City of
Paris Entertains the Cardinal Mazarine with demonstrations of Affection, and
Treats him splendidly in the Townhouse. Bellagarda besieged, and taken by the
Duke of Espernon. The French Army marches into the Field, and takes Rhetel.
That of Spain also marches out with Powerful Forces; Enters France; Is waited
on by the French: They Encamp for some time with various Success* Some
Conspiracies in Bourdeaux are discovered. New Recruits are sent from Court into
Guienne; and the King's Forces take Bourg, Libourn, and other places, and
straighten Bordeaux, the Citizens whereof make meetings amongst themselves, and
desire Peace; There grow some Tumults, which are quieted by the Prince of
Conty. The Treaties are revived; Difficulties are cast in; The Propositions of
both Parties are debated severally, and at last the Peace ensues. The Spanish
Fleet comes into the mouth of the Garonne, and hearing of the Peace concluded,
cast Anchor, and proceed no farther. The Princess of Conde, and the Duke of
Anguien, with their Domesti^^, take Ship^i^g, and ^o for Flanders. The Dukes of
Vendosme and Canda^ enter into ^ourdeaux: Several Places in Guienne return to
his Majesty's Obedience. The Marches and Encampings of both Armies, upon the
Frontiers of France, and Occurrences happening between the Parties: The
Spaniards besiege Rocroy, and the French, Monson, and both the one and the
other Town are taken. The Treaty between the Court and Cardinal de Retz is
revived, but he refuses all terms of Agreement. A Plot against Cardinal
Mazarine is discovered, and the persons guilty are taken, and condemned to
death. The Marshall Grance goes to Command the French Army in Piedmont, there
is a great Fight between the Armies at Rochetta del Tanaro. The Spanish Fleet
leaves the Seas of Guienne, and returns into Biscay without effecting of their
purpose. The Siege and taking of Saint Menhaud: The Motions of Cardinal
Mazarine. The Prince Marries the Countess Martinozzi, Niece to the Cardinal.
The Imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain. The Treaties of the French with the
Protector Cromwell, the Duke of Mantua, and the Duke of Modena. The secret
Negotiations about the Duke of Guise his going into the Kingdom of Naples.

THE Cardinal Mazarine came into Paris upon the Third of February, about Two ^
clock in the Afternoon, Honored by the King himself, the Duke of Anjo^, and
all the Court, who went to meet him two Leagues out of the City.

His Majesty received him with extraordinary tenderness of Affection, took him
into his own Coach, and entered by the Port of San Deny, through a great throng
of People, and brought him along with himself into the Louvre, where his
Lodgings were provided (as being first Minister of State) near to his Majesty,
where he was forthwith Visited by the Body of the City, and by all the other
Orders, and Magistrates, who acknowledging to have received by his means
singular Benefits, and that all France was highly obliged unto him for his
Conduct, testified the Content they took at his Fortunate Return. It was
notwithstanding thought by many, That by how much the greater shows of Love
were made outwardly, so much the less was the Affection which was really born
unto him; there being no hatred so intense and dangerous, as that which shrouds
it self under the mask of simulation. But I who have with an exact diligence
and long experience, endeavored to instruct my self in the Nature of those
Persons of whom I write, may to the glory of France say, I have not met with
any People less given to dissembling than they are, who being open and free of
speech, as they think little of what is past, so they consider nothing of
what is to come; all their Faculties being wholly taken up with intending only
the instant of the present time. Whosoever therefore shall consider the
Injuries and Scorns, which were in September before done to the Cardinal's
Name, and Memory, in Paris, and what were now the Honors, and Welcome which he
received there in February following, will know, this only can be said, That
the Price of 50000 Crowns set on his head, and all the Scorns and Contempts
cast upon his Reputation, were only the Effects of a Passion, which being
wisely dissembled by this Cardinal, served afterward to let them see his good,
and just Intentions, and made him at last triumphant overall his Persecutions,
and rendered his Ministry Glorious to all Posterity.

The same Night his Majesty kept him to Supper with himself, in the Lodgings of
the Marshall de Villeroy; that Night were many Bone-fires made, and the next
day as he returned from Mass, he cast some Money amongst the people, as he had
done the day before upon the way in the Country as he passed along: And the
Visits which he received from the Grandees at Court and other particular
Persons of all Orders and Conditions, being over, he betook himself unto the
management of the Affairs of the Crown. The same day there came to Paris also
his three Neeces, who had been always with him, who were also met out of the
Port of St. Honor, by the Princess of Carignan, the Marshal of Guebran his
Lady, the Marchioness of Ampous, and several other Ladies of Quality. These
Ladies were also Lodged in the Louvre, in a Quarter apart over the Queens
Lodgings.

The King since his return had not done any thing in the distribution of
Offices, and Charges, either Ecclesiastical, or Secular, (although many were
void, and there were a great number of pretenders) being desirous to expect the
Cardinal's coming, and to give him the Honor of disposing them, as he who was
best informed of each man's merit; whereby he made himself also to be much more
observed, whilst every man being in hope to be rewarded according to his
merit, became more ready, and careful, in the Service of his Majesty,

He had notwithstanding of himself passed the Edicts for New Impositions, and
done all other things which were like to prove displeasing to the People,
because (had it been done after the Cardinal's Return) it might seem to have
been done at his solicitation, whereby those Crimes would have been afresh
imputed to him; whereof he had formerly, though without cause, been esteemed
guilty. But there remaining unto him now by the special Favor of his Majesty,
the disposition of the Church Benefices, and diverse other Offices, and Charges
of the Court, and Kingdom, he began presently to make a distribution of them,
among such persons as he esteemed best deserving, and fittest for the
Employments; reserving notwithstanding a good part of them undisposed, that he
might keep up the hopes of such as were for the present disappointed of
Employments.

To the Count Servient, who was a Minister of State of great Wisdom, well
deserving of the Crown, and most Affectionate to his Majesty's Service, in
which he was grown old, having spent his time in the management of sundry
Charges to the advantage of the Public, he gave the Office of super-Intendant
over the Finances, vacant by the death of the Marquess of Vienville, with whom
was joined Monsieur Fouquet, Procureur General, who was also made Minister of
State; a Person of great Merit for his continued Loyalty to his Majesty, to
whom upon all occasions (and particularly in the Translation of the Parliament
to Pontoise) he^ ^ad rendered very particular Service, so as there was then seen
at the same time two super-Intendants of the Finances, as there was also a
Chancellor, and a Keeper of the Great Seal, a thing seldom practiced, although
the like has been before during the Ministry of the Cardinal Richelieu.

To these Super-Intendants, were also added four Intendants of the Finances,
who were the Monsieurs Paget, Boisleue, Housset, and Brisaccier, he took also
good order for payment of the King's Revenues, to the great ease, and
satisfaction of the Farmers of them.

Cardinal Anthonio Barberini coming about that time to Paris, the Dignity of
Great Almoner of France, vacant by the death of Cardinal Richelieu, Archbishop
of Lions, was conferred upon him by the means of Mazarine, who endeavored to
give testimony of his gratitude, and to oblige him more strictly to the Crown,
as conceiving his protection in Rome, necessary unto the Interests of France;
the Cardinal Francisco his Brother being accounted averse to them, by whom ill
offices had been then lately done unto his Majesty by Letters, censuring the
Conduct, and direction of Affairs.

It was reported in Court, That this change in Cardinal Barberini, was because
he was gained by the Pope, and Spaniard, upon the hope of restoring to him the
Profits of the Ecclesiastical Benefices of Naples, and Sicily, and the Money
sequestered in Rome, when the Pope pretended by calling him to account, to undo
the House of Barberini.

That which moved the Pope to a reunion with the Barberins, was, because
having not long to live, he thought not fit to leave a lasting Feud between his
own Relations, and that Family, which was still powerful in Rome; and the
Spaniards also desired the same, that they might take off the dependence of
that Family upon France, and find no opposition from them, upon the Election of
a new Pope.

The Cardinal Francisco therefore being transported with this hope, because he
had no other pretext, made use of this, That he had been neglected in France,
the Cardinal Mazarine having married his own Niece to the Duke Mercoeur,
without concerning himself to find a party for his Niece, as he might have
done; And seeming to resent this highly, he commanded the Abbot his Nephew, who
was at Lions, to take away privately the Prince Prefect and all his Family
from thence, causing them to retire into Italy near Vincenza; and this he did
whilst Cardinal Anthonio was in Paris, without giving him the least notice of
it.

This sudden Resolution appeared strange in France, and the rather, because
there had been always a good intelligence between that Baberini and Cardinal
Mazarine, unto whom he had proposed some years before the Marriage of one of
his Nieces, Colonel Vaini her Cousin being sent into France about it, and the
thing had been agreed by his Majesty's consent, and Writings drawn up touching
the Marriage.

After this Reconciliation of Cardinal Barberini with the Pope, that this Union
with that House might be more firm, there was a Marriage concluded between Don
Maffeo Barberini, then the Abbot, and a little Niece of the Pope, in
consideration of which Marriage the Prince Prefetto was promoted to be
Cardinal, and renounced the Inheritance unto his said Brother the Bridegroom.

The Bishopric of Poictiers, worth about 30000 Crowns yearly, was also given
to the said Cardinal Anthonio, the same being void by the death of Monsieur
Rocheposay an Excellent Prelate who had enjoyed that Dignity 40 years; and had
in two important occasions preserved that Country to the King, himself with a
half Pike in hand followed by the people, who were much devoted ^^ him,
standing in opposition to the Nobility, who in the former Wars had taken Arms
for the Queen Mother of the late King, and intended to seize upon that great
City, as is written in the History of those times, and now at last showed a
great Loyalty in preserving it by his generous Actions for his Majesty; as also
did the Marquess his Nephew, who was Lieutenant General of Poictou, who without
any regard of the Expense, went to meet, and serve the King, when he came into
that Province with a good number of Gentlemen, and kept open house for the
Court two months together.

The Bishop had another Nephew, an Abbot, Brother to the Marquess, a person
replete with virtuous qualities, it was great reason that for the merits of the
Brother, of the whole Family, and for those also of the Abbot himself, that
Dignity should have been conferred upon him, and the Court esteeming likewise
that 'twas just intended to gratify him with it: But in Governments it happens
often, that Princes, and their Ministers, are by emergent occasions enforced to
prefer Public Interest; before the satisfaction of private persons; and the
Abbot, after the hopes given him thereof, for a year and a half, was at last
excluded, without the least cause on his part given for his being deprived of
it: The Abbot notwithstanding acquiesced without resentment unto the King and
Cardinal's pleasure, preferring his Majesty's Satisfaction before any
particular concernments of his own; and that no suspicion might be had that he
intended to engage himself amongst the Malcontents, retired himself, and went
to make his residence in Rome; comforted in this, That both his merit, and the
wrong done to him, were publicly notorious. The Cardinal Anthonio being
informed of the great Worth of the Abbot, condoled with him, and by an Act
suitable unto the generosity of his nature, declared a readiness to make a
resignation thereof to him; but he with a greatness of mind equal to such an
offer, returned him thanks, and refused to accept of it; And with Patience,
which is the Scene of all the Virtues, considered, that the Favors of Princes
though slow, are like the soft and gentle motion of benign Planets, which fail
not in due season to communicate their influences unto the bodies which they
govern.

The Archbishopric of Lions was given to Monsieur Villeroy, Brother to the
Marshall of France, a Person of Eminent, and singular Parts: Of many other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Abbeys which were void, Mazarine (though he gave
promises to several) yet refused to dispose any, that he might keep all in
hopes, and consequently make them more obsequious, and that he might be always
master of something, whereby to reward and gratify those, who should best
serve him to his satisfaction; which was a thing very ill taken by diverse, who
thinking they had sufficiently merited by their long patience, could not
without much trouble suffer this delay, and exclaiming against this Maxim,
said, The Cardinal was like him, who g^ve not the Medicine till the Patient was
dead. The Duke of Guise, and the Mareschals de Turenne, and Grammont, were
about the same time made Ministers of State, as well in reward of their
Services, as for their great Capacities, and Wisdom.

And now the King leaving the Reins of the Government wholly unto the
Cardinal's management, to avoid Idleness gave himself unto those sprightly
Exercises, which are commonly most suitable unto the Lively Cheerfulness of
Generous Youth; that was unto a wondrous Ball, danced often by his Majesty, and
several other great Cavaliers, with general Applause, and Commendation, in the
great Hall of the Petit Bourbon, excellently set out, and adorned by Scenes,
and Machines, invented by Giacomo Torrelli an Italian, his Majesty's Engineer,
to which being very much assisted therein by Signior Ascunio Amaltei, a famous
Priest; it was danced the first time upon the 23. of February at Night, in
presence of the Queen; of all the Princes, Princesses, Grandees of the Court,
and Ministers of For^ain Princes.

It was divided into four parts, or nights, wherein there were Forty three
Acts, or changes, all of them so extremely splendid, both for the novelty of
what was represented, the goodness of the matter therein recited, the Sumptuous
Magnificence of the Clothes, and Gracefulness of all the persons who acted in
it; that the Spectators had been at a stand unto which they should have
attributed most of Gallantry, had not the King like to a Radiant Sun behind a
Cloud, from the disguise of those Habits, shot forth such Rays of his
Majestic Looks, and graceful Action, as dazeling the Eyes of all, enforced
them with just reason to acknowledge, that there was none could equal the
Grace, or Majesty of his deportment.

In the beginning of the Action fire catched accidentally upon the Hangings
which were before the entrance on the Stage, and was like to have disturbed,
and confounded the whole order of it, but the fearless Courage of his Majesty,
and care of those who had charge of ordering things, restored all forthwith to
its pristine quiet; And this was taken for a Presage of what should follow;
like to the Auguries of the Assyrians and Persians, who regulated all their
Enterprises, by the Omens gathered from that Element.

Truly those who made this Observation were not deceived, because the day
before that very night, the Count Beauvais Lieutenant General of his Majesty's
Forces in Champaigne, having notice that the Prince of Conde being come to
Stenay, had lodged about 1400 Horse and Foot in the Village of Therme, marched
thither privately, and about an hour after midnight, fell upon them with so
much fury, that more than 300 Foot and 200 Horse were taken prisoners, and the
rest with the Count de Briol, Commander, by the darkness of the night made
shift to disperse, and get away.

This good Military Rencounter was attended by another Fortunate Success in
Civil Matters, of no slight consequence, which was, the Commitment of Monsieur
Croissy Fouquet, a Counselor of Parliament, one of the Prince of Conde's
part, and who had been a great Stickler amongst the Faction des Frondeurs,
which was raised against the Cardinal. He was taken in Paris, not so much
because he was a banished person, as for holding private intelligence with the
Prince of Conde, and because he had made use of a pretended Pass from Court, to
Treat, and Advertise him what passed, and manage a new Cabal with those of the
Prince's party. He had always showed himself a bitter Enemy of the Cardinal's;
and it being thought a matter of importance unto the settlement of his
Majesty's Authority, that some example should be made, and especially of some
Member of Parliament, there was a resolution taken to make his Process. Upon
which he desired to be brought from the Bois de Vincennes, unto the Bastile,
where he thought the Parliament (amongst whom he had much credit, and many
Friends) would favor him; there were assigned Commissaries for judging of him,
and the Monsieurs de L^sco, and Bison, were appointed to draw his Process; but
he continuing firm not to answer elsewhere but in Parliament, necessitated the
Court to condemn him as a Mute; which being a thing extraordinary in France,
and that which was against him being only grounded upon conjecture, against
which he made good defense, made them resolve to remand his Process to the
Parliament, either because he might answer before his natural Judges; or
because the Cardinal being of a sweet Nature, was loath to put things to
extremity; in virtue whereof the Chancellor, and first President having sent
for, and examined him, and finding that there was more of suspicion than proof
against him, upon the Report they made thereof unto the Cardinal, and by reason
of the continual instances made by Croissy, That he might be judged by the
Parliament, it was resolved to free him, upon condition he should remain in
Italy, until the Prince had made his Peace, or that the King should recall him.
This Example above all showed the Cardinal's moderation, there having been no
person of the whole Party, who had more violently acted against him. Monsieur
Courtin, a Maistre de Request, was also at the same time imprisoned as a
Complice, and Friend unto Croissy, but defending himself with Wit, and Spirit,
was released.

There were also taken prisoners in Champaigne upon the Road to Paris, the
Monsieurs de Vineuil, and Ioly, with forged Passes, accused for going to Paris
with Letters of Credence and Instrctions, to form some new Party against his
Majesty's Service, to scatter Libels defamatory against the Court, and his
Government, to raise Sedition amongst the People, and to engage the Friends and
Kindred of the Cardinal de Retz, into the Prince of Conde's Faction; and also
with other Dispatches, containing the ways they were to use for Treating to
this purpose, as well within as without the Kingdom. They were strictly kept,
and their Release absolutely denied unto the Prince of Conde, and the
Commanders of the Spanish Army, who pretended they were Prisoners of War, and
as such required them from Count Vaubecour, Governor of Chalons, threatening to
use the same Treatment to others, as was showed to them. The King denied
absolutely to give allowance to those Protests, declared their Crimes, and
showed, That Rebels could never be comprehended amongst the number of prisoners
of War; that therefore if any breach of Quarter should be offered unto those
Prisoners which the Spaniards had in their hands, it should be corresponded
unto in the same terms, against those of their Party who were Prisoners with
his Majesty.

There were also several other persons of inferior Rank seized, who against
the King's Edicts took the boldness of coming into Paris, being of the Prince's
Party.

The Preparations for the next Campaign were after made, and diverse Sums of
Money were delivered by the Cardinal to Colonels, and Captains of the old
Troops for Recruits, and to others for new Levies; he thought fit also to have
a Strength of German Horse, and gave the Care thereof unto the Count Neunteil,
Monsieur de Milet, Contery, and others, who went for that purpose into Germany,
as was also done in the Country of Li^ge, by the Counts of Grand Pre, and
Beauvais.

And forasmuch as Piedmont seemed to be much threatened by the loss of Casal,
and the Preparations for War made by the Spaniard in the State of Milan, where
they expected several Recruits of Soldiers, both from Naples, and Germany, the
Duke of Savoy therefore reiterated his D^si^es, That he might either be
assisted by a considerable strength of Soldiers, or permitted to agree upon a
Neutrality with Spain: There were therefore sent from the Court of France into
Piedmont, 4500 Foot, and 1500 Horse, who passed happily in May unto Annore for
the recruit of the Count de Quinc^, Commander General of the French Forces in
those Parts, there being no Marshall of France sent to Command them.

And in regard the Spaniards continued still their Negotiations begun long
before in the Court of Savoy, either to gain them to their party, or at least
to persuade them unto a Neutrality, upon Terms very advantageous which they
proposed, some Minister of Piedmont seeming to be well inclined thereto; his
Majesty therefore dispatched Monsieur au Plessis Besanzon, Lieutenant General
of his Army, a Person of great Understanding, and profound Judgment, unto the
Princes of Italy with the Title of his Envoy, to Treat upon all Affairs and
Concernments in those Countries.

Besanzon taking leave of their Majesty's, and the Cardinal, (who were then at
Fountain Bleau) in the beginning of May, went forthwith unto Turin, where
having first assured the Duke of his Majesty's intentions to maintain the
Treaty at Chierasco, and to protect always that State with the speedy supply
of a strength of Soldiers, and Considerable Officers; He went after unto
Casal, where the Duke of Mantua then was, where being received with such
Honors as are due to such as are Ambassadors, he reduced his Negotiation unto
two Heads; The One, That his Majesty should be satisfied touching the Interest
of Casal, so as that Town might not either by surprise, exchange, or otherwise
howsoever, come into the Spaniards hands. And the other, Touching the Interests
which the Ministers of Spain, under the Duke of Mantua's Name, might have
against Monferrat held by Savoy, the King being ready to pay effectively the
Sum contained in the Treaty of Chierasco, on behalf of the House of Savoy.

The Duke answered unto these Propositions, That he acknowledged this comeing
of Monsieur Du Plessis, as a particular Favor to him, being a Person in whom
he should confide, who as a Prudent Man, being informed of the necessity which
had obliged him to get into the possession of his Towns, and being satisfied
that no Accident whatsoever should alter him from that Devotion which by reason
of infinite ties, and obligations, he professed toward his Christian Majesty,
would also, as he hoped, be so kind to him, as to persuade his Majesty, That
with the hazard of his Life, and Fortunes, and that also of all his Subjects,
he would maintain the possession of those his Towns, against the Spaniards, and
all other persons whatsoever.

That although perhaps the Money for maintenance of the Garrison might come out
of the King of Spain's Purse, that yet he neither could, nor did acknowledge it
from any other hands, than those of the Empresses his Aunt, and Sister, under
whose authority the Treaty was concluded.

That as soon as ever he should be again possessor of that part of the Country
which with too ^pparant an Injustice was kept from him by the Savoyard, and
that he could freely make use of those Rents, as formerly he had done, without
being prejudiced by that Treaty, against which he had so often protested as a
thing never approved of by the House of Mantua, he would then maintain the
Garrison, without assistance from any other, and therefore he conceived that
for the accomplishment thereof, it were more proper to send unto the Court of
Savoy, and employ his Majesty's Authority with them, That they should without
contradiction restore what they withheld, which h^ desi^ ^^ always to obtain
rather by friendly means then by the way of force, whereby the Peace of Italy (
a thing so much at all times desired, and endeavored by the House of Mantua)
might be preserved; it being very clear by what had passed, unto any that shall
make impartial reflections thereupon, who had been the disturbers of it. That
the S^m offered could not be accepted, the Treaty not being consented unto a^
aforesaid; and although those Articles should have been binding, yet they were
then to have been performed when the places had not been enjoyed by Savoy, and
not now when the Mean Profits of those places have been so long enjoyed by
them, without account.

Monsieur du Plessis had already declared unto the Duke, and the Marquess de La
V^ll his principal Minister, That satisfaction could not be given to France,
otherwise then by putting Casal and Monferrat in the same condition they were
in before his Highness had made use of the Spaniard to cause the French to quit
the possession of it; but having found by the Answers he had received, as well
by word of mouth, as writing, that 'twas a thing not to be hoped for, and
conceiving that it might be a sufficient satisfaction to his Majesty
(considering the importance of the place) that it should be well fortified and
provided of an ordinary Garrison, that might be of a Nation, whose interest it
was that the Spaniard might not upon any pretense whatsoever be let in there;
he resolved to try what might be done, and proposed, That for the effecting
this, a Garrison should be placed there, the one moiety of the Duke's Subjects,
and the other moiety of Swisses, drawn from the Catholic Cantons, to be under
his Highnesse's Authority and Command, to be paid the one moiety by the
Christian King, and the other by the other Princes and Potentates of Italy, his
Confederates, who were also interessed in the Affair, under such reasonable
conditions as should be adjusted, that the Duke might be at no expense, till
the General Peace between the Crowns were concluded, and yet not be enforced to
take money from the Spaniard, a thing ill taken by those who had so often
maintained the Town against them, which might give occasion of many
inconveniences, absolutely contrary unto the quiet of his Subjects.

There was at the same time with the Duke Monsieur Iean Coxens, Secretary unto
the Empress his Aunt, who came post, sent thither expressly by both the
Empresses, to have an eye unto these Treaties.

The Duke having communicated this Proposition unto that person, he protested,
That both his Aunt, and Sister, would have great occasion to complain, should
be hearken to it; because they being obliged by promise unto his Catholic
Majesty, that the Place should be always kept free in the disposal of his
Highness, and having thereupon procured from him a maintenance for the
Garrison, there should be so little credit given to them, who were so much
concerned for the maintenance of his House, and States, the Interests whereof
they had espoused always as their own; and it would also be ill taken, that
whilst his Highness desired the Investiture of Monferrat from the Emperor, he
should receive into the same a Garrison or Money from any other Prince, without
his Imperial Majesty's knowledge, and consent, especially having herein
disgusted the said Empresses, his Aunt, and Sister.

The Answers therefore of the Duke stuck to this Point, That when his Countries
which were unjustly detained from him by Savoy, should be restored, he should
then be able out of those Revenues, without any others assistance to secure
himself, and keep those his Towns; and this being a thing well known to
Monsieur Du Plessis, he doubted not but he would in his great Judgment, upon
consideration approve it, as the best Expedient, and represent it favorably to
his Majesty, with the assurance of his most humble duty and respects, which he
was resolved to preserve always inviolably toward him.

This Answer gave no satisfaction to Du Plessis, who perceiving the effect of
his Propositions to be desperate, after he had received many Honors, and
demonstrations of Respect toward his Person, parted from Casal, refusing those
Presents which the Duke's Generosity had destined for him, and returned unto
Turin, from whence he gave account of his Negotiations to the King his Master;
thence he went to Genoua, where he Negotiated with that Republic, unto their
mutual satisfaction, from thence he took his way to Parma, and Modena, with the
like success, and at last came to Venice upon the 24th of July.

The substance of his Negotiations was to let those Princes understand of what
importance it was, to have Pignorol kept in the French hands, that the Treaty
of Chierasco should be observed, and that the Duke of Mantua should be forced
to give satisfaction unto his Christian Majesty, touching the business of
Casal, for avoiding of great stirs which might be much more dangerous to the
quiet and liberty of Italy, when the King should be forced to march with his
Forces into the heart of Lombardy, which he should other^ wise be absolutely
forced to do.

The Command of the Army against the Spaniard in Flanders, was afterward
conferred upon the Marshall Turenne, and the Marquess d'U^^elles, the Count
Beauvais, and the Monsieurs Castlenau, and St. M^r, all Persons of great
Experience, and high Repute, were appointed his Lieutenant Generals. There were
sent under the Command of the Marshall d'Oquincourt 7500 men, Horse and Foot,
into Rousillon, and Catalonia, and the Count d' Ognon, being at last prevailed
upon by the Bishop of Xantes, (a Person of Eminent Condition, and who had long
before Treated with him): upon honorable and profitable Terms voluntarily
quitted the Governments he held, as Lieutenant General to the Queen, in the
Pais d' Aunais, the Isles of Oleron, and Rea, and the most Important Town of
Brou^ges, receiving in lieu thereof the sum of 530000 Franks, and a Patent for
Duke, Peer, and Marshall of France.

This Cavalier's Mind was wrought upon by this discourse, that not being able
to maintain himself, he must either put himself under the Protection of the
Spaniard, or the English, or else return to the Obedience of his Majesty.

Upon this consideration knowing well that he should at last become a prey to
those who did support him, and being sensible that 'twas the part of a Wise man
not to expect till he were brought unto necessity, he thought 'twas better to
restore himself with safety to his Country, then expose himself unto the
danger of a Precipice to the eternal dishonor of his Name, and Family.

The Lieutenancy of the said Governments were conferred by his Majesty upon
Monsieur d' Estrade, a Person of known Experience and Loyalty; the Government
of Brouges upon Monsieur de Champ^^e^ry; the Fort of Oleron upon Monsieur de
Saint Leonard; the Fort of Preda in the Isle of Oleron upon Monsieur de
Louches, and the Towers of Rochel upon Monsieur d' Aunais, all of them the
Cardinal's Confidents, to whose direction Fortune favorably corresponding, all
things were thereby and by his own good Conduct so well ordered, that the
effects which followed rendered all his Actions entirely commendable and
praiseworthy.

They Negotiated also with the Count d' Harcourt to agree with him to deliver
up Brisac, doubting that he might Treat with some Foreign Prince, and endanger
thereby that most Important Place; but the Treaty being upon the point of
conclusion was interrupted, because whilst it was thought that Prince would
content himself with the Government of Anjou, and the Fort of Fera, in exchange
of his Command in Alsatia, he finding that they had some thoughts of Arresting
the Prince of Armagnuc his eldest Son, who studied in Paris, caused him
privately to withdraw thence, and come unto him to Brisac, which gave a stop to
all Treaties, and renewed the former jealousies and distrusts of him.

It was then generally thought that Harcourt, being a Prince of great Valor,
and having such a Fortress in his hands, would have driven things to an
extremity, and taken his advantage upon agreeing with the Court, to have gotten
the most that he could promise to himself for the restoring of it; but he did
not, having a Mind too noble to stoop unto an Action which might show want of
Faith and Ingenuity, contenting himself with the payment of the Garrison, and
his own security in that place, without making any other Proposition, though
the first Treaty had been interrupted. The King's Council on the other part did
not much solicit him, for several Reasons: The first was, Because they hoped
that when he should want money, the Garrison being unpaid would revolt against
him. The second, Because they would not engage themselves to Treat with him,
till it appeared who was Master of the place, Charlevois being there, who gave
sufficiently to understand that his Authority there was not absolute. And the
third, Because knowing how great a Friend he was to his own Reputation, he
would ^urely never undertake an Action which might lessen his Fame and
Reputation, and therefore they thought not best to make a Treaty with Harcourt,
lest they might have another to make with Charlevois. Which was the cause that
when the Count renewed his Negotiation by the Baron de Milet, and the Abbot de
la Charente, (who communicated all things with the Duke d' Elbeuf, the Prince
of Harcourt, the Duke d' Harpaion, the Marquess d' Ampouz, and other Kindred
and Friends) the Cardinal always delayed the matter. Monsieur de Bes^^s
Captain of his Guard went to Brisac, upon pretense to conclude the Treaty, but
instead of that (whereof he outwardly made show) corrupted the Garrison of
Philipsbourgh, into which Fort they suffered the Kings Troops to enter,
publishing a thing very injurious to the Count his Loyalty, that they had done
it, because the Count was in Treaty to sell it to the Duke of Lorrain;
whereupon order was given to the King's Querries not to receive his Orders any
more, as Grand Escuyer of France; and command was given to Marshall de la
Ferte Senneterre, to march with his Majesty's Forces into Alsatia, and make
War against those Places which held for the Count, to enforce him unto those
Capitulations which his Majesty should think fit to grant him. The Marshall
besieged, and in a few days took the Castle of Betford, defended valiantly by
the Count de Susa, and gave notice unto the Count, That he should give up
Brisac without other pretensions, and retire himself into his Government of
Alsatia, or to Philipsbourgh, which should be restored unto him. Harecourt
showed himself willing to submit unto his Majesty's pleasure, entered into a
Treaty with the Marshall, and accepted the Articles subscribed by him, the
substance whereof was, That there should be paid unto him 40000 Doubloones, to
pay Charlevois, and the Garrison of Brisac, and 10000 to himself, for a greater
sum expended by him in maintaining the Garrisons of Brisac and Phillipsburgh.

This Treaty was by the Marshall dispatched away to Court to be ratified, and
brought thither by Monsieur de Brinon his Nephew; but the Cardinal (being
assured that the Count d^Harcourt could not Treat with the Spaniard, as being
not absolute Master of the place, and less with the Emperor, who would not
listen to it, as well by reason of the 3000000 which France was to pay unto the
Archduke Charles Ferdinand of Inspurgh, granted by the Treaty of Munster, as
because he would not give occasion unto the French to draw the Swedes again
into Germany) refused to approve the Treaty made by the Marshall; but the said
de Brinon (and Monsieur Dautichamp (who had been sent along to Court by the
Count for the said Ratification) were sent back with Orders to revoke all that
had been granted, and Monsieur de Senneterre by the said de Brinon writ to the
Marshall his Son, That there was no cause for him to take offense at this
disowning of his Articles, but he was to obey in all things.

The Marshall observed punctually his Orders, and sent the said Brinon with
his Letters of excuse unto the Count; letting him know, That his Majesty had
not approved the Treaty he had made; and that there remained therefore nothing
to be done, but to submit unto his will, which was, That all things should be
restored unto the former state; That he should forthwith give up Brisac into
his hands, and that he would instantly advance into Alsatia, to reduce all
those Places that should refuse to give Obedience. Harecourt at a news so
unexpected was greatly troubled, and esteeming himself to be deluded, pretended
that the Marshall should make good his Parol to him, and upon that account
kept Brinon prisoner; but it availed not, because the Marshall caused
Dautichamp to be forthwith Arrested in his return from Court, and sent Monsieur
de Castlenau his Lieutenant General to take in Tannes; Dautichamp seeing all
his endeavors to be released fruitless, desired the Marshall to consider him
as a prisoner of War, and give him liberty upon his Parol; which being
granted, he continued his Journey toward Brisac, and came to Tannes at the
same instant that Castlenau was about to attack the Suburb, which was trenched
in, he wrote instantly unto the Marshall, praying him that the Assault might
be forborne; assuring him, That the Count d'Harcourt would command Monsieur de
Grun, Governor of the place to open him the Gates. But the Marshall taking it
to be only a delay for gaining time, gave order that they should give no
farther time; whereupon the Suburb being taken by the King's Forces, and
Castlenau having granted them a Truce till Dautichamp's return, who went with
all diligence toward Brisac, and in his passage saw the Marshall at Cernay,
who made him hope for the continuance of that Truce until the 9th of March in
the morning, that he might return from Brisac with an answer; but
notwithstanding this the Truce was suddenly broken, and the Place vigorously
assaulted: The Count d' Harcourt upon notice hereof dispatched presently Orders
unto the said de Grun, to receive in the King's Forces without contest; which
Orders Dautichamp sent away forthwith by a Soldier who went all night, and
himself came thither the next morning: But the Marshall not willing to receive
from Harcourt a thing which he knew he could gain by himself, suffered them not
to speak together, and so the City was Assaulted with great fury, Castlenau
being hurt there with a Musket shot, and diverse other Officers of either party.

The Governor trusting upon what had been treated with the Marshall, coming
out of the Town to discourse it with him, was made Prisoner, and the King's
Soldiers entered the Town, plundered the Governor's own house, and himself was
condemned to pay 3000 Dobloones to his great mortification and trouble, to have
been betrayed under color of the Public Faith. Dautichamp having at last got
to speak with the Marshall, and the Regiment of Lorrain being brought into the
Town, the Marshall himself who at first had demanded only the Town, and had
(as the Count d' Harcourt said) promised not to attack the Castle, demanded
that should be also rendered, and gave only four days time to the Commander,
that he might have Count Harcourt's Orders, who that he might by this last
Action take away all pretenses could be made against the sincerity of his
dealing, at the same time released Brinon, and sent back Dautichamp unto the
Marshall, and from thence to Court, to throw himself without reserve at his
Majesty's Feet, declaring that he went to put himself into Phillipsbourgh,
where he would expect his Majesty's Commands. And so this Prince quitted
Brisac, and Charlevois, being at the same time satisfied what he had advanced,
the Garrison was changed, and the said Monsieur de Besmenus was placed there as
Commander, with other Officers depending entirely upon his Majesty.

This Action which succeeded just as the Cardinal (contrary to the opinion of
many others) had foretold, much increased the Reputation of his Managery, and
merits from the Crown. But the Cardinal declared notwithstanding unto the Duke
d'Elbeuf, That he was sufficiently satisfied of the Count d'Harcourt's
Ingenuity, and had him in the same Esteem as formerly; and that in case he
would leave the care thereof to him, he would find a fit occasion to procure an
entire satisfaction for the Count. The Court was well pleased with his respect,
and the generosity of his proceedings; and his Enemies who had falsely slandered
him with many imputations laid to his charge, were very much confounded and
ashamed.

The Duke d' Anvil who a few days before had been banished the Court, was
recalled, and restored unto his former degree of favor with his Majesty, and
the Cardinal; he fell into this disgrace, because having promised to surrender
the Government of Limousin, destined to the Marshall Turenne, for recompense
of his Services, when it came to the point, he refused, by the instigation of
the Archbishop of Bourges, who suggested to him that he was not to quit it but
upon other terms; whereupon the Court who were engaged unto Turenne, and could
not let him want it without some show of collusion, found themselves obliged to
take this course as well to satisfy the Marshall, as to let the Duke see how
'twas resented by his Majesty, which he perceiving, and performing what he
promised, he was restored unto his former degree of Favor.

Whilst the Marshall d'Hoquincourt was making preparation for his Voyage into
Catalonia, the meeting of the States of Languedoc was that Winter held at
Pezenas, a City with a Castle situate upon the Point where the two Rivers of
Peine and Erand do meet together, the Marquess de Plessis Belliere was then
quartered there, and finding the minds of that People, through the unhappiness
of the Times, disposed rather to make Cabals, than contribute Money to the
King, did what possibly he could to make them sensible of their duty, and
discovering at last, that the States would fall upon a resolution, not to give
any thing unless the Troops were removed out of that Province, and knowing that
the Money for accommodating of the Horse, and other things necessary for the
provision of the Army in the Campaign, must be raised by what should be given
by that Province, which would ^ail totally if they gave nothing, and that by
consequence the Army would be disabled to march, he resolved to get into the
Field, that something might be contributed to that purpose; which accordingly
they did. He saw farther, that the Season of the year was advanced; and was
informed, that there came unto the Spaniards Recruits of men from Italy; That
the Enemies drew to a Rendezvous; That they made preparation in Castile of
Pieces of Battery, Powder, Bullet, Scaling Ladders, and all other Necessaries,
and intended forthwith to besiege Roses; And believing that there would be no
means of relieving it, in case they should finish their Line before his coming,
he resolved to make a timely preparation for it.

He parted therefore from Pazenas the 25th of May, and advanced to Segean, and
Rivesalta, where he made a halt, that he might draw together all his Troops,
and to see what would be the last Resolution of the States; he knew well the
importance of preserving Rossillon, to which purpose the Cardinal had written
to him, and recommended that Province to his care, he therefore appointed
Boulon for the general Rendezvous of all the Troops, from whence he marched the
16th of June to pass the Hill of Pertus; his Army was composed of about 2500
Horse, and Three or four thousand Foot, all tried old Soldiers: That of the
Spaniard was stronger by a Regiment of Foot, and was commanded by the Baron of
Sabach, the Constable of Castile, and the Marquess Serra, and it was therefore
probably thought they would have opposed the French at that Pass; but they
only put a Guard in the Tower della Ionquiera, with a thought notwithstanding
that the same would have stopped the French, until they might march up to
charge them with advantage; but the Tower contrary to all expectation, yielded
forthwith upon sight of two small Pieces of Canon, which the French had brought
with them out of Rossillon; There they staid one day, to expect the Rear-Guard,
and the Baggage, and from thence advanced into the Plain beyond Loustelnau:
Plessis Belliere ordered his Army into two Battails, having advice that the
Enemy would expect him toward Castillon; and to the end they might be stronger
in the Field, they had burnt their Forts before Roses, and drawn the Garrison
out of Feguieres. The French marched in good order toward the Spaniards,
leaving Feguieres on their right hand; the Vanguard saw the Spaniards in
Battalia behind Castillon, covered by the Town, a Morasse, and by several
Ditches and Cutts; but as soon as they saw Night draw near, and that the French
Rear-Guard approached, the Baggage, and Foot marching behind with great
diligence, they began to turn their backs, and by the benefit of the Night to
retire, leaving in Castillon 1200 men, to hinder the advancing of the French.

The Marquess of Blessis Belliere called then a Council of War to consult what
was fit to be resolved touching the pursuit of the Enemy; and it was resolved
they should not follow him, because in a Country full of narrow Passes, as that
was, 'twas not possible to fight him, unless he would himself* and besides, the
Provisions for the Army were not come, so as it would be necessary to retire
back to have them, and would besides have much lessened their Reputation with
the People, who are much guided by outward appearances, and whose Friendship
was of great importance to them.

It was resolved therefore to take Castillon before they advanced farther, and
to go on slowly, without engaging themselves by their marches, where they could
not be followed by their Baggage, and in order thereunto, having brought two
Pieces of Artillery from Roses, and viewed the place, they began forthwith to
open a Trench, which was presently advanced to the Town-Ditch, notwithstanding
the continual firing upon them by the Besieged.

Castillon is a Town environed with a plain Wall, and a little dry Ditch; the
Garrison consisted of Irish and Neapolitans, Commanded by Colonel Milon, who
being made one of the Heads of the People of Naples in the late Revolution, had
abandoned the Party; and put himself into the Spanish Service, where he gained
great Reputation.

The Besieged made no Sally, because they had no Redoubts without to favor
them, but cast an infinite number of stones, which obliged the Assailants to
make a Gallery over the Ditch, that they might with more security approach the
Wall; where having in three days sunk a Mine in the corner of a Tower, the
Besieged knowing the place was not longer to be defended, made Articles, and
were admitted unto an Honorable Capitulation, with a tie upon them to return
into Spain by the way of Fontraby, being the farthest way about. The French
found here six Pieces of Cannon, and 5000 pound of Powder, which came very
seasonably to them, considering their present want, having engaged themselves
in this Enterprise, with a great scarcity of Ammunition. During this Siege,
Plessis Belliere sent the Marquess de Bellefont with part of the Troops, to
attaque Empouriers the Torn de Medas, and other little places, which were all
yielded upon the same Terms with Castillon.

The French Commanders being informed before their entering into Catalonia, that
the Irish were not well satisfied with the Spaniard, invited them unto their
Party, and made them advantageous offers, which were accepted with a promise to
come over with seven Regiments of that Nation, upon the first occasion should
be presented.

Notice was given during the Siege of Castillon to those within, that they
should execute their promise; who answered, That they would not basely abandon
the Spanish Service; that whilst they were in the Town, they would do their
Duty like men of Honor, and when the Siege was over, they would make good
their words; and so they did, as soon as they came to Rossillon, where they
divided from the Neapolitans, and went into Quarters in the Daulphine, where
they were forthwith followed by many others.

As soon as the Spaniards had quitted Castillon, Plessis Belliere renewed his
Orders to all the neighboring Villages, after the taking of Barcellona, to
bring Victuals into Roses; and he gave farther Orders, that they should send in
Workmen, to demolish the Forts built by the Spaniards about Rosa, and the Walls
of Castillon, and left that charge with the Governor who remained there, with
a Regiment of Foot, and one of Horse, who having neglected the performance
thereof, was severely punished. From thence (being informed that the Enemy was
retired into Girone, and there entrenched) he marched thither without delay,
with a resolution to fight them, he thought to march along the Coast, and put
himself between the Enemies Camp and Barcellona; but finding it not
practicable, he took along the River Fer, putting himself at the Head of the
Forlorn-hope, that he might the better observe the Enemy; where having
discovered the Guard of Horse, which they kept at Ponte Maggiore, that was
retiring toward Girone, the first Squadrons of the French leaving Ponte
Maggiore on the left hand, and marching always up the River until they were
beyond the City, found the Spanish Horse a forraging on the other side of the
River, who were presently cast into Squadrons, and all the remainder of the
Troops issuing out of Girone, and the Trenches with the Cannon, were drawn up
into Battailia, before the said Fortifications; and there whilst the
Forlorn-hopes skirmished together on each side of the River, which was betwixt
them, the French advanced, and drawing close together as they came up, disposed
themselves to give a sudden charge upon the Spanish Army; whose Commanders
discovering the Enemies Design, drew back forthwith into their own Line, which
was broad and deep enough, with a good Breast-work, flanked with four or five
stone houses, and well lined with Musquettiers.

These Fortifications being regularly made, began at the Wall of an Hospital in
the Town, and ended at a Stream not foordable; Night in the mean time drew
near, the greatest part of the Soldiers wanted Powder, and the Wagons which
carried the little store they had, were not yet come up; notwithstanding which,
the Soldiers showed an earnest desire to fight, and Plessis Belliere (being
unwilling to deny them that satisfaction) took with him all the Horse, and six
hundred Musketeers, and making each of them carry a Faggot, passed himself the
River on the left hand, a little below the City, and the Marquess of Bellefond
did the same 500 paces below that.

There were several other little cuts between the River and the Spanish Camp,
so that it was midnight e're the Forlorn-hope of the Foot reached it, they
found the Trench set with Ma^ches, and drawing near knew that the Spaniards had
abandoned it; Plessis Belliere sent them several little Parties upon all the
ways to bring tidings of the Enemy, and the night being passed over without
making any discovery, the day at last discovered them upon the Mountain behind
the City.

The French had left their Baggage beyond the River with some Foot to guard it,
and expect the Cannon. The Spaniards knowing it, made their Horse come down the
Mountain, and passing through Girone thought to go and plunder it; but they
missed of their Design, because as soon as they were seen to march that way, 7
or 8 Squadrons were forthwith sent to cross the River; which caused the
Spaniard to forbear the Attempt, and return unto the Mountain. The Baggage,
Cannon, and remainder of the Foot being passed, the French encamped themselves
in the open field, within half Cannot shot of the Town wall, with a Design to
assault the Town, as soon as the Ammunition (which they expected from Narbonne)
was come, that so in case the Enemy should put their Foot into Girone to defend
it, they might attaque the Mountain, and if they did it not, the Town might be
with the more ease besieged and taken.

Girone is a great City, situated upon the hanging of a Hill, encompassed with
Walls, flanked with some little Towers, the Houses whereof served for Parapets
unto that part of the River Fer, which glide^ on the right side of it; so as it
would not be hard to take it if there were not in it a great Garrison: The
French were Masters of the Field, their Conveys came without danger, and in all
Skirmishes and Encounters, which were frequent enough, the Spaniards always had
the worst.

Belliere practiced Intelligence by all the means he could; their Soldiers
both Horse and Foot, came from time to time in good numbers to yield
themselves, so as the Officers themselves were forced very often to keep guard
over their own Soldiers. The Irish had promised to come with their whole
Companies into the French Service; the Besieged began already to suffer much,
and some days were passed that the Horse had nothing to maintain them but the
Grass and Weeds they got from the Parapet of the Town Walls.

The Spanish Generals perceiving that their Troops daily wasted, to preserve
the said Mountain had built three Forts, and designed (as was gathered by
Letters which were intercepted) to pass a part of their Cavalry to Barcellon^,
to relieve them from their Sufferings there, and to join with the Army which
the Constable of Castile was raising for the succor of Girone, so as the
French were constrained to be extremely vigilant, and to keep their Horse
always sadled in the Camp.

Whilst the Siege passed in this manner, Plessis Belliere Treated with the
Inhabitants of San Fe^ion, a little Town with a Castle indifferently strong,
situate upon the Sea beyond Palamos, and Blanes; the Garrison whereof having no
suspicion of what happened* kept not so good Watch as they ought to have done.

The Enterprise succeeded luckily, and Monsieur de Massarmes who was sent
thither to effect it, took the Town, Castle and Garrison the 26th day of July
in the Night, he found there 7. Brass Pieces of Canon, and 4. of Iron, with
some Ammunition, and for a complement of the good fortune, a Bark going to
Barcellona loaded with diverse Merchandises of value which lay there, was
boarded before they heard the news; and instead of Spaniards whom they
expected, become a prey unto the French.

Things standing in this posture, the Marshall d'Oquincourt taking leave at
Coure went into Languedoc, where assembling the Soldiers appointed to serve
under his Command, he provided to march, and join with the Army before Girone;
Plessis Belliere as soon as he had notice of it, dispatched Monsieur de
Rabaliere his Kinsman away to him, to complement him, and give him an account
of what had passed in the Siege. He let him know the w^nt there was of Powder,
that it was necessary to send that which was to come unto Narbonne, and in the
mean time to borrow a quantity from the Governor of Perpignan, or Rose* that
in case he would force Girone; or continue the Siege, 'twas necessary to speed
the Levies of the Catalonians in Rossillon* and cause Monsieur Lochman his
Regiment of Swisses which had stayed there to advance as also those of the
Queen, of Anjou, and of Languedoc, who refused to march with the rest, by
reason of the precedence challenged by those of Auvergne, who were in Conflans,
under the Command of Monsieur de Tilly.

The Marshall did what was desired of him by Belliere, he brought with him
those Regiments who renewed their said Pretensions, and insisted so far upon
them, that it was necessary to put all the Officers of Auvergne under Arrest*
upon that occasion, where they remained till Girone was relieved* he brought
3000 pound weight of Powder from Perpignan, Belliere went to meet him, a League
and half from the Camp, accompanied by all the principal Officers of the Army,
and brought him thither upon the 27th of July, informing him how all things
stood. The Marshall took the Command of all his Majesty's Forces in those
Parts, and the Marquess du Plessis Belliere fell sick of a continual Fever,
which enforced him to keep his bed for five weeks time.

Mean while the French being resolved upon the taking of Girone, battered the
Walls, made a breach and tried to gain it by Assault; but whether it were that
the breach was not sufficiently large, or that the Parapets, and defenses made
to flank the Soldiers, were not well lined with Earth, o^ that those who were
commanded upon the Assault, were wanting to their Duty in not following their
Commanders, they failed in the Onset, and were forced to desist from any
farther attempt, upon hopes that the besieged being reduced unto necessity for
want of Victuals, would of themselves yield; and in truth they were put unto
the last extremity, when their relief began to appear, which entered into the
Town upon the 24th of September, being Mules loaded with Corn* upon that side
of the Town which was of most difficult access, where were placed the S^isses,
and the Queens Regiment, seconded by Monsieur Car^i^ton's Regiment of Horse;
who were no sooner charged by the Spaniard, but they fled, and thereby gave
them opportunity to join with those of the City who ^allied out. The Marshall
was gone to visit certain Posts, where having notice that those Regiments were
engaged, he went forthwith to relieve them, but coming thither he found his own
men fled, and the enemy joined. Plessis Belliere who had also notice of it,
hastened thither, and meeting the Marshall who gave him notice of the
accident, and consulting together, they resolved to quit the Enterprise, which
being to be forthwith executed, for avoiding loss of time, and of some
difficulty; Oquincourt desired Belliere to take the charge thereof: In order
whereunto he gave Orders forthwith unto his own Regiment of Foot, that of
Poicto^, and the Swisses, that they should keep the Posts which the French held
at Pont Maggior, to facilitate their passage over the River; he caused
afterward the Army to march in good order, and pass the River to incamp at
Madignan; as they advanced, and as soon as the Guard at Pont Maggior was drawn
off, the Spaniards seized upon it, and the Constable of Castile drew about 400
horse over the River, and some Musketeers, who placed themselves in the houses
beyond the River: The Horse were no sooner drawn out into the field, but the
French facing about, charged them so briskly, that they pursued them to the
River side, taking a good number of them Prisoners; which defeat made the Enemy
keep in his own bounds, and forbear the farther following of the French.

From Madignan, Oquincourt marched to Barca, and the next morning being the
26th of September, he marched to the new Town of the Ampuries, where he
sojourned some time to amass together all the Corn found there, and carry it to
Roses, as he did, making every Company carry six Quarters of their Country
measure.

After this having nothing more to do in the Country of Lampourdam, the Troops
not being able longer to maintain themselves there, they made them pass the
hill of Pertus upon the 28th of September, and leaving the Regiments of Anjou,
Languedoc, Roquela^re, Grammont, and Harcourt in Roses, they came unto Boulon,
a place upon the River Tiech the 30th day, from whence the Marshall sent his
own men to quarter in Rossillon, and those of Plessis Belliere in Conflans.

All these Troops stayed in that little Country till the arrival of those of
Guienne, Commanded by the Marshall Marinville, and as soon as they were entered
into Rossillon, Oquincourt resolved to pass a Convoy into Rosa.

He caused all things to be prepared for that purpose, and himself would have
the conduct of it, together with all the General Officers, and the whole
Militia, excepting only such as were thought necessary to be left for guarding
of some Posts were to be maintained in Conflans: Upon the 29th of October he
passed the Mountain, and the next morning made the said Convoy enter into Rosa,
and the French Army advancing, met the Spaniards near Loustelna^ in a bad
posture; but because 'twas necessary to make haste that the Foot might pass the
Mountain, they had the means to retire, the Marquess Marinville, who that day
had the Van with his Troops of Guienne, followed them to Figuieres, from whence
the Spaniards drew the Garrison; and the Inhabitants as soon as they saw
Mari^ville's Troops, cried, Vive le France; the Garrison which also was in
Castillon retired from thence in great disorder.

Upon the 6th of November, Plessis Belliere having the Vantguard, commanded out
100 Horse to get Intelligence of the Enemies condition, by whom having notice
that they had discovered seven Squadrons of Spaniards, beyond the River toward
Servia, Oquincourt being then with Belliere, they marched forthwith to the
River side, where Belliere being acquainted with the Fords, by the Mareschal's
Order passed, and marched after them, with so much swiftness and good success,
that he came up to them, and fell upon their Rear, skirmishing with them till
they came into Bourdilles, one of their Quarters, where they thought to make a
stand, being seconded by those who were at that time in the Quarter; but being
driven from it, and beaten unto another of their Quarters, and thence to Salt^,
which was their general Quarter, they made another stand by the assistance of
the Troops there, but with the same ill success they had at first; being
entirely routed and defeated, many being killed upon the place, and a number
wounded, and taken Prisoners, all their Baggage, of the value of above 10000
Crowns lost, and their whole Army disordered, and in confusion; the French
having only some few Soldiers hurt, and two Brothers of the Villavoir's
Prisoners, who engaged themselves too far into a Troop of Officers, who were
retreating ^owards Girone.

After this Noble and Famous Action, the French Troops lodged without
disturbance in the same Quarters the Spaniards had taken up for themselves, and
enlarged themselves something farther, that they might maintain themselves with
more convenience, and for the longer time till the arrival of Monsien^ Picoy,
who was expected from Court with the King's Orders for the French Armies Winter
Quarters, and they staid thus about two Months in L^mpo^rdam, the Spaniards
not daring after the said Rout, to offer them the least disturbance, until at
last about the 20th of December Picoy came with the Winter Quarters, at which
time the Marshall held a Council, where it was resolved to send the Army into
Quarters.

Rosa was in the mean time furnished with all sorts of Victuals, and they
transported thither whatsoever they could find in La^po^rdam. The 27th of
December the French Army repassed the Mountain, and entering into Rossillon, the
Marshall gave Order to Plessis Belliere for quartering of his Troops, who
having appointed them their Quarters, and sent them thither, took leave of the
Marshall to go to Court according to his Majesty's permission given him for
so doing, and the Marshall remained there to place the Soldiers in their
Quarters, and to make all such Provisions as he thought fi^ to be done,
according to the Discipline of War.

Whilst these things were in Action, the Cardinal Mazarine was thinking upon
the means which might be fittest for gaining of the discontented Spirits,
rather by the way of gentleness than rigor, and yet neglected not to make
Provisions as well of Money, as Forces for continuance of the War, the Recruits
of the old Troops, and raising new was not hard, because the Cardinal's Credit
prevailing with the men of War, beyond all other Interest, they employed
themselves with affection and diligence therein, that they might thereby make
demonstration of their gratitude, and deserve his favor, a thing whereof the
Soldiery (being infinitely obsequious and devoted to him) was most ambitious;
by whose force he was after able to compass his designs, which (in spite of
the contrary Opinion of those who envied him) took good effect, as will appear
by that which follows.

The Cardinal's principal aim was to calm the Intestine Broyls, and reunite
the divided minds of all the French, wisely considering that all France being
at unity, and in obedience to the King, there was no Foreign Power whatsoever
of Strangers was to be feared. He applied therefore his utmost diligence by
Treaties, and Arms to reduce those of Guinne, not neglecting the Designs
entertained with several Inhabitants of Bourdeaux, he gave Order, that before
all things, they should block up the City from making use of the Garonne,
without which, it could neither receive supplies, nor continue its Commerce,
and being harrassed by the King's Forces, 'twould in a short time be forced to
yield without stroke stricken.

The Duke of Vandosme therefore having with his Majesty's Fleet stopped up the
mouth of the River, built Forts in the most important places, and driven away
the Prince's Forces from several Towns with the Land Forces; it was resolved in
Council to publish a new Proclamation of Grace to those Citizens, letting them
know, That notwithstanding so many advantages, as rendered the Enterprise in
manner certain, yet his Majesty's clemency was so great, that he was ready
with open arms to receive them into his favor, who had with so much
ingratitude risen against him.

This Act of Grace was published, and Registered in the Parliament, which was
adjourned to Again; upon occasion whereof many Assemblies were held, wherein the
most moderate Persons spoke with great sense in favor of the Country, setting
forth the prejudices it suffered, and the dangers in which these Subjects were
involved, who upon the foundation of Foreign hopes, build up a structure of
Contumacie, and Rebellion; but the incentive of Ambition were too powerful, and
the rashness of the Common People incapable of reason was too prevalent, so as
they abandoned themselves to be wholly guided by presumption, and especially
those of the Olmiera giving a sinister interpretation unto the counsels of good
Citizens, terming those false who with the greatest candor, and strongest
reason labored for the Public Good; and thereupon rejected all Advice and
Counsel, and moreover threatened those who concurred not with them, and grew the
prouder hereupon, as being given to understand that the Propositions made unto
them, were not the effects of love and kindness, but were produced by fear and
weakness.

The surest Props they thought to be those Promises made them by the Spaniard,
who with Money and other Arts, had gained the Principal Persons of the
Councils, and Factions; they thought also that the English would not neglect an
occasion so favorable to them to advance their own Interests during the
Divisions in France, by assisting that City which was establishing it self like
another Rochel; they hoped the Prince of Conde with the Arms of Flanders would
make an impression as far as Paris, and that he would make that way so powerful
a diversion, as the King's Forces should be no more able to advance toward
Bourdeaux, wherein the Princess, the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess of
Longueville by their presence gave some splendor of light unto the darkness
wherewith they were overshadowed.

These considerations seemed likely, and the colors wherewith they were set
out, were able to deceive a prudent eye, so as their obstinacy grew so
obdurate, that 'twas thought difficult (if not impossible) to re-establish the
King's Authority over that furious people, linked unto Spain, which omitmitted
no mean with the profuse expense of Gold to keep up that Party; that gave life
unto their greatness. But for as much as particular Interests are generally
preferred before the Public, and those hopes which seem to flourish most in
show, fail oftnest in producing their effects; The Burdelois were disappointed
in their expectations, and although they dispatched Deputies to London to
represent unto the Parliament, and General Cromwell, how important their
subsistence was unto the Interests of England, and that the English well knew
how much it concerned them to keep up the Divisions in France, and had also a
will and desire to do it; yet were these reflections so counterpoized by other
considerations, that the regard to future things, had greater force to move
them than the present.

The English had upon their hands a War with Holland, that tottering
Government had not foundations strong enough to support a design of such
importance; and the consideration that by ruining France, the Power of Spain
(most averse always to their Religion) would be increased, made them know it
suited not with the present state of things to break with France, which would
be able (in that case) concluding a Peace with Spain, by the assistance of
Holland, and intelligence with the English, (who obey that New Government only
because they want Power to oppose it) to bring their King Charles into the
Kingdom, and let in amongst them those Confusions and Disorders which they
endeavored to produce amongst their Neighbors (in all probability) unto their
total ruin; so as they esteemed it better for them that the Discord between
the two Crowns should be continued, that they might mutually weaken each other,
than to turn only against one of them, which could be no advantage to the
English.

To these Reasons was added another Point of Policy, then a great Secret, and
that was, The particular Design of Cromwell to reform that Government; which i^
the form it stood he knew could not continue, so as it was not fit to engage in
Foreign Quarrels, having occasion to make use of the Forces for himself, and
to employ his Thoughts in the first place about the stablishing of his own
Dominion in those Kingdoms, full of Malcontents, of persons envious of his
Fortune, and of people greedy of Novelties, so as he assured Monsieur Burde^u,
who was then resident in London, from the Christian King, that he would
preserve Peace, and good intelligence with France; The Burdelois
notwithstanding did not totally despair of relief, being hopes given them that
the War with the Hollander being ended, and a peace concluded with them which
was now in Treaty, there should be some care taken of their Interests.

As for Spain, she did what possibly she could to keep up that advantage for
her self, but the Indian Fleets, and other the Revenues of the Catholic King
were not sufficient to satisfy so many Pretenders, and maintain War in so many
places* neither could his Kingdoms and Dominions exhausted of Men, furnish the
Soldiers that were necessary, and therefore he was forced to move in England,
for leave to raise some Irish, which was forthwith granted, thereby to purge
the Country from Catholics, and persons ill-affected to the new Republic;
from Germany no Soldiers could be had, because Money was wanting to supply the
charge, (those Levies being more expensive) notwithstanding the favorable
conjuncture of circumstances to their advantage, which was a great proof of the
Spaniards weakness.

There were at several times above 2000 Irish sent to reinforce the Prince's
Party in Guienne, the Marquess de Santa Cruz had order to make ready the Fleet
in Biscay, and the Baron of Batteville to draw together Men and Provisions, fit
to make a return into the Garonne, and upon promises and other engagements of
repayment, considerable Sums of Money were remitted, as well to Bourdeau's, as
Flanders, for making of new Levies, and fitting out the Army that it might
march with the Prince of Conde into France, on the one side; whilst the
Burdelois should make a strong diversion on the other. But the Money which was
remitted, was so well liked of by the persons into whose hands it came, that
the part which they converted to their own particular uses, was generally
greater then what was laid out in the public business, whereby the designs of
the Catholic Court were not only retarded, but sometimes also overthrown, the
said Court not being able by reason of its distance from the Provinces, wherein
the War was managed, to give those Orders and Directions, necessary to be
taken according to accidents, and the present conjuncture of Affairs, whereby
great inconveniences do sometimes happen, and the most prudent Orders and
Designs are overthrown.

To this was also added, That the Spanish Council was very often deceived by
the different relatives of the French that served them, who magnifying the
Forces, and intelligence of their own party, and vilifying and abasing that of
their King, filled with vain hopes even the most Prudent persons, who grounding
their deliberations thereupon, found themselves after to be involved in greater
difficulties. Whereas on the contrary France being an united Body, was able
readily to give directions unto all its Members, and having for Steers-man to
the Government Cardinal Mazarine, who had a most clear and perfect knowledge of
the nature, and interests of all Nations, we must not wonder that he was able
to take all advantages, and to give a sudden cure to that disease which but
for his care and foresight, had gangrened, and grown to an incurable disease.

But whilst the Court of Spain was thinking of Expedients, whereby to nourish
the French Troubles, and the Cardinal in France was casting in his mind how to
restore the declined greatness of that Potent Kingdom, the Generals of the
Forces were vigilant to make such progresses as they esteemed to be for the
advantage of their Princes.

The Count Marsin General of the Prince of Conde's Forces in Guienne, desirous
to enlarge his Soldiers Quarters, by taking of some Neighboring places easy
to be gotten, sent Colonel Baltasar with a Recruit of (...) Irish, to take
Grenade upon the Garonne in the County of Gaure, thereby to facilitate his
Entry into the Countries of Armagnac, and A^ches, Monsieur de Baz, Marshall de
Camp, endeavored to possess a Pass upon the River of L^don, whereby he hoped
to oblige Monsieur d' A^^eterr^, to abandon that Country, and to gain a
notable advantage unto himself, and his Soldiers, by getting thither* but
A^beterre being advertised of it, with 300 Horse, and 50 Musketeers, marching
speedily unto the place, changed ^uriously ^00 Horse, and so many Foot, who
were already passed, that pu^ting (...) to flight, part were drowned in the
River, and others killed, and taken prisoners, the Horse saved themselves in
great disorders at Tartas, one of the best places which the Princes had
thereabouts, being followed by the King's men to the Town Gates, where they
took prisoner Monsieur de Fag^^, first Captain of Baltasar's Regiment, and
Monsieur Doro^^in was mortally wounded.

This happy Encounter made the Inhabitants of Sarlat ta^e heart, who being
greatly discontented at the injuries they suffered from the Soldiers of the
Regiment of Anguien, commanded by Monsieur Sa^^gnac Governor of the Place,
sent to the Marquess de Sambeuf, That i^ ^afe he would (...) thither with his
Troops, they would give him Entrance at a Channel which r^^s under the Wall:
But that design not taking, the same To^n^^men Treated with certain Officers of
the Garrison, who were discontented with Marsin, and having concluded with
them, they gave notice thereof unto the Duke of Candale, who immediately sent
Count Marin thither with 400 men.

The Inhabitants took Arms, and by the Assistance of the said Officers, happily
brought in the King's Soldiers, the 23. of March, an hour before day, where
being met by Monsieur Boriel an Advocate, and Consul of the City, they went
jointly to assault the Bishop's Palace, where S^vagnac was quartered, who
hearing the noise, leaping out of bed, endeavored to save himself in his shirt
by flight, but pursued by the Citizens, was taken prisoner, the Guard at the
place of Arms made some small resistance, but Monsieur de Bois^^le Lieutenant
of A^g^ien, and three Captains, wi^h other Officers being killed, Monsieur de
Cha^^elloy, Maistre de C^^^, and Monsieur de ^a Roche, Major General, and all
the other Officers who had bar^^cadoed themselves up in the house, yielded
freely, and took Employment under the King.

This good fortune was followed by the taking of several other Towns and walled
places, where the Prince's men were quartered; so as the King's Forces always
advancing toward Bourdeaux, and the City being thereby straightened, the sam^ was
no small cause of fear and apprehension unto judicious persons, who considered
of it.

They thought what end this thing would have, and saw a speedy and seanoble
succor was necessary, or otherwise the King's Party growing daily stronger in
that Province would be afterward much more difficult to hinder him from making
farther progress there.

The Bourdelois could not then receive aid but from Spain, or England, Monsieur
de Choppes, and the Count Marsin's Secretary were therefore sent away to Saint
Sebastians, and from thence to the Court of Spain, to solicit the effect of
the promises had been made unto them, for keeping up that Party, which being
now forsaken by the other Cities and Provinces of France, there remained only
Bourdeaux ready to become a Prey, either of those who defended it, or of those
who fought against it.

Monsieur d' Agolin had not been wanting to solicit continually in Spain, the
sending of more Money, and of the Fleet, and at last protested in the Prince of
Conde his Patrons Name, that in case no Money were advanced before the end of
February, he would be gone, there had been already sent to Bourdeaux 10000
Crowns; but the Catholic Court being informed by the coming of Choppes, who
was also followed by a Deputy of the Council d'Olmiere, of the danger Guienne
ran by the endeavors used by Mazarine for the reduction of it, there were
30000 Doubloons forthwith dispatched unto the Port of Passage, in Biscay, with
order that they should forthwith put to Sea six great Vessels, and four
Fireships to enter into the Garonne, and make opposition to the French.

The said Envoye's had also farther satisfaction by 15000 Crowns for the Prince
of Conde; and because there was an opinion that Monsieur Lenet did not observe
the respect due to the Prince of Conty, by reason of the great dearness between
him and Marsin, who did also fail in his duty toward the said Prince; there
were therefore some Instructions given by the Spaniards, touching the manner of
their Conduct, that the Prince of Conde's Party might be kept up.

But the Count d'Ognon's agreement with the King of France, gave a great
trouble unto Don Lewis d' Aro, and the other Grandees of the Council, wanting
thereby that foundation which they had built on the adherence of that Cavalier,
for supporting of the Troubles in Guienne, where the King's Forces daily
increased, and those of the Prince's hourly lessened; and this being one of the
greatest inconveniences apprehended by the Court of Spain, they failed not upon
this occasion to send Orders and Instructions, and to contribute supplies of
Men and Money, according to the extent of their abilities.

There was afterward represented unto the Court by the Baron de Batteville,
the difficulty of bringing Ships into the Garonne, unless they were reinforced
by a more considerable strength. Whereupon there were forthwith sent unto him
20000 Crowns, with Orders to take Sea immediately with those six Vessels, and
to carry 500 Irish unto Bourdeaux; but as things daily change face, so was it
necessary to vary also in their Counsels, and Batteville could not effect the
Spanish Orders without being provided of a greater Force, which being wanting,
it followed consequently, that the things resolved upon, were spoken of, but
could not be put in execution.

The Marquess of Lusignan, was a while after sent from Bourdeaux to Madrid, in
show to congratulate with their Majesty's for the recovery of the Queen, who
had been sick of the small Pox, and in great danger, and of his Majesty, who
had been for some days sick of a Fever, who arrived there in May; but his true
Errand was to solicit for Supplies, because the French being Masters of the
Garonne, did so fortify themselves there, that 'twas very hard to drive them
thence; and in case that were not done, it followed consequently, that
Bourdeaux, in which the King's Party grew daily stronger; must be lost.

Lusignan had good words given him, there were 200000 Crowns consigned unto
him, and at his parting the Order for the Vessels to set sail from the Port of
Passage, were put into his hands; but that was afterward suspended by reason of
the impossibility of putting it in execution; and in lieu of it, Batteville was
commanded that he should with all speed possible get into Bourdeaux by the Lake
of Archazon, to keep up the hearts of the people, and give some hopes unto the
Prince of Conty, and the Principal Persons of the Party. He was there to
propose three things to them; One, Whether they thought fit the Spanish Fleet
should advance into the Garonne, and hazard a Battle: The Second, Whether they
would have him lie in the Mouth of the River: And the Third, Whether they were
willing he should sail to Britanny, or Normandy, to divert the French, by
giving disturbance in those Places.

There were also sent 900 Irish more toward Guienne, and the Archduke and
Spanish Ministers in Flanders were written unto by the King, that they should
forthwith draw into the Field, and pay 200000 Crowns more unto the Prince of
Conde to reinforce his Troops, that he might march into France, whereby the
Cardinal being obliged to draw that way with all his Forces, should not be able
to continue the Enterprise of Guienne, and that there might be during that time
some fit means used for putting things into a good posture in that Province:
But neither could these Orders be performed, because the Ship which carried
300000 Rials into Flanders, falling into the English hands, they took the
Money, although the King of Spain were then a friend to England, and kept for
some time as lawful prize, it being in a Holland Bottom: But these Misfortunes
are not to be imputed unto the negligence of Ministers, but to the accidents of
time, which often frustrates the success of prudent Counsels.

There were 30000 Doubloons more sent to the Fleet, and Batteville was
Commanded to try all ways of getting into the Garonne, and opening the Passage
into Bourdeaux, and that he should make use of that Sum to corrupt some of the
French Commanders; which notwithstanding prevailed nothing, they being all of
them loyal and constant in their Duty to his Majesty.

The Count Fiesco, and diverse others went again also into Spain, to represent
the Necessities, and solicit for Assistance unto Guienne; though 'twere
conceived by some, 'twas rather to receive the Money and Rewards which by the
Catholic King's generosity, were prodigally dispensed unto as many French as
came to his Court; which caused many to endeavor more the getting of his
Money, than his Service, whereby he was abused: And whosoever shall consider
the Sums of Money distributed among the Malcontents of France, will find them
to have been sufficient to have conquered a whole Kingdom; and notwithstanding
were issued only upon expectations, which either through treachery or ignorance
were disappointed.

Mean while the Duke of Vendosme hastened the building of the Fort Ca?sar upon
the Garonne, and of another in the Country, about the place where the two
Rivers meet; beginning at the rising ground of the House of Ali^^t, and from
thence making Forts to hinder the Communication of the Places held by the
Princes with Bourdeaux; and to take from them Ler^^ns, a place s^ituate at the
Point where the Dordogne, falls into the Garonne, which was garrisoned by 500
Irish, under the Command of Colonel Dillon: To which purpose upon the 26th of
May he shipped the Regiments Melleray and Normandy in Galleys and Brigantines,
and by the favor of the Tide, the Cavalier Albret Marshall de Camp, and the
men under his Command, skirmished in passing by with the Galleys which lay
under that Fort; there embarked then the Count Cominges, Lieutenant General,
the Brothers Count and Baron of Montesson, and the Lord Garteret, who treated
with the said Colonel Dillon Governor of the place, and persuaded him instead
of defending himself, to change his Party, and to put himself and all his
Soldiers into the King of France his Service; this happened, because the Irish
Soldiers were extremely discontented, as having been sold like slaves unto the
Spaniard, and therefore having no tie of Honor, or other Obligation lying upon
them.

This Example had been seconded by others of that Nation, by reason of a
scruple of Conscience they had to serve the Spaniard, who were so much united
with the English, contrary to the Allegiance they owed their Prince; if Marsin
foreseeing it, had not enforced the Officers of every Regiment to give Hostages
into their hands.

The loss of Lermont was very grievous to the Bourdelois for the importance of
the place, whereby the Royallists took from them the benefit of the Rivers, in
the Command of which consisted their safety or their ruin.

Notwithstanding all these advantages, the clemency of his Majesty, and of his
Ministers, made him continue still the Treaty of Peace with those who amongst
that crowd of rebellious Spirits, seemed best affected to it, upon perswassion
that the hope of Pardon would work more than the fear of punishment. And
therefore in the Month of May, another General Pardon and Oblivion was
published for all in Bourdeaux, with Expressions, That his Majesty was more
inclined to use Mercy, than Rigor. Upon this there was a general Assembly made
in the Public Palace, to consult whether it were better to accept thereof, and
give an end unto the Public miseries, or persist in their disobedience. 'Twas
thought by men of the best Judgment, that 'twas much more expedient for
Subjects to live in obedience under their own natural Prince, than with the
shadow of Liberty under a stranger.

The fear of the Olmiere kept every one in awe; there were notwithstanding
several things debated amongst some of that Council; but the obstinacy of
those Plebeyans, could not be overcome with Politic considerations. They
seemed to be all of them charmed by the Spaniard; they inclined to think they
should be forthwith freed, they persuaded themselves what they desired; they
believed nothing which thwarted their imaginations; and being conceited they
had that in their hands, which by false colors was represented to them by the
Princes, they concluded no other Oblivion or Amnesty was to be accepted, but
that wherein the Prince of Conde was included, for whose cause they had taken
Arms, and brought a War to their own Doors; and that whoever should speak
contrary to this resolution, should as a Traitor to his Country be drowned in
the River.

These Persons made account, the offers which the Court made, were an effect of
weakness, proceeding from Necessity, and from thence drew great hopes of being
able to maintain the Divorce they had made from the King's Obedience; they
solicited upon that score General Cromwell at London, that he would undertake
the protection of them; and in case that succeeded according to their hopes,
they thought they should be able to make good their own contumacy, and by the
assistance of England, make themselves free, and independent of their own
Sovereign. This Discourse was dictated rather by Fury, and Passion, then Solid
Reason, and accordingly they found themselves in a short time deluded by those
vain imaginations.

All ways of sweetness therefore used by the Court of France, to mollify the
obdurate obstinacy of that fierce, untamed people, proving fruitless, they are
resolved to use rigor, to prosecute the War vigorously against them; There
were therefore express Orders sent that they should endeavor by all means to
streighten the City on every side, thereby to enforce them by necessity to
comply with their duty, since other means would not incline their wills; and
above all, that the Maistry of the River should be made good against all
attempts the Spaniard should make, which would reduce the City to despair, and
specially if they could keep things in that posture, till the Vintage, and if
the King's Forces could disturb them therein, it would be one of the great
damages, and punishments, could be inflicted on them; the Revenues of that City
consisting principally in the great plenty of Wines there made, by sale of
which unto the English, Hollanders and others, they raise a very considerable
profit.

But in respect 'twas also necessary to provide for the Frontiers toward
Flanders, where the Prince of Conde, united with the Spaniards, made
extraordinary preparations, and boasted that they would make a very
advantageous Campaign, by reason of the Towns he held in Champagne, and the
intelligence he had in Paris, toward which it was the public talk he meant to
march; The Cardinal therefore with no less diligence, sought to prevent the
blow, by making all provisions ^itting for it. He considered, that all
consisted in the uniting the Forces of the Kingdom, it being very hard to
beware of a domestic Enemy; and that therefore if he could not reduce Conde
(whose Mind was carried away with high pretenses, and the advantages, and
hopes, he drew from Spain) unto his duty, 'twas fit to deprive him of the
Credit, and Party he had in France; which being done, he would be then reduced
to the condition of being a private Captain only, to the Spaniard.

The Cardinal therefore bent his thoughts in order thereunto, upon two things;
the one, to take from him those Places he held in France; and the other, to
deprive him of those Friends which followed him. Upon this design, there was a
General Amnestie granted unto all persons, who repenting their Error would
return unto the King's Obedience. Whereupon the Count of Tavannes, who had
always declared high for the Prince, and had worthily performed all parts of a
Valiant, and undaunted Cavalier, being unsatisfied with him, left his Party,
and retired to his own House; The same did also several other of his adherents,
perceiving well that nothing can be an act of greater rashness, than to oppose
the Sovereign Authority of ones own Prince, to submit unto the obedience of a
stranger.

The Prince made show not to be troubled at it, because he had not Forces
sufficient to maintain his Friends, and repair the loss they suffered for him
in their own Country, and that 'twas necessary for him to keep unto himself
that little pittance he had from the Spaniard, which being far short of the
vast promises were made, though hardly sufficed to maintain himself, in a
condition inferior to his Birth and Quality.

He would also himself have made his Peace ^if the King's Council would have
condescended to his Pretensions, which in such case he would have moderated.
But as it was a thing very desirable to gain him, when he had a great Train of
discontented French that followed him; so now when he was abandoned by all, and
as it were a private Captain to the King of Spain, his Propositions were no
more to be admitted, he being at that time rather a trouble, than advantage to
the Spaniard, so as he would be able to do less harm abroad, than by returning
into France.

As to the first, 'twas thought, that being covetous of Glory, and Reputation,
he would ill suit with the Spaniards, who are full of Ambition, and
Pretensions; that the free and open carriage of a Frenchman, would never be
well matched with the reserved and close deportments of a Spaniard; that the
imperious absolute demeanor of Conde, could not but make him odious unto the
Spanish Commanders, who are all upon punctilio's; that the Antipathy between
the Nations, and difference in Language, would presently put him into disorder,
who knew not how to command, and be punctually obeyed, but by Frenchmen.

If his Actions should meet with good Success, the Glory of them would make him
envied, and suspected, as a Forraigner, in the same manner as Mazarine's had
caused him to be in France; And if 'twere otherwise, the damage would be
accompanied with scorn, there having been as much spent upon his single person,
as would have served to keep an Army. The Jealousy which the Spaniards would
always have, That he who was not satisfied with being the first Prince of
France, could not content himself with being a Servant to the King of Spain,
would keep them in a continual distrust of him, which in a short time would
destroy the grounds of Friendship; And this could not happen but with notable
advantage unto France, because it would at last be brought to this, that either
the Spaniards must destroy Conde, or he to revenge himself must destroy them;
so as to leave the Prince in their hands, was a great charge unto them, which
instead of being an advantage to them, would puzzle all their Counsels and
deliberations.

As to the second, if the Prince should be agreed with, and restored to Court,
and that the Affairs should prosperously succeed, all the applause would be
attributed only to his Direction, so as he would eclipse the Luster of all
others, with the splendor of his Glory; and re-assuming his first thoughts of
giving Law to all, without receiving it himself from any, would consequently
destroy the order of Government, which in a Monarchy must depend only upon one
single Person. Besides that, there would then be no occasion to show the World,
that France had other Captains no less Valiant, and Ministers of State as
Prudent, as those the King of Spain could boast of.

The King would out of his own Clemency have condescended to restore him unto
his former degree of Place, and Favor, if Conde without farther meddling with
the Affairs of the Kingdom, would have resolved quietly to retire himself, and
enjoy the benefit of his Estate and Revenues in any Country out of France,
which was in amity therewith; but being in the flower of his Age, and enured to
command, he was too passionately in love with Glory, which is not gained
without toil and labor, to be content to fit down, and give himself unto
repose and quiet.

France being therefore Regulated by these Maxims, and the Cardinal working by
courteous means, and demonstrations of affection, rendered his Ministry full of
sweetness, never pretending to take other revenge against his Enemies, but
only to let them know he was a good, and virtuous Person, whereby that
bitterness against him which by a few seditious persons, Enemies unto the
Public Quiet, had been infused into the minds of many, was in a great measure
allayed and sweetened. The first effects whereof were seen at Paris, where his
Reputation having been more blasted, than in any other place, the Citizens by
the remorse of their own Consciences, thought themselves bound to make a
public show of their Repentance, by making him an open satisfaction, for the
injuries they had by a public Arrest done to his Reputation the Year before;
and in order thereunto, invited him upon the 29th of March, unto a sumptuous
Feast in the Townhouse, being an Honor never used by them but to great
Princes.

The Cardinal went thither, accompanied by the Dukes of Guise and Arpaion, by
the Mareschals of France, Estree, L'Ospitall, Villeroi, Grammont; Motte,
Haudecourt, Ferte Senneterre, Aumont, Hoquincourt, and Grance, by the Count of
Servient, by Monsieur de Fouquet Surintendant des Finances, Monsieur le
Tellier, Secretary of State, six Counselors of the Community, three
Quatreneurs, and many others.

Then followed the Feast with great Pomp and Order, and with so much show of
affection in the people, of which the Piazza in the Greve was so full, that
being my self there out of curiosity, I heard them publicly bless his Name,
praise his management, blame those who had falsely slandered him, with diverse
other wonderful things, which happen when a people changes the extremity of
hatred and contempt, into the excess of honor and esteem. The Cardinal came
several times to the windows, and caused pieces of Money to be thrown amongst
the people to his great applause; his health was often drunk by all those
Citizens, and all those honors were done unto him, which can possibly be
rendered unto a first Minister of so high a Condition; whilst he dined, the
Seats and Hall were filled with as many of the City Dames as the place would
hold, drawn thither by their curiosity, to see a Man they esteemed the Miracle
of Nature.

The Cardinal used great Civility toward all, throwing about great quantities
of Sweetmeats; at his going through the Hall at parting, he entertained
sometimes one, sometimes another; and although he were in view of all in the
Piazza, there was not amongst all that people heard one, that spoke an ill word
of him; but I observed, that all applauded, and wished him good success; I
heard more than one say, he was a good Friend to France, and the Spaniard's
Scourge. Others said, he had given unto France a King, and to the King a good
Minister of State, with such like sayings; they ran after his Coach, every one
desiring to see him, and to show himself; the Omen was surely good, and the
events proved it to be so, the effects being correspondent to such good wishes.

The Count de Beaujeu held about this time Intelligence with one of the
Inhabitants of Rhetel, and agreed to surprise that place through a hole in the
Wall; he drew together 600 Foot and 400 Horse; and on the 4th of April at
night, came privately thither, and caused some Soldiers to enter through the
hole; but being discovered before a sufficient number were got in, the Design
failed, and he notwithstanding took in hand another Enterprise.

The Count had been advertised that the Lorrenois Commanded by the Chevalier de
Guise, Brother unto the Duke, leaving their Quarters beyond the Mose, and the
Sambre, were drawing toward the Frontiers of France; he therefore advanced
that way; and whilst he was at Charleville, consulting with the Marquess of
Noirmonstier Governor of that place, with Monsieur de Bussy Lamet, and others,
they had news from Monsieur de Mentegu, Governor of Rocroy, That the Count
Coligny, Lieutenant General to Conde, was gone to attaque Couvin, a little Town
upon the River Noirau, three Leagues distant from Rocroy, in the Country of
Liege, garrisoned by the French, who had beaten thence a Regiment of the Enemy,
which had been quartered there; and that he had invested it with two Pieces of
Cannon: Whereupon gathering together all the Troops which in so short a time
could be assembled at Rocroy, they marched from thence unto a little rising,
distant a quarter of a League from the Camp of those of Conde's Party, and put
themselves in Battalia, under the covert of a Coppice, from whence Beaujeu and
Mentegu, alighting to discover the posture of the Enemy, saw their Cavalry
drawn up in Order beyond the River, and the said Wood.

Beaujeu presently considered, That in case he should march with the whole
Body, the Horse would then retire under the shelter of the Musketeers, where
the French would have much more difficulty to fight them, and therefore thought
'twas best to make the Enemy believe their number was much less, so as
believing it to be a small Party, they might engage to fight them, and follow
them into the whole Body behind the Wood; and so it punctually happened; for
two Squadrons only being sent out, they were immediately charged by Coligny's
Troops, the King's men began to skirmish, receiving the Charge with great
dexterity.

Conde's men not doubting any Stratagem, advanced so far that they fell in
among those by whom they were expected; Beaujeu, and the other Commanders, when
the time served fallied out, and charged the Enemy with so much fury, that they
forthwith put them to flight, spurring hard toward their own Quarters. The
Royallists in the Chase took several Prisoners; Monsr. de la Villetta at the
same time fell upon the Foot, abandoned by their Horse, who were retiring to
Bossat, but being charged, after they fired once, yielded forthwith, and
throwing down their Arms, took Quarter as Prisoners of War; in which number was
Coligny himself, after he had performed all the parts of a valiant Cavalier, in
laboring to make those who fled, turn face against the Enemy; he was taken by
Monsieur de Delore Cornet of the Troop of Rocroy; the Colonel Ghegy was taken
by Monsieur de Rumelly; Monsieur de Buchol and several other Officers were also
Prisoners; and in this Action Monsieur de Loan, Montreuil, and the Marquess de
Caufort, carried themselves nobly, they being the Persons who charged the Foot
between Couvin and Bossat. This good Success, joined to the other whereof we
have before treated, gave great satisfaction to the Cardinal, as on the other
side it brought great trouble to the Prince of Conde, who had there lost above
a thousand good Soldiers, and the best of his Officers, amongst whom he heard
with great grief of the imprisonment of Coligny, his Kinsman, a Person of great
valor, and in whom he had great confidence; and the Court taking this as a
Presage of good Success, Resolved that the Duke of Espernon, Governour-General
of Burgundy, should undertake the Enterprise of Bellagarde.

After the rendering of the Castle of Dijon, Burgundy had been ever in great
trouble, by reason of the plunderings of that Garrison, which continually
infested that whole Country. The Duke had therefore Garrisoned the Castle of
Pagny, near unto it; and wanting Force sufficient to take it, he had given ear
to some Propositions made by the Prince of Conde's Friends to sell him the said
Place, which was hard to keep, because it was so far within the King's
Countries; but the Treaty being broken off, by reason of the too high demands
of the Marquess of Batteville Governor of the Place, Espernon took order for
making of Provisions fit for besieging of it; and considering that those of the
Franche Comte, notwithstanding their Neutrality, might send and succor it; he
sent concerning the same unto the Marquess of San Martin, and Monsieur de Cea,
Principal managers of the Catholic King's Affairs in that Province, from whom
being assured that they had no thought of doing any thing against the
Neutrality established; and being also encouraged by the Burgundians, who to
pull this Thorn out of their sides, offered to find Money and Provisions fit
for the Siege; the Duke passed the Sum at San Iean de Losne the Marquess
d'Uxelles came from Chalons to Verdun, with what Soldiers he could draw from
the Neighboring places, and brought together about four thousand Soldiers,
Horse and Foot, under the Command of the said Uxelles, and de Roncerelles, both
Lieutenants-General: The Ninth of May, the Duke possessed the Posts of
Campblanc, and de Pany, whilst the others took up their Posts at Cas^elles,
and San George, and opening the Trench, they made their Approaches to the
place, and with their Artillery battered it on two sides, and a little below
also on the other side of the River, where Monsieur de San Quintin lodged
himself with four hundred Foot.

The Besieged defended themselves with great courage, and by their frequent
Sallies endeavored to hinder the King's Forces from advancing toward the
Ditch; but Roncerelles advancing the Trench unto the Counterscarp, drained the
water out of the Ditch, filled it with Faggots, and sprang a Mine under the
Bulwark toward the River.

Batteville having no hopes of Succor, and not being in a condition long to
defend himself, sent to the Duke, and let him know, It had been never practiced
in a War amongst Christians, to assault a place without first giving a Summons
to know if they would freely yield; and therefore he desired to understand upon
what ground, they proceeded so severely against him.

Espernon made answer to him, That this was usually practiced against lawful
Enemies, but not against Rebels to the King; and pretended he would not defer
the Assault, for which all things were now ready; but being entreated by the
Officers of his Army, not to use such severity which oftentimes casts men into
despair; he consented, rather for sparing the lives of his own Soldiers, than
of the Enemy; and a Capitulation for the Surrender was agreed upon, Batteville
marching on the 8th day of June out of the place, with 700 Soldiers with their
Arms and Baggage, who were convoyed unto Stenay: The Burgundians were much
pleased with this Enterprise, having hereby quieted their Province, and
Espernon, according to the promise he had made them, caused the place to be
dismantell'd and uncovered, whereby the passage over the Sum became free, and
those people were eased of the Contributions they were forced to pay unto that
Garrison, to avoid being fired, and ill entreated by the Soldiers, and himself
acquired much honor, and a general Commendations by the Action.

The Troops who had served in this Siege were sent, part unto Marshall
Turenne, who was now ready to take the Field, and part unto the Marshall de la
Ferte Seneterre, who was already quartered upon the Frontiers of Lorrain, and
had taken diverse Castles of the Territory of Verdun, which were held by the
Enemy.

To these good Proludiums of fortunate Success, followed another Enterprise
very bold and unexpected, executed by Count Broglia, Governor of la Basse, a
Captain of high repute, and experienced valor. He was advertised that the
Troops which had been in the Quarters of Etere, la Gorgue, and the Neighboring
Posts, being appointed to serve in the Prince of Conde's Army, were the most
part of them drawn thence unto the general Rendezvous, so as there were in
those Quarters only Colonel Murphy, with about 700 Irish, and about 80 Horse,
under the Command of the Baron de Lambs; he marched therefore from la Bassee,
with 400 Firelocks, and 100 Horse, with a Bridge of Boats to pass the River
Lis, above Etere and Armentiers, that he might fall upon the Quarters of Etere
where Murphy's Regiment lay. He Commanded Monsieur de Lavogadre, a Colonel of
Piemontoi^, to pas^ the River with 350 Firelocks, and himself staid on the
hither side with the 100 Horse, and the remainder of the Foot, to succor and
assist where need should be.

Monsieur de la Trenoy, Serjeant-Major of Bassee, advanced with 100 Firelocks
about midnight the 13th of June, and charged with so much valor, that
notwithstanding the Assault was sustained with great courage by the Enemy, yet
he drove them to the Church, where they fought two hours, but at last the
French having made themselves Masters of the Church Doors, constrained the
Irish all to yield themselves prisoners of War, who were in number 300
Soldiers, 6 Captains, and all the other Officers, Murphy himself escaping by
favor of the Night: From thence the same Night the Count advanced unto the
Fort of la Gourgue, but found it quitted; and so having driven the Country
thereabouts, and got some Booty, he returned to La Bassee, very well pleased to
have destroyed that Fort, and taken all those Soldiers and Officers.

The Prince of Conde was startled with this News, and had without doubt
forthwith taken the Field, had not the taking of the 300000 Ryals, before
mentioned, by the English, retarded the Provisions which were thereby to be
made, and in particular of Horses, to remount the Cavalry, and for Artillery,
which were afterward provided with some difficulty in Holland.

The General Turenne, making use of this Conjuncture, having caused the Troops
to march into the Country about Rheims, parted from Paris the 14th of June,
and in a certain place not far distant from Chillery, in Champaigne, consulting
with the Marshall de la Ferte (who was yet drawing together his Soldiers in
the Country about Verdun) touching the course they were to hold, they
concluded to besiege Rhetel, to take from the Enemy all means of advancing
farther into Champagne, being an open Country, and full of Corn, as without
doubt they would otherwise have done, to their very great advantage.

Turenne advanced to Chauteau Porcien, and placed himself beyond Rhetel, and
Chaumont, that is a Castle where the Spaniards had a Regiment of Foot, that
were recruiting, and 60 Horse in Quarters, who at first sight yielded
themselves prisoners of War, without Colors or Baggage. The Marshall de la
Ferte, came by the Valley of Bourg, on the other side of the River Aisne, and
there in the Campaign of Chaumont, having drawn up all their Troops, they made
their approaches to Rhetel, on both sides, where the same Night the Regiments
of Picardy, of Turenne, and Palnau, possessed themselves of all the Outworks,
raising two Batteries, one near the Port of Rocroy, and the other at the River
Gate where La Ferte was quartered.

There were in the Town 5 or 600 men, under the Command of the Marquess de
Persan, who in the Night, was in great danger of being made a prisoner at the
taking of the Outworks; they opened in two days two breaches, and whilst the
French prepared to assault them, the besieged Capitulated, and agreed to march
out with Arms, Baggage, and two Pieces of Artillery, and to be convoyed unto
Stenay.

The Mareschals left there for Governor Monsieur de Boda, with his Regiment of
French Foot, and themselves went to observe the motions of Conde, and the
Spaniards, who during the time of that Siege marched together toward Hayes d'
Avennes, their taking the Field having been delayed as well for the said want
of Horse, as for a Treaty they had with a certain Citizen of Arras, about
surprising of that City, he had intelligence with Cardinal Mazarine, and played
the double spy to deceive the Spaniard, and get money from them.

The intelligence was begun the Year before, and continued until Conde found
himself abused, having parted with above 2000 Doubloons at several times upon
that score. The French having notice that the Spaniards were not strong enough
to fight their flourishing and numerous Army, marched up toward the Prince,
being resolved to assault him before he was reinforced with more men, which he
carefully labored to be; but he drew up his men in Battalia between two Woods,
behind a straight Pass which prevented them from taking him in that place of
advantage where he first was, and had been found, if he had been but one half
hour later advertised of the French Armies motion: Whereupon the Mareschals
returned unto their Quarters, and from thence marched toward Vervins, into
certain Villages near the Abbey of Fougny, from whence drawing to Vervins, they
lodged near Poussy, and from thence Coasting by Guise, they encamped at
Riplemont, to observe the Enemy who were reinforced by the Army of Lorrain, and
some Troops from Flanders, with which their design was to enter France, upon
hope that when they should appear there would many declare for them.

The French Generals therefore being much inferior in number were to carry
themselves very circumspectly, and not to hazard a Battle, which was much the
more dangerous, by reason of the consequences would depend upon it, then for
the present loss they could receive.

The French Courts aim was to gain time, to resettle the Affairs of the
Kingdom by gaining Bourdeaux, to hinder Conde from raising new Stirs and
Garboiles, by means of his party, and dependence, and to frustrate the
Spaniards expectations of ruining France, grounded upon the Credit and
Reputation of Conde; which was the only Butt unto which the Consultations of
Spain tended, as believing that Crown with their Dominions and Countries so
divided, and void of Inhabitants, could not in any other manner get an
advantage over France, an entire united Country, and therefore without sparing
of Money, nay even with the prodigal lavishing away thereof, unto the
Malcontents of France, they endeavored to draw others, and by such arts
obtain that, which by their own Forces they could not gain.

The Effects notwithstanding corresponded ill with the appearance, because the
hopes being reduced unto a few particular persons, who were more greedy of
their own profit, than that of others, they sought only the means how to
render themselves necessary unto the King of Spain's Service, and to draw
thence advantages, grounded upon this Maxim, That to draw Rewards from
Princes, they ought to make them rather hope for, than obtain the fruit of
their Endeavors. Things being therefore thus managed, and the Spaniards having
made their Provisions for that Years Campaign, there were diverse Consultations
held between the Princes, and Generals of the Armies, touching the several
courses they ought to steer.

The Generals of Spain proposed to undertake some notable Design, and by taking
some Town of Importance, by means thereof to make afterward a farther
progress; and upon that foundation to maintain a War in the Enemies Country,
it was proposed, That Five or Six thousand of the best Soldiers with Expert
Captains, should be embarked, and sent forthwith for Guienne, to reinforce the
Prince's Forces in that Province, give Courage unto those of Bourdeaux, and
nourish that War, which was the powerfullest Diversion could be given to the
Christian King's Forces. But the fears that the Succors of Spain would not be
sufficient for that purpose, and the disorder would arise by dismembring the
Forces of Flanders, made that Proposition to be laid aside.

The Prince of Conde magnifying the Correspondence he had in Paris, declared,
and was very pressing with pregnant Reasons, That they should forthwith draw
the Army together, pass the Sum, and marching as near as they could to Paris,
invite their Partisans to raise some new Sedition in the City, wherewith the
Court being startled, would easily quit it, and in that confusion marching to
Mantes, they might seize upon Pontoise, Senlis, and some Neighboring places,
where their Party being strengthened by those Malcontents, would fall in with
them, they might reap singular advantages, and keep the War alive in France.

This Proposition was specious in appearance, and so well represented, that the
Council approved of it, thinking that Conde would be seconded by the effects,
as he seemed to be by the desires of many, who applauded his Actions, and could
not stop the turbulency of his spirit.

Two notable Difficulties occurred in the execution, the one, that the hearts
of many were very much cast down by the Successes of Bellegard, and Rhetel, who
could never have imagined that the King in that Campaign could have Forces, and
Conde want them; to suffer two Towns to be miserably lost under his nose,
whereby the confidence they had in him was much diminished.

The other, That the French Army being drawn out into Campaign much stronger
then was expected, 'twas very dangerous to pass Rivers, and engage ones self in
an Enemie's Country, without a place of Retreat upon occasion, being Coasted
by an Army (though inferior in number, yet equal at least to them in valor)
of Soldiers, being all French, Bold, and Expert, and a Body of 4000 German
Horse, the remainder of the Renowned Forces of Saxon Weymar; and having also to
Friend many great Cities, and strong Forts, all most affectionate to his
Majesty. Notwithstanding as there is nothing does so much transport the
imagination, as the value we put upon our selves, fomented by a vehement
desire, Conde was so transported with the opinion of the great Esteem had of
him by the People of France, that he believed the same alone sufficed to make
him Conqueror before he fought. It was therefore resolved to follow this
advice; whereupon the Spanish Army advancing toward Cambray, and from thence
to Crevecoeur, and Catelet, came at last without opposition to Fontz Sum,
where the River Sum rises, being only two Leagues distant from the French
Camp.

There were in the Spanish Army effectively 30000 men, the Troops of Lorrain
and Conde being taken in; Composed of Spaniards, Italians, Walloons, Germans,
Burgundians, Flemmings, and other Nations, who by the diversity of their
Languages, and Fashions, caused in that Camp on harmonious discord: The
Equipage was very great of Cannon, Baggage, and Ammunition.

There Conde made a halt for some days, and faced the French Camp, passing the
time in frequent, but slight skirmishes, of the Light Horse, who beat about the
Country with much diligence; His hopes were built upon the Friends, and
Intelligence he had in Paris, which he thought would infallibly take fire; but
he was mistaken in his account, because the King being in the City, and the
Cardinal always Vigilant to prevent any Novelty that might arise, there was no
motion at all there; neither was there any of the banished persons, who
(according to appointment) would come to Paris, and head the discontented
Persons that remained there. So as the Prince's Designs vanishing, the opinion
conceived of him by the Spanish Ministers, fell therewith also; finding him not
to have that credit and dependence in France whereof he boasted, and by which
he had promised the effecting of such great matters, and therefore being no
less perplexed then confounded, touching the course they were to take, the
Armies kept their ground, and only faced each other for some days.

Conde (as being stronger in Men) desired to come unto a General Battle; The
French would not hazard it with so much disadvantage, but endeavored only by
Lodging in convenient places, and by the favor of Towns and Forts, to hinder
his advance, and make him spend the time unprofitably; so as the one studied
the means of coming to a Battle; and the other endeavored only to decline it.

This occasion showed the Excellency and Valor of the two Captains, who made
War with Courages emulous of Glory and Reputation, and therein the Conduct of
him who was inferior in Forces, proved, that wise Foresight has the advantage
over Courage.

But the Courts design was driven at another rate. The Cardinal had nothing
more in his mind than the reducing of Bourdeaux unto obedience, he knew the
quieting of that part, would be a certain preservation to the rest: his opinion
was approved by all the Council, and the resolution was taken to stop Conde
upon the Frontiers of Picardy, or Champaigne, that the Affairs of Guienne might
not be imbroiled, where all things tended to an happy issue, although the means
used by Treaties, and Intelligence had not succeeded.

The Marquess of Theubon, who had defended with Valor, and good Fortune, the
new Town of Agenois against the Count d'Harcourt, being offended, that the
Count Marsin Arrogated only to himself the glory of having freed that City, by
putting into it 200 Horse, whilst the overflowing of the Water had made the
Royalists draw farther off, and that by Marsin's orders some of his kindreds
Houses had been Plundered, amongst whom were those of Monsieur de Colongis, and
the Widow Marchioness of Ville Franche, belonging to Theubon himself by
Substitution, came to Bourdeaux; and expressing his discontent, was desired by
Conty to lay aside all Rancour, and thought of Revenge, which he professed to
bear in mind toward Marsin; but notwithstanding that, and the Sum of 500
Crowns given him toward his losses, he sent Monsieur de Mondevis to Blaye, to
Negotiate some agreement with the Duke de San Simon, and also with the Duke of
Vendosme, who was lately before arrived there.

The business took well, and gave good hope of a happy issue, but the
banishment at that time of one Litherie, an Advocate who had a hand in it, upon
other suspicions, (although this Plot were not discovered) did for the present
give a stop unto it; Theubon was solicited by his friends, and those who
wished well unto the King, to stay in Bourdeaux, to serve them for a Head, not
to be Reconciled unto Marsin, but to endeavor by all means to be Revenged,
because in case he could effect it, and take away his life, the War it self
would dye together with him, and upon pretense of a private quarrel, he should
do great Service to the public, and accomplish his own ends by it.

Notwithstanding which he left the Town, as being too much observed in it,
leaving there good correspondence, communicated his thoughts unto the Duke of
Candale, and they agreed, that the Army advancing to Lormont, he would get them
to be let in, by means of Monsieur Mousnier, and Monsieur du Sault, who were
disgusted, and weary of the Princes Government, and by the assistance of a
Counselor of Bourdeaux, who was much offended that he had been imprisoned by
Conty's orders, although he had been afterward Released, and received by him
with great Courtesy.

These three Monsieurs, were all of them principal Frondeurs, and of great
Authority, so as 'twas easily by their means, to have struck the stroke, and
the rather, because several of the Olmiera joined also with them, and in
particular one Cot, a great man amongst the Rabble, and one called Cavalier,
son to a Proctor of the Palace served for the Messenger, or Carrier of the
Letters which passed between the Conspirators, and the King's party.

The Army appeared at Lormont ready to have effected the enterprise, but Cot
having been bribed by the Princes, and Cavalier, being taken with the Letters
about him, he was as a Spy put to death before the Palace Gate, and all
intercourse was broken off; at the same time Monsieur de Chambon, who had been
by the Prince of Conde sent into Guienne, to hinder the Count d'Ognon from
agreeing with the Court, by the offer of 300000 Crowns in Money, and one of his
Towns with the Title of Duke, ran a fortune not much unlike to this; for
having found all his Negotiations fruitless, and being willing to go to
Bourdeaux, where they had an ill opinion of him, for having rendered the City of
Xantes the year before, he was by the Rabble taken and Tied to the same Gibbet,
where they had hanged him, if in the time allowed him for Confession, he had
not been relieved by the Prince of Conty, who caused him to be forthwith
released, and withdrawn from so infamous a death.

Theubon gave not over for all this to set a fort new Engines, for compassing
his ends, and together with Count Maria one of the King's Mareschal's de Camp,
had frequent intelligence with all those whom he thought fit to serve in this
occasion, amongst which pitching upon a Treasurer of France called Filiot, a
Person very bold, and zealous, who passed to and from the City, he made choice
of him to Confide in, and to keep a foot the correspondence Marin held with the
two Brothers de Chateau, and with the Counselor de Sault, Son to the Advocate
General, who growing desperate to see the Authority of Parliament, submitted to
the impertinences of the Olmiera, was entered into the party, and determined to
put himself in the Head of some Citizens, and open one of the Gates to the
King's forces.

The business was wisely carried, and the success was in a manner certain, as
being managed by Persons in whom the People put their trust, but for as much,
as it is a Maxim of the French Nation, (more frank and open than any other)
That secrets in the Breasts of Young Men, are kept like Water in a Sieve,
Chatein, one of the Brothers, having discovered the business to the Count
d'Autell Governor to the Duke d' Anguien, 'twas discovered by means of a young
Citizen, of whom the Count was Enamoured; Filiot was taken, and the Counselor
de Sault, and both imprisoned: the other Brother, who knew nothing of this
discovery, was gone to advertise the Duke of Candale, that he should draw to
Bourdeaux with the forces, believing 'twas impossible it should miscarry. The
King's forces advanced with so much secrecy and speed, that notwithstanding the
discovery of the Plot, if the Prince of Conty had not been in person at the
Port, they had entered in that Confusion, without the help of any other
Accomplices. This March of Candale, did so confirm the certainty there was a
Plot, and filled those of the Olmiera with so much Rage, that like Fools, and
Madmen, they all ran about furiously in Arms, crying, that better 'twere to
suffer Death a thousand times with Arms in their hands, then to be betrayed
with so much baseness.

They made presently a Solemn procession to give thanks to God, and charged a
Franciscan Friar to make a Sermon exhorting to Union, and Loyalty unto the
Country; the Friar went into the Pulpit, and although he were by Faction a
Frondeur, and of that judgment, yet being in that moment enlightened by the
Eternal Wisdom, he spoke in presence of the Princes, Princesses, Frondeurs, and
those of the Olmiera, so well to dispose them unto Peace, that all were
marvellously touched, and confounded, and the People wonderfully Edified at his
great Eloquence, and Learning. Whereby it is seen that the Divine Providence
Concurrs both to the settleing, and overthrow of Crowns. The Innocence, and
goodness of his Majesty being protected, and the ingratitude of Subjects being
there opposed by the Divine Justice.

Filiot's Process was after made, and no sufficient proofs coming against him,
he was put upon the Torture, which was Cruelly given him, in the presence of
Duratesta head of the Olmiera, and of the Advocate Pontellier. When he was
first put upon it he swooned; but having implored the help of God, and of the
blessed Virgin, he found himself so much comforted, and strengthened, that he
endured it Valliantly, without discovering any of his Accomplices. There was no
farther proceeding against de Sault; the Tears of his Father, and Services
done by the Son unto the Fronda, prevailing against the punishment due for a
Treason against the Princes, which had it taken, would have exposed them unto
the fury of the Soldiers without Capitulation.

Conspiracies and Plots having all failed to reduce Bourdeaux under the King's
obedience, and the Forces which Vendosme and Candale had being of themselves
too weak, to overcome a City so strong and obstinate; The Cardinal gave order
unto Monsieur d'Estrades, Lieutenant General in Rochel, to draw what Soldiers
he could out of the bordering places, and to March up with them forthwith unto
the Duke of Vendosme; Estrades was extremely diligent, and being a Person very
expert in War, and affectionate unto his Majesty's Service, came thither
speedily with a good Strength of Men near Bourg; the taking of which Place, as
necessary toward that of Bourdeaux, was enterprised by his counsel: But there
being a necessity for the vigorous carrying on thereof, to invest it on three
sides, and the Foot being sufficient only to do it upon two, the Duke of
Candale was desired, That he would furnish Forces necessary for that purpose.
The Duke corresponded with all readiness to the Desire of the other Generals,
and coming to discourse it with the Duke of Vendosme, and d'Estrades, in the
Fort Casar, he gave Orders to his own Regiment, with that of Lorrain, and
Champaigne, to march, and he himself would be of the Party, having agreed with
Vendosme touching the Command.

Bourg was Attack't, and on the 29th of June they broke ground on three sides;
On the first the Duke of Vendosme was with the Regiment of Britanny, and that
of Monsieur de Rozacerviere, Marshall; on the second the Duke of Candale, with
the Regiment of Champaigne, and that of Monsieur de Saint German; on the third
Monsieur d'Estrades, with the Regiment of Douglas, and that of Monsieur Saint
Romain; This last Approach was so vigorously advanced, that on the fourth day,
Monsieur Delas Marshall de Camp, lodged on the brink of the Fosse, and cut in
sunder a great Pallisadoe in the middle of it, notwithstanding a perpetual
shower of Musket Bullets, and a multitude of Bombo's, Grenades, and other
wild-fires, which were continually rained from the Walls to hinder his attempt.
This advance was made by the King's Forces without the help of any Battery, by
the negligence of the Canoneers, and the failing of the Pieces, which were but
twice discharged.

The besieged were so astonished with this extraordinary Courage of the French,
and so cowed with the luster of their Arms and Clothes, trimmed after the new
Mode, that they were in such confusion, it seemed they could do nothing else
but gaze upon that gayety, which perhaps was new unto their eyes. Don Joseph
Osorio, who Commanded there without thinking farther then on his own safety,
and to get out of these broils, Capitulated the Third of July, and marched out
from thence the 5th, with 800 Men, Arms, Baggage, and two Pieces of Cannon, but
to his great blame of Cowardice and baseness, and as such he was by order of
the King of Spain imprisoned after at St. Sebastians, although he justified
himself by reason of want of Victuals.

This Important Place being then lost by the Spaniards in five days only, for
keeping whereof they had laid out a great Sum of Money in fortifying it a la
Royalle, and circling of it with strong Walls, the Generals and Captains of
that People were not only troubled, but all the Malcontents of the Prince's
Party were above measure disturbed, foreseeing that this loss was a true
prefage of their utter ruin. The French on the other side, proud of so
fortunate Success, resolved to make a farther progress, and without making
stop, resolved to take Libourne, and thereupon whilst the Duke of Vendosme
staid in Bourg, to give such Orders as were necessary, and to dispatch away
Artillery, and Provisions fitting for the Enterprise; Monsieur d'Estrades with
1200 Foot, and 400 Horse, after two days stay, marched toward it, and in his
passage took the Castles of Savagnac, and Laubardemont, and passed the River
Iolla the 9th of July, the Foot in Boats at Guistres, and the Horse a League
from thence at the Foord of Coustras.

The Place was next day viewed, and Quarters set out for the Troops, until the
coming of Vendosme, who the 11th day at Night arrived with the Cannon and
Ammunition, going up the Dordogne, and passing happily under the Enemies Fort,
not above half Pistol shot off, by the assistance of the Galley, (being one of
those appointed for his Guard) which was commanded by Monsieur de la Monnerie,
Commissary General of the Admiralty; after which the Trench was begun on that
side of the River where the Duke of Vendosme was lodged; and the care of this
Attack was given to the Count of Montesson, Colonel of the Regiment of
Bretagne, and a Battery of two pieces of Cannon; d' Estrades attacked on the
other side of the River Ille, and Monsieur de St. Romain, assisted in making
the Approaches, and another Battery with the Regiment of Douglass.

In this mean time the besieged made a great Salley on that side, with Horse
and Foot, but were so briskly repulsed, that they durst never after peep
abroad. Both the Attacks were advanced with so much vigor, that the second day
the French were Masters of two Half-Moons, in one of which they took 17
prisoners, and a breach being there opened on the Duke's side, and a Mine ready
to be sprung on that of d' Estrades, the besieged upon the 17th of July founded
a Parley, and demanded the same Terms as were granted unto Bourg; but 'twas
refused them, the French thinking it not reasonable that Libourne should think
it self'equal to Bourg; at last it was agreed, That as to the French and Irish
Soldiers, they should be Prisoners of War; the Officers should have liberty
to return to their own houses, and twelve only should have liberty to carry
the Baggage away with them. The Soldiers who were about 800, divided
themselves under the King's colors, where they voluntarily entered themselves
into Service.

The Justice of the King's Cause was visibly approved by the facility wherewith
these two Important Places were gained by his Forces, and the diligence and
abilities of his Captains appeared likewise to be very great, and particularly
in the Enterprise of Libourne, which being Garrisoned by more than 800
Soldiers in pay, was besieged, and taken by an Army of 2200 Foot, and Four
hundred Horse, the remainder of the Troops being divided, part of them placed
in Garrison at Bourg; part part left to make good the Posts of Castillon, and
Monreal, and the rest Commanded upon several Parties by the Generals, upon the
notice they got by Letters of Marsin intercepted, and undeciphered, that his
Lieutenants marched with some Troops of Perigord and Quercy, unto the relief of
that place, which being the principal foundation of the subsistence of
Bourdeaux, was furnished with all things necessary for the holding out of a
long Siege.

This second loss put all the Inhabitants into a wonderful apprehension, and
the Prince's Party lost much of their first Credit, the people crying out, That
in lieu of the Succor which they hoped for, they were contriving to cast them
into the slavery abominated by them.

The Citizens therefore made several Assemblies, and examining the state of
their Affairs, found clearly that their hopes of subsistence were very small
without speedy Succor, which could not be elsewhere had but from Spain, or
England; they therefore sent away to solicit the Catholic King's Generals
for their promised Succors; and failed not to request of General Cromwell,
That he would open the Passage of the River, and give maintenance unto that
City which would bring so great advantages to England. But the Spaniards who
desired very much to perform this Request, wanted Forces, and the English who
could with ease have done it, had no thoughts of putting it in execution.

The French who saw well that Expedition was the Mother of Success and were
sensible that either the Spaniard might get Forces, or the English an
inclination to succor Bourdeaux, disposed themselves with extraordinary
diligence, to put in execution all those things which might serve to reduce
that People speedily under obedience, and therefore Libourne being taken, they
quartered their Troops as near as possibly they could to Bourdeaux, that they
might incommodate the Citizens, and deprive them of all communication with the
Country.

The Duke of Vendosme held the Castle of Lermont, all the Country between the
two Seas, and by means of the Fleet, was Master of the River; The Duke of
Candale, with his Forces divided upon the principal Passes, was Master of all
the Avenues, having to back them the Fort Casar, the Bourg of Blanquefort, and
the Quarter of Begle, and thereby hindered the City from receiving any Relief on
that side, where they had before got it, and expected it afresh from Spain, and
the Count de Marin was sent to take the Castle de la Test de Certes, wherein
was that Garrison which had facilitated the Count de Fiesco his passage
formerly.

But although 'twere certain, that Force was the securest means to restore the
King's Authority within that City; yet considering it might be long first,
'twas thought fit to try the means for reducing the Inhabitants unto a
voluntary submission. The House of Espernon had in it a great number of
Creatures, and well-affected persons, gained by their long abiding in those
Parts, who notwithstanding the Seditious Cabals, had always retained their
good affections; Which made it easy for the Duke of Candale (a Prince
generally beloved for his Virtuous and Noble Qualities) to set on foot a Treaty
upon this design, with the well disposed Citizens.

By means therefore of Friends and Confidents, (there being many others
disposed to Peace) they thought fit to attempt the means of bringing it about.

The multitudes of Country people running into the City for fear of the
Soldiers, served wonderfully to make the scarcity of Provisions appear,
because the Corn being with great dexterity bought up, and hidden in private
houses, and the Mills being out of order by biding of the stones, and other
implements, the Bakers were not able to find Bread sufficient to furnish such a
multitude; whereupon the throng of people, who were present at the distribution
of it, began to think that the want was extreme great, and that therefore the
public safety was more to be considered, then private interests. The Provision
for the Hospitals was also neglected, and those Poor were sent unto their
doors, who were thought to be most interested in the continuance of the War;
which was so done, that with their pitiful Outcryes, they might let them see
'twas necessary (not being able to resist longer against so great an extremity
of Miseries) to moderate their own particular obstinacy, which had been the
cause of bringing it upon them.

The fight of this Crowd of Poor, and Beggars, whispering at their doors who
were looked on as the beginners of the War, wrought very much toward the
disposing of them unto Peace, beginning now to fear that those very persons of
whom they had made use to disturb the public quiet, would fall upon
themselves, and plunder their houses, it was also proposed to the Religious,
That they would expose the Blessed Sacrament in their Churches covered with a
black Vail, to the end it should appear that God detested and abhorred this
War. But the Prince's Council, and the Frondeurs, having notice thereof,
caused it to be exposed in the Great Church, and supplications to be made for a
general Peace; which was the pretense they made use of, to abuse the ignorant
multitude.

This Revolution lasted until Wednesday the 9th of July, on which day after
many private Conferences, several Merchants met in the Palace de la Bourse,
saying 'Twas necessary to shut up Shop, considering there could be no farther
business done during the War.

The Prince of Conty having notice of these Murmurings; made a Cavalcade
through the City, but it passed no farther; and the next day one du Bas, having
been seized on by his order for having cried out, Peace, before the Palace of
Justice, all the Neighboring Quarter took Arms, and required his enlargement.

This du Bas plotted with a Conventual Friar Minim, called Friar Romain, who
having made some intelligence with the Count d' Autel, showed unto several of
the Citizens a Paper which he said was from the Prince of Conty, whereby he
gave him liberty to have meetings, that he might give him notice of all things
that might concern his Party; but the matter was otherwise handled, in regard
the Friar had no design but to discover thereby who were good subjects, and who
were ill-affected to the King, whereof Bas and others taking notice, they were
reserved, and would not communicate any thing of importance to the Friar.

The good Repute du Bas had in the public Vogue, moved the Citizens to make
that stir, and to demand his release, threatening some novelty in case case
they were not satisfied herein; Conty and Marsin got to Horse, together with
the greatest part of the Nobility, and Officers of the Army, all the City
Companies were commanded to take Arms, the greatest part of whom had some of
the Olmiera for their Captains; but it so happened, that the Butchers under
Command of Gilbert, and one Master Isaac, armed with Muskets and other Arms,
cried out for Peace, and that if any had particular disgusts, they should
revenge themselves by their own Arms, without engaging therein the Lives of the
whole City. And a Hollander, married in Bourdeaux, told Marsin to his face,
That they knew how to dye, but would not dye unrevenged; and that being free,
they would not dye tamely. Wherewithal being started, they concluded that after
Dinner all those of the Olmiera should meet in the TownHouse.

There several Expedients were proposed, and the plurality of voices agreed in
this, That the Citizens dwelling in the Quarter called de la Rochelle, and the
New Street, should be assaulted, and Cannon drawn up against them. The Prince
of Conty liked not the Advice, and thought it better to expect the Judges, and
Consuls of the Exchange, who with much submission, came to Petition him, That
he would not suffer the good Citizens to be outraged, nor comply with those of
the Olmeira, who were about him, and made their boasts that they would plunder
their houses. The Merchants appeared, and Petitioned for Peace. That they might
avoid greater disorders. The Prince answered, That he desired not to keep any
in subjection by force, which he could with case do; but that if they were
constant to his Brother the Prince of Conde, and himself, he would protect
their Interests; and by being united, all those difficulties would be overcome;
which whilst they were at variance among themselves, daily augmented, and
would cast them into inextricable difficulties; but that he would consider with
his Council, what was fit to be resolved upon in this Conjuncture.

The Count de Fiesco was in this interim dispatched from the Court of Spain,
and imbarking himself upon a Frigate at St. Sebastians, he was come unto the
Port of the Test de Busch, there finding all the Country in Arms for the
King, he landed, and had much ado to save himself, leaving the Frigate to the
discretion of those Countrymen, by whom she was seized, and all the persons in
her made prisoners: The great Guns in her were made use of to batter the Castle
of the Test de Busch, and another place near thereunto called Sertes,
garrisoned by the Prince's Soldiers, that they might keep open this Pass for
those that went, and returned from Biscay. To these Country Forces, were sent
a Recruit of 600 Foot, under the Command of the Count de Marin, by whom these
two Castles (which much favored the Spaniards landing) were in five or six
days taken.

Fiesco coming to Bourdeaux the 12th of July, went instantly with the Prince of
Conty unto the Townhouse, and highly magnifying the Catholic King's Power, he
assured those of the Olmiera, Of a Speedy, and Powerful supply of Men, Money,
Shipping, and all other manner of Provisions, which he had seen himself all in
good order, and left under sail in their course at the height of the Port of
Passage, so as the Wind blowing fair, it could not be far behind. Upon this
News it was resolved to have a General Meeting of the Companies of the City,
where Fiesco made the same relation, assuring them, That this was no relation
of a Gazet, but an assured certainty; himself having been present at Council,
and at the execution of the Orders which were thereupon given from the Court of
Spain.

These Passages were by well-meaning men listened unto with horror; yet some
Counselors of Parliament being revived with these hopes, said, They ought not
to proceed farther in the Proposals for Peace, made by a Party of the Citizens,
for fear of abusing the Favors of his Catholic Majesty under whose protection
all things would surely be concluded with an entire Liberty, and Quiet. But
notwithstanding this, the Presidial (which is a Magistracy composed of above
Thirty Counselors, and Officers of Note, to whom belongs the ordinary
administration of Justice) next morning made a deputation unto the Prince of
Conty, desiring him that Peace might be concluded; and that belief should not
be given so lightly to the report of Fiesco, transported with the Passion he
had for upholding of the disobedience against his natural Sovereign. After
which, all the Religious went to perform the same Office, for the Public
safety, and repose.

The Chapter of the Cathedral Church of St. Andrew made the same Request, but
their Deputies were threatened by Granant the Goldsmith, a principal person
amongst the Seditious; there came also Ministers from the Hugonots, who in all
these occasions showed themselves very zealous and affectionate to the King's
Service. The Prince of Conty answered to all, That himself also desired Peace,
but such, as should be lasting and secure; that when the same could be obtained
with fit security, he would be more ready than any other to embrace it. At
which time he also sent unto the Marquess de Santa Cruz (General of the Spanish
Army) several Expresses, to represent unto him the Necessity of a speedy
Succor, any small delay whereof would bring all things unto the utmost
extremity, and therefore the resolution was to be forthwith taken; that himself
was ready, and resolved if any new Stirrs happened, in case Baltissar would
march out with some Troops of Horse, to go with the Duke of Anguien his Nephew
unto Tartas, and so by Land unto the Frontiers of Spain.

This was a bold and hazardous Attempt, and as such was opposed not only by
the Princesses, but by Lenet and Marsin himself. Mean while the Citizens being
weary of the Indiscretions and Tyranny of the Rabble of the Olmiera, by the
advice of the Vilconte de Virlade, a Councellor of State, and of Monsieur de
Bacalan, Advocate General du Chamber des Edicts, and several other persons,
devoted to the King's Service, took a resolution to make themselves Masters of
the City Gates, by being present at the changing of the Guards with their
Servants armed, that so they might be stronger in number, as they were
superiors in valor to the Captains of the Guards, who were all of them of the
Olmeira, who were lifted by the Prince of Conde, and paid by him, that he might
have them true and faithful to him; these were extraordinarily astonished and
amazed, seeing a number of Persons of Quality, with Halberts on their
shoulders, Pistols, and other Arms about them, to lift themselves, and serve in
the same manner as the meanest of the common people; whereupon some of the
Captains of the Olmeira offered to go along with them, and demand Peace.

There were some of the Citizens who seeing themselves Masters of the Ports,
desired to bring in the King's Forces that they might with more ease shake off
the Yoke; but the rest who were as willing to preserve the Prince of Conty, and
his Family, as to free their Country, opposed such violent courses, and
endeavored to have the Peace concluded upon Honorable Terms, and not by
falsehood, and conspiracies, whereby the City might be exposed unto the fury of
the Soldiers, with danger to the Prince's life, who being of a bold undaunted
spirit, would according to his wonted custom, run upon the least noise, and
expose himself unto the greatest danger.

And therefore these moderate Persons insisted, That the things resolved upon
were to be executed vigorously, but with good order, rendering to the Prince and
his Family the Respects due to their Royal Birth, and endeavoring to gain all
persons by sweet means, such as might procure most advantage to their Country,
and gain most Glory to their Actions.

In the mean time Marsin, and Fiesco, had resolved to bring Soldiers into the
City, that might reduce the Inhabitants by force unto their wills; and to the
end they might more freely vent their fury, had a design upon the Prince of
Conty his liberty, and the lives of Monsieur de Saracin, and the Abbot of
Colnac, his Confidents.

The Prince was advertised thereof by the Fathers of the Society, and desired,
That for his safety he would please to lie either in the Town-Honse, or retire
himself into their College which was near unto it.

But the Visconte de Virlade being advertised of all this, was the first who
took Arms, and with his Friends seized upon the Port de Chapelle Rouge, through
which they were to have let in the said Forces. He Treated also with the Irish,
who were the persons that should have struck the stroke, and by persuading them
that Marsin intended to put them into the hands of the English their Enemies
and Persecutors (with whom he Treated by means of Francars, and Blaru, Deputies
of the Olmiera who were in England) brought them to take employment under his
Majesty.

The Disgusts between the Prince of Conty, and Marsin, sprang from Marsin's
ever growing in his Pretensions, whereby Lenet and he, arrogating to themselves
all the Authority, treated the Prince as he had been a liveless Statue; so as
Conty and the Duchess of Longueville his Sister, not being able longer to
support the insolence of these two persons, wrote Letters testifying their
resentments to the Prince of Conde, That he might take some order for their
satisfaction, which could not be otherwise but by removal of those two persons;
or by permitting them to retire themselves.

The Prince was two months ere he returned an answer, and then did it contrary
to what they expected, writing only in general terms, desiring them to lay
aside all animosities, and study Peace; and declaring, That he intended Marsin
should Command all things relating to the War, and Lenet those touching the
Finances; and Monsieur de Chouppes having also written to him touching the
abuses of Marsin and Lenet, he sent unto them the Original Letters.

This was sufficient to have given occasion unto the Prince and Duchess, to
leave their Brother's Party, who besides seemed not to confide in them; but
these Princes used more prudence and moderation than they were bound unto, and
quite contrary to what Conde had done, would never Treat about any Union with
the Court for themselves separately, as the Prince their Brother had done, who
without acquainting them therewith, (by means of the Duchess of Chastillon,
the Duke of Rochefaucaut, and Monsieur de Gaucourt) had the Year before held a
secret Treaty for making his own peace. But they remained constant even to the
last extremity, having besides Monsieur de Chouppes, and the Marquess de
Lusignan, dispatched Monsieur de Brequigny unto the Catholic Court, and
Monsieur de Fay unto the Marquess de Santa Cruz, then at St. Sebastians, where
the Baron de Batteville, unsatisfied that any other should enjoy the fruit and
honor of his Labors, cast in new difficulties to the Resolutions of the
Spanish Court, who according to their usual delays, entertained the Princes
and their Party only with hopes.

These differences continuing between the Princes, and the Ministers of Conde,
were in part the means that gave more life, and boldness, to the Merchants
Meetings in the Common Burse, that being thought the most convenient place
(because the Town House was taken up by the Counsel of the Olmiera, and the
Palace of Justice by the Frondeurs) Monsieur Lenet went twice to speak with
them, to sow divisions amongst them, by insinuating to the Merchants that he
approved what they went about, so it were done without engaging therein the
Advocates, and others of the Long-Robe, who as Interested Persons, would draw
all the glory of the Action to themselves, and leave the trouble of it unto
them; he represented to others their own interests, the power of Conde, and his
good affections toward the City, endeavoring to gain all Parties, partly by
Terror, and partly by jealousies, and hopes; but all these endeavors, and
Negotiations hindered not the concourse, and meeting, of the well affected Party
in this Assembly; Wherefore finding that all things went cross to his
intentions, and that the Citizens were altogether bent to Peace, instead of
confiding in the Prince of Conty, who stood firm unto the Interests of his
Brother and Family, notwithstanding his ill usage by him, he raised several
suspicions of him with the Princesses, and (which was the worst Counsel could
be taken as things then stood) being himself Universally hated, cast forth many
slanders against the said Prince, to discredit the onley stay that could
support them, sowing discords in his House, and amongst the People well
affected to him, and endeavoring and by paltry means to Circumvent them.
Fiesco took a Lodging in the New street amongst the Merchants, that he might be
nearer at hand to persuade them, that to make a secure Peace, 'twas necessary
to follow the Counsels of Marsin, a Person of tried experience; and not those
of Conty a raw young man.

They caused also some of the Frondeurs in whom they most confided, to be
present at those Assemblies in the Burse, amongst whom were also some of the
Counselors of the Parliament that staid at Bourdeaux; to occasion some
differences, and trouble amongst them, thereby to gain time wherein they had
placed all their hopes; and they wrought also with one Ramont, who stood
Sentinel in the Townhouse, to stop one Doriol from entering there, though he
was one of the Olmiera, because he did not second their opinions, which was so
ill taken by his his Companions, and all the Olmiera, that they commanded him
out of the City, and having discovered that Marsin had tampered with many of
the People, they made by common consent, a general meeting in the Burse upon
the 19th day of July, of all the Companies of the City.

Being met, there was present among them the Cavalier Todias, a Jurate, and
occasion being thereupon taken that a City Magistrate rendered the meeting
Legal, they enjoined him to accept a deputation from them to the Prince of
Conty, to signify unto him the good Citizens resolution to Treat a Peace, to
desire he would approve the design, and consent that the Obstacle which both
within and without the City was a hindrance to it (which was the Olmiera) might
be removed, and abolished. That the Captains and Officers might be changed, it
being a thing very unseemly, and unreasonable, that so many Persons of Birth,
and Quality, who went Personally to the Guard for the public security, should
be commanded by those Mean, Seditious, Pleb^ians, and that Persons of worth,
and merit, might supply their places. It was afterward concluded, that all
those who were there present, should be esteemed as Deputies from all the
Companies of the City, and should from day to day assemble together as
principal Counselors of the same.

These to the number of 30, together with several of the principal Artificers,
went together toward the Duchess of Longuevilles House, where the Prince of
Conty then was, a small number of them staying behind in the Burse. Where
Monsieur de Virlada, Monsieur de Bacalan, together with the Baron de la
Mogarolla, and young ^erang, Son to the Hugonot Minister, concluded, that 'twas
necessary to do some bold thing; and thereupon whilst the Deputies were going
thither, they cried out to as many as they saw in the Court and street before
the Palace of Justice, and in the Marketplace, Vive la Roy, and a la paix
distributing to all they met, pieces of White Ribon for a Sign. The Deputies
were encouraged by this noise, and the Cavalier Todias, with much freedom
represented unto the Prince of Conty, the miseries, which were occasioned as
well by the King's forces, as by those of the Princes who were lodged under the
Walls, and principally by the tumultuous O^^^sts, who in one year had committed
so many Scandalous Actions, as would remain a stain upon them for many Ages.
That the good and peaceable Citizens, could no longer suffer the Licentious
carriage of the Soldiery, and therefore besought him in the name of all, to
take some fit expedient for the general comfort, and relief, assuring him of
the affection, and constancy of all the Citizens toward his Highness, and the
interests of the Prince his Brother, the Duke of Anguien his Nephew, the
Princess of Conde, and the Duchess of Longueville his Sister.

The Princes Answer was, That he desired them next day to meet at the
ArchBishops Palace, to agree upon the means how a durable Peace might be
concluded. As the Deputies went out of Longueville House, they met with those
who cried out, Peace, with whom they joined, every one taking some white Sign,
and in a moment there was nothing heard throughout the City, but Vive le Roy
and la paix, and meure L'Olmiere; the Women, Children, and all others, took
some white mark, and who had nothing else, got a piece of Rag, or white Paper;
and on the contrary the Olmeists, and those of the Princes party, got a piece
of Sky Color, or Isabella, for a distinction.

The Sandry following by the Princes order, there met in Counsel, the Counts
(...), de More, Fiesco, Mata d' Aubell, the Marquess of Lusiguan, the Colonel
B^^^hasar, the Counselors Ramont, du Duc, and Espagnet, who had met at the
Burse. There was also called unto this Counsel the President de Tresne, who
upon pretense either of a True, or Feigned disease, had kept himself for two
years concealed at home, the affairs was there discoursed upon, and debated,
with variety of opinions. Some of the Frondeurs to keep the Matter from coming
to a resolution, either through ignorance, or malice, desired to delay the time
that the matter might not come unto a Vote, which being suspected by Virlade,
who was sufficiently informed of Marsin's Arts, and knew of what importance the
time was which was unprofitably wasted, he staid with some of his friends in
the Burse, and besides those who were with him the day before, got together the
Monsieurs, Lacrup, Father and Son, the Brothers of the Lestriges, Cosages, and
several Persons fit for Action, with whom (that he might encourage the Deputies
then in the Archbishops Palace, and give some fright unto Marsin, and his
party) together with about 2000 Persons gottogether by their persuasions, he
caused the House of Blaru, who was the Deputy in England, to be assaulted, that
so the report which he had caused to be given out being increased, might be a
motive unto the Prince of Conty, and the whole Assembly, to satisfy the
Citizens desires; but the People fickle and changing like the Wind, quickly
gave proof of their inconstancy, and abandoned them in the middle of the Action.

The Heads of the enterprise, endeavored to Rally the People but in vain, and
in the mean time Night drew on, no resolution being taken; Virlade bethought
himself to give some Doubloons unto Monsieur de Cabanieux his Kinsman, that he
should Assemble some of his Companions, and go unto St. Michaels Steeple, where
taking down the Red Banner advanced there by those of the Olmiera, he should in
Lieu of that Bloody, and Fatal Color, fix there a White Banner with the Arms
of France, which being punctually executed there, and upon the Steeples of San
Remy, and San Pierre, by the Parish Priests there who were well affected to the
King, as also upon the Gate near to the Burse, gave them so great an
apprehension, that even Marsin himself, who was averse from Peace, condescended
unto all that was required by the Merchants Deputies, upon the apprehension he
had of some surprise intended toward him.

Twelve Deputies were thereupon picked out to consult together with the Princes
Council, touching the terms fit for the concluding of a Peace; But Marsin
perceiving the fear he had to have been groundless, meeting the same Night in
the Townhouse (where the Prince of Conty lodged) with the officers of the
Army, and other heads of the Olmiera, they Treated together touching the means
to distrub the designs of those, who were well affected to his Majesty.

Those of the Olmiera proposed to have all persons to be Seized, and Executed,
who had Assembled in the Burse; Marsin, and Fiesco, would have a middle course
taken, that they should stand upon their defense, and bringing Forces into the
City, should lodge them in the streets about the Townhouse, unto the quarter
of Sant Eulalia toward the Bishops Palace, and the Castle de Ha, where the
inhabitants were not suspected; they resolved also to make use of an arrest of
Parliament made about the Frondeurs, which prohibited all Assemblies as
unlawful and Seditious, which were made upon pretense of making remonstrances
unto the King for Peace, that so the Olmiera might Unite themselves with the
remainder of the Parliament against the other Citizens.

The Prince of Conty liked not the bringing in of Forces, as a thing which
would make the Citizens desperate, and oblige them to let in the Dukes of
Vendosme, and Candale, which would be the utter Ruin, and Desolation of the
City. But 'twas concluded that they should make use of the resolutions of the
Parliament, the Counselors whereof going to meet next Morning, were hindered by
a Company of Citizens, who told them, that the Parliament was now in Again, and
not at Bourdeaux. Virlade caused a Corpse de Guard to be put upon the Palace of
Justice, to hinder the Counselors from meeting there, and at the Burse Gate,
caused Monsieur Lovergnac an Advocate to read a Letter from the Duke of
Candale, wherein he proffered them his Mediation, and a general Act of
Oblivion. The people though they accepted not thereof, prayed Virlade and
Bacalan, to appear as their Tribunes, in those Counsels which were held for
public Affairs in the Archbishops Palace.

Affairs in Bourdeaux standing in this posture, and the major part of the
Citizens being for Peace, the French Generals thought fit for strengthening of
those good intentions, and disabling the seditious persons of the Olmiera, from
interrupting of them, to advance the Troops from the Quarter de la Begle,
toward the Port de San Julian, and at the same time to draw up the Fleet
toward Lormont.

This Resolution was forth with put in execution, Candale's Troops marching
before by Land, who were about 4000 Foot, and 200 Horse, under the Command of
three Lieutenants General Canillac, Marin, and Bougy; and of Coudray
Monpensier, who Commanded the Horse, because the Count de Marinville, who was
Lieutenant General, under whom were 1500 Foot, and about 1200 Horse, who came
from Catalonia, stirred not from his Quarters at Blanquefort; the dust which
the Horse marching raised mounting into the Air in Clouds, and the noise of
the Artillery from the Ships, and Galleys, against the Post of Bacalan, was
seen, and heard with so much confusion and terror, that the Frondeurs, and
some Counselors of Parliament who were at the Burse, presently broke up the
Assembly, all pale, and troubled, reproaching the rest that under color of
Peace, they endeavored a Surprise and Desolation of the City.

Virlade used his utmost endeavors to have the Officers at the Ports (who were
of the Olmiera) to be changed; but he, and the Advocate Dalon, were the only
men of that opinion; and consulting with him finding their designs were now
discovered, and that the people were in a rage against them, he resolved to go
unto the Townhouse, and there with some of his Friends to endeavor the naming
of new Captains. He found there the Prince of Conty, and represented to him the
Confusion wherein the City was, disordered within, and attacked by the King's
Forces without, that the Citizens not being willing to obey those who were now
Captains, nor the Sergeant Major Periera, he besought him for his own security,
to accept of those few Captains whom in the Cities name he tendered to him,
giving him some jealousy of the Jurates pretensions against his authority, in
case they should have the power to choose those persons as they desired.

The Prince to free himself from him, in a time wherein Surprises were to be
feared, received their Oaths; they then went to Council in the ArchBishop's
Palace, and Treated upon the Expedients for having Peace. Virlada offered
himself to go, and negotiate with the Duke of Candale, without expecting a
Passport, or losing time: Marsin thought to spoil his design, by giving him
Monsieur de Baz, a Colonel, and his great Confident, for a Companion; But
Virlada went away at Midnight, only with the Prince's Pass, without de Baz.
Monsieur de Bacalan was also named to go unto the Duke of Vendosme, together
with Monsieur de Calapian, Brother of the Marquess of Lusignan, a Colonel, in
whom Marsin had also a great interest.

Virlada declared unto Candale the Intentions of the City, who were ready to
return unto his Majesty's Obedience, and presented unto him the Commission he
had from them to Treat with him, as also a Letter of Credence from the Prince
of Conty, whereby to prevent a Conspiracy against his life, and liberty, by
some who have absented themselves from Bourdeaux, but were now returned unto
it; he declared his willingness to Treat with the Duke, being his particular
Friend, for the security of all those of his Party; and did farther humbly
beseech him, That he would interpose his Authority, that the good Citizens
might receive Effects rather of the Clemency, than of the Justice of his
Majesty.

The Duke received these Expressions with much Courtesy, and professing
himself to be a Friend, and Servant, of the Prince of Conty, made unto him all
demonstrations of Esteem which were requisite to a good correspondence. But
there being a necessity that in order to Treating of a Peace, a Truce should
first precede, Virlada being earnest with him to grant it, the Duke answered,
That he would resolve nothing therein without the Duke of Vendosme, with whom
he had a perfect good intelligence. But whilst these things were acting, the
Soldiers were strictly charged not to stir out of their Quarters, nor commit
any act of Hostility against the Lives or Goods of the Burdelois.

He sent also the Cavalier de Muns, Captain of his Guard, to complement the
Prince, and assure the Citizens of his good Inclinations toward them, and of a
sincere interposition with his Majesty in their favor; from thence the said
Captain passed to the Duke of Vendosme, to give him an account of what was
doing: Monsieur de Bacalan made the same submissions and protests unto the Duke
of Vendosme, in the name of the Citizens; which were received by him with all
expressions of Kindness and Favor, which were natural unto him.

The same day Monsieur de Gourville came from Court into the Duke of Vendosme's
Quarters, and desiring to pass over unto the Duke of Candale, sent into
Bourdeaux to demand a Pass, that being much the shorter way; the curiosity of
the Commanders was the cause they sent him a Passport to come through the City,
every one being desirous to hear some News, of what had happened since their
separation from the Prince of Conde; and because the house where Monsieur Lenet
lay was next unto the place where he alighted, he visited him first, and staid
all Night with him, which gave some suspicion unto the Prince of Conty, and the
Duchess of Longueville, they thought that coming from Court he might bring
some Orders to Treat with Marsin, and Lenet, who stood then upon very bad terms
with Conty, and Longueville; who being visited by him the next morning, were
very earnest to know what Orders he brought: but Gourville professing that he
would not have meddled in any thing of that kind, without acquainting them, and
that they ought to consider him as a person depending solely upon his Majesty's
Service, the same did very much increase their jealousy and apprehension.

The curiosity of these Princes kept him in a long discourse of several things,
which wrought the same effect in the minds of Marsin, and Lenet, as his
conversation before with Lenet had done in theirs; and the rather, because
having treated of nothing at all with them, they fancied, the Orders were to
treat only with the Prince, so as both the one, and the other, remained
equally suspicious of each other; Gourville went on in his Journey, and
together with Monsieur de Bas, (the Colonel who was by Marsin sent to take
notice of Virlada's actings) came to the Duke of Candale, by whom he was most
civilly received, and communicating with him touching those things were to be
done for the King's Service in Bourdeaux, and by agreement with Virlada, got a
suspension of Arms for three days, in which time the Duke pretended that he
would confer personally with Vendosme, to adjust the Articles for a Truce, not
only for the City, but also for the whole Province of Guienne. Mean while the
Prince of Conty went to the Burse, and there took a white Riband with the
general satisfaction; but being informed of the great inconveniences occasioned
by the frequent commerce of the King's Officers and Soldiers in the City, he
prohibited by advice of the Citizens, that any should be admitted without
Passports.

Virlada being returned to Bourdeaux, informed the Prince of his Negotiations
with Candale, and communicated the same also unto the Citizens; Marsin being
troubled to see that Treaty near a conclusion, which by so many artifices he
had endeavored to protract, or quite break off, would not consent that any
answer should be made out of the Archbishop's Palace; whereupon Virlada to
animate the people, and make them fond of Peace, published another Writing from
the Duke of Candale, whereby he gave permission unto the Citizens to go
securely unto their Country houses, about their Vintage, and distributed Passes
to as many as required them.

The Duke of Vendosme sent also Monsieur de Butin, his Secretary, into
Bordeaux, to acquaint the Citizens with the good inclinations he had to favor
them, but that he would not Treat without the Duke of Candale his consent, and
to the end the Propositions might be with the more ease examined; and agreed,
That the Duke of Candale and he would meet together, and not part till the
Treaty were concluded, or broken off; Butin was received with great applause,
but Cavalier Todias principal Jurate declared, It was against the Rules of
War, and their own interest, to make a show of so much fondness after Peace.
The Secretary was also sent again, and Vendosme's Letter was directed to the
Prince of Conty. Marsin appearing at the Council called in the Archbishop's
Palace, reproved Virlada, That he had suffered in his presence, Feran the
Hugonot Minister to speak unto the Duke of Candale, against the Princes Party;
and added, That 'twas a demonstration made it evident, that the Hugonots hated
the Spaniard, which was against the Common interest, considering there was no
Succor to be expected from any other place then Spain; but that both be, and
Feran, would be therein disowned by the other Townsmen.

Virlada answered, That he was Servant to the King, and a good Frenchman, and
therefore he assured himself that honest men would never blame him; and what
the bad said be little cared. The relations which Virlada and Bacalan made of
their Negotiations, were a great trouble to Marsin, who foresaw therein the
loss of his cause, and that the major part of the Inhabitants were disposed to
return unto his Majesty's obedience.

There was a Passport then demanded for Vendosme's Galleysto go and bring the
Duke of Candale unto Begle; Marsin opposed it, saying there might be some
Treason therein, and offered that he should be carried in the Town-Shipping.
Virlada, and Bacalan, disliked that Proposition, and said, That 'twas not
reasonable the King's General should be carried by any other Shipping than his
Majesty's: Wherewith Marsin being more incensed, there passed a Contest, and
high words between the parties, and he made instance that the said Deputies
might be changed; but they being well liked of by the Loyal Party, were not
removed but confirmed in their Employment, and the Articles of the Truce were
set down, the substance whereof was, That all Hostility should cease till the
conclusion or breach of the Treaty; That the Soldiers should not have Commerce
with the Inhabitants, unless they Pass-Ports from the Generals. That after the
King's Forces were drawn off, Quarters should be given to those of the Princes
4. Leagues from Bourdeaux. That during the Truce Privisions should go freely
into the City. That Pass-Ports should be given to some for Flanders, to give
notice hereof unto the Prince of Conde; and for Spain, unto the Catholic King,
That Balthazar with his Troops might retire to Tartas. There was a dispute
about the Article touching Pass-Ports for Spain, and 'twas changed by the
Prince of Conty, who agreed, That notice should be given to the Spanish
Admiral, with a desire that he would not set sail for Bourdeaux, because he
should be there neither assisted, nor received.

All these things were wonderfully displeasing to Marsin, and to all the other
constant Servants of Conde, and such as were averse unto the Peace; they
therefore caused new whispers and divisions to arise in the City, setting afoot
Cabals to overthrow all good concord and agreement; these represented that
there was sufficient store of Corn in the Town for three Months; that the want
of provisions, and Diseases got into the King's Army daily increased, so as
they could not long subsist, nor make head against the least attack of the
Spanish Fleet, which was hourly expected stored with all provisions of
Victuals, Money, and Soldiers, so as holding of but some few days, they might
obtain a much more advantageous Peace. That in Flanders, the Prince of Conde
with a powerful Army was able to march up even to Paris, without hinderance, by
reason of the weakness of the King's Army, and disaffection of the people to
Mazarine. They went on detesting the Propositions of the Peace now in hand, as
unworthy the name of their Union, and contrary unto their promises, so often
reiterated unto the Prince of Conde not to abandon him; That this was only the
effect of a Conspiracy by some few persons, corrupted by the Court, and
disposed to better their own Fortunes by the public ruin; That they were to
beware of their offers as of the Sirens Song, and that when one has highly
displeased his Prince, there was no better counsel then to endeavor never to
see him but in Picture.

On the other side, those who knew the artifices of the Seditious persons, held
forth other Reasons, they alleged; That things were now brought near to the
extremity, which was, that they should through inadvertence either fall into
the hands, and under the insupportable Yoke of the Spaniard, or become a
miserable prey to the Arms, and Indignation of their own King, that the Town
could not fall under a greater Tyranny then was exercised among them by the
Prince's Troops, who in fine sought nothing else then to satisfy the furious
raging desire they had to deprive them of their Goods and Honor, and leave
them in a languishing and miserable condition. That being 'twas impossible the
City should be reduced unto worse terms, they ought to lay hold on the fair
opportunity offered to redeem them from such evident danger, whilst the
Generals with unexpected kindness offered to all the favors of his Majesty's
Clemency, and esteemed it a glory to themselves rather to have obtained their
Pardon, than to have been the instruments of his Majesty's revenge upon them;
That the time was now come wherein they might cancel all the dishonorable
blemishes of Rebellion, by making it appear that 'twas rather the violent
effects of a few turbulent spirits, than the inclination of the generality.

That Marsin as a stranger, for his own interest (whereof he plainly showed
himself much carefuller then of the Princes) endeavored to bring things unto
the extremity, by the false and counterfeit pretenses of a relief, which were
rather to be abhorred, then entertained, since by giving a farther nourishment
unto the War, it would precipitate the people into an Eternal inextricable
confusion, wherein their own Revenues would be totally destroyed, the same
consisting in their Traffic with strangers, and their Vintage, whereof the one
was now shut up, and interrupted, and the other would be totally destroyed if
they were hindered from gathering of their Grapes. They added, That the Princes
professing to have care of the peoples good, would not desire that for the
interest of a few Partisans of theirs, so many Innocent Persons should be
destroyed, and they being of so high Birth, and Quality, might when they would
submit, be restored unto their former greatness, and Authority in France,
wherein whoever was a Frenchman, had an Antipathy against the Spaniard, who
rejoiced at these troubles, and sought his own advantage by it, alluring the
unwary with the Luster of his Gold, and flattering hopes, rather than by strong
effective Succors; and they concluded, that having a Sovereign bestowed upon
them by God Almighty, they were not to doubt but he would perform those Great
and Magnanimous Actions, which consisted principally in forgetting injuries,
and pardoning offenses.

These reasons which were avowed by almost all the Citizens in public
declarations, added to the fear of being again outraged by those of the
Olmiera, if they should by the assistance of Foreign Forces rise again, made
them to issue out a Total prohibition of any Assembly of the Olmiera, and with
much diligence to renew all the Captains of the Quarters, and keep a strick
Watch at the Gates, to hinder the entry of all stranger Soldiers.

The Colonel Balthazar was also privately Treated withal in the Duke of
Candal's name, that they might gain him, he being a frank and generous Person,
who in case he were reunited with Marsin, could do more hurt then any other,
but by reason of several disgusts received, was not then in good intelligence
with him.

Virlada being in this mean while returned to Begle, that he might accompany
the Duke of Candale to Lormont, and be present at the Treaty of the general
Truce; the Duke had notice sent him at Midnight by an express Courrier from
Vendosme, that 35 Sail of Spaniards were in sight of Blaye, whereupon the Truce
of 3 days being now expired, Candale thought fit to give them another without
limitation of time, which should continue till the conclusion of the Peace, and
publications of the Amnestie; this he did to engage the Citizens in a Treaty,
before they were advertised of the Arrival of the Spanish Fleet, least
otherwise they might change their opinion, and concur with the heads of the
contrary party.

He therefore concluded, and carefully settled the same, and dispatched Virlada
into Bourdeaux, to draw from the Prince of Conty a precise resolution, and a
public declaration for the King's service.

Being come unto the City he found it in great Commotion, by the Artifices of
Marsin, who having been at the Burse together with Lenet, to excuse themselves
from the practices imputed to them, had in part satisfied them, and removed the
jealousies conceived of them, and by distributing Money amongst the common
people, had gained a good part of them, and particularly those of the
Confraternity of St. James, being there numerous enough above 1500 Persons, in
the procession usually made on that Saint's day, and had thereupon caused them
to tie Red Ribons in their Hats, and appointed them to cry through the streets,
and in the Procession it self, Vive tes Princes.

Virlada being much troubled with this Novelty, went to them with the Trumpet
from Candale, from some of them he took their Red strings, giving them White in
lieu thereof, and by distributing Money amongst them, made them cry Vive le Roy
and la paix, from thence going to the Townhouse where the Prince of Conty was,
he was earnest with him to declare himself either for Peace or War, that he as
his servant could not choose but let him know, the danger wherein he stood was
very great, Marsin desiring to make himself Master of the Town, though with the
Ruin of his Highness, and therefore he desired him to continue the suspension
of Arms which being to last till the conclusion of the Peace, rendered him
secure, and took from the King's Generals all occasions to attempt any
Enterprise, or Plot, which in that troublesome time might with ease be put in
execution, to the endangering of himself, and his friends, or at least with
very little honor to him.

These occasions entered far into the Prince's mind, replete with generosity,
and greatness, and therefore much inclined to receive such Counsels as were
fortified with reason, and with justice, which together with the persuasions of
Gourville, who had about the same time been very earnest with him to cast off
all thoughts to the contrary, made him at last resolve to underwrite the
suspension of Arms, which was published, and the Prince went unto the Burse, to
make a public declaration of the Treaties.

There was afterward read the Articles of Peace which were to be proposed, as
also a Renuntiation from the Citizens of all Treaties with the English, or
Spaniards; and this was done in public with much frankness by the Prince, and
followed by great acclamations from the people.

The Arrival of the Spanish Fleet was not yet known in Bourdeaux, and those who
knew the inconstancy of the people, used all possible means to hide it from
them; the Duke of Candale went to Lormont, and together with the Duke of
Vendosme, signed the Articles of the Truce in the same Terms they were
presented, excepting only the giving of quarters unto the Princes Troops, the
passport for Baltissar, and License to bring Victuals, and provisions into the
City.

The time was afterward agreed upon when they should meet with the Deputies to
Treat upon the Articles of Peace; and the designs of the Seditious persons,
and of the Spaniards being thus broken, the French Generals were highly
satisfied, and the rather because 'twas much to be suspected that if the
Sprnish Fleet had appeared sooner, they might have easily relieved Bourdeaux,
and ruined all the King's Affairs in Guienne, whose interest would also have
suffered very much in other parts of the Kingdom, by so potent a diversion.

The Spanish Shipping cast Anchor at the mouth of the Garonne, and the Generals
thereof being advertised of the Bourdelois their resolutions, as they were
ready by the Tide of Flood to attempt relieving of them, were confounded, and
astonished, and that they might not with so much danger engage themselves into
the River not being certain to be received as friends, but rather to be used as
Enemies, continued still at Anchor, sending with all care unto the Court of
Spain, to give them notice of this alteration of Affairs, and receive orders
what was to be done in this Conjuncture, they dispatched also news of it unto
the Spanish Ministers in Flanders, and to the Prince of Conde, who then found
all his hopes were blasted, as being well assured the Spanish Shipping would
never pass into Bourdeaux, nor get any advantage in case they Fought.

Upon the 27th of July the Deputies being in number 12, to whom was added the
foresaid Viscount de Virlada, to Negotiate with the Generals, proposed the
Articles of Peace, the chief amongst them being the Cavalier Todias. One of the
Citizens called Baratau, was by the Prince of Conty's permission sent to give
notice unto the Spanish Fleet, that the City had quitted all Leagues, and
Confederacies concluded with the King of Spain, and renounced all succors
promised by him.

The Articles of Peace being read by the Generals, there were found amongst
some demands so prejudicial to the King's Authority, that they were upon the
point of dismissing the Deputies without a word speaking; but it being doubted
that the Bourdelois would desperately throw themselves upon the Spaniards, who
were now so near at hand, they took a middle course which was more proper, that
is to continue the Treaty, and come unto a conference, in which those things
which could not be granted should be referred unto his Majesty, rather then
dismiss the Deputies, which would have given great boldness to Marsin, and
disgust unto the people, and when the well affected Citizens should find their
hopes deluded, 'twas thought they would be easily induced, to admit the Spanish
succors.

They therefore recalled the Deputies, and after they had offered them a
general Oblivion for the inhabitants, in the same form 'twas granted to the
Parisians, and as 'twas Registered in the Parliament transferred to Again, unto
the Princes, and Princesses, and all others of their party, such Passports as
they could desire, unto the Generals, and French Officers, License to retire
themselves unto their Houses, and to the foraign Forces leave to depart the
Kingdom, they promised the next day to examine in a Conference the Articles of
the peace, which being made known to the Prince of Conty, and the inhabitants
in an Assembly at the Burse, all the Articles were in two Sessions agreed, and
set down in manner following.

Upon the first, and second, after reading of the King's Declaration in 1650,
it was agreed that a General Pardon and Oblivion should be granted to all the
Bourdelois, together with a confirmation of their Privileges: Upon the third,
which concerned the person of the Prince of Conde, and his indemnity, 'twas
referred unto the King; but to the end he might have notice of the present
Treaty, a Courrier was to go with a Passport unto the Court, and from thence
with his Majesty's Pass unto him in Flanders. In ease the Prince of Conty, and
the Duchess of Longueville would be comprehended in the Amnestie of Bourdeaux,
'twas allowed unto them; or if they desired it apart, it should be granted to
them in the best form, and verified for them, and those who depended on them,
in the Parliament of Paris; as also that for the Bourdelois, in the Parliament
of Guienne: To the Duke of Angaren, and the Princess his Mother, Passports
should be granted for their security, or stay, in case they would settle their
abode in any part of the Kingdom. Unto Marsin, License to go unto the Country
of Liege, whereof he was a Native, either by Sea or Land; The like unto the
Count de Mora, the Marquess of Lusignan, Lenet, and others, in case they
refused the Amnestie.

There grew some difficulty about the Gens d' Arms of the Prince's Guard, and
the Regiment of Anguien, the Generals pretending that those being the King's
Troops ought to be disbanded, or take pay under his Majesty; but the example of
the Capitulation at Bellagarde, made them consent to give them Billet for
Quarters in France unto the Frontiers, the Regiment of March, and de
Marcousse, together with all others of the Princes party were disbanded.

Unto the Irish was license also given to retire into Spain, but they had
privately (as has been said) agreed already with the French Generals. The
Castles were restored, the prisoners freed, but the demolition of the Fort
Caesar, Bourg, Libourne, and other places, was referred to the King's pleasure.

There was a long dispute touching the returning of the Parliament to
Bourdeaux, and upon the Article for taking off the imposition settled at Blaye,
of two Crowns upon every Tun of Wines, the reimbursement of Debts contracted
during the War, upon Rents, and Merchandises, touching the revocation of the
discharge of Taxes, and Tithes, for ten years, and the suppression of the Court
of Aides; all which Articles being of high importance, were referred to his
Majesty, that such course might be taken in them, as to his Majesty should seem
most fitting.

The Generals also refused to include in this Treaty the New Town d' Agenois,
and other Cities of the Princes party, saying, They were at their own freedom
to accept the Amnesty, and submit voluntarily unto his Majesty's Authority.

After this Conference the Duke of Vendosme asked of the Deputies, How the City
would be satisfied, these Articles being agreed unto, the King's Amnestie being
granted in that manner, and the Soldiery being retired. This was for a long
time debated in the Townhouse upon the 29th of July, where the Prince of
Conty, together with the Duke of Anguien; and Lenet, being present, the
Proposition from the Generals was examined. The Contents thereof was, That
these Articles being underwritten, they should rely upon their words as
Persons of Honor; and that in regard time would be spent in writing, and
receiving an answer with the King's confirmation, the Generals should forthwith
enter into the City, and they would then allow them Victuals, and safe Conducts
for the Princes, and License for their Troops to retire; but in case they would
expect his Majesty's Declaration before they suffered them to enter, they
intended not in such case to permit them to be relieved with Victuals, nor to
suffer any to go out of the City but their Deputies.

Upon this the Counselors of Parliament that remained in Bourdeaux; being all
of them Frondeurs, and principally Monsieurs d' Espagnet, and de Saux,
maintained, That in this case 'twas better to have War, than a doubtful
uncertain Peace; and that they ought not to consent that the King's Declaration
should be registered elsewhere than in the Parliament sitting at Bourdeaux, or
that the Generals should be permitted to enter into the City.

In this Intrigue, they took for the best Expedient to cause the Peace to be
forthwith published, to expect the King's Ratification thereof, and give
Hostages mutually, but not to permit the Generals to enter the City. They added
to this (because the people began to rise in Tumults, desiring an end of the
Treaty, and of their miseries) a Request, That the Troops might draw off, and
that some days might be allowed unto the Princes for adjusting of their
businesses. But the French Generals refusing to condescend to this Demand,
answered, That unless the Peace were entirely settled, the King's Forces could
not draw off from Bourdeaux; and that as long as the Princes, Princesses,
Marsin, Lenet, and others, were in the City, they could grant them nothing but
the Cessation of Arms agreed by the Truce of the 30th of July.

The Prince of Conty, who had signed a Treaty for himself, and all his Family
with Gourville, declared in the Assembly of the Burse, That he would trust unto
the General's Parol, and desired not that for any interest of his, or of his
Family, the Citizens should be hindered from coming to an end of their Miseries,
by drawing off their Forces from them; That as for himself, he was resolved
forthwith to leave the City, and retire himself to Cadillac. It was also
declared by the Cavalier Todias, That the Princess of Conde would retire her
self unto L'Esparre, and the Duchess of Longueville to Plassac, there to
expect Passports or the Amnesty. Which coming after, Longueville by consent of
the Duke her Husband, went to reside out of the noise of Troubles in a
Monastery of Nuns, in the Fauxbourg of the City of Moulins, in the Burbonese.

The Deputies therefore returning that day, they concluded, That the Dukes
might conformably to the Conditions, their own Quality, and the Honor due to
the King's Commands, enter into the City whenever they should please, and
that the Princes Soldiers should retire as they desired. The Passports were
brought unto the Princess of Conde, Duke d' Anguien, Marsin, and Lenet, by
Monsieur de Comminges.

The same day the Duke of Vendosme sent the Count of Montesson; and the Duke of
Candale, the Count of Marinville to Court, for the Ratifications which were
necessary. The manner of the General's Entry into the City, and of their
Reception there, being afterward agreed upon the first of August: Virlada
brought from the Duke of Candale unto the Citizens, a general freedom for their
Goods in the Country, and liberty for bringing in provisions although the
Generals made not their Entry until the third of August; The Prince of Conty
being the day before retired to Cadillac, the Princess of Conde toward
Castillon upon Medoc, to take Shipping, and the Duchess of Longueville
attended by Monsieur de Comminges, went to Plassac.

After this, Courriers were dispatched unto the King, the Queen; and the
Cardinal, to give them notice of this agreement. The Entry of the Generals
being then agreed, they came thither upon the third of August, Vendosme from
Lormont, and Candale from Begle, accompanied with the principal Commanders of
the Army, and their Guards of Horse and Foot, and alighted in the Convent of
the discalced Carmelites, where they were received by the whole Body of the
City out of the Port de Chappelle Rouge, and brought with Acclamations of Vive
le Roy, through the City Companies standing in Arms, which made up above 12000
Foot, unto the Cathedral Church of St. Andrew, where Te Deum was sung, and an
Eloquent Sermon preached by the Father Ythier, Exhorting all to continue
constant in his Majesty's Service, and to enjoy the sweets of Peace: From
thence the Dukes were conducted unto the Lodgings prepared for them, comforting
with their lovely and grateful presence, that whole City, wherein the Sun
(having as it were a horror of the passed tumults) seemed not to shine forth
with his accustomed cheerful splendor.

There each of the Dukes received severally the complements of all the
Companies of the City, and were Treated with a huge Supper, with so great
abundance of all delicacies, as made it evident, that not want, but abundance
of Affection and Loyalty, had occasioned the opening of the Gates unto them.

On the other side the Dukes to show a grateful correspondence, presently
discharged their own Guards, and gave order that the Citizens should mount the
Guards at their Lodgings, and did what they could to make it appear that they
confided in them; that being the principal thing which nourishes good will in
subjects, and with letting them see the Force of their affection, obliges them
to a return of love for those, who are desirous of their safety.

The next day in presence of the Bishop of Tule six new Jurates were chosen,
all persons of worth, who during the late Revolutions had rendered themselves
very remarkable for their Loyalty; afterward the Assemblies in the Burse being
now ended, they returned again unto the usual place in the Townhouse, new
purged of all that Infamy, and the Plangues, which had been practiced there,
during the meetings of the Olmiera.

The Princess of Conde having in this interim left Bourdeaux, embarked in the
Ship called Saint Sauveur, to go unto Castillon upon Medoc, with the Duke of
Anguien her Son, accompanied by Monsieur Lenet, and convoyed till she took Ship
by Monsieur de Bousquet, Savagnac with 200 Horse, Marsin went into Spain by
Sea, and the Count Fiesco took Post thither.

The Prince of Conty (who would not conclude any Treaty apart from his Family,
without comprehending therein the Prince his Brother, so as a time might be
allowed unto him to accept the Amnestie) seeing that the Duchess of
Longueville, Marsin, and Lenet himself, were ready to conclude one for
themselves without including him therein; He therefore proposed to conclude
with Monsieur Gourville, that the Princess of Conde, and Duke d' Anguien,
should with security Retire to Stenay, or any other place depending upon the
Prince her Husband; that Lenet should have the same Liberty to go away either
by Sea, or Land; and also that Marsin might likewise go into Holland, or the
Country of Liege, leaving his Wife in Normandy. That it should be Lawful for
the Prince of Conty himself, to Retire unto any of his Houses so he accepted of
the Amnestie, which was also to be accepted by the Duchess of Longueville, who
was to have License to go unto Newcastle in Switzerland, or any other place
where she should be directed by the Duke her Husband. He on his part promised
that he, and the Princesses, would by themselves, their friends, and
dependents, cooperate to the submission of Bourdeaux, and give the Citizens
free Liberty to make their agreements; but that in case the Peace were not
concluded upon by the Town before the 17th day of August, that yet the Prince,
and those of his party should Bona fide execute their parts; which agreement
was subscribed by them and by the Duke of Candale upon the 25th of July.

The Prince of Conty coming to Cadillac, found there Monsieur de Langlade,
Secretary to Cardinal Mazarine sent about the Treaties at Bourdeaux, but
falling sick he could not be present at the conclusion in the City.

Mean while Colonel Baltasser finding that things went very ill with the
Princes, and his disgusts with Marsin still increasing, entered into a Treaty
after the Citizens by permission from the Princes had begun theirs, and came
over to the King's Service together with 600 Foot, and 400 Horse. This was
concluded at the same time with that of Bourdeaux, and the Irish also at the
same time entered themselves into his Majesty's pay; Baltasser had received
great disgusts from the Prince of Conde, all things being communicated only
with Marsin, himself being in the mean time ill paid, and less regarded by the
Prince's Ministers. Baltasser did also another service of importance to the
King's interests, by causing Monsieur de la Roche, who was in the City of
Perigueux, with 100 Foot, and 60 Dragoons, to return under his Majesty's
Command.

He by reason of a suspicion entered into his mind that the Marquess of Chanlo
Governor of the place, intended to clap him up, came out with several of his
friends and joined with the King's Forces, and was in a great measure the cause
of a Treaty which began with the inhabitants of the said City, to reduce it
under his Majesty's Obedience.

The Brother of Father Ythier the Jesuit guided the Hall, who went about not
only disposing the minds of the Citizens, but watching narrowly for all
occasions; Father Bertaut was his partner in this employment, who Officiated
for the said Father Ythier being then sick: There was also a secret Treaty
begun with the Irish of the Garrison; but the Goverour who suspected, and
therefore kept a watchful Eye over them, upon some jealousy conceived, caused
the Captains to be arrested, and divided the Common Soldiers amongst his
Confidents.

The Duke of Candale who being of a generous Soul, hated to overcome even
Enemies by Deceit, and Treachery, liked not these ways, but resolved to besiege
the City, and have the Glory to have won it by the Sword in a fair War. He had
already caused Cannon to be Shipped, and sent away the Marquess de Saufbeuf to
invest it with part of the Forces, Commanded by the Marquess of Cavillac, and
Count of St. Germans. But the Citizens knowing how great a prejudice the City
would suffer by expecting a Siege, resolved according to the example of the
Bourdelois, to put themselves in Arms, and take the Guard of the Ports from the
Soldiers of the Garrison.

The Governor having notice of this Novelty, who was upon a Treaty about
quitting that Country, and getting leave to march his men unto the Prince of
Conde his Patron, presently drew all his men into a Body, put them in Battalia
in the great Piazza, and being something heated with Wine as coming from a
Wedding Feast, went hastily accompanied only with his Page, and one of the
Consuls of the Town, unto the House of Monsieur de Budon procureur General, to
know what Assembly was made upon such occasions without his privity* He was
kept out of Budon's house, and told there was no meeting there, but
endeavoring to come in by Force, some Pistols were discharged upon him by
friends of the Procureur General who were then with him, and he fell dead.
Whereupon the inhabitants taking heart began to run about the streets, and cry
Vive le Roy, and la paix, and committed Barbarous outrages upon the Body.

The Soldiers by this sad dismal change were so confounded and disheartened,
that although Monsieur de la Baune Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Conde,
endeavored with much Gallantry to keep in a Body, and oppose the peoples fury,
yet in a short time they threw down their Arms, and disbanded, some here, some
there, the Town remaining without opposition in the hands of the Citizens, who
forthwith writ unto the Marquess de la Douze, one of the prime Lords of that
Country, desiring him that he would procure their Deputies access unto the Duke
of Candale, from whose hands they would receive the Amnestie and put themselves
under his Majesty's obedience, which was done; one called Magot being Broken
upon the Wheel; 16 of the most Seditious persons banished, and a new Election
being made of Officers, and Captains of the Quarters.

Perigeaux lies upon the River Isle, which divides the City into two parts; the
Situation of it is something raised, upon a rising ground in a Champane
Country, compassed with good fortifications made by the Prince of Conde's care,
who repaired it with the addition of new works; the people Fierce, and
Warlike, as are all the Gascons, who become good, and stout Soldiers; this
City is numbered amongst the most Ancient, and Noble Towns of Guienne.

The Villeneuf d' Agenois, which was grown Proud with having resisted, and
broken the designs of Count d'Harcourt against it, after it had been quitted by
the Marquess de Theubon (emulating the fury of the Olmiera, in imitation of
those inhabitants had taken some Companies into their pay, made their brags
that they would by that means keep themselves free) was also in great
likelihood of being surprised by the Count de Valliac, who had made an
agreement with some Citizens, that having seized upon a Tower thought to have
brought him in, but the design being discovered took no effect.

The Troops conducted by the Marquess d' Aubeterre chanced to draw near unto
it, at the time when their Corn being Ripe (wherein the Town is very rich) the
people were just going out to Harvest, whereupon they fearing to be deprived of
their Rents, without which they could not live at ease, preferred the fear of
Misery, before the Ambition of being free, and sent Deputies unto the Prince of
Conty, desiring him either to send them relief, or make their Peace; but
Bourdeaux being now reduced, and the Prince having retired to Cavillac, and
laid down Arms, the persons employed were brought to the said Count Valliac,
and from thence unto the Duke of Candale, who sent thither Monsieur de Ribere,
a Councellor of State, and Officer of the Army, with whom the Amnestie was
concluded, but upon condition, that the Walls should be thrown down, the
fortifications dismantled, and the Citizens who had offended because they were
Purse-proud, should pay 4000 Doubloons, reserving also a Liberty to dispose of
20 persons Prisoners, two of which were hanged up by the Neck upon the public
Gallows.

Villeneuf d' Agenois stands in a spacious Plain, compassed with Ancient, but
strong Walls, bathed by the Loath, a River which rising in the Mountain of
Ge^odan, after it has with a Rapid course passed through the Provinces of
Rovergne, and Quercy, comes to run calmely in Agenois, and loose its Name in
the Garronne; not being Navigable before it comes to the Villeneuf. It was
heretofore very plentiful of excellent Fish, and particularly of Pikes, but
after the Fishing of them was forbidden by St. Ambrose Bishop of Cahors, and
that the people refused to obey him, it has been constantly observed, and
found true, that there has never more been any there. The people is there very
numerous, because the Commerce for Corn, and fruits, is more abundant there
than in any other part, and the Citizens being thereby wonderfully enriched,
were swelled to a great height of Pride and Insolence.

Whilst the Dukes of Vendosme and Candale were ordering the Affairs of
Bourdeaux, with all mildness and sweetness possible, being notwithstanding
watchful over the Actions of some, who full of perfidiousness were by the sweet
harmony of their Virtues rendered more Barbarous and Savage; the Chevalier
Carteret, an Englishman, had notice that one Edward sent from the Parliament
of England, was hid somewhere about the Country, privately blowing the coals
of that Rebellion, which was not yet totally extinguished, in the minds of some
Seditious persons, whereupon a little Felouke being by chance taken with
Letters from Lenet to this same Edward, which invited him unto a Council was to
held aboard the Admiral of Spain: There were also taken two Citizens of
Bourdeaux, with Billets from Lenet to several persons in that City, and
particularly unto some Women, in which their intentions of re-uniting
themselves with the Spaniard, and fomenting the hopes of the Frondeurs, being
sufficiently manifested, the same gave occasion to the said Dukes to open their
Eyes, and apply themselves with all diligence to minister fitting Remedies, for
making up those Wounds which were not as yet sufficiently healed.

Espagnet, after the Procession of the 15th of August, was imprisoned, and with
a good Guard sent unto the Castle of Angoulesme. There were Passports given
unto diverse persons suspected of plotting some new Conspiracy, and amongst
these were the Counselors de Duc, Morpin, and La Chese. Some Troops were
ordered to march into the Meiau, that they might go aboard the King's Shipping,
and fight the Spanish Fleet which rid at Anchor in sight of Royan, a little
place, but wonderfully strong, with a Castle seated upon a rising ground, which
makes it more defensible, being a place of great Importance, having on the
right hand Xaintonge, and on the left, the Country of Medoc: Other Soldiers
were put into Xaintonge it self, where all the Country was in Arms, for fear
the Spaniards should land; and all other the inconveniences which might happen,
were so well provided against, that Rebellion could take no footing, nor
disturb the public quiet and contentment, which was generally in Bourdeaux,
where they were grown wise at their own costs; the conveniences of good order
being no where so well known, as where disorders have been experienced.

Whilst the Affairs in Guienne passed in the manner above rehearsed, the two
Armies encamped upon the Frontiers of Flanders, with different designs. The
Spaniards, and the Prince of Conde, having a great confidence in their Forces,
which consisted in an Army of above 30000 Combatants, took up large Quarters,
and endeavored to draw the French Army unto a Battle, because in case they got
the Victory, they thought they might march unto the Gates of Paris, to give
countenance unto those whose minds were yet set upon Troubles, and fill all the
Country with terror and confusion, by breaking into the heart of France,
before any thing could be done in Guienne to the advantage of the King.

But the number of Counselors differed in their Opinions touching the way they
were to take for the effecting of it; because, although the Prince of Conde was
firm in his Opinion, That they ought to advance, without engaging themselves in
the attacking of any Place before they came unto the Seine; the Spaniards
notwithstanding, were very wary in concurring with the bold ventrous thoughts
of this Warlike Prince, being loath either to engage their Army into some
dangerous Pass, or to elevate Conde himself with too much Glory, as being
jealous of his inconstancy. After many consults touching the course they were
to hold, it was at last unanimously resolved, To endeavor by all means the
forcing of the Enemy unto a Battle, according to the event whereof, they might
afterward proceed to farther resolutions. With these Designs therefore the
Armies advancing, and confronting of each other, ^taid eight or ten days,
having no other obstacle to hinder their encountering, but the River Oyse which
ran between them.

The Marshall Turenne (although inferior in number to the Spanish Army) would
have have accepted of the Battle, to which his noble Courage did provoke him,
had not his daring spirit been restrained by that staid Experience which
(though young in years) he had (to his great glory) gained in Two and twenty
pitched Battles, wherein he had commanded; and he was forbidden by express
Orders from the Cardinal, who seeing the Fortune of the Kingdom to depend upon
that Army, would not expose to the uncertainty of an Encounter upon so much
disadvantage, all his past labors, present condition, and future hopes. And
thereupon following the opinion of that wise Roman, who destroyed the
Carthaginian Army with holding it at a bay, without concerning himself for
public rumors, he contented himself with galling them sometimes in the flank,
sometimes in front, and sometimes in the rear; with enforcing them sometimes to
Quarter close together, sometimes to enlarge themselves; to hinder their
Marches, reduce them into want of Victuals, and finally to overthrow all the
designs they had projected against France.

But there being in Turenne, as well as the Prince of Conde, a most ardent
desire of glory, he could not satisfy his Mind without giving some proof of
his Courage upon some occasion, and therefore he passed the River one day with
between 700 and 800 Horse, and joining with the great Guard he kept beyond the
River, charged that of the Enemy kept upon the head of the Marsh of Fonsomma,
beat them into the gross of the Spanish Army, took many prisoners, and with
incomparable Courage and Conduct made a safe retreat to his own Quarters.

Upon the 24th of July, the King, Cardinal, and the whole Court came to the
Army, where he was received with extraordinary Duty and Applause, by 100
Squadrons of Horse, and 18 Battalions of Foot drawn out, which made up in all
16000 Combatants, consisting of Old Soldiers inured unto the War, Expert
Officers, and Noble Persons, who were Volunteers. Turenne being willing to give
them the Divertisement of a Skirmish, which was wonderfully desired by his
Majesty, who was full of Lively Martial thoughts, passed the Oyse at a Foord,
with the Guard of Cavalry, Gens d' Arms, and about 1000 Horse drawn out of the
Army, charged upon, and beat up the same Guard of Conde, who taking it for
granted, that the French Generals upon his Majesty's arrival were resolved to
give Battle, drew up all his Army, and stood firm, observing the motion of the
French until the King retired, and that 'twas known to have been only a party,
at which time they were troubled, they had not advanced and tried their Fortune.

His Majesty staid all that day in the Camp, filling all persons, by the
Majesty of his presence, with Courage and Desire, to do something which might
signalize them in his Service.

He Dined that day in Turenne's Quarters with a good number of the principal
Commanders, who sat at Table with him; at Night he Supped in those of the
Marshall de la Ferte Senneterre with the same order, and lodged in Turenne's
Quarters in the midst of the Army, and went the next day from thence toward
Paris.

Two or three days after the King's departure, the Spanish Army rose from
these Posts, and took their March directly toward San Simon, and Serocourt,
Passes upon the River Sum, between Ham, and San Quintin; That of France
followed it, marching the way of Fera, lodged at Chery, and Maiou, and passing
the Oyse in the same place where it makes a little Island; and a little higher
at Verduel, it drew up in Battalia a little above Travessy, where it encamped,
always observing the Enemy that he might not have time to invest any place, or
throw up Works about it as they desired to have done, after they perceived the
difficulty of drawing the French to a pitched Battle.

Conde doubting least Turenne should be upon his Back as they filed along by
San Simon, was careful in the passage, and took up Quarters only a league from
Ham, which gave great apprehension that he thought of besieging that most
Important place, situated upon the Sum between St. Quintin, and Peronne.

This Motion obliged the French Generals to advance unto Chauny, a Town upon
the Oyse, and from thence to coast unto Noyon, chief Town of a County, strong
in Men, and situate upon the same River, where they made a halt some days,
during which (the Spaniards making head against them) the Prince of Conde went
with 6000 men to Magny, and from thence to Roye, a walled Town upon the head of
the River Moreul, and approaching it on three sides, got it by Surrender in 15
hours, there being none but the Inhabitants, and some Gentlemen of the Country
thereabouts who ran in, to defend it; and being without Parapets, or other
Fortifications.

The taking of this being understood by the French Generals, they suspecting
the Attack of some place upon the Sum, marched to Magny. Conde designing the
Enterprise of Corbie, a most Important place Royally built, seated upon the
Sum, between Peronne and Amiens, made show of marching with part of the Army
and Artillery upon the way of Beauvais, a City, the Metropolis of a rich
County, one of the strongest and wealthiest of France, bathed by the River
Therein, that he might cause the French to draw off from the Post which they had
taken, and at the same time clap about Corbie.

Turenne who by long experience was able to discover the Prince's Arts, and
knew full well that he would not engage himself into France with so many strong
Towns behind him, and an Army in flanck, instead of marching after him, as it
might seem probable he should have done, after he had consulted with the
Marshall his Colleague, upon the 9th of August marched that very Night to
Magny, where they made the rejoycings due for the good News of the Reduction of
Bourdeaux; which filled all their Minds with confidence of good success, and
presently passing the River, dispatched the Count Schomberg, Lieutenant of the
Company of the Scotch Guard, with 400 Horse, and 200 Foot, to reinforce Corbie,
and prevent the Prince's designs upon it.

All the French Army marched at the same time toward Ham, passed the River by
night, and quartered on the other side, where having notice, that the Count de
Maile, with a great Convoy of Ammunition, and Victuals, 4000 men drawn out of
the Garrisons of Flanders, and 6000 Freebooters, was parted from Cambray, to
reinforce the Spanish Camp before any place they should besiege; presently with
the best part of the Horse, and a party of choice Foot, Turenne at break of
day, put himself upon his march that way where the said Convoy was to pass, to
look for, and Fight it; which was the best thing he could have done, and would
have spoiled all the Enemies designs.

Conde perceiving the French march, as he that had a perfect knowledge of the
manner of proceeding of Turenne, and the best part of the other Captains, who
had formerly served under his Command, perceived that his design was
discovered, and suspecting what the Enemy might Enterprise, made a sudden turn,
and with the lightest of the Horse marched presently toward the Sum, sending
notice by Polinet his Ajutant di Camera to the said Count de Maile, to return
unto Cambray without passing farther: Polinet in his return the same day, was
taken Prisoner by a party of the King's Forces, and it being known by him, and
after confirmed by the Scouts, who had been to discover even to the Gates of
Cambray, that Maile was retired, and that the Prince having cast two Bridges of
Boats over the Sum, had passed it, and was Lodged upon the banks thereof
between Corbie, and Bre, Turenne with all speed returned unto his Camp, which
was now advancing toward him, and together with the Marshall Ferte
Senneterre, secured their Baggage under the Walls of Peronne, and encamped
about a little Village not far distant thence, and near the Spanish Army, from
whence they took the advantage of a Site proper for them to fight in, if they
should be enforced unto a Battle.

The Prince verily thought to have then taken Turenne unprovided, and force him
to fight, and with that belief he marched hastily all Night so long a march,
that the next morning in sight of Peronne, he found the Enemies altogether
unadvertised of his coming, as having thought it unpossible he should have come
so soon, but he forbore to attack the French Camp, not so much because his men
were extraordinarily tired, and weary, as because Fuensaldagne would not give
way to it, doubting the Lorainois would not Fight, it having been insinuated to
him by some Letters received from France, that Cardinal Mazarine by great
promises of Money, and other means, had underhand gained the Duke of Lorrain,
so as from thence grew the beginning of the Disgusts between Conde, and the
Count; Conde pretending that the opposition made unto those earnest desires of
his to make use of the opportunity, proceeded from fear, not from a prudent
foresight or just reason.

The Prince took up his Post at Mount St. Quintin, an Abbey upon a Hill, but
found it so well provided that he thought not fit to assault it with so much
disadvantage, Conde notwithstanding made show of being come expressly to attack
it, to stop Turenne there until he might receive the Convoy from Cambray,
without which there was no likelihood of being able to lay Siege to any place,
and in the mean time, whilst with slight skirmishes he endeavored to give
credit to that report, he caused his Van to march the straight way toward St.
Quintin, leaving the King's Army on the right hand, and a great Wood between
them.

Turenne being watchful to all occasions, not willing that the Enemy should
advance before him, which was the design of Conde, marched with so much have,
as he got before unto that Post which he intended to have seized, and by that
means obliged him to make a stand, and so the Armies were again brought to
front each other, separated by nothing but a little Valley easy of access,
upon which the French put a great guard over against a Wood, which ended near
to the Spanish Camp not above a Musket shot from it.

There the two Armies made a halt three or four days, which they passed with
great care, and watchfulness; Conde, and the Spanish Generals, not being
willing to make any attempt upon that place the Mareschals of France had chosen.

The 14th day of August there happened a great Skirmish wherein the two Counts
de Russy engaged themselves too far, and Turenne's Lieutenant Colonel was
killed; the same day the Prince of Taranto, the Marquess de Batteville, and the
Count Duraz, were upon Conde's out Guard, and being desirous to see and salute
the Marshall Turenne, who was advanced to his main Guard, they desired that
favor by a Trumpet, which was civilly granted to them, receiving them with his
wonted affability, and they discoursed and complemented each other
Reciprocally: Some Gentlemen also of the King's Camp went to salute the Prince
of Conde, who came within 200 paces of Turenne, with a desire of speaking to
him; but he making show of business, set spurs to his Horse, and went thence
without expecting the invitation, which the Prince gave order should be sent
unto him to that purpose, by one of his Gentlemen.

The 25th day of August two hours before day the Prince raised his Camp, and
took his march toward St. Quintin, of which Turenne having notice, and
suspecting the attack of some of those places, he caused the Count Beaujeu
presently to repass the Sum with 1200 Horse, and 600 Foot, with orders to
keep near unto Ham, and St. Quintin, that he might relieve any Town should be
invested, and the French Generals repassed the River at Peronne, marching all
Night, and the next day strait to Ham. Beaujeu coming to St. Quintin, heard
that the Count Duraz had drawn out 2000 of the Enemies Horse, and was advanced
with them to invest Guise; whereupon with great diligence crossing the Fere, he
put into that Town a seasonable Recruit of a good number of men, whereof Conde
having notice, suddenly recalled the Count after he had held that Town invested
for 12 hours space.

The Prince finding that his designs were still defeated, and much confounded
to find in the King's Captains Wit, and Valor, equal to that wherein till then
he had conceived hinself unmatched by any, resolved to make another trial,
advancing the Army within a League of Ham, and extending it in length along a
little River which there falls into the Sum, with a resolution to attack that
place; or in case the King's forces should come to relieve it, to fall upon
them, and with Sword in hand to determine their emulation and differences, upon
that Campaign. He was no sooner come to the designed Post, but that he saw all
the French Army in his flank, and the Count Beaujeu on his Rear, who having
repassed the Oyse, had taken up his Post at Fargny, to be ready at hand upon
all accidents.

The Armies rested there looking on each other three weeks without making any
attempt, because Conde, and the Spanish Generals, being now hopeless to break
into France as they imagined, to give Battle, nor take any place upon the
Sum, by reason of the great vigilance, and wariness of the French Commanders,
their counsels were very confused and variable! Conde had insinuated unto the
Spanish Ministers and Captains, that when they entered into France he should
meet with the applause, and assistance of the people, so as their way should be
made, rather by their voluntary yielding, than the Sword; but they not only
failed therein, but exasperating the Country by the rapine, and violence, used
by the Armies, had caused an Universal hatred of the people against him, which
being discovered by the Spaniard, they abandoned the thoughts of advancing, and
the rather because distrusts, or emulation falling between the Prince, and the
Count Fuensaldagne, they seemed not to proceed with the usual agreement, their
bloods being stirred, and jealousies between them being rekindled, by some
brisk words and threatening gesture used by the Prince unto the Count.

'Twas a great corrosive unto the Princes generous mind, when he considered
that his former credit, which was much lessened by the said unfortunate
rencounters, would be totally lost, if with so great Forces, and such
preparation, a Campaign should be unprofitably spent, which in its first
beginning seemed to promise so great advantages, and glory unto Spain, and so
much ruin and destruction to France, and thereupon in a full Council of War,
he proposed the Enterprise of Rocroy, and brought Warlick and Politic Reasons
for the maintenance of his Opinion: He said, He had been informed the Garrison
was very weak, because the Chevalier Montaign, Governor of the place, upon the
confidence he should not be attacked, had sent out the King's Regiment unto
Rhetel, that in 12 days at farthest they might win it; that 'twas not hard to
invest it, there being no River to pass, and the Siege would be very easy, the
place standing between great Woods, so as whoever could first gain the entrance
of them, would defend them with much ease, and make good the Field Line; and
that Rocroy was a place of great Importance, being a Key unto the Frontier of
Picardy, by which (although France could receive small damage, yet) the
Interests of Spain would be much advantaged, because the French by means of
that Town, brought all the Neighboring Country, and the moiety of Luxembourg
Province under Contribution.

The Considerations of the Prince were very good, and his words (by reason of
the great Esteem had of his Valor) were received by all the Captains as an
Oracle; but the Spaniards, who use not to put their feet into the water, till
they have sounded the bottom, and who have prudence for the unseparable
companion of all their Actions, though they inclined unto the Proposition, yet
seemed not totally to approve it, considering that a Siege, consuming Men,
Money, and the patience of their Soldiers, if it should last longer than was
expected, would so lessen their Army, as they should be no longer Masters of
the Field, wherein was placed the sole hopes of those, who upon that ground
were endeavoring new Cabals in France.

Some were of the opinion, that the Army living upon the Enemies cost in his
Country, they should endeavor by money and promises, to make use of the
intelligence they had, and gain thereby a profitable Conquest; which could not
be entire without penetrating into the Bowels of France, and dividing the
great, and opulent City of Paris, from a Union with the King. But this design
having been at first attempted took no effect, and now there was no ground to
hope it, the rather, because by the Pacification of Guienne, the Prince's party
was much declined, and the Cardinal's credit highly increased. Wherefore the
Enterprise of Rocroy was resolved, and to that purpose the Count of Ligneville
went with 3000 Horse upon the 5th of September by break of day to invest it at
unawares, being followed by the gross of the Army, which was a thing so
unexpected, and little foreseen by the Governor, that 100 of the best
Soldiers of the Garrison who were gone out to scour the Country according to
their usual custom, were excluded. The French Generals used their utmost
diligence to put in some supply of Men* but ways being narrow, and hard to
pass, they could not do it.

All Passes being taken by the Spaniard, the Prince of Conde lodged himself in
a place called L'Un^hue, the Count Fuensaldagne sat down in the Field, where
heretofore had been fought that Famous Battle got by the French, extending his
Quarters from the place of Battle to Getdessu; The Lorenois shut up all the
space from thence unto the Prince of Conde's Post: The Quarters of the Army
being thus disposed, the Circumvallation was presently begun, which in four
days was entirely finished, and the 11th of September they began to open the
Trenches, and at the same time attacked the Bulwarks du Chene, del Perdu, and
the Half Moon or Ravelin between them.

In the Bes^egers Camp there commanded over the Spaniards, the Count
Fuensaldagne General, Count Garcies Liutenant General, the Prince of Ligny in
the third place, and the Prince Ulric of Wittemburgh Captain General of the
German Horse: Over the Lorain Troops the Count of Ligneville; And over those of
the Prince of Conde, the Marquess of Batteville, the Counts of Briole, and
Duraz, together with the Prince of Taranto, who after left the Camp, being
disgusted with the Spaniard because they would not admit him into a Command,
which had been conferred upon him by the Prince. Rocroy was very well provided
with Victuals, Munition, Artillery, and good thick Walls, but thin of
defendants, the Garrison consisting only of 450 Foot, 50 Horse, and 30
Townsmen armed, to which were added 90 Peasants, that were run in thither for
relief; the Ditch full of Water, the Earth without being all spungy, and as it
were moorish, but 4 or 5 foot deep, all a chalk clay.

The French Generals upon the first motion of the Enemies Army, saw presently
they could have no design but upon Rocroy, and therefore it being impossible to
hinder the Siege, and much more to relieve it, they marched presently unto the
Fera, crossed the River, and by the way of Heppe, d' Auchenne, and Polineux,
came to Armely, from whence they sent away a Body of Men to join with the Count
de Grand Pre, who was already from the Fera advanced to invest Mouson; The
Prince of Conde foresaw that Turenne to recompense the loss of Rocroy, would
endeavor to take Mouson, and therefore gave order unto the Count de Briole, to
go beforehand with 400 Horse, and 1200 Foot unto Stenay, and join with the
Forces of the Marquess of Persan, who were gone thither after the rendering of
Rhetel, and together with them to be watchful unto the preservation of all the
Neighboring places, which were held by his Forces; and thereupon as soon as
they had notice of the King's Armies march, Briole went to Beamont, a Town
distant from Mouson about a league, and from thence put with care some
Companies of Foot into the Town, returning with the remainder into Stenay, that
he might be ready upon occasion to reinforce the Garrisons of Clermont, and
St. Menaud, if the French finding the Garrison of Mouson to be well manned,
should turn their Forces upon either of these Towns; But notwithstanding this,
all the French Army went before it, dividing themselves into four Quarters, one
in Amblemont where Turenne lodged; the second at Vaux where Ferte Senneterre
placed himself; the third by the River, commanded by the Marquess d'Uxelles,
Lieutenant General; and the fourth in the Fauxbourg beyond the Mose, into which
the Count de Plessis, Son to the Marshall of that name, entered with his
Regiment of Foot, and some Dragoons.

And in regard 'twas necessary for keeping of that Fauxbourg, to secure
themselves from the damage they might receive from the besieged, by means of a
great Redoubt which they kept at the end of the Bridge, Turenne passed the
Mose, and caused it to be assaulted with so much courage, and good order, that
they carried it, the defendants retiring themselves into the Town; by taking of
which Redoubt, the Bridge being rendered altogether useless to the Enemy, and
the Quarters in the said Fauxbourg being secured, the Count Beaujeu who with a
Body of Horse was lodged at Lobbe, four leagues from Rocroy, to observe the
motion of the Spaniard, came also to Mouson, and with his Horse took up his
Quarters in the said Fauxbourg.

Mouson lies upon the River Mose, a branch of which runs through the Town, and
the other runs on the right side of it. There is a fair Bridge, at the head of
which was the said Redoubt, that commanded the Fauxbourg; which was a little
divided from it: It is encompassed with strong Walls and Towers, built after
the ancient manner, lined with Earth in several places, and flancked with
several Bulwarks and Ravelins, after the ancient manner, the Ditches are on the
one side, watered by the River it self which runs into them with a gentle
current; it is besides encompassed with outworks, which reach from one side,
to the other of the River, with Bulwarks and Half-Moons; There was within it
1500 Foot, good men, and 200 Horse, under the command of Colonel Volse, a
German, with sufficient provision of all things, and 18 Pieces of Artillery.

The French having taken the Redoubt, and secured the Fauxbourg, opened their
Trenches, and in four or five days made themselves Masters of the outworks,
and lodged upon the Bank of the Ditch, on two sides whereof they planted three
Batteries. The Marquess of Castlenan Lieutenant General, lodged at the side of
the Ditch toward the River, possessing a Half Moon which was abandoned by
those that had the keeping of it, and endeavored to get unto the foot of the
Wall to undermine it; but he was then hindered, by the Valiant defense which
those within made with Fireworks, and Granado's, which forced the Assailants
to break the Counterscarf made up of Stone, and to pass the Ditch covered by
Galleries unto the Pallisado: in which Action the Vidame de Laon, Son of the
Count Boussy, Nephew to the Marshall Turenne, a bold courageous young man, of
about 17 or 18 years of Age, was killed with a Musket shot. The French also
made another attempt against a great Tower, and passing the Ditch without a
Gallery undermined a Corner of it, and giving Fire thereto, by means thereof
lodged in a part of the said Tower, continuing their Mine to blow it absolutely
up; as they did also on the other side with an extraordinary diligence, that
they might carry this place before Rocroy were lost: And the Mines being now
brought unto a good pass, and ready to have Fire given to them, the besieged,
fearing they should not be able to resist an assault, resolved to make Terms,
and render the Town, which was done the 26th day of September, 18 days after
the Siege, the Governor marching out with about 1400 Soldiers, all well
appointed.

Whilst the French were intent upon the taking of this Town, the Spaniards were
not wanting in their careabout the business of Rocroy, hoping to compel the
besieged to yield it before the taking of Mouson; which had it happened, they
would then with ease have compassed their desires: having therefore finished
their trenches, their approaches, and raised their Batteries, on which were
placed 23 pieces of Cannon, two planted upon the brink of the Ditch, and three
in the Campaign, the 16th of September the Prince of Conde caused the hollow
way to be attacked by 4000 Soldiers, and a post to be taken up upon the
Counterscarf, assaulting the half Moon between the said two Bulworks, which was
worthily defended by the besieged; the Governor wanting neither Experience,
nor Valor, by frequent Sallies rendered the access more difficult, than was
imagined by the Spanish Captains; between whom, and Conde, some difference
arising by reason of the misunderstandings between him, and Fuensaldagne. The
Archduke himself came to the Camp, to remove by his presence and dexterity,
all bitterness out of the Prince's mind; but if on the one side this coming
quieted the trouble of Conde's mind, it raised notwithstanding on the other
side a greater coffeehouse in his Breast, as thinking that his presence
diminished that Glory, which he thought in taking of that place was due only
unto himself, whereof he gave apparent sign, refusing to take the word from the
Archduke: at which he being not a little troubled, gave order to the Prince of
Wirtenburg, who was lodged in Conde's Quarters, not to obey his orders. But
this business was adjusted by the Duke of Lorrain, who was at that time in the
Spanish Camp by this expedient, That the word should be given neither by the
Archduke, nor Prince, but by a Person appointed for that purpose by them both.

The first sally which the besieged made, was upon the said lodging taken up
upon the Counterscarf toward the point of the Half Moon, being of 60 able men
all Armed with Sythes, put upon strong Poles, with which Entering into that work
they cut in pieces all those who were the foremost in it.

These men were led by the Chevalier de Cuma, seconded by Monsieur de
Champigne, and Monsieur de Bournonville Major of the Town, whom the Governor
himself countenanced, and assisted, by the Artillery of the Neighboring
ramparts; there sallied out also after this, Captain Delvincourt with 45
Soldiers, and two that threw Granado's, and entering into another Post,
advanced by the besieged against the Bulwark de Chene, under the Pallisado at
the entrance into the Ditch, put to Sword all he found in it.

But notwithstanding these good Encounters, the besiegers ceased not to
redouble their Forces, and to advance against the Walls of the Bulwark's, to
make breaches by Mining, and so to give an assault: The besieged also made
another Sally upon the Spaniards quarters, where they did great damage, and
took a Lieutenant Colonel, and a Spanish Captain Prisoners; all which
notwithstanding, the besiegers next day made two Bridges of Faggots over the
Ditch, got over it, and Mined the Walls on the face of the said Bulwarks, one
of which was countermined by those within; the other in the Bulwark de Chene
was fired, and took good effect, the Governor was also shot in the head with a
Musket Bullet, but he ceased not for all that to cause himself to be carried in
a Seat, wheresoever his presence was necessary.

In the mean time two breaches in the face of the Bulwarks were made, and
fiercely assaulted by the besiegers, and with no less constancy defended by the
besieged. The same Night after they had been repulsed from another assault
given to the Half Moon, having lodged themselves upon the point thereof they
became Masters of it, because the besieged not being able to maintain it,
thought fit to quit it; especially because there was no Port of Communication,
which made them doubt that not being able to defend it, those men would be all
lost; which was a matter of great consequence, considering the need which they
had of them. Finally the Governor having taken view of his men which were fit
for Service, and finding they exceeded not 300, seeing the breaches in the
Bulwarks opened, and an attack begun upon the Curtain, which had only a dry
Ditch, the same Night when they were ready to give the assault, resolved to
Capitulate, and yield the Town, which was concluded the 30th of September, and
he marched out the first of October with 220 Soldiers, upon Honorable Terms,
and was convoyed to Charleville.

This Enterprise cost the Spaniards dear, because according to the common
opinion they lost 2000 men who were killed, and 7000, or 8000 by sickness, and
that ran away, so as in the last assaults they were forced to bring the Horse
up to the breaches, who dismounted came to fight with Boots on their Legs, and
Pistols in their hands, whereby 'twas thought the Conquest was rather hurtful,
than profitable, considering that in the beginning of the Campaign with such a
numerous, and well appointed Army, they might have gone into the heart of
France, and thereby have given Fuel unto the intestine discontents, which had
been much more advantageous unto the Catholic King's Interests, than the
taking of one simple Town, with the loss of so great a number of men, and the
expense of so much Money, and Ammunition, it being computed that there past no
day wherein there was not at least 500 great shot made, so as all things being
considered, the taking of Mouson by the French, with the loss of a few men, and
with that Reputation which in War is looked on as the Life, and Soul of Armies,
was esteemed to be a thing of greater consequence.

Mean while the pang's wherewith the resolute courageous heart of Conde was
tormented, were very great, who blamed the Count of Fuensaldagne, that he had
taken an entire, and secure Victory out of his hands, he said his prudence was
void of daring, that he was envious of his Glory, and distrustful of his
Actions, and among his friends he would make his complaints, that he had
engaged himself with a Nation, whose manners, and Genius, were so different
from the French; and sigh to be in the head of 10000 of his own Countrymen, with
whom he could have done more service than with 15000 Strangers, and to be kept
from it by engaging himself amongst a people, where never any stranger was
exempt from Envy, and from Emulation, and where no Frenchman could ever yet
Enjoy a lasting quiet.

This Town was after put into the Prince's own hands, Garrisoned by the Forces
depending on him, and the Government thereof given unto the Duke of Anguien his
Son, not without some resentment, of diverse who had served the Crown of Spain,
who discoursing politickly amongst themselves would say, that they had lost
Mouson, and were not Masters of Rocroy, because it being in the hands of Conde,
'twould rather be a means to increase his pretensions, by the jealousy would
be had of him that he might the better make his peace with France by being
Master of that Town, than any way make him more constant to the Spanish
Service. The Spaniards were forced to take this course because (conceiving that
after those disgusts which he had taken, he did not press things with his
wonted earnestness, and that in case that Enterprise could not be suddenly
effected there might happen some disaster to the Army) they thought fit to
engage him with the promise of that place, to give a quick dispatch unto the
Siege; Rocroy being taken, the Spanish Army staid there some days, to throw
down the Line of Circumvallation, and repair the Breaches, and after (in regard
it was much weakened and harrassed out) retired into the Country d' Avennes, to
refresh themselves, the Prince of Conde remaining in Rocroy, sick of a quartane
Ague.

The Court made this Voyage to Amiens, to take the Government of that City and
Citadel, from the Duke de Channes, who had thrust himself into the possession
of it after his Brother's death, and seemed willing to keep it against the will
of the King's Council; and although the said Duke, having a great estate in
France, and his mind well affected to the King's Service, was not conceived to
have any other design but only to give some jealousy unto the Court, and make
his profit thereby (being a thing much more usually practiced in France than
elsewhere) yet 'twas thought good Policy to secure themselves against the very
shadow of those, who might by their change of thoughts, any way prejudice the
Sovereign Authority.

And although the Duke had sent to Court the Letters written to him by the
Prince of Conde full of promises, and hopes, if he would enter into his party,
yet 'twas however esteemed to be a seasonable Service, to be entirely secured
of that most important Town, which was by this means done without noise, the
Duke himself being content to quit it unto Monsieur de Bar, and accept the
Government of Dourlans, which the said Bar had, with the addition of the Title
of his Majesty's Lieutenant General in that part of the Province which lies
about the said Town, and being paid for all the Arms, and Ammunition, which
were bought into the Citadel upon his account.

Mouson being in this manner gained, the Marshall Turenne left there a
Garrison of 500, or 600 Foot, with the Count de Grand Pre his Regiment, and
made him Governor, and he with the Army past the Mose, and marched directly
toward Maziers, and being lodged thereabouts, he had news of the taking of
Rocroy, at the same time the Count de Navailles, advanced to Vervins with 1500
Combatants; and Turenne, after the said taking, marched near to Aubigny, that
he might be near at hand to observe the motion of the Enemy, and hinder him
from making of any other attempt, and there he made a halt two days: Turenne
being at Maziers, sent the Marquess d'Uxelles from the Army with 1200 men, unto
the Castle of Bousancy, which being not to be relieved from the Garrisons of
Stenay, Clermont, and St. Menhaud (because they were watched by Monsieur de St.
Maur with a body of Horse) presently yielded, without expecting the coming of
the Cannon.

The King who was the first of September come out of Paris, and after the
Voyage of Amiens had been at Soissons, came the 30th of the Month unto Laon, to
give countenance unto the relief of Rocroy, which was intended to have been
attempted, and for which purpose the Duke of Elbeuf had been sent for from
Picardy, who with about 3000 men encamped thereabouts, and with them also
joined the most part of his Majesty's Guards, b^ the Town being rendered before
all things were in a readiness, the thoughts of that Enterprise ceased, and
they changed them for another design, undertaken by the Cardinal with great
courage, and undaunted boldness.

The Court thought good to entertain themselves out of Paris, that they might
more vigorously assist the Army with Forces, and with Counsel. The resolutions
being soon made, and a great number of Nobility following the King, besides his
ordinary Guards of Horse, and Foot, both which would be ready to assist on all
occasions.

It had not been amiss that their Majesty's had staid in Paris, to crush the
accidents might happen in that City, where the sinister intentions of some
against the Government were not entirely quelled; principally because the
Archbishop, being in a declining Age, and Retz being to succeed him, the same
might cause new motions amongst the people, upon pretense they could not be
without their Pastor, who was highly valued, and esteemed, for his generosity.
But there being a necessity of going into the Campaign, the Court thought that
they might prevent all accidents, and deprive Paris of that Prelate, who had
such high and wandering thoughts, by offering him his liberty, and the King's
favor, upon condition he would renounce the hope of his future succession, and
would go to Rome with promise to stay there without returning into France; in
recompense whereof there was something offered him of equal value, although his
Uncle were yet living, and an Aiuda de Costa that he might live splendidly.

The Cardinal although he suffered the troubles of a Prison, preferred the
glory of constancy, before his own private gains, and being full of hope to see
the face of things changed quickly, either by the Archbishops death, or
endeavor of his friends at Rome, who were emulous of Cardinal Mazarine, was
fixed not to quit his Dignity, declaring that he would for his Majesty do that,
or any other thing, to the effusion of his blood; but that knowing it to be
only the Artifice, and interest of Mazarine, he could not swallow so bitter a
Pill presented to him by his mortal Enemy. The Pope notwithstanding he inclined
not much unto the satisfaction of France, declared, that the proposition seemed
to him fair, and fit to be embraced, and the Prisoner had notice of it; but
this would not suffice to make him lay aside the bitterness he had conceived in
his mind, which by constant suffering of the blows of adverse fortune,
increased in him the opinion of being more generous and daring; and having
found means to write unto the Congregation of Cardinals in Rome Letters full of
complaint, and earnest desires to be assisted by their protection, whereof he
thought he ought not to be deprived, by reason of that prejudice the example
might bring unto the Dignity of Cardinals; One of the Cardinals of great
credit, seeing they were about to answer him, and to think of some expedient in
his favor, declared in givnig his opinion, That he could not see any reason
why they should engage themselves in that Affair, which was rather to
prejudice the Dignity of Holy Church, then advantage the Prisoner, since they
could give him no other assistance but by words, which would persuade much
better by the way of sweetness, then of rigor.

He said farther, That although the Cardinal Mazarine had fallen into the same,
and worse intrigues with the Parliament, there was nothing done for his
assistance, although the Service of the King his Master were also concerned in
it, and that therefore they had much less reason to interest themselves in
behalf of Retz, who stood in opposition against his Majesty.

The said Cardinals advice being considered, and approved of as the best, the
resolution taken was, That his Holiness should be desired, to exhort the King,
by Fatherly admonitions to grant his liberty. His most Christian Majesty showed
himself most ready to do it, and after several Negotiations, at last the
Duchess of Chevreux undertook it, together with that of Charles Duke of
Lorrain, and although he was afterward, as shall be showed, arrested by the
Spaniard, yet that for the Cardinal was not intermitted, but was at last
concluded upon this condition, That he should renounce the Office of being
Coadjutor of Paris, other benefices of the value of the Archbishopric of
Paris (which amounted to a considerable Sum) being conferred upon him in lieu
thereof.

This affair was upon the point of being ended, and all the difficulty rested
only upon two points, one was touching the number of the benefices, and the
other about the security to be given for performance of his Parole. The death
of the Archbishop his Uncle brought some change in it, the Curates of Paris
(being all of his Faction) and his friends having spread abroad some new
rumors; but de Retz notwithstanding resolved to accept of the conditions
offered to him, and coming out of the Bois de Vincennes, was consigned into the
hands of the Marshall de Mallery, who brought him to Nantes, to abide there
till the conditions were performed, after which it was resolved to send him
unto Rome, and give him money for his Voyage, and for an Ayuda de Costa; but he
going afterward privately from the said City, all things were left at large,
as in its proper place shall be declared.

In the mean time Cardinal Mazarine's Enemies seeing all the Artifices, and
Cabals used by them to ruin him were come to nothing, resolved by fraud, and
treachery to take away his life, which being effected, and he once out of the
way, they hoped then to compass their ends, which by the Cardinal's providence
had hitherto been disappointed; and 'twas a public report that the Prince of
Conde made use of such means, upon the knowledge, or at least suspicion, that
the Cardinal had made the like attempt upon him; which time notwithstanding
showed to be false, and an invention only of the common Enemy.

For the giving of this stroke there were hired, or persuaded, one Rigau,' and
another called Bertau, who being resolved to attempt it, began to haunt the
Lowvre, that they might spy out a fit time, and place for putting it in
Execution. It happened that some Letters were casually intercepted which gave
cause of suspicion sufficient to seize upon them, after which upon Examination
they confessed they had resolved to kill the Cardinal by stabbing him with
Knives, as he went up (which he did every night) to the King's lodgings by a
private narrow pair of stairs.

They were condemned unto the deserved punishment of the Gallows, and being
broken upon the Wheel in Paris, near the Bastile, the 11th of October in the
great street of St. Anthony.

The Cardinal Mazarine (who by reason of the mildness of his nature and the
Character he bears of being a Prince of Holy Church) abhorres these bloody
Spectacles, did what lay in him to procure their pardon, and would surely have
obtained it, if being so enormious a Crime, it had been grantable without a
notable prejudice to justice, which in such cases must not at all give way to
pity.

There followed after diverse other Executions in Paris, done upon several
persons who were imprisoned for heinous Crimes; but without doubt the effects
of the King's clemency were much the greater; those being many more in number
who were pardoned, then who were punished.

I cannot here omit the mentioning of one, who being condemned to be beheaded,
pretended by his Ambition to Triumph over death, he before he was brought out
to Execution, with an undaunted boldness, as if he had been going to a Wedding,
dressed himself up, shaved, turned up his Mustaccio's, powdered his hair, and
made his boasts, That Civil Men, though suffering Ignominious death, ought to
dye honorable.

And although to encourage subjects by too much levity to a relapse into their
former errors, be by some qualified with the name of a false Maxim, yet that
could not discourage the King's Ministers from using it, because to generous
minds the occasions of meriting the thanks of such as are obliged are much more
welcome then the imprecations of those who suffer; which having drawn down
Heavenly favors on them, has let us see those miracles which have rendered his
Government most happy, who having inherited the Title of Most Christian, has
joined unto it the glorious appellation of Most Clement.

Truly they may be well called miracles which were seen in France in the year
1653, because whilst it seemed likely that the Kingdom combated every way by
furious storms should fall in pieces, it became suddenly more serene, and every
way more glorious then before, because being (by the quieting of Bourdeaux, and
all Guienne) freed from that powerful diversion which employed so many Forces,
those being now at liberty, have secured all the borders from those dangers
wherewith they were threatened, and marching into Catalonia, and Lombardy, have
interrupted all those designs the Spanish party hoped for from their precedent
Victories. The Ministers of which Crown, were thought to have committed a great
oversight, in that they had not four years before agreed unto a general Peace,
the ease whereof tempering the fierce, and stirring nature of the French, would
have proved much more useful to them, then the necessitating of them to a War,
which raising the desires of it in a youthful King, and so a great number of
young Nobility, may probably make the effects thereof bitter unto them, it
being certain that no Victories are so severely prosecuted, as those which are
in prosecution of a just revenge.

The same time that the Affairs of War in Catalonia, Guienne, and Champaigne,
passed in the manner before related, the French concerns also in Piedmont put
on a better face; so as there was no farther cause of fear that the Piemontois
should for want of considerable assistance, be forced to free themselves from
the Inconveniences of War, by making some agreement with the Spaniard, for
that the Count de Quince being gone (as has been said) into Piedmont, and some
French Troops being joined to him, he advanced into the Enemies Country with
between 5000 and 6000 Men, and incamping at Annone, upon the Banks of the
Tanaro, for about a months time, during which he staid there, he infested
continually the Country about Alexandria with frequent parties sent into those
parts; after which quitting that Post, he returned to Monferrat, and passing
the Po at Verna, went to incamp above Crescentino, to observe the Marquess
Caracene, who having taken the Field with 8000 Soldiers, was marched to
Fontant, and Palazzuolo, three miles distant, where the Armies stayed some
days, observing each other, in which mean time the French sent abroad several
parties, and particularly one even to Vercelli of 1500 Horse. Before he
dislodged thence, drawing up all his Horse in the Plain of Bertola, about a
Cannon shot from the Spanish Camp, he sent to defy the Marquess Caracene to
fight a Battle; but he holding a Maxim, That the French Fury was to be stopped
by the Spanish Gravity, made a mock of him.

These attempts of the French being vanished without effect, Quince repassed
the Po in July, and entered again into Monferrat, crossing the Tanaro upon a
Bridge of Boats near Asti, and from thence staying two days at Rochetta, went
to encamp at Monbersel.

Upon notice of this march by the French, the Marquess Caracene passed the Po
again with his Forces near to Pontestura, and having marched cross Monferrat,
went to lodge at Felizzano, intending to cross Tanaro at Rochetta; but finding
opposition from the Enemy, he went to pass lower toward Alexandria, advancing
unto Nizza della Paglia: Quince stayed at Castle Nuovo Brusato, observing his
motions about 15 days, there being daily skirmishes between the Horse of
either party. But Caracene being at last resolved to break into Piedmont, and
by that diversion to make the French quit Monferrat, passing the Po at
Pontestura, he began to scour over the Country thereabouts; but that sufficed
not to make Quince stir, who judging that it would be of great prejudice to
his Affairs to bring his men to make the War in a Friends Country, took a
contrary course, he sent his Baggage into Asti, and foording over the Tanaro at
Rochetta, and after passing Bormida, came by the way of Novi, unto Saravalle, a
great Town above Alexandria in the Confines of the Genouese Country, between
the Rivers of Sirvia, and Orba, and having sacked it, went toward Tortona, and
Castle nuovo de Scrivia, taking great Booties in those Towns where he was not
expected. Caracene was thereby forced to quit his designs in Piedmont, and
march in all have to Alexandria, gathering together all the Garrisons, and
foreign Soldiers to cut off the retreat of the French toward Nizza; but
Quince advertised thereof, marched by Cassino de Strada, by Aicqui, and by the
Valley of Bistagno, to the said Town of Nizza, whither the Spanish Army was
already come; for which cause the French retired that Night to St. Spefaro, and
went with great care to get the Pass of Our Lady at Tenello, and prevent the
Enemy, who came thither just as the French had seized it with their Vantguard,
where they began to skirmish, but with great reservedness of the Spanish side,
because they would not engage in a Battle with the French, who although they
were inferior in number, had the advantage in the Experience and valor of
their Horse. Quince went from thence directly toward Alba, and thence between
Alba and Asti, quartering his Troops all along the Banks of Tanaro, and there
the French staid till the arrival of the Marshall de Grance, who passing the
Alps with a Recruit of 1200 good Men, upon the 18th of September came to the
Army, where informing himself of the condition wherein the Spanish stood, which
encamped upon the same Frontier, and endeavored to get farther into Piedmont,
he had notice that Caracene having left Montenego, was upon his march to gain a
Pass over Tanaro, at a place called La Rochetta, with design to go to Felizzano.

He thereupon presently called a Council of War, wherein it was resolved not
only to hinder his advance, but also to enforce him unto a general Battle, and
put all unto a hazard; whereupon he sent the Marquess Monpesat, Lieutenant
General, and Commander of the Rear-Guard, upon the 23. of September, to seize
upon the places of most advantage, and having himself put the rest of the Army
into order of Battle upon the Campaign, which is sufficiently spacious, he
advanced with 4. Squadrons to take notice how many passed, being accompanied by
the Marquess Vardes, who was that day of the Guard, and commanded as Lieutenant
General.

He came without contest unto the rising ground, which commands all the
Neighboring Campaign, and having there discovered that Caracene began to pass
with the Vanguard over a Bridge of Boats, and was followed by the Foot, led by
the Lieutenant General Don Vincenzo Monsury, the Horse foording over the River
a little lower with the Duke de Sesto, General of the Gens d' Arms, and Count
Galeazzo Trotti, General of the Neapolitan Horse, he thought he would not give
the Spaniards time to pass with all their men, because they might then seize
upon the Campaign, and either force the French to retreat, or fight with
disadvantage; and therefore advanced presently with the Gross of the Army.

Caracene not being able to prevent the French by reason of the time spent in
passing of the River, and two hours lost in expectation of the Bridge of Boats,
pretended to make a halt there, and expect him in the advantage of those Posts
he thought most convenient to defend his Camp, which had now passed the River;
and because he had not time to draw out his Army into the Plain, and that the
place beyond the Tanaro was something narrow, accommodating himself unto the
time and place, he drew his Horse up in Squadrons behind his Foot. He then
presently seized upon two Houses, and placed there the Regiments of Don Lewis,
and Don Inigo de Velandia, and in the space between the Houses, the Regiments
of Don Joseph Velasco, and Don Diego d' Arragon, and de Beltin, with a design
of uniting them together by a Breast work to be cast up; but that for want of
time was left unperfect.

The Marshall considering the posture of the Enemy, and that his Vantguard
which was advanced, might by the advantage of the Hill put some disorder into
the Spanish Camp, which was commanded by it, yet not within Musket shot,
though he had only two small Pieces, which were not very proper for that
business, put his Army presently in order into two Divisions.

Unto the Marquess of Monpesat, he gave the care of the Right Wing thereof,
composed of the Regiments of Navarre, Peirault, Aiguebonne, the King's Guards
of Swisses, the Squadron of the Mareschal's own Guard, the Regiments of
Orleans, Feron, Prince Maurice of Savoy, Marcousse, Fernes, and Epinchat.

The Left was Commanded by the Marquess de Vardes, consisting of the Regiments
of Foot of Orleans, Lionois, and Quince; and the Horse were the Regiments of
St. Andre, Bregi, and Villa Francesi, on the left hand of which stood all the
Free Companies, the Troops of the Savoy Horse under the Command of their
General the Marquess de Monte, a Veronnois, to whom were also joined the Foot
of the Regiments of the Marquess Monpesat, and of the Marquess de Villa,
Lieutenant General of the Savoy Horse.

In the second division stood the Regiment de Saux, to second the Regiment of
Navarre, with the Regiments of Carignan, and de Sault, and on the left that of
Grance, seconded the Regiments of Orleans, and Lionnois, having with them in
the same division the Guards of Savoy, the Gens d' Arms d'ordinance of France,
together with the Regiments of Ris, Deuncly, and St. Aignan.

In this order the French marched on, and charged briskly upon three Companies
of light Horse, and some Files of Musketeers that were advanced unto the top
of the Hill, and pursued them into the Gross of Benavides, Vellandia, and
Beltin, who received the French with so much courage and fierceness, with their
Pikes, and with Musket shot through diverse holes in the Walls of the said
houses, which flanked upon them, that Monpesat, perceiving 'twas impossible to
make any farther impression upon them retired, and the French resolved to
endeavor the gaining of a little Church, or Chapel, which stood toward the
River, not above 20 paces distant from the Houses, where Caracena had placed
two Files of Musketeers, Spaniards, and Italians, to guard it, with orders
that if they were attacked they should retire unto a body drawn up in
Battle-ray, and composed of the Regiments of Don Carlo d' Este, Don Joseph
Brancario, Daniel Asti, the Count de Santillana, and the foreign Soldiers of
the state of Milan.

Grance caused the said Chapel to be attacked by 200 chosen Foot, seconded by
some Horse, and forthwith took it, the Musketeers who were placed there
retiring themselves (according to their orders) unto the gross which stood
firm, and kept their Post; he then drew out his Company of Gens d' Arms, about
30 paces from the left Wing of the Spanish Troops, and at the same time gave a
vigorous charge with his Foot, hoping that if they could make any impression
upon the Enemy; the French Cavalry might break in, and total confound them; but
meeting with a certain Slough, made by a Brook which runs into the Tanaro, he
was constrained to make a stop, at the same time when the Troops of Savoy
charged between the River, and the Spaniards right Wing, in a place that was
more open, where with the first volley of the Enemies shot, the Marquess de
Monte, a Cavalier of great conduct, by reason of his long experience, and much
renowned for his many famous Actions, was unhappily shot by a Musket Bullet in
his head, whereof he forthwith died; the Marquess Villa was slightly hurt in
the Arm, besides the Count de Medavy, Son to the Marshall, Monsieur de Bussy
Major General of a Brigade, and several other officers who were also hurt.
Whereupon Grance finding the constancy, and resolution of the Spaniards,
animated by the presence of Caracene their General, (who like a Valiant Captain
engaged himself in the first ranks where greatest danger was) drew up the
second division with the two field pieces, one of which at the first shot, was
rendered useless by the breaking of the Carriage, and the French continued
shooting with the other, but to so little purpose, that being every where Nobly
repulsed, at last with the declining of the Sun their fury flacked, wanting
also Artillery, and Ammunition, it being observed that the Swissers for want of
Bullets, shot away almost all the Buttons from their Coats, and they retired to
the Campaign upon the Hill, where they encamped that night in Battalia, and the
next morning marched toward Montemagno, and Grana; there died of French in
this action, the said Marquess Monte, and 4 Captains, and diverse Officers,
together with some considerable number of Soldiers, which was not precisely
known, and above 100 wounded, amongst whom were several Commanders.

The Marquess Monpesat had his horse killed under him, and his Hat shot through
with a Musket Bullet, and so had also Monsieur d' Epinchat, and the Captain of
the Mareschal's Guard. The Spaniards lost fewer Soldiers, and few or no
Officers, but there were many hurt, and amongst others the Marquess himself,
received a slight hurt with a Musket Bullet.

After this Action the French Army staid 17 days at Montemagno, and neither
party being in a condition to do any considerable thing, all this Campaign was
spent in marches, and Countermarches, from one place to another: The French
desiring to live in the Territory of Milan upon their Enemies Country, and the
Spaniards to hinder them from doing of it; during which time there fell out
several Skirmishes between them, with various success.

The French after disldoged from Montemagno, and went to Fubine, being always
coasted by the Spanish Army, who at the same time leaving Felizzano were a
front of them, and there some Burgundian Officers, having a desire to wait upon
the Marshall Grance, as being known unto him, and his friends, by License of
the Marquess Caracene went, and spoke with him, as did also afterward the
Marquess himself, and the Marshall, both the one, and the other, being
accompanied by the prime men in either Army; they continued together in
conference about two hours, with much civility, and complements. The French
being all of them much taken as well with the Valor, as great courtesy of
Caracene, by whom he was highly valued, as a generous and prudent Captain, so
as many of the French said to the Spaniards themselves, That it was great pity
he was not a Frenchman.

This conference being past, the French Army marched to San Salvator, and from
thence, the Marquess Monpesat three days after, with 500 Horse, and as many
Foot, scoured all the Country thereabouts, Pillaging several Towns, and
gathering together a great quantity of victuals; the Army staid for those three
days at San Salvator, that of Spain being always in the Flank of it, with
design either to distress it for want of Victuals, or take it in some place of
disadvantage, and fight it; in which time there past continual Skirmishes
between the Scouts of either party. But the French afterward perceiving that
by reason of the great vigilance of the Spanish Captains, they could gain
little in that Country, retired toward Monferrat, unto Moncalvo; and for as
much as Grance had strict orders from Court that he should be sure to Winter in
the State of Milan, he marched to Gabbiano, and casting a Bridge of Boats over
the Po, a little below Crescentino, the French passed toward Sesia to plunder,
and live in the Enemies Country, took the Castle of Carpigna, Garrisoned by two
Italian Companies, run over all the Country even to the Gates of Novara, and
made several other marches without any other Action between them, but only some
skirmishes, which from time to time fell out between the parties, because the
Spaniards intending to hinder the French from taking up their Winter quarters
in the State of Milan, were sometimes in Flank, sometimes in Front, and other
whiles upon their backs, with so much inconvenience and trouble to them, that
at last finding themselves not so strong, as was necessary to maintain the
Posts which they had taken, and the season growing very bitter, they were
forced to retire into Piedmont, where lying too heavy upon the Duke of Savoy
his Subjects, the French Horse was sent beyond the Mountains to Winter in
Daulphine, Bress, and Dombes, and so ended the Campaign for this year 1653,
with some resentment of the Court, who intended that the Troops should (what
ever became of it) maintain themselves upon the Enemies charges that Winter in
the State of Milan.

In this mean time the Courriers who brought the Letters and Capitulations of
Bourdeaux were come to Court, and Monsieur de Las, (who was dispatched from the
Generals, and Monsieur d' Estrades) having made his relation of all passages,
the Amnestie was presently dispatched unto the Burdelois, containing an entire
abolition of all their Crimes, none being accepted in it but the Councellor
Trancours, and Blaru, and Desert, Merchants, who were sent by the Olmiera into
England, and also Duna Festa, and Villars, heads of that Faction, and Clerac,
who was deputed by them into Spain; it was farther ordered, that the Citizens
should renew their oaths of Fealty unto the King, and rebuild the Castles
Trombesta, and de Ha, as being necessary to repress all popular risings, and to
protect and defend the good, and able Citizens, it being evident, that in all
Cities the Common People are ever Enemies to those persons who have most to
lose.

This declaration of the King's being proposed to Monsieur La Vic Advocate
General who was then in Bourdeaux, that he might make the process against those
two spies from Marsin, and Lenet, sent back into the City, and verify it;
Every one expected from the Parliament proofs of their submission, which might
cancel the memory of their passed disobedience: But La Vic willing to make use
of this occasion to render himself necessary, raised such scruples and
intrigues, by his propositions, which were interlaced in such manner with his
conclusions, that some of the Counselors of Parliament took thence occasion to
restrain the King's Will, with such Glosses, Comments, and Modifications, that
it appeared they would be, not the Interpreters, but Moderators and Disposers
of the Kings Favors, so as none should be thanked for them, but themselves.

They did particularly excite the people not to suffer the yoke of the Castles,
ordering that new Instances should be made to Court for demolishing the Forts
in the City, and that in case the King were absolutely resolved to impose that
Slavery upon them, yet that those Places should not be under the command of the
Governor of the Province.

This reflection was not pleasing to the King's Ministers, and much less the
Condition, That the publishing of the Amnestie should be put off, until the
residence of the Parliament should be established, as if their return to
Bourdeaux (which was so much the more suspected by the Court, by how much 'twas
more earnestly desired by them) were necessary for the security of the people,
or for rendering the King's Pardon valid.

These Actions of the Parliament, and these their so extravagant undertakings,
were highly resented by the Duke's of Vendosme and Candale, as if it had been a
flat disobedience; whereupon they presently gave order to the Counselors which
had retired to Reolle, to return unto their residence in Bourdeaux: The said de
Vie, who was believed Author of this bold attempt, for his own particular ends,
was forbid to stay in Bourdeaux; and the Original Declaration being got out of
the Parliament Notary his hand, was by Order from the Generals, published by
the ordinary Magistrates of the City.

The Court being as much surprised with this disorder, as disgusted with the
Parliament of Guienne, whose most faithful Members appeared to be rebellious,
by a severe Decree of Council on the 26th of September, gave them a sore
mortification, commanding them not to intermeddle in any thing whatsoever which
concerned the State.

The Generals in the mean time seeing the nearness of the Troops to be a
trouble to the City, resolved to draw them off, and the War in that Province
being ended by the taking of Peregueaux, the Count Bougy, Lieutenant General
was by Order from Court sent away with between 5000 and 6000 Horse and Foot
toward the Frontiers of Flanders; 3000 Foot, and 1200 Horse more marched
toward Catalonia, and there remained only part of Vendosme's Army in the
Country (vulgarly styled, That between the two Seas,) ready to be put on
Shipboard in case the Spaniards continued in the Garonne, from whence two
Leagues distant from Blaye they landed, and burnt some Works belonging to the
Duke San Simon; and on the other side they went up into the Medoc, and burnt
the Country thereabouts.

Vendosme during this time, had taken a view of his Shipping lying under the
Fort Caesar, and together with those which had been provided in Bourdeaux
during the Siege, proposed to fight the Spaniards, which was extremely desired
by the Duke of Candale, and Monsieur d' Estrades, who for that design had
brought Seven hundred Mariners from the Islands of Rochel under his
Government: But the Sea-Captains represented, That the Forces were unequal in
the number of great Ships; and that although the French Shipping were more, yet
they were less, so as the Spaniards had great advantage with their Gallions
full of fresh men, whereby they would be easily Masters of them, the King's
Ships being neither well furnished with Men, nor sufficiently fitted with
Cordage and other Trimming; and supposing the Spaniard should stand out to Sea,
or keep in the Mouth of the River where they were, the Galleys, armed Shallops,
and other lesser Shipping would be of no use, which notwithstanding where the
River was narrower, and barred with Sand, would be able well to assail them in
case the Spaniards should advance higher.

To end these differences and disputes made by the Captains of the Ships,
Monsieur d' Estrades undertook to gather a number of Mariners fit to fight, and
to serve with them himself upon the Shipping; but whilst he executed the Duke
of Vendosme's Order to bring them, the Spaniards were suddenly seen to hoist
sail, and advance toward Blaye, up to Paulliac, not as at first, 5. or 6. at a
time to fetch Water, but it seemed that the whole Body of the Fleet would go
against the French, at a time when for the ease of Bourdeaux, the Duke of
Vendosme had sent his men unto Xaintoigne; but they being with all speed
recalled, and some Regiments advanced to go on Shipboard, the Spaniards retired
unto the Fosse of Verdon.

The Duke of Vendosme had himself viewed the Spanish Vessels upon the 26th of
September, and he had sent the Chevalier Carteret, and Englishman, to inform
himself at a nearer distance of their condition. He found there were 28 Great,
and strong Galeons, but by some prisoners taken in the Isle of Patiras, 'twas
understood that an Infirmity called the Scurvy, which seises on their Joints,
was much amongst them. They landed notwithstanding at St. Surin de Cadurna, in
Medoc, where they burnt some houses, before the King's Forces were in a
condition to repulse them, or plant some Cannon against them, which the Duke of
Vendosme had appointed for that purpose. Who preparing himself to go against
them, had sent some Galeots to St. Surin de Mortagne, and to Mortagne it self,
to make provision of Corn. Marsin being come to the Spanish Fleet, had a design
upon that Town, landed 3000 men, surprised the Ten French Galeots come to fetch
Corn for the Army and Fleet, forced the Castle, and sacked some houses; but
doubting after that Monsieur de Breval, a Marshall de Camp, should come upon
him with the Regiment of Normandy, quartered a side hand of it, he abandoned
the Posts that he had taken; and if Breval had had the least number of Horse to
cut off the Spaniards passage, they being unprovided of Horse, and laden with
Booty, he might have given them a total Rout.

Marsin made some Barricadoes in a Meadow which reached unto the River, having
the Channel of Mortagne which covered him on the one side; and on the other his
own men drawn up in Battalia. He sustained the Skirmish with Courage
sufficient, Imbarqued the Goods, and Plunder of that miserable Town, losing
notwithstanding some Foot in his Retreat, taken by that Regiment of Normandy,
who as the Spaniards embarked and thereby grew fewer, fell upon them.

Monsieur L'Estrades gathered in this time out of the Towns under his
Government about Rochel, and Brouages, about 1200 Mariners, who being got
together, and put a Shipboard, 'twas resolved that they should presently set
sail to fight, or chase away the Spaniard.

The Duke of Vendosme went aboard the Admiral, and having Shipped his Men, they
set sail against the Spaniard, who being surprised at this unexpected
resolution, set fire to some Barks, and small Boats, and by the favor of the
wind retired. Vendosme followed them to the Rivers Mouth, and there saw that
they divided themselves into two Squadrons, one directing their course toward
Biscay, and the other toward Dunkirk.

The Duke took land at Royon, and whilst he staid there to know certain news
of the Enemies Fleet, the Vice Admiral of Spain called San Salvator, which came
from St. Sebastians, accompanied by a Foyst laden with Victuals and other
Provisions, entered into the River, not knowing that the Spanish Fleet was gone,
and engaged her self so far amongst the French Shipping, that the said two
Ships being laid aboard, after some resistance were forced both of them to
strike Sail, and yield.

There was aboard the said Vice Admiral, 40 Pieces of Cannon, and aboard the
Foyst 700 Mariners, and provisions of Victuals for a month for the whole
Fleet. After the taking of these Swisses, the French Shipping went into the
River Sudre, and the Duke of Vendosme returned to Court.

Monsieur d' Estrades for his great merits was declared Maiore of Bourdeaux, a
place much esteemed, and of great importance, being the principal amongst all
the inhabitants, Maiore signifying head, and Governor of the City; the
Mareschal's of France de Mattignon, d'Ornano, and de Roquelaure, having
heretofore enjoyed that Office. The stirs in Bourdeaux were thus quieted, and
the people enjoying the fruits of that Peace granted unto them by the King's
favor; the Plague coming into the City, allayed much the gust of their repose;
the freedom of Commerce being interrupted thereby, and by the Calamity of all
the Neighboring Towns, who tasted of the same Calamity, and were almost
dispeopled by it.

The Deputies of Bourdeaux coming afterward unto the Court, which was then at
Chalons in Champaigne, were received by their Majesty's with such
demonstrations of clemency, and affection, as took from their memory, the shame
of their past errors, and gave them courage to expect favors from his
Majesty's Bounty; in the mean time the Parliament of Guienne which was retired
to Reole, received the provisions for the Government of Limousin, granted by
his Majesty unto the Marshall Turenne.

He by the vigor of his Sword, and prudence of his Councels, kept the Frontier
quiet, from all attempts of the Enemy, and encamped always where he might
observe the Prince of Conde's motions; who though he were retired a little to
refresh his Soldiers, had not yet laid aside the thoughts, of taking the field
afresh, and at least to keep his Winter quarters in France.

But the Cardinal Mazarine finding himself, by the happy success in Guienne,
freed from that strong diversion, which was given to the King's Forces in those
parts, and being now at liberty which all the Forces to repel the Prince of
Conde's bold designs, and take from him all the Credit he had in France, having
called all the Generals unto a Council in his Abbey at Laon, proposed unto them
that he desired before the Forces drew into their Winter quarters, it being as
yet Autumn, which in France is used to be mild open weather, to attempt the
taking of St. Menhaud, from the Prince of Conde, as that which having in it a
strong Garrison, scoured all the Country thereabouts, and drew great
contributions not only from the open Towns, but from those also that were
Walled.

The opinion of the greatest part of the Commanders who met in Council, was not
to engage in any Enterprise that year, because the Spaniards though much
weakened by the Siege of Rocroy, might draw out again, and returning with
considerable Forces, might either raise the Siege, which would much prejudice
the reputation of the Army; or by way of diversion recompense the loss of it,
with something which would be of more importance.

The Cardinal opposed this opinion, and let them see, that with the Armies of
the two Mareschals Turenne, and Ferte Seneterre, they might make head against
the Spanish Army, and at the same time invest St. Menhaud with the King's
Guards, and some few Forces added to them; and afterward the Forces which were
expected from Guienne, and new Levies from Germany being joined to them, they
might besiege the Town, and carry it, whereby all Champaigne would be freed
from the Plunderings, and damage, which they suffered by that Garrison.

This opinion prevailing, the Court returned from Laon, unto Soissons, and from
thence upon the 20th of October went to Chalons; mean while the Marquess
Castelnau drew out with about 1500 men from Turenne's Army, and was sent
toward St. Menhaud, and St. Mor also did the like with 900 Horse, and some
Foot, provided by the Cardinal, and they with these Forces the next morning
blocked up St. Menhaud, making four quarters about it, but without drawing any
line about it, because the Armies of Turenne, and Ferte Senneterre, standing to
cover, and defend the besiegers, they pretended to take it by storm without a
Siege.

And although it appeared ridiculous, that 3500 men should attempt to besiege a
City with a strong Castle, Garrisoned by above 1500 men, under the command of
brave Chieftains, the Marquess de Fortz, Governor of the City, and Monsieur de
Montal Commander in the Castle, but who directed all as being Conde's greatest
Confident; they undertook the matter notwithstanding with so much readiness,
and courage, that the issue of it made it apparent how great the Judgment, and
ability of the Cardinal was, who himself alone (contrary to the opinion of all
the other Commanders) made them engage in this design.

There commanded then in the King's Camp as Lieutenants General, the Marquesses
of Castelnau, and Uxelles, the Count of Navailles, and Monsieur St. Mor; the
provisions for the Camp were brought from Chalons, and for want of Horses, and
Carts, all the Country being ruined by the War, they made use of the Court
Carriages, a thing extraordinary, and which not being foreseen by the Enemy,
made them constantly believe that 'twas a vain Enterprise, being resolved upon
without means convenient to perform it; principally because Clermont was on the
left hand, the Garrison whereof scoured the Campagna, and incommoded all the
Neighboring Country, having amongst other exploits, one day taken diverse of
the Court-horses under Carts of Ammunition, and Victuals, going to the French
Camp.

The Marshall Turenne, in respect the Cardinal had undertaken the said Siege,
rose from Aubigny, and with between 6, and 7000 men, put himself to observe the
motion of the Spaniards, who seemed as if they would go toward Rocroy. The
Marshall de la Ferte, placed himself with his body between the Mose, and
Clermont, to countenance the besiegers. The Count Beaujeu marched farther into
Picardy with about 2500 chosen Soldiers, to guard the Frontier places: The
Duke d' Elboef, and the Count d' Illebonne his Son, with their men, kept
sometimes at Rosan, sometimes at Mon Cornet, and sometimes at other Posts,
according as the business most required.

The 26th of October the King accompanied by the Cardinal, and a good number of
principal Cavaliers of the Court, went to the Camp to see the posture of it,
and to give countenance to the Siege, he lodged in the Abbey of Cicussy,
belonging to the Cardinal Bichi, and from thence went to the rising of a Hill,
under which was the quarter of Marquess Castelnau, from whence some Cavaliers
went in bravery within a Musket shot of the Walls, and amongst them the Count
de Guiche, eldest Son of the Marshall Gramont, though a youth not above 15
years of Age, being all fire, and spirit, advanced his Horse before the rest,
and without fear discharged his Pistol upon the Enemies Guard, and returned
without hurt unto his Majesty, who was much edified to see so extraordinary a
Courage, which to the French Nobility uses to be an unseparable companion of
their high Birth. And there being a Council of War held in his Majesty's
presence, they resolved to send Monsieur de Villequier with a Summons to the
besieged, and a particular demand unto the Marquess de Fortz, to give up the
Town unto his Majesty.

This Marquess, by the mediation of Monsieur de Vaubecourt his Brother-in-law,
who was Governor of Chalons, treated to make his peace with the Court, and the
business was upon the point agreed; but the Town being blocked up, just as he
expected the Prince of Conde's consent unto the agreement, he thought he could
not with his honor quit it, but as a generous Cavalier stand in defense
thereof, he returned therefore that answer, and that Montal might have no
occasion to suspect his Faith; he declared that he would in that Siege serve as
a private Soldier, leaving the care and Government of all to him; which he
did, exposing himself always to the greatest dangers.

The King returning upon the 28th of October to Chalons, upon the first of
November the French began to break ground, and make their aproaches on two
sides, and planted their Batteries against the City, but with little profit, by
reason of the brisk defense the besieged made by sallyes, and other
oppositions, which made the Enterprise seem difficult.

Upon news brought that the French besieged this Town, the Prince of Conde who
(as has been said) was troubled with a Quartane Ague, gave order unto the
Counts Briole, and Duraz, that drawing together what strength could be gotten
out of the neighboring quarters, they should endeavor to put some relief into
the Town, and the whilst he with the Spanish Generals would gather together all
their Forces, not so much to defend that place, as to be able to take up
Quarters within France.

The said Counts by assistance of the Lorenois, got together 3000 Foot, and
2000 Horse, and advanced to accomplish their design; which without doubt had
taken, if the Cardinals diligence had not prevented them, who having notice
thereof upon the 4th of November at Night from the Count Grand Pre, Governor
of Mouson, presently leapt out of Bed, and gave orders about it; he dispatched
presently Monsieur d'One Lieutenant of his Guard to Vitry, to make the Count
Brugy with the Forces of Guienne come in all have unto the King's Camp; he
commanded the Gens d' Arms, and Horse of his Majesty's Guards, and his own,
and all the Gentlemen of his House to march immediately. He forthwith sent
Courriers all about, that from all places Soldiers should come, and reinforce
the King's Army, to the command of which he appointed the Marshall du Plessis
Pralin, in whose fidelity, and experienced Valor, he had great confidence; so
as by break of day all the Soldiery, and as many Gentlemen as were about the
Court, were Horsed and Armed, with a readiness equal unto the quickness of
their Life, and Spirit.

The Marshall went from Chalons after Dinner the same day, and being
accompanied by a good number of Volunteers, and the said Guards, marched
toward the Camp to be there at Night the most privately he could, and that he
might be ready to fight them the next morning, at which time they were
expected* but the Commanders of Conde's Troops moved not at all, being perhaps
in fear of being encountered, and enclosed by Marshall Ferte S^nn^terre, who by
the Cardinal's Order, was drawn off from the Army with 3000 Horse, and 500
choice Dragoons, and marched to get between Clermont and St. Menhaud, being a
fit place to charge upon the Enemies Rear, in case they had engaged themselves
in any design against the Army that besieged the Town.

The next day all the Troops of Guienne came up, being in number Eleven
Regiments of Horse, and Ten of Foot, all Old tried Soldiers, so as the Army
being now reinforced by these, and other Recruits which came from Germany,
Conde could not undertake to relieve it without a full Army, and that with
evident danger of being drawn to a pitched Battle, then much desired by the
French, but abhorred by the Spaniard, who should then have run too great a
hazard, and therefore were very wary in seconding the daring Councels of the
Prince of Conde, about fighting a Battle, or the undertaking of any hazardous
design; and especially it being about a Town belonging to the Prince himself,
they were not willing to venture their Soldiers for another benefit: To which
was added, That the Lorenois pretending to have done sufficient for that
Campaign, were resolved not to draw again out of their Quarters.

Upon the arrival of the Marshall du Plessis, the Siege was taken up with
greater vigor, being notably defended by Montal, with frequent Sallies, and
losses on both sides; and better he would have done, had not a Magazine of
Ammunition been blowed up the Night before the 6th of November, by means of a
Cannon Bullet shot into it, or some other accident, the same being variously
reported. The French assaulted vigorously the Half Moon before the Port du
Bois, and at the same time got into the Ditch on the other side; but the
Besieged fallying out upon their backs hindered their work, and took prisoner
Monsieur d'Ortis, a Lieutenant of the Guards; and hurt several other Soldiers
and Officers, amongst whom was Monsieur de Pontet, a Captain of the said
Guards. Upon the 16th day they made a Sally upon the Guard of Monsieur de
Nancre, who commanded then in the approach, but were with some loss beaten
back, which happened also in another Salley, made upon the Trench kept by the
Regiments de Guard two days after, where they were repulsed by Monsieur de
Charmon, a Captain of that Regiment, with the loss of some Soldiers, and of
Monsieur de la Guard, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment de Burgoigne. Which
was also seconded by the death of Monsieur Demon, Sergeant Major of the Town,
who was next day killed in the Ditch, as he went to discover which way they
might go with most security, to interrupt the Works of the Besiegers.

The Marquess Castelnau in the mean time attacked a Work called Ferra Cavalli,
and having carried it, got into the Ditch, and made a Gallery to defend the
Miners; which succeeded well, after they had beaten back two Sallies of the
Besieged, who were many of them killed upon the place. The Regiments d'Uxelles,
and Dampierre, on the other side, took the Half Moon on the right side of the
breach called La Exvelape; whereupon the French being on the one side ready to
give the Assault, and a Mine ready to blow up the Bastion on the other, the
Besieged wanting Powder, demanded a Parley, and offered to give up the Town, if
in Eight days they were not relieved: which being refused by the Marshall,
who gave order for prosecution of his Works; Upon the 25th day, Montal without
any reserve, agreed to march out of the Town, with Arms, and Baggage; which he
did upon the 27th of November toward Rocroy, being followed but by few French,
because the greatest part of those who served him, accepted the Amnestie, and
either went into the King's Service, or their own houses; as did also the
Marquess de Forz, Monsieur de Taissy, Geneste, and others, who being invited by
the King's Clemency, c^st from their minds all kind of bitterness, and found
that the true happiness of Subjects, consists in their entire obedience to
their Sovereign,

Together with this Enterprise of St. Menhaud, ended the Campaign 1653; which
in the beginning of it was likely to have proved very prejudicial, and fatal,
to the King's Interests, by reason of the unequality of Forces, and the
Diversion in Guienne, which was the most part of it under the Princes, so as
the more hard and improbable a matter 'twas to hinder the Enemies Progress, so
much the greater Glory resulted by it unto the Prudence of the Cardinal, and
valor of the Commanders, who were able to gain so considerable advantages; and
having through so many disasters and cross accidents of Fortune, brought things
unto so good an end, we cannot choose but hope for the continuance of good
success, since the malignity of the times can never be so great, but that it
will be overcome by the constant endeavors of Wit, and Prudence.

By taking of this Town, the Country thereabouts was freed from the
Contributions they were enforced to pay unto this Garrison, to avoid the
mischiefs which otherwise they did unto them.

During this Siege, the Cardinal failed not with incredible diligence to have
an eye to all, and to give such Orders as were convenient for the good
Government of the Kingdom. He dispatched Courriers into Provence, to make them
with their Galleys carry necessary Provisions into Rosa, doubting least the
Spaniard after the happy relief of Girone, should lay Siege to that important
place; he sent the Captain of his own Guard to Brisac, to conclude the
Negotiation with Count d' Harcourt, and get that considerable Fort to be left
freely unto his Majesty's disposing; he applied to Bourdeaux such remedies as
were proper for curing the unquietness of that people, to make them taste the
Sweet of Peace, that they might thereby better know the bitterness of their
passed troubles: Orders being afterward given out for the Soldiers Winter
Quarters with the least trouble that might be unto the Subjects, he returned
with the King to Paris, where his Majesty was received as in Triumph, with
theincredible applause of every one, and with so much admiration of the
Cardinal's Abilities, that his Name was rendered Venerable, and immortal, by the
Hands, and Tongues of those, who had before exclaimed against him.

Whilst the Cardinal Mazarine was employed about the business of the Campaign,
and intent upon the Enterprise of St. Menhaud, the Countesses of Mancini, and
Martinozze, his Sisters, with a Daughter of the latter Countess, who after
Barbarine's alliance with the Pope had left Rome, came into Provence, being
honored in all places where they passed, and particularly in Genoua, with all
those marks of honor, and esteem, proper unto the generosity of that State,
and due unto the merit of their Brother, and their own worthy qualities, being
Ladies endued amongst their many other Virtues, with an admirable Modesty, and
excellent Deportment; they staid in Provence for some days, and coming to Paris
when the Court was returned thither, were received with an Affectionate
courtesy, not only by the Grandees of the Court, but also by his Royal
Majesty.

The Affairs standing in the posture has been related, the Prince of Conty was
in Cadillac, where Monsieur de Langlada the Cardinal's Secretary lay sick,
amongst other discourses which past between them, the Prince discovered to him
the design he had to make his Peace at Court, and put in execution the last
Advice he had received from the Mouth of his dying Father, which consisted in
this, That he should always stand for the King's Interests, and never swarve
from the Obedience due unto his Prince.

He revolved in his mind upon the example of his Brother, who whilst he had
contained himself within his Duty, had been Fortunate, and Glorious. He
considered, That the misfortune of his Family, deceived by their Friends, who
for their own particular Interests had made a separation between him, and his
Brother, reduced him unto the necessity, either to be in an ill condition,
wheresoever he should live, without Favor or Trust at Court; or to take
unfitting means for returning with glory and advantage to his first obedience,
and preserve his Family in that condition, wherein his Father had by great
endeavors left it, and from whence Conde was about with so much inadvertency,
to throw it headlong.

He foresaw that to retire himself into Spain, would be contrary unto his
Genius, and 'twould be to expose himself absolutely to the revenge of a
Brother, who prepossessed by Count Marsin, blinded by Lenet, and full himself
of sinister impressions against him, would make a scorn of him, and of those
Eminent Services he had done him in Emergencies of high Importance, having with
an admirable dexterity kept up his Party with a few Men, and little Money,
amidst the aversion of the People, who were tired even to extremity, with the
Miseries of War; he thought that by retiring into Italy, or any part of his
own Lands in France, he should never be able to avoid the continual suspicions
would be had of him by the Court; so as either the one way; or the other, his life
in the flower of his Age would prove unhappy, idle, and unworthy of his Lively
Spirit, and Courageous Heart, which made him capable of all Noble Actions;
revolving therefore with himself, what was Essential to his own Interest, and
weighing prudently what was fit for him to do, he found the only means to
preserve himself in a condition fit for a Prince, such as he was, would be to
follow the example of the Prince his Brother, and to unite himself with the
first Minister, by the strict ties of an Alliance, which would consequently
restore him to the Favor of his Royal Majesty.

He gave a hint of these thoughts unto Langlada, but opened himself after with
greater confidence unto the Duke of Candale, with whom he professed to have a
particular tie of Friendship; neither was he deceived in his thought, for the
Duke concurring in opinion with him, approved his thoughts as well projected,
and firmly grounded, praising the Resolution with frank sincerity,
notwithstanding the Duke himself were far proceeded in a Treaty with the same
party the Prince proposed, and did extremely desire the conclusion of it.

The Prince for all this thought it not fit to discover his thoughts so
suddenly unto the Court, but only sent thither Monsieur Menil the Captain of
his Guard, only to pass Complements, but without Letters of Credence, or other
Instructions. Menil was received with great kindness, and he having informed
himself touching the sense, not only of their Majesty's, but also of the
Cardinal, and all the other Ministers, assured the Prince, That he had found so
great an inclination in the Cardinal toward him, that he might certainly
assure himself of an eternal Oblivion of all things past, and of the renewing a
sincere Affection toward his Person. Upon these informations he resolved to
dispatch thither Monsieur de Saracin his Steward, in whose Fidelity and
Prudence he had great confidence, that he might make some Overtures, and speak
more freely of those things which he before hinted in Cadillac, unto Langlada.

Saracin found the good inclination of the Court, and in consequence thereof
after some Journeys to, and fro, made by him, and Langlada, the Treaty of
Marriage between the Prince of Conty, and the Countess Martinozzi Niece to the
Cardinal, was so far advanced, that it was no longer doubted. This News being
heard by those who were envious of the repose, and glory, of both Prince, and
Cardinal, they attempted with great malignity to sow tares, and foment
suspicions between them. Some of them representing unto the Abbot Ondedei, That
all this was but an Artifice; That Conty held secret Intelligence with his
Brother, and the Duchess his Sister; and that the effect would never be
correspondent to the appearance. But the advantage being reciprocal, and the
inclinations between the parties equal, the spite of those who maligned them
was at last overcome, and the stipulation of the contract was concluded by his
Majesty himself, to whose good pleasure the Cardinal referred his will, having
already wholly sacrificed himself unto his Service; and if the execution
thereof was delayed, it proceeded from the Prince of Conty his good Nature, who
would not be present at the making of his Brother's Process, who was accused
and declared guilty of High Treason, by the Parliament of Paris.

The Prince got his coming to Court to be put off until the end of Carneval;
and then coming thither was received with all imaginable applauses and content,
1654.
the first Friday in Lent the Ceremony of their Hand-fasting and Betrothing was
performed, with a Dowry of 200000 Crowns given to the Princess by her Uncle,
and 50000 more by the King's Bounty; to which was added a Pension equal to the
Church Livings, which (being a considerable Sum) were resigned by the Prince
into the King's hands: After followed the Marriage, which was honored by the
presence of the King, Queen, Duke of Anjou, and all the Princes, and great
Lords about the Court; where there were none so stung with Envy, or possessed
with Rancour, or ill will, that durst find fault with this Conjunction, because
the Merits of the Uncle from the Crown, were altogether unparalled, and the
Beauty of the Bride was accompanied by all those excellent Conditions, that are
able to enforce Praise and Commendations, even from Envious persons and
Detractors.

The Queen her self would needs do that Honor unto the Princess, to put her
into Bed; and by her Incomparable Kindness, to give testimony of the Content
this Marriage brought her.

The King after made a gracious Gift unto the Bridegroom of all the Goods and
Charges of the Prince his Brother, which were Confiscate; but he with an
exemplar greatness of Mind, refused the Favor, despising all Riches and
Dignities which might accrue unto him by such spoils; to let his Brother know,
That in his Heart there reigned no other Interest but that of Reputation and
Honor, which ought to be the only guide unto the Actions of Moderate and
Prudent persons.

The days following were spent in the most lively expressions could be made of
general Contentment for the reunion of this Branch unto the Royal Stock, which
was accompanied with Balls, Music, and other Recreations befitting a Royal,
and Majestic Court; And in honor of these Nuptials, there followed after many
Poems composed by several persons, and amongst others by Monsieur Amaltei in
France, and Monsieur Torcigliani in Italy, the two most Famous Virtuosi of this
present Age.

At the same time that Paris was all in coy by reason of this Marriage, and the
good Success of the Campagna; at Brussels on the contrary, all were in Sadness,
and apprehension, occasioned by the fear they had conceived of some sinister
Accident, by reason of the Imprisonment of Charles Duke of Lorrain, which
happened in manner following.

This Prince lived in Flanders with Maxims directed unto the taking of the
Common people, conversing with persons of mean condition, and shunning the
converse of Noblemen, which by the Nobility was attributed to an extravagancy
of humor; with the Common people it got a vogue. But his courses were much the
more observed by the Ministers of Spain, because he approved not the Form of
their Government. To which was joined a particular difference he had with the
Prince of Conde, which produced many inconveniences, and in particular spoiled
all Plots that were well laid, one of them hindering always the designs of the
other.

The Count Fuensaldagne in all his Negotiations with the said Duke received
ever doubtful answers; he was always willing to feed him only with hopes, and
promises; and making show of great distrust, would always have his money
beforehand, when he was to do any Service with his Force; it was known that
Cardinal Mazarine caused him to be Treated with under-, hand, to make him quit
the Spaniard, and put himself under the Protection of France.

The Prince of Conde, who had particular Information of all that passed by his
Friends in the Court of France, and served the Catholic King with all fidelity
and truth, could not endure that any prejudice should be done unto the Spanish
Interests, more than his own concernments; and 'twas the common Opinion in
Flanders, That both he, and the Kings Ministers there being advertised of it,
gave notice thereof unto the Emperor's Court, and that of Spain, representing
to them, That 'twas necessary to come unto a speedy resolution, to avoid the
blow might be expected from the Duke unto his Majesty's prejudice.

After several meetings and consultations in the said Courts, it was resolved,
That they should secure his Person in Flanders, as soon as it might be done
without confusion or trouble. This Order was some time before come from Spain;
but could not be as then effected.

Finally, In the Campaign 1653, it was discovered that he had made an Agreement
with France, That in case the Armies came to fight, the Lorenois should stand
Neuters, without assisting either Party: And the suspicion thereof, was the
occasion that when the Armies faced each other, the Spaniards (as has been
said) durst not engage the French, nor make use of the opportunity they had to
fight Turenne, but the Forces of both sides (after the taking of St. Menhaud by
the French) being gone into their Winter Quarters, and the Duke being in
Brussells, an Arrest upon his person was resolved to be executed in manner
following.

First, 'twas agreed with the Count Ligneville, Commander-General of the
Loranois (who had a particular Antipathy against the French Nation) that in
cause any change of Quarters should be made among the Spanish Soldiery, he
would take order that his men should not move, and then they caused some Troops
to draw near Brussels for the effecting of the Arrest which had been ordered.

The Duke was advertised of this, but said to him who gave him that notice,
that he valued it not in case those were the Troops who changed their Quarters.

The King's Ministers being in doubt notwithstanding that he might escape by
Night, either by favor of the Citizens, or some other way, kept a most strict
watch at the Gates; the next day the news was spread abroad over the City, and
coming to the Duke's ears, he answered, I fear not: Night being come, a while
before Sunset the Duke being with a Father Confessor at the Magdalenes, in
their little Church, he saw Count Garcia, Sergeant Major General, come in with
many Officers attending on him; the sight of whom made him change color.

The Count told him, That the Archduke was to confer with him immediately
about several Affairs of great importance to the Crown, and expected him at the
Palace. The Duke answered, He thought the hour something late, and that in the
morning he would perform his Duty. The Count then replied, That he had order to
bring his Highness to Court that Night. Upon which the Duke said, Your Lordship
may please to go, and I will follow.

When they came unto the street before the Palace, where the Courtiers use to
walk, the Count said to him; Your Highness is to go toward yonder other
appartment, for I have the King's order to arrest you.

The Duke then stood, and after he had with a frank speech, ripped up the
Services he had done the House of Austria to the total ruin of his own, he
highly blamed the Spaniards usage, and refused to go farther, till he had
spoken to the Archduke. But he could not obtain that satisfaction; for Garices
had told him, That in case he refused to go willingly, he must be enforced to
carry him by violence. Finally, the Duke being persuaded, was brought into the
lodgings appointed for him, showing at first an extraordinary cheerfulness, but
the Cavaliers being afterward retired, he resolved 'twere better (since by
force he could not do it) to endeavor his own release by submission.

He writ very calmly to the Archduke, and recommended to him the Countess
Cantacroy, his wife, though their marriage was at Rome declared unlawful.
Whilst he was writing, the Secretary Navarre entered the Chamber, and made him
subscribe an order unto his Troops, That for the time to come they should be
obedient to the Archduke. That night he was served at Table by principal
Cavaliers; and when Bed time came, two of his own Valets de Chamber were
appointed to wait upon him, at their first entrance into the Chamber, he cried
out with a great sigh, See the remainder of my Fortune. That night all the
Citizens had order to be in Arms, to prevent any inconveniences, which was
presently executed, there being none that dis-approved what had been done. In
the morning they waked him, but he would not rise, saying 'twas yet too early,
to which no reply was made, but he was left to his own liberty: At last when he
thought good, he arose, and after he was dressed, they brought him several
Dishes of Meat, and he was served by the Archdukes Camariers in extraordinary.
The Count Garcies after came in, and told him, That he came to wait upon his
Highness to Antwerp; upon which the Duke rose up presently without reply.

Being come out into the Hall, in presence of a numerous Guard he opened his
Doublet, and showing his Breast, said aloud to them, I am a Soldier, and fear
not all these preparations made for me; I only desire that some of you would
take my Life, and by my Death all troubles will be ended.

Many would have it, that he believed they were absolutely resolved to kill him
by some lingering death; but Garcies with all sweetness told him, He wondered his
Highness should entertain such thoughts, that the King his Master intended
nothing but to secure him for some time. He then went on, and it being now
late, all the people ran togehther to see him pass in a Coach, being Guarded
through the City by 300 Horse. The Duke made no show of sadness to the people,
but with courtesy and in a pleasant manner saluted the Citizens by name, and
passing by a lodging wherein some French belonging to the Prince of Conde lay,
he said to them, Ah! What will the World say that the Duke of Lorrain should be
made a Prisoner by the Spaniard for whom he has lost all his own Country.
Being come out of the City, the said Count Garcie, who was something sickly,
had License to return, and the Guard of him was assigned to another Colonel;
when he took leave, the Duke told him with Tears in his Eyes, That he had
brought him through the City at Noon day to make him a laughing stock unto the
People: Garcie answered, His Highness had been cause of that by remaining so
long in his Bed. The Duke replied, That he was a faithful Servant to the King,
and his actions would speak him so; and that he had never done any dis-service
to the House of Austria, and prayed him to inform, and assure the Archduke
thereof, when he should relate uno him what had passed, and that he would also
give an assurance unto Fuensaldagne of his affection. He was conducted unto the
Castle of Antwerp where he was kept for some time before he was sent into
Spain; his House was after searched, his Papers seized, and all the Goods
sequestered, which were found in his, or the Countess Contueroy her house, which
were amongst other things, Jewels of the value of 500000 Crowns, which belonged
to the House of Lorrain, and amongst the rest, a very fair Diamond, given
heretofore by the Emperor Charles the fifth unto a Duke of Lorrain one of his
Ancestors, which was called Charles the fifth his Diamond. What sum of money
there was found was not declared; and although the general report was that the
Duke was considerably rich therein, yet 'twas thought the Spaniards did not
find him to be so.

But in regard the Ministers of Spain, suspected that the Lorrain Soldiers,
and particularly the Nobility who (purely for affection toward their natural
Prince) had followed him, preferring his service before their own particular
interests, (even to the leaving of their Country, and loss of their estates)
would not endure the injury done to their Sovereign Prince, but rise up
against the Spaniard, and put things into confusion. The Count of Ligneville
therefore (who was Lieutenant General) and the other principal Commanders, were
gained by money, and other promises, to the affecting whereof the Antipathy
between them, and the French, to whom they bear a natural hatred, contributed
in a great measure. So as by means thereof, and the declarations which the
Archduke made, that he put the command, and whatsoever else belonged unto the
Duke, into the hands of the Duke Francis his Brother, the Soldiery was
quieted, and all those stirs they feared were avoided.

The Archduke after published a Manifesto, setting forth the reasons which
moved his Catholic Majesty unto this Resolution, the substance whereof was;
That when the Duke retired into the Dominions of Spain, to preserve himself
from the violence exercised by France against his Person, and Estates, he was
received by his Catholic Majesty, and his Lieutenants General, with a sincere
friendship, and taken into his particular Protection, with so much love, and
care of his Concernments, that he had always included him in all Treaties
touching the General Peace, which sufficiently showed forth the candidness of
his proceeding, and the honorable esteem had of his Person, admitting him
besides into all Councils of War, and other debates of his Majesty's Officers,
and Ministers of State, that notwithstanding these so great benefits recerved
by him, he had contrary unto his duty, and the ties of gratitude wherein he
stood engaged, done many things prejudicial unto the Interests of the Crown,
from which he had received so great advantages. For that besides the
Plundrings, Rapines, Sacriledges, and inhumanities exercised upon the Subjects
by his Forces, which were to be imputed unto the Duke himself, and were rendered
sufficiently notorious, and public, by the general Outcries, Tears, and
Lamentations of the people, there was an ample discovery made of his secret
intelligences, and the carrying on of designs by him, no way conducing to the
advantage of the public service, which he was bound to promote sincerely by
the assistance of his Forces; that every man was capable of discovering his
inconstancy, and affected irresolution, in the matters to be resolved on
touching the War, and the delays used by him in executing the designs of most
importance, which was the cause that (by his sole default) many considerable
Enterprises, which according to all probability and humane providence, were
likely to have been of great benefit and advantage, had miscarried. That all
these things were so well known, not only to the Lieutenants General, Colonels,
and other Officers of the Army, but even to the very Soldiers, and common
People, who were Eyewitnesses thereof, that they exclaimed, and admired so
abominable abuses, were let to run on, without a remedy. That true it was, the
King of Spain by reason of his own innate goodness, and the affection he bears
unto the House of Lorrain, had been indulgent even to the extremity; hoping
still the Duke touched with remorse of his own conscience, and consideration of
his Majesty's unparalled bounty, would at length return unto his duty. But
things proceeding still from bad to worse, and his irregular deportments, being
arrived even to the utmost bounds of sufferance, were come to such extremity,
that all his Majesty's Subjects, and all the Neighboring Princes, and States,
had them in such abomination, that the effects of their revenge, were even upon
the point of falling upon Flanders, on that account.

His Majesty therefore, that he might no farther provoke the Divine wrath
against himself, nor the indignation of the abused Princes and People, against
his subjects, could not longer defer the taking such courses, as were necessary
to stop the Current of this mischief, by the securing of his Person, wherein he
swarved not in the least manner from the Law of Nature, and of Nations, which
permits all Sovereign Princes to prevent without respect of any Person
whatsoever, all oppressions, and violences exercised against their Dominions,
and Subjects, and do justice unto themselves, their People, and the
Neighboring Princes, and States, in Amity with them; having first in vain,
made trial of ways of sweetness, for the effecting of it.

That he did this not out of any aversion to the House of Lorrain, but on the
contrary protested that he would always protect it, and espouse their interests;
in testimony whereof, he had proposed the Prince Francis of Lorrain his Brother
to command his Forces; and until his arrival, the Archduke declared and
commanded, all should observe and obey the orders of the Count Ligneville,
Lieutenant General of the said Forces, giving farther an assurance unto all the
Officers, and Soldiers, of a general pardon of all excesses, they had before
committed under the said Dukes command; and this Manifesto was made the very
day on which the Duke was arrested, which was the 25th day of February 1654.

It was afterward insinuated among the Soldiers, that the Duke should not be
sent away for Spain, but that some points being adjusted with him, and security
given for his Fidelity, he should be set at liberty; wherewith the minds of the
Officers, and Soldiers, affectionate unto the Service of their Prince, were
something quieted and that bitterness removed which this unexpected accident
had raised amongst them.

The news of this Action coming to the Court of Spain, was received with that
content which an Affair deserved, whereon depended consequences of so great
importance; but these superficial reflections, corresponded not to those were
made by them who looked deeper into the matter, because although the Action
were judged to be necessary, and that a longer dissimulation would have been
improper, to give a remedy to those disorders, yet the ill consequences such an
example might produce, rendered the execution of it to be no way suitable, unto
the rules of Policy.

It was considered, that the Services the Duke had done the House of Austria
were public, but his failings published in the Manifesto, and declarations of
the Archduke, were yet unknown, little credit being usually given to what is
published by interested Persons; that it was very hard to wipe out the opinion
already settled, that the Duke had provoked France against him, only to comply
with the Spaniard, and upon that account only, had lost his Country, so as if
he were after the loss thereof refuged in Flanders, it seemed rather to be the
effect of an Obligation, than their courtesy.

That by how much the deeper he was charged with Crimes by the Spanish
Ministers, by so much more the proceedings of France against him, seemed to be
justified, with this consideration, that if he had given just cause unto the
Spaniard whom he had so much obliged, to punish him, the French, against whom
he had raised Arms, had certainly a just occasion for what they did; besides it
was some trouble to the Spaniard to consider, that upon this example, any
Prince, or Person of Quality, who had well deserved from them, might hereupon
have a just cause to think, that the Services done to them meet with
ingratitude, but the injuries they receive are never pardoned; and thereupon
desperately resolve, to employ themselves no more in performing Services which
are not like to be acknowledged, but choose a party that may be able to secure
them against their power of being able to inflict punishment.

The Court of France upon this news made a great stir, and endeavored to
improve this good opportunity of decrying the Actions of their Enemies, which
because it may be gathered, from the Manifesto published in the King of France
his name, the 2d. of July 1654. in Sedan, where the Court then was: It will not
be ^^niss here to insert it.

WHereas the most Christian King has been given to understand, that diverse
Commanders, and a great part of the Soldiery, and other Persons belonging to
the Army, being Natives of the Countries of Lorrain, and the Barrois, with the
great prejudice of their Honor, and duty (notwithstanding the excessive injury
done by the Spaniards unto Charles Duke of Lorrain their natural Prince, in
imprisoning his Person) have taken party with, and engaged in their service;
neglecting the advantageous offers made unto them of assistance, for the
procuring of his liberty. His Majesty considering that to continue toward
them, the same favor, and goodness, he has been pleased to exercise since
Lorrain has been under his obedience, having never proceeded against any who
abandoned their Country; to put themselves into the said Dukes service, because
they followed the fortunes, and were obedient to the Commanders of their own
Prince) were to render his clemency blameworthy, and of too great prejudice to
his Affairs; be resolves therefore (as justice requires) to employ all such
lawful means as he is able, for their punishment, to punish them, making them
feel the effects of his indignation, considering they now Act directly
contrary, not only unto the Interests of his Crown, but also against those of
their own Duke, and his Family; unto whom his said Majesty has upon all
occasions sufficiently declared his Affection, and esteem, having several times
(as is notoriously known to the whole World) offered the said Duke to restore
unto him the possession of his Countries, if he would forsake the Spanish
interests, and take part with him, but those offers (which would have prevented
the disgrace that has befallen him) were still refused, upon the expectation
probably he had, that by refusing those advantageous, and considerable offers,
made him from France, and his firm adherence unto Spain, for so long a time
with such extraordinary constancy, and perseverance, would certainly have
merited from them, some other recompense than a Prison, and the loss of all his
Goods. His most Christian Majesty does therefore hereby Order and Expressly
command, all Commanders, Officers, Soldiers, and others, being Natives of
Lorrain, or the Barrois, that serve in the said Duke's Army, or that are any
ways engaged in the Spanish Service, to abandon the same, and retire within 15
days after the Publication of these presents, upon the confines of France;
either to take pay under his Majesty (in which case they shall be Received and
Treated as others are who now serve under his command) or otherwise to retire
themselves in their own Countries, or where ever else their Estates lie; being
in such case to make a declaration before his Majesty's Judges where they shall
chance to come, or those who are next adjoining thereunto, that they will no
more bear Arms, nor Act any thing directly, or indirectly, against his
Majesty's Service; upon penalty that such as shall refuse, after the expiration
of this Term, shall be prosecuted as Traitors, and declared guilty of High
Treason; and suffer the punishment due fore the same, by confiscation of their
Goods, demolishing of their Houses, destroying their Woods; and other pains and
forfitures, in such cases due, and to be inflicted. His Majesty does farther
order and command the Mareschals of France, Turenne, and Ferte Seneterre,
Generals of his Forces in Flanders, Picardy, and Champaigne; to cause this his
declaration to be published in all places necessary, that none may pretend
Ignorance thereof, and to put the same in Execution, unto the utmost of their
power, declaring that the same credit shall be given unto authentic Copies of
this declaration, as to the Original itself.

To this Manifesto was annexed, a declaration concerning the Terms upon which
the Colonels, Captains, Officers, and Soldiers, which would put themselves
into the French Service, should be received; the Tenor whereof is is follows.

HIS Majesty highly resenting the imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain by the
Spaniards, and the injurious, and unworthy of age, received by him from those
who have no Authority over his Person, or his Forces; has caused several means
to be proposed unto the Count Ligneville (Commander in chief of the said Duke's
Army) for procuring his liberty, before he was sent away into Spain, which the
said Count was advertised would certainly be done, but he neglected to give ear
unto them, unto the prejudice of his Faith, and Honor, having suffered himself
to be wrought upon by the Spaniard, to whom he has showed much more affection,
than to his Lord and Master; and considering that the Colonels, Captains, and
other Officers, and Soldiers; may probably be (...) disposed to advance his
Majesty's design for the said Dukes enlargment; has by these presents been
pleased to give a firm assurance, once all Officers, and Soldiers, as well
Foot, as Horse, of the Lorrain Army; who for revenging the wrong, and
endeavoring the releasment of their Prince, shall put themselves into his
Majesty's Service, and take pay under him.

That they shall be put, and kept together in one body, under the command of
Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre, Governor of Lorrain, and the Barrois.

That as soon ^s there shall be got together anybody, or Company of the said
Forces, they shall receive a pay, as well Officers, as Soldiers, and that
everyone shall be continued in his former charge, and employment.

That every Regiment shall be tried by their own Colonels, in the same manner,
as was formerly accustomed.

That his Majesty will assign them Winter Quarters after the end of the
Campaign, and that they shall upon all occasions be treated as the other
strangers, who serve in pay under his Majesty; who does upon the word of a
King, promise to observe, and make good whatsoever he has hereby published and
declared.

The King of France upon the first news of this imprisonment, had dispatched
Monsieur de Corberez, unto the Count Ligneville, with fit instructions to make
him sensible of the obligations he had to endeavor the releasment of his
Master, by force of Arms, if by other means he could not obtain it; but all the
applications, and persuasions, made to the Count and Prince Francis of Lorrain,
who in a few days after came out of Germany, into Flanders, were without
effect; the Count's Antipathy against France, and the Spaniards Arts, working
more powerfully with him, then all the declarations, and offers of the French:
The Count alleging for his excuse, the orders he had received from the Duke to
obey the Prince his Brother; and the Prince those promises made by the
Ministers of Spain, that the Duke should be suddenly released, as soon as
things could be in such manner adjusted, and dispatched, that they might be
secured against those prejudices, which the intelligences he entertained with
the money, had brought upon them.

The discourses which were after made in either Court, touching this Action so
important, and unusual, were very various, and many conceits were published
thereupon, dictated by hatred, or by passion; for there were some who blamed
the Spaniards, as having taken this resolution, only because they knew
themselves unable to satisfy the immoderate covetousness of the Duke, with
such Sums of Money as they should be forced to give him, if they intended to
make use of him and his Armies Service, and that therefore the Archduke,
foreseeing that when Money fell short, he might be drawn to quit them, and make
his Peace; they had by this Act sought to prevent him, not upon any just ground
they had against him, but only upon a bare suspicion of it.

Others published, That all this was a plot of the Prince of Conde, who being
naturally zealous of the House of Lorrain, and impatient to have a Companion in
the Army, who perhaps did in some sort take away part of that profit he
expected from the Catholic King's generosity; and by reason of his wariness in
preserving of his Army (which was his All) would not second his fiery
resolutions, but gave a stop unto them, by sober, and mature Counsels, had by
his Artifices contrived, and brought to pass, all this mischief which fell upon
him.

But as all these conceptions had no other foundation but guesses, and
conjectures, grounded only upon likelihoods, so they found not that credit was
expected; but as shadows upon the appearance of light vanish, so all those
suppositions were wiped away by another conceit, which of all others came
nearest to the Truth, and this was, That the Duchess of Chevreux, who is
witty, and full of Spirit, above any Lady of this Age, being for the reasons
above mentioned, a particular Enemy unto the Prince of Conde, being of the
House of Lorrain, and consequently of kin to the Duke Charles; found means to
insinuate unto him dexterously, an agreement with the Court of France,
proposing to him, That prudent men ought to make use of all imaginable
Conjunctures, since there was nothing of greater consequence then to lay hold
of opportunity, which renders that at sometimes easy, which when the nick of
time's once past, becomes impossible.

The Duke listened unto these Propositions, and much more unto that of 300
thousand. doubloons, to which (as the report went) besides the payment of his
Army (which in that case was to come over from the Spanish Service, into that
of France) and entered into a Treaty; the rather, by reason of the Envy he bore
unto the Valor, and Prerogatives of Conde, which seemed to lessen the esteem
was had of him, and might also dimminish much of his usual gains; and this
being discovered either by Conde, or the Count of Fuensaldagne, was the cause
that moved the Spanish Ministers to prevent a blow of that importance, which
would have proved destructive, and fatal to them, because their Army being
lessened by the departure of the Lorrain Forces, and the French receiving a
double increase by the addition of those Forces; all Flanders would have been
totally overrun, and wasted by the Enemy.

The Cardinal in the mean time, ceased not to continue the management of
Affairs with a wise dexterity; his design was to keep the Kingdom United, to
carry the War out of France, and to enforce the Spaniard unto that Peace, which
they professed publicly to desire, but were privately resolved never to make.

He renewed therefore the Treaty of Peace with the Protector Cromwell at
London, to secure France against those Jealousies, that Kingdom, which was in
Arms, and had no diversion, might give unto it, and sent the Marshall
Grammont, on whose Valor and Fidelity he much relied, unto his Government of
Baione, and Bearne, to observe the motions of the Spaniard in Biscay, and
prevent all stirs upon that Frontier, either by them, or by the English.

He sent abroad new orders for recruiting the old Troops, and raising new ones,
that he might the next Campaign, not only Quarter without fear in Flanders,
Catalonia, and Piedmont, but also take in hand any other design upon occasion,
and for that reason, gave order for setting out, and Victualling of a Fleet,
that when time served might set Sail for Catalonia, or toward the Sea of
Naples, where the Duke of Guise pressed for a sudden resolution; relying much
upon the good intelligence he had with the discontented Persons in that
Kingdom, by whom he was often Solicited, and Persons sent expressly to him from
them. Together with the care of things belonging to the War, he mingled also
the thought of those, which tended to the settling of Peace at home; and caused
his Majestys mercy and clemency to be extended unto all those who were yet
contumacious, that so an end might be put unto all Jealousies within the
Kingdom; and by experience it might appear, that he desired nothing but to
render his Actings, and Ministry, equally profitable, and grateful to the whole
French Nation. Toward which (notwithstanding the ill usage he has received
from many of them) instead of seeking his revenge, forgetting all injuries done
him, he bears so great a kindness, that his whole Study is, to bring them all
by favors, unto a repentance for their Errors; that they may avoid all
punishment due to the crimes they have committed. And for as much as Money is
the sinews of War, and the Soul of all great Enterprises, he applied himself
with his whole Study, to distribute it in due manner, and raise it with the
least trouble of the people, he received in all places good intelligence with
friends, and endeavoring to create good correspondencies with Neuters, he
dispelled from France all those Cloudy storms of troubles, wherewith 'twas
threatened, and restored unto it that calm it now enjoys; which probably will
produce the Peace so much desired, and hoped for, in Christendom, and furnish a
large matter for Learned Pens, to celebrate the glories of his most Christian
Majesty, and applaud the Virtue of him who has done him such worthy Service.

FINIS.

