A Short DEFENSE OF THE Church and Clergy OF ENGLAND. WHEREIN Some of the
common Objections against Both are Answered: AND THE MEANS of UNION Briefly
Considered.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the
Bishops-Head in S. Paul's -Churchyard, 1681.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. 1.The Introduction. page 1. Sect. 2. Of Episcopacy. page 6. Sect. 3. Of
Liturgies. page 21. Sect. 4. Of Ecclesiastical Laws. page 30.


Objections against the Constitution of the Church.

Sect. 5. Of the choice of Pastors. page 40. Sect. 6. Of want of Discipline.
page 45. Sect. 7. Of joining with the purest Church. page 47. Sect. 8. Of
Lay-Chancellours page 51. Sect. 9. Of permitting a Plurality of Benefices. page
52. Sect. 10. Objections against the Clergy. page 57. Sect. 11. Of their
Ignorance. page 58. Sect. 12.Of their Debauchery. page 61. Sect. 13. Of their
Pride, and Covetousness. page 68. Sect. 14. Of their being Popishly affected.
page 71. Sect. 15. Of their Love to Arbitrary Government. page 76. Sect. 16. Of
their meddling with State Affairs. page 80. Sect 17.Of the great fault they are
generally guilty of. page 82. Sect. 18. Of the means of Union. page 85. Of
Comprehension. page 86. Of Toleration. page 87. Sect. 19The Conclusion. page
90.


A SHORT DEFENSE OF THE Church and Clergy OF ENGLAND.
SECT. I.
THEY that see only the outside of Affairs, but cannot discover the secret
hinges upon which they turn, must needs think it very strange that after all
the talk there has been about it, and the apparent necessity that is confessed
to be of it, there should be so little done toward a firm and hearty Union of
the Protestant Interest. It was hoped at first that when the horrid designs of
our Popish Enemies to establish their Religion by the most traiterous and
bloody methods, were laid so plainly before us, our common danger should have
made us more treatable, and that the fear of being devoured by such a ravenous
Monster, might have put an end to the petty contentions amongst our selves. At
least one would have thought that they should have been managed with more
moderation, and without any personal and uncharitable reflections. But instead
of this, the established Church and Clergy of England, whose ruin was chiefly
aimed at in this hellish Conspiracy, are openly traduced, and publicly
assaulted with popular Clamours, as if they did but faintly oppose, if not
secretly endeavor to inslave the Nation to the tyranny of Rome. The
miscarriages of a few, have been improved to the disparagement of all. Some
have come purposely to hear their Sermons, that they might quarrel with them,
and catch at every word that could give them any pretense for a cavil. They
have been libelled in most of the Pamphlets that come abroad, in this great
liberty that the Press has lately taken. Some that would be thought to argue
against them with the greatest smartness, have turned the whole controversy
into a kind of grinning drollery; and answered the most learned, grave, and
serious Writings, with nothing but an empty bravado, and the most scurrilous,
and disingenuous contempt. As if our differences, and the sad effects they may
still have, were a subject to be played with, by an idle trifling Fancy: Or that
their Wits were so very rampant, and ungovernable, that they scorned to be
checked by the rules of decency, or the severer laws of Conscience. Nay some of
the known Professors of Debauchery, men whose Principles are as licentious as
their lives, are become zealous Advocates for our dissenting Brethren; and they
that are so wonderfully suspicious of the Conformists, do not seem to be at all
jealous of these; they applaud, and cry them up, and are willing to entrust
them with their greatest concerns: As if they were fit instruments to promote a
Reformation, who make it their chief business to baffle, and laugh at all
manner of Religion. I do not wonder that the declared Enemies of God should
hate the settled Ministry of his word; nor do I much admire that they that are
passionately engaged in a Cause, should make use of all the assistance they can
get to support it. But this appears very strange indeed, that men piously
disposed, as I hope many of our dissenting Brethren are, can ever imagine that
profaneness can be in earnest when it pretends to favor a purer way of Worship;
or that they can have any concern for other men's Consciences, that have no
reverence at all for their own. Or if they could be supposed really to intend
the advancement of Piety, which is very incredible; yet it can scarce be
thought that the Divine Providence would be so pleased with their present
officiousness, as to suffer any Religious design to prosper long in such
wicked, and unholy hands. Or if they are to be used but for the time, till the
established Church be over-thrown, and then laid aside as soon as the business
shall be effected: It is dangerous compassing our ends by the help of such
Auxiliaries as these are. It has been often known that when foreign forces have
been called in to subdue a potent Adversary at home; they have done the work
for which they came, and then turned their arms upon them that desired their
aid, and made slaves of those that thought to have gained their liberty by that
assistance. And I wish that when men of loose and profane Principles are
invited, at least permitted to join their endeavors for the ruin of our
Church, it may not give them too fair an occasion to triumph over all, and
become the only victorious and prevailing Party at the last. However this may
be; it is manifest enough that the Romish Emissaries have always used the
greatest subtilty and diligence to undermine the English Church; and the method
which they have constantly pursued, as the most effectual for this end, is to
foment the dissentions which their cunning, and our own folly have bred amongst
us. But yet I cannot tell how it happens, that when we have the greatest
apprehensions of danger from them, we carry on the same project which they had
laid; and weaken our selves by our unhappy divisions, just as they desire it
should be. That Church which they have envyed the most, is deserted and
reproached by those that received their Baptism in it; the several Parties that
have separated from it, agree in nothing more than the unanimous outerys they
make against it; the noise has been so great and universal, that many that were
satisfied with the present Constitution, begin to imagine they cannot be
Enemies enough unto Popery, if they continue their friendship to the Church of
England. Did I believe there were the least ground for such jealousies as some
have entertained, I confess I should be tempted to swim with the stream, and
suffer my self to be born down by the tide of popular opinion. But because I am
persuaded, upon the most impartial estimate that I have been able to make, that
these suspicions are merely imaginary; and that they may be imposed upon the
credulous, and unwary multitude, to promote some designs* we are not yet
acquainted with; and that they will certainly serve no other, but Popish
purposes in the end: I shall therefore show, as plainly as I can in this short
treatise, That the Constitution of the Church of England is such, as need not
give any matter of offense to the Conscience of any good Christian; I shall
then answer the most common and popular Objections that are wont to be made
against this Constitution, and the Clergy that conform unto it; and lastly
consider the means of Union that have been hitherto proposed. And in
discoursing of these things I shall keep my self, as much as may be, on the
defensive side, and strive only to ward off the blows that are made at us,
without endeavoring to wound the hand from whence they come. And that I may,
if it be possible, avoid giving the least offense, I shall not so much as name
the Authors from whence I take the Objections I endeavor to answer, but make
choice of such as I have observed to be most usually insisted on of late; and
some others which have been spread abroad, to no other end that I can conceive,
but to incense the minds of men against us, and raise animosities at such a
time, as the most calm and peaceable Counsels would be more seasonable, and of
greater advantage to the Protestant Cause. And therefore I do here solemnly
profess that I shall not say any thing out of partiality, or any sinister
respect whatsoever, or any ill will I ever bore to any of our Nonconforming
brethren, by some of which I have been most particularly obliged, and I love
them all as men, and more especially as Christians; But as a compassionate
member of a poor despised Church, that has been made the mark of common obloquy
and scorn, I shall declare her innocence as publicly as I can, now that I take
her to be in so much danger of ruin, from the settled and deliberate malice of
Popish Agents, and the inconsiderate heat of other Adversaries; that will
dearly repent it, when it is done, if they should ever be so unfortunate as to
succeed in such an attempt.

I cannot have so bad an opinion of all, but that they may see what a Church
some of them could wish destroyed, I shall briefly lay open the Principal parts
of the Constitution of it, as it consists in Episcopacy, Liturgy, and
Ecclesiastical Laws. Of these I shall treat but very briefly, and only to give
what satisfaction I can, to those that have not leisure, or skill to peruse
those many large and learned discourses that have been formerly, and some very
lately written upon these Subjects.

SECT II.
Episcopacy, or the Government of one Bishop over many Presbyters, is a thing
so very ancient, that it seems to have been propagated in the World by the
first Planters of the Christian Religion. That the Apostles had such an
authority will not be denied; and that they communicated the like authority to
others, is no less evident in the Examples of Timothy and Titus; and to affirm
that this power of theirs, over many Presbyters, was only temporary, and
personal, and that it was to cease as soon as the Apostles, and those
immediately constituted by them, were dead, is an assertion altogether
precarious. For the Scripture makes no mention of it; and there is no reason to
imagine that that Government which was once established in the Church, should
be afterward altered, unless it had been declared by them that did establish
it, that it was to continue but for such a period of time. And if any, without
such a declaration, shall maintain that the Apostolical, and Episcopal power is
now wholly ceased; others upon the same principle may contend that the
Presbyterial power is ceased too; and as they say that every Presbyter is
become a Bishop, so these will plead that every Christian is to be a Presbyter;
though it might not be so at the first institution.

But besides that the Scripture does not acquaint us that this power was ever
to cease, the whole current of antiquity runs strongly against it. The oldest
and most Authentic writers of the Church do generally acknowledge the
Episcopal Authority; and look upon Bishops as the Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 3. c.
3. Cyprian. ad Rogat. Epist. 65.
successors of the Apostles in their ordinary power, and Jurisdiction. And
sometimes in their disputes with Heretics, they appeal to the Records that
were then extant, to show how they Iren. lib. 4. c. 63. Tertul. de prascript.
c. 32.
succeeded one another from the Apostles, down to their own times And this is
enough to prove what opinion they had of the Original and continuance of the
Episcopal power.

But if we wanted these testimonies, and were not able to derive the succession
so high as we can; yet this is confessed by the most zealous, and learned
opposers of Episcopal Government, that such Bishops as we contend for, were
universally allowed, very soon after the decease of the Apostles. And I do not
think that any one can name one Church that had not a Bishop in it, in those
first and purest ages of Christianity; and when other corruptions crept in,
they were not so great and bold as to attempt the subversion of that truly
Primitive Government. And when some in these latter times have endeavored to
contrive another kind of Ecclesiastical order, they seem to have been forced
upon it rather out of necessity, than choice. They did not so much prefer their
own model before the ancient one, but when they could not have this, they were
fain to content themselves with that. They that framed and promoted the
Discipline of Geneva the most, have spoken very honorably of the English
Episcopacy. And many learned Men that have lived quietly under that
Constitution, have thought ours the more desirable; and there have been none,
that I know of, beyond the Seas, but that have readily acknowledged that it
might at least be allowed: So far have they been from calling it Popish or
Antichristian; that is a Complement that none but a disobedient Son could
bestow upon so good a Mother.

But we need not come so low as these latter ages to seek for Authorities to
confirm the Episcopal Jurisdicttion; it was the Government that was always
owned and exercised amongst the first Christians. And they were wont to settle
their Bishops in places of the greatest confluence, in Cities, whither the
people did usually resort, from the neighboring Villages, and lesser Towns,
for the convenience of Trade, and administration of Justice. And because in
every Province there was one Capital City, or Metropolis, where the chief
Secular Magistrate had his ordinary residence; they had there a Bishop which
was first called a Metropolitan, and afterward an Archbishop; who had an
authority over the several Bishops within the whole Province. And in some parts
of the Roman Empire there were Bishops that were styled Patriarchs, who had a
certain Superiority over the Metropolitans themselves.

The order that was observed amongst them seems to be this: The inferior City
had a Bishop, who with the assistance of a number of Presbyters under him, had
the Ecclesiastical care of the Territory that belonged to his City; in the
chief City was a Metropolitan or Archbishop, and without him there were Can.
Apost. 34. Council. Antioch. Can. 9.
some things that were not to be done by the other Bishops; and in some parts
there were Patriarchs that had the inspection of diverse Provinces. And herein
the Ecclesiastical honor followed the Civil; and in those places where the
secular Governor had the greatest power, the Authority of the Bishop was
increased in some degree proportionable to that.

And this indeed, and not his being the pretended Vicar of Christ, or the
successor of S. Peter, is the true reason of all the pre-eminence that the
Bishop of Rome could ever lay claim unto. He was Bishop of the Capital City of
the Empire, and upon that account might have the honor of precedence; but was
never acknowledged to be the Universal Pastor, that had a power of commanding
the whole Catholic Church. He had the same Authority, and no more, within his
own Precincts, as other Patriarchs and Metropolitans had in theirs. What ever
the Privileges of the Bishop of Rome were, it is well known that the Bishop of
Constantinople had the same conferred upon him, by the decree of several
Councils; and the reason that is given for it is this, because it was Council.
Constantinop. can. 3. Chalced. can. 28. Trul. can. 36.
new Rome, and an Imperial City as well as the old.

But it is clear that this distinction I have been speaking of is very ancient.
We find mention of a Patriarch, very probably of Alexandria, in an Apud Flav.
Vopisc. in Saturnin.
Epistle of the Emperor Adrian; which must be written within about a hundred
years after the passion of our Savior. In the first general Canon. 6.
Council at Nice, the power of Metropolitans was confirmed, and then accounted,
by the Fathers assembled there, amongst the ancient customs of the Church. So
that it is evident what the judgment of Antiquity was in the case of
Episcopacy; they did not only allow of the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters, but gave the Metropolitan some power over the other Bishops; which
was very agreeable to the form of Government that was exercised in the time of
the Apostles.

Now all the Christians in the World make up but one Catholic Church, and the
several portions and subdivisions of that, whether smaller or greater, have the
same name, and are called Churches, as the whole is. Thus we may read of the
Eastern, Western, or African Church, which did consist of diverse Provinces; and
of the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, or Corinth, which were Episcopal, or
Metropolitical Churches; and thus every particular assembly of Christians,
meeting orderly together for the worship of God, may be called a Church. For in
homogeneous bodies where the nature of all the parts is the same, they do
properly take the same denomination with the whole; thus every Bucket or drop
that is of it, is water, as well as the Ocean. And thus have all Christians
spoken of Churches, without any scruple, in all ages. But that there are no
Churches but Congregational only, is an opinion which I take to be exceeding
modern. And I will endeavor to make it appear, in the instances of Jerusalem
and Corinth, that it was otherwise in the most Primitive times.

The Christian Religion, by the blessing of God, spread it self so fast at
Jerusalem, that within a short time after the miraculous descent of the holy
Ghost we find that Act. 4. 4.
many of them which heard the word, believed; and the number of the men was
about five thousand. And soon after that Act. 5. 14.
Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women.
And again, Act. 6. 7.
the word of God increased; and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the
faith. Now if we consider these expressions, and the mighty numbers that were
wont to be converted by the Apostles preaching, we may well conceive that by
this time they might be augmented from five to ten or twelve thousand, or it
may be more. But suppose them not to amount to above seven or eight thousand;
which is the least that can be reasonably imagined; these how many soever there
were of them, did all make but Act. 8. 1.
one Church; but it cannot be thought that they met all in the same place, and
that they made but one single Congregation. For if there were no other
Preachers there besides them, yet the Apostles were all at Jerusalem at that
time; and then one of them must have gathered a Church, but the rest could have
none; if it be supposed to have been but one Congregation. But not to insist
upon this. If they were but one Congregation, in what place could they possibly
meet together for the public exercise of their Religion? If hated and
persecuted as they were, they durst have adventured upon erecting of a building
capacious enough for so vast a multitude, they had not yet done it. When they
assembled themselves, it was in some private house, and commonly in an upper
room; and what beams and rafters were able to bear them? or what Palace had a
Hall large enough to contain such huge numbers, as must flock together upon
their solemn times of Worship? Or if these difficulties were removed; the
unbelieving Jews were their sworn and most implacable enemies, and would not
have suffered so many of them to meet, without the most violent opposition, and
setting the whole City in an uproar against them. Or if their malice could, the
vigilance of the Roman Government would never have endured it. They were
extremely jealous of every great and unusual concourse of people; and would be
more so in a Nation that had not been very long conquered, and accustomed to
the yoke; especially one so stubborn, and rebellious, and hated of all the
world, as the Jewish was. And their jealousy would have been increased, when
they had found that this was to be a frequent stated meeting, for the exercise
of a strange Religion, as the Christian was then accounted. For though they
were very indulgent to all their conquests, in allowing them the free use of
the old Religion of their Country, they were very fearful and cautious of
admitting any new ones. And these considerations being laid together, it seems
to me absolutely incredible, that the Church of Jerusalem should consist but of
one particular assembly. For when the Christians there were so exceedingly
multiplied, why should we not think that they had so much prudence as to part
themselves into several Congregations; when it is a thing confessed to be
allowable, and sometimes necessary; and there were Apostles, and Teachers ready
to instruct and edify them all; and they might do it with so much greater
convenience and security.

And that they did so, besides the reasons already alleged, the Text seems to
intimate plainly enough. Act. 5. 42.
And daily in the Temple, and in every house, that is, from house to house, as
the same phrase is Act. 2. 46. (...).
before translated, or in some houses, they ceased not to teach and preach
Jesus Christ. They went to the Temple whither the unconverted Jews did resort,
at the hours of prayer, and preached Christ publicly to them there; and at
other times they disposed themselves into the private houses of some of them
that did believe, and there they farther instructed and confirmed those that
had already received the Christian Faith. And besides this there is mention
made of their Ibid.
breaking Bread from house to house; and if by breaking Bread we are to
understand the participation of the holy Eucharist, as I think will not be
denied; then it is clear from hence that they did daily meet in several houses
to hear the word Preached, and to pray, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and that therefore the Church of Jerusalem had in it at that time
diverse distinct Congregations; very probably as many as there were Apostles at
the least, if no more.

The other instance which I shall give, in those Apostolical times, of a Church
that was not merely Congregational, is that of Corinth. Clement then Bishop of
Rome writing to that Church, upon occasion of a great difference that was
amongst them* begins his Epistle thus: (...). Clement. Epist. ad C^^i^t^. p. 1,
The Church of God dwelling in and about Rome, to the Church of God dwelling in
and about Corinth. I think the word (...) should be so translated here, to
comprehend those that dwelt in the Territory that lay round about it, as well
as those that lived within the City itself; because that this Epist. Clem, ad
Cor. p. 61.
Epistle was written to those that S. Paul wrote his; and he wrote his not only
to those that were of the City of Corinth, but to all the Saints 2 Cor. 1. 1.
which were in all Achaia; and therefore this of Clement must be written
likewise to all the Saints in all Achaia, whereof Corinth was the Metropolis;
and these are made but one Church by him that was personally known to S. Paul,
and whom he calls his Phil. 4. 3.
fellow laborer. And this Church being of so great extent, must consist of
many Congregations; for he that can believe that there was but one Congregation
of Christians in all Achaia, may be persuaded in time that there were no more
in all Greece. If either of these instances will hold good, it will
sufficiently prove that all Churches in those first times were not
Congregational.

I shall now make it farther appear that there were Bishops then that had the
rule over many Presbyters; and of this I shall give a few Examples, such as I
think may be the most convincing.

I begin with S. James that is called the Gal. 1. 19.
Brother of our Lord; his near Kinsman to be sure he was, whatever the
particular relation might be. He was not of the number of the twelve Apostles,
but yet was preferred by them to be the first Vid. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 1. Hieron.
de script. Eccles.
Bishop of Jerusalem, as all Ecclesiastical Writers, that mention him, do
agree; and there are several passages of Scripture that may serve to confirm
their Authority, which otherwise we have no reason to question. For we find him
generally residing at Jerusalem, and sometimes with the Brethren, or Elders
about him; if there happened any matter of importance to the Church, it was
communicated to him. When the Angel had delivered S. Peter out of prison, he
bid them to whom he first came go show these things to James and to the
Brethren. Act. 12. 17.
When S. Paul was returned to Jerusalem, the very next day after his arrival,
he gives him an account of the success of his Ministry among the Gentiles. For
he and they that were with him went in unto James, and all the Elders were
present. The Elders Act. 21. 18.
or Presbyters were there; but S. Paul went in unto James their Bishop, and
applied himself more particularly to him. In the first Council that ever was
held in the Christian Church, concerning the great controversy, as it was then
esteemed, of Circumcision and keeping the Law of Moses, after much disputing
and debate upon the question, S. Peter stood up and gave his opinion; and when
some other matters had been discoursed, S. James at last resumes the argument
again, and determines, as it were in a Judiciary manner: (...). Act. 15. 19.
Wherefore my sentence is. Which words are observed to carry more of Authority,
than those which S. Peter had used before: And it became S. James so to speak,
as being then within his own Diocese. And it is farther taken notice of that S.
Paul mentioning Gal. 2. 9.
James, Cephas, and John, puts James before the other two, though principal
Apostles: because he was speaking of things that were transacted at Jerusalem
where James had the Episcopal Jurisdiction. And these probabilities, if they be
no more, joined with the unanimous consent of Antiquity, may convince us that
James governed the Church of Jerusalem, as their Bishop; in which there were
certainly many Presbyters; and it cannot be doubted but that there were diverse
Congregations of Believers, which they did severally edify, and confirm in the
Christian Faith.

Another example of such a Bishop is Ignatius of Antioch; who is said by some
to have been the little Child that our Savior took up in his arms, and
blessed; but though it is most likely he was not the Child, yet for his age he
might have been; for he was very old when he suffered Martyrdom, which was but
about seventy four years after the Death of our Lord. And he saw our Lord in
the Flesh after his Resurrection, as St. Ego vero and post Resurectionem in
carne eum vidi. Hieron. de script. Eccles.
Jerome translates his words; but certainly he expresses as much (...). Ignat.
Epist. ad Smyrn.
assurance of the thing, as if he had seen it with his own eyes. This holy and
Apostolical man is accounted the Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 22.
second Bishop of Antioch, after S. Peter had left that place; he continued
some considerable time there, and then was sent from thence to Rome, to be torn
in pieces by wild Beasts. In that long and tedious journey he wrote Epistles to
several Churches, and amongst them to three of those to whom S. John had
written in the beginning of his Revelation, about twelve years before; and in
these he declares the Superiority and power of Bishops over Presbyters so
plainly, and urges it so frequently and passionately, that they that will not
allow of such a power, have no greater Argument than this to prove that those
Epistles are not genuine.

But I think this will not now be denied, since it has been lately so clearly
demonstrated by a Joan. Pea^son Episc Cestrens. vindic. Epist. S. Ignat.
Reverend Prelate of this Nation, in a most learned, and accurate Treatise
written purposely on this Subject. In these Epistles he shows a great concern,
and desires their prayers for the Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. Id. ad Magnes.
Church in Syria; and in one place he calls himself the Bishop not of Antioch
but of Id. in Epist. ad Roman.
Syria. And the particular care that he often expresses of the whole Church of
Syria, and the title he takes of being their Bishop, do very probably prove
that he was Metropolitan of that Province, whereof Antioch was the chief City;
and therefore he cannot be denied to have had many Presbyters under him, and it
may be several Diocesan Bishops, which very probably were then established in
so large a Country as that was.

The last example that I shall bring is that of Polycarpus of Smyrna. He was
one that had conversed with Iren. Epist. ad Florin. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 20.
and in Epist. ad Victor. apud Eus. lib. 5. c. 24.
St John, and other Apostles; and as some say was made Bishop of Smyrna by St
Tertul. Hieron.
John whose scholar he was. But Iren. ubi su-pra.
Irenaeus who knew him, and had heard him with great attention, when he
discoursed of many things that he had heard from St John's own mouth, and from
others that had seen the Lord; he tells us that he was made (...). Id adv.
Haeres. lib. 3. c. 3.
Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles; and if so, then this Polycarpus must be that
Angel of the Church of Smyrna to whom St John writes one of his Epistles in the
Revelation; for that Book of holy Scripture was not written till after the
death of the other Apostles. And if he were made Bishop by them, for which we
have the undoubted testimony of one that knew him; then he must be confessed to
have been the Angel of that Church, whom St John does so highly commend. And
that he had Authority over many Presbyters, cannot be questioned; because he
collected the forementioned Epistles of Ignatius, and amongst the rest that to
his own Church of Smyrna, and sent them to the Philippians; in all which this
power is most fully, and evidently asserted.

I have made choice of these few Examples, out of many more, because they seem
to me to be very clear, and were all of them unquestionably within the times
that the Apostles lived; and therefore it may appear from hence, that the
Episcopal Government in the Church was a Constitution that was allowed, and
established by them.

But if this could not be proved, yet it must be confessed, that soon after it
was universally received all over the Christian World; for from about the
middle of the second Century, and so downwards, there is not an instance of any
Church that had not a Bishop under whose Government it was. The Churches in the
Roman Empire, and those without it did most unanimously agree in this, that
they all owned the Episcopal superiority. And this is a very strong argument,
that it was a matter of Apostolical institution. For it is not otherwise
conceiveable how it could be brought into such general use throughout the whole
Catholic Church in so short a time. If any should think that it might be
determined in a General Council soon after the decease of the Apostles; this
were a good testimony that it were still Apostolical. For else it would never
have been decreed by those, some of which in all probability, must have seen,
and conversed with some of the Apostles; and who were wont constantly to
contend for such things as they had heard from them, and to reject all other,
as illegal innovations. But that there was never any such Council seems to be
beyond dispute. For it could not be assembled in a time, when the Church was
often in a state of persecution, and always looked upon with a jealous eye by
the Civil power; which would not have suffered so great a number of Christian
Ministers to meet together, without giving them some great disturbance. Or if
we should suppose they might have been permitted to meet quietly; yet that they
did so, there is not the least mention or intimation in any Ecclesiastical
Writer; and it cannot be conceived that they could have been silent in a matter
so considerable as this, when they have punctually recorded so many of far less
importance.

But if any can be inclined to believe that the Episcopal superiority was a
mere usurpation of one Presbyter in a Diocese over the rest, without the decree
of any Council; it is exceeding strange that all the World should be imposed
upon about the same time, in the same manner, without ever consulting one with
another. And who can imagine that the primitive Bishops, who are acknowledged
to have been such pious, mortified, and self-denying men, could be guilty of an
ambition to advance themselves above their brethren, contrary to the rule of
the Apostles; especially when they were like to get nothing by their aspiring,
but to be the first that should burn at a stake in the marketplace, or be torn
in pieces in the Amphitheater? Or if we could suppose them to have been so
wicked, and foolish too; it is not possible that they could have gained this
new power, without some considerable opposition. Men are naturally very jealous
of any incroachment that can be made upon their Rights. And the Presbyters of
those times may well be thought to have had as great a care of preserving their
Liberty, as we have now of ours. It is not therefore at all credible, that they
should, as it were, with one consent, put their necks quietly under this new
invented Yoke, and submit without struggling, to the usurped power of one of
their Equals; and that this defection should be so universal, that the ancient
Parity, if there had been any such, should not keep its possession in one
Church in all Christendom. And from hence it seems very plain that the
Episcopal Government, that was exercised by the Apostles, and by others in
their time, and received in all Churches, must be instituted by them; and they
certainly did not act, in a Case of that high concernment to the perpetual
peace and order of the Church, without the particular command of our blessed
Lord, or the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

I have drawn together, in as clear and plain a method as I could, the
substance of the Argument that may be made for the Power of the Bishop over
many Presbyters. And if to all this, and whatever else may be alleged, it
should be thought reply enough to say that the Mystery of iniquity began to
work in the 2 These. 2. 7.
Apostles days; and that therefore we are not to be obliged by any Examples
though never so old. If this should be pleaded, as I think it has been
sometimes; it may be answered thus: That Episcopacy may be proved upon good
grounds out of the Scripture it self; I am sure far better than any other form
of Government can pretend unto. But then being explained by the practice of
that, and all following Ages, it will put the thing beyond all controversy; if
the sacred Text alone should not be clear enough to convince us of it. But if
the Mystery of Iniquity should be still insisted on; this can be no prejudice
to our Cause; unless it can be proved that such an Episcopacy, as we plead for,
is that Mystery of Iniquity, which is spoken of. That it is not, seems to me
very evident. Because I cannot think that the Mystery of Iniquity, though it
did work very early, should so mightily prevail, that in a very short time
there should not be any Church any where, that can be heard of, that was not
Governed by the Mystery of Iniquity; if Episcopacy be supposed to be so.
Clement, Ignatius, Polycarp and other holy men and Martyrs, that had seen and
conversed with some of the Apostles, were all Bishops; and it would be hard,
and uncharitable to think that such as they, did not only not oppose, but that
they were great managers, and promoters of the Mystery of Iniquity. Nay I do
not see, if it should be thus, how Timothy and Titus can be wholly excused; for
that they had an Episcopal power, will be readily confessed, and therefore they
must be real Bishops; and though the Apostle bid 2 Timothy 4. 5.
Timothy do the work of an Evangelist; that was a thing very consistent with
the Episcopal Office, with which they were invested; as it is confirmed to us
by the Ancients, who had better opportunities than we, of knowing the truth,
and who do account them the first Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 4.
Bishops of their respective Sees, the one of Ephesus, the other of Crete. So
that if we will not involve these, and the other most holy men in one common
guilt, Episcopacy cannot be that Mystery of Iniquity that began to work so very
soon.

It will be granted that the extent of the several Bishoprics might be
various, in some places of a wider, and in some of a narrower compass; and the
number of Presbyters might be augmented, as the number of Converts did
increase. But that one Bishop should have the Authority over many Presbyters,
was a thing practiced in the Apostolical times; and universally received in the
Church: and there is not the least mention to be found, that this was ever to
cease, and any other Government, or none, to be established in its room. So
that the Church of England is very excuseable, if she still retain the
primitive form; and it might be the highest presumption, if no worse, if she
should attempt to make any substantial alteration in it.

SECT. III.
The next thing in the Constitution of the Church of England, which is disliked
by many, is the Liturgy or usual Form of Prayers prescribed by Authority, as
the ordinary Office of our public Devotions. But it cannot be esteemed any
blemish to the English Reformation, that the use of these has been enjoined,
much less should it be accounted as a thing unlawful. Before our Saviors
appearance in the flesh, there is no doubt but that set Forms of Prayer were
lawfully used in the Jewish Church; some were appointed in the Law, and the
whole book of Psalms is nothing else but a Collection of such, composed by
David, and other holy men, upon several occasions, and fitted for the public
service of the Temple. Besides these they have other Forms, some of which they
pretend to have been made by Esdras, and some they say, as old as Moses.
However that be; Prayer being none of those Ceremonies that were to be
abolished, but a principal part of that natural worship, which all men owe to
Almighty God, it may as well be offered up in a set Form now, as it was then.
For that which was once lawful will always continue to be so; unless there be
some command forbidding that to us, which was allowed unto them.

I do not find any such prohibition as this in the Gospel; but of so much we
are sure that there is a Prayer recommended unto us by our blessed Savior; in
which, it is true, all things are comprised, which it may be necessary at any
time for a Christian to ask. But yet we may not therefore think that this is
not to be used by us as a Form of Prayer, because it is the most excellent one
that was ever made, and may be proposed as the most admirable pattern by which
we may direct our selves, and be still furni^^ed with suitable matter in all
our addresses at the throne of Grace. This is no good reason why it should be
laid aside, because it is more exact, and perfect than any other Form. And that
our Savior intended it should be used as such a one, it may appear; in that it
consists of several distinct Petitions; and most of these, as it has been
observed by learned men, were such as were then familiarly known amongst the
Jews, and are still to be found in some of their devotional Books. And this
Prayer was delivered to the Disciples at two several times in the same Words;
once in the Sermon upon the Mount, and again when they came unto him, and
desired Mat. 6. 9. etc.
him to teach them to pray, as John had taught his Disciples. And this methinks
might be enough to convince Luke 11. 1. etc.
us that it was a Form which they were to use; but to put it out of all
question, our blessed Lord expressly commands it: After this manner, or thus
therefore pray ye. When he bids them pray thus, and then immediately sets down
a certain Form; who can doubt but that he plainly commands them to use that
Form? But if it should be possible for any one to conceive that when it is
said, Pray thus or after this manner, no more should be employed, but only that
this is to be a pattern to make other prayers by, and that the following Form
is not to be used to any other purpose than this: to avoid that, when the same
Prayer is repeated by another Evangelist, upon a different occasion, as if the
Holy Ghost had designed to prevent this exception, it is not said, thus or
after this manner, but only when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. A command so
positive, and absolute, that, if it may be evaded, I do not see but that all
the precepts of the Gospel may be cancelled upon the same grounds, that can be
pretended for the dissolving the obligation of this. If it should be said to
have been no more than a temporary command laid upon the Disciples at that
time; and that it was to endure no longer in force, but till they had attained
some higher degrees of perfection, which they had not then arrived unto: It is
manifest that this command has no such restriction annexed; and it is exceeding
dangerous to make any, where the Scripture has expressed none. For suppose we
should allow it but in this instance first, that the command were but
temporary; men's extravagant fancies would presently extend it to as many more,
as they pleased; and when they began to dislike any command, that seemed to
contradict their fond opinions; they would immediately decry it as a thing
wherein they were not concerned; that it was only intended as a help to
Novices, and beginners, but did not oblige such great proficients, and persons
of such mighty seize, as all bold, and ignorant Enthusiasts are apt to
imagine themselves to be. And thus by yielding it in one particular, we should
lay the way open to the making void of the whole Gospel. And so it has been
known by experience, that some by the natural improvement of this principle,
have laid aside the use of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and thought
themselves above Ordinances, and despised them all, as beggarly Elements. But
not to insist upon these inconveniences that would follow; it must be granted
that our Savior gave his Disciples a Form, and commanded them to use it; and
what he commanded them, cannot be unlawful for us.

It is plain what opinion the Primitive Christians had of prescribed Forms of
prayer; since they were very anciently received in the Church; probably as soon
as Christianity it self. But this we are sure of, that ^^^. Ma^t. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr toward the middle, and T^^t^l. Apo^oget.
Tertullian about the end of the second Century, do both of them, in their
several Apologies, declare to the heathen Emperors, in diverse particulars, what
the Christians of those times were wont to pray for in their solemn assemblies.
And where the matter of their Prayers was constantly the same, we have no
reason to think but that the expressions might be so too. For why should not a
Liturgy be altogether as lawful, as a Directory? And if they were ordinarily
limited as to the subject of their Prayers, why should we believe that they
were always bound to vary the Phrase? If this will not amount to a proof; it is
otherwise certain that the use of Liturgies has been very ancient, and never,
that I know of, excepted against till of late years. For the Lawfulness, and
expediency of these, I shall only produce the testimony of Mr Calvin; a man for
whom many of our dissenting Brethren have justly entertained a very high
esteem: He in that known Epistle of his to the Duke of Somerset, that was
Protector here in the minority of King Edward the sixth, delivers his Q^od ad
^orm^lam pr^cam, and ritu^^ Ecclesiasticerum, valde probo, ^t illa certa ^xt^t
a qua pa^o^ibus disced^^e in f^^ctio^^ s^^ n^n li^^^^. Calvin. Epist. ad
Protect. Angliae.
judgment in this manner. As for a Form of Prayers and Ecclesiastical Rites, I
do highly approve that there should be a certain one, from which it should not
be lawful for the Pastor in his office to depart He gives some reasons for it
afterward. But by this it may be seen, that he did not only allow of it, as a
thing that might be done without offense; but that he thought a set Form of
public Prayers so extremely convenient, that it was very fit to have it
strictly enjoined; and that in such a Case no Minister should be permitted to
use his own expressions, but keep close to those that should be prescribed. And
the practice of all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas has been agreeable to
this opinion; for though some of them do sometimes leave the Minister to his
discretion to suit his Prayer to the particular occasion; yet they have some
received Forms from which they do not suffer them to vary. And this indeed has
been the custom of all Christendom, some very few places excepted, where
another has been but lately introduced; and there being no precise time that
can be assigned when this universal custom first began, it is a very strong
presumption that it may be a thing of Apostolical institution. But whether that
be so, or not, it has been a thing generally submitted unto, and the Lawfulness
of it was never controverted in former ages. For how could that be called in
question that might be easily justified by the example of our Savior and his
Disciples, and the whole Christian world? Or what could make that unlawful
which had been approved by all these; but some subsequent Divine command
expressly forbidding it? And I think there is not such a one to be found in all
the holy Scripture.

If it should be imagined that it may not be sufficient, that it is not
forbidden, but that to make a thing lawful in the worship of God, it is
necessary that it should be positively commanded. To this it may be answered;
that it seems very clear that that which is no where forbidden, is not contrary
to any Law, and therefore may be innocently done; for there can be no sin, nor
disobedience where there is not the violation of some Law. And if we should
admit of the foregoing assertion, that a positive command is requisite to make
the thing Lawful, it would lead us into inextricable difficulties in this Case,
and many others that may frequently occur. For if we may suppose that a Form of
Prayer is unlawful, because it is not commanded; then a conceived or Extempore
Prayer must be unlawful too, because it is no more commanded than the other;
and then all manner of Prayer would be equally unlawful; and this opinion
instead of teaching us to Pray better, would absolutely hinder us from Praying
at all. But to put this matter out of doubt, our blessed Lord did command the
use of a Form in one instance, at the least, as has been showed; and what he
did but once command, can never be unlawful; unless he himself be pleased to
make it so, by reversing of his former command; which it does not appear that
he ever did.

But it may possibly be thought by some, that a Form is unlawful, because it
was prophesied that God would pour out the spirit of Grace, and of
Supplications. Zech. 12. 10.
This prophecy might have some immediate reference to some extraordinary time,
and might be fulfilled, as that of the Prophet Joel was, at the miraculous
effusion of the holy Ghost. But if it should have a respect to all ages of
Christianity, as I will not deny; yet this spirit of Supplications may be very
consistent with praying by a Form. Because it is given us to excite a greater
fervency of devotion in us, and not to furnish us with some pretty variety of
words. And this may be not unfitly gathered from that passage of St Paul: The
spirit also helps our infirmities: Romans 8. 26.
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the spirit it self
makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered. Groanings are
inarticulate sounds that do naturally signify the mind to be very deeply
affected with something, but they do not particularly declare what it is. And
with these the spirit helps our infirmities; the assistances it gives us are
not such as a voluble tongue, and a great fluency of expressions; but certain
inward affections, and emotions of the Soul, which it is not in the power of
any tongue to express. And these sincere, fervent, and passionate desires may
be raised in us by the Spirit, at the repeating of a known Form, as well as in
the conceiving of the words of a Prayer.

But others may be ready to say, that those that have the Gift of Prayer,
cannot be lawfully hindered of the exercise of such a Gift. If by the Gift of
Prayer they understand no more than a faculty of expressing themselves freely
upon all occasions they may have to pray; this is but what some may have a
natural disposition unto, which may be much improved by art; and others may
acquire the same by frequent use, and repeated acts; as all habits are
generally produced. And no man will deny but that such a Gift may be
restrained, as Authority thinks fit. But if by the Gift of Prayer they mean an
extraordinary Gift of the Spirit, by which they have matter and expressions
suggested unto them in the performance of that duty: It must first be made
appear that they have indeed such a Gift, before the Exercise of it can be
proved to be necessary. Or granting that they had this Gift; it is very evident
that it might be restrained, for the preventing of 1 Cor. 14. 32.
disorder, and great inconveniences in the Church* which might easily arise
upon the unlimited Exercise of it. But the moderation of the Church of England
may put an end to this dispute; for in Pulpit Prayer some liberty of expression
has been generally taken, and seems to be allowed by the Canon; and will not be
condemned in any, that know how to make a prudent and sober use of it. And
since our prescribed Form does not exclude all exercise of men's private Gifts,
it is not reasonable that the pretense of these Gifts should deprive the Church
of the great advantages of such a Form.

What has been sometimes confidently spoken, and as easily believed by
credulous men, concerning Praying with the Spirit, I shall not mention; because
I think it will not now be insisted on; since it is manifest from the Text,
that that phrase imports no 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16.
more but only Praying in an unknown tongue; which was a Gift that some had in
those first times, but cannot be applied to our present controversy.

I shall not weigh the conveniences, and inconveniences that may be imagined
on either hand, though I suppose the advantage might lie on our side. Neither
shall I examine the particular exceptions against the Liturgy established
amongst us; I do not judge any of them material enough to make us break the
peace of the Church for their sakes; or to justify our living in an open and
constant contempt of Authority. But if any thing in it can be made appear to be
repugnant to the word of God; I am very sure that the wisdom and piety of our
Governors would never rest till it were altered. And therefore having
endeavored to show that set Forms of ^^ayer may be lawfully used, I think the
Church of England cannot be blamed for having enjoined the use of them. I shall
add nothing farther here, but only desire those that do approve of the public
way of Worship now received amongst us, that they would be serious and
affectionate at their devotions, and very careful that they do not discredit
their prof^^^^on by a loose and unholy life. For those that cannon yet be
persuaded to join with us, I would take leave to advise them, that they would
be very cautious how they censure, or despise those that do. And for such as do
not altogether like it, but yet can allow themselves to come sometimes to our
assemblies; I would earnestly beg them to give God their hearts while they are
there; and not sit as if they were wholly unconcerned in the petitions that are
putting up, much less to esteem it a piece of Religion to behave themselves
irreverently during the time of divine Service.

SECT. IV.
The last thing in the Church of England which I shall mention is concerning
Ecclesiastical Laws. By these we understand such Rules and Constitutions as,
not being contrary to the word of God, may be made for the better regulating of
our external Worship, and the more orderly administration of Discipline, in
matters not particularly determined in the Holy Scripture. And in places where
the State is not Christian, the Authority of the Church alone is sufficient for
the perfect establishment of such Laws; but where Christianity is the received
Religion of the Country, they are to be confirmed by the concurrence of the
Civil Power, before they can have their full obligation. But it cannot well be
questioned, but that there is a Power in the Church of making such
Constitutions as these. For the Church is a Society of Christians; and
therefore there must be some Authority in it to govern the several members of
which it is composed; or else it would be immediately dissolved, and brought to
confusion. And if there be such an Authority, then it may command us in those
things that are not forbidden in the Written Word. For these are in themselves
indifferent, and may be injoined by Authority, and done by us without any Sin.
For our Governors are no more forbidden to command them, than we are to do
them; and if they do command them, it cannot be conceived that the command of a
Lawful Power should make that Unlawful which was not so before it was commanded.

The Church in all ages has assumed such a Power, and was never that I
remember, condemned for the exercise of it. In the famous Council held at
Jerusalem, Act. 15.
where many of the Apostles were present, three of the four things which they
decreed to be observed, were absolutely indifferent, upon the Christian
Principles; and were nothing but prudential determinations, which the necessity
of the times seemed to require, that they might not give too great a Scandal to
the converted Jews, who still retained a mighty veneration for their ancient
Law; nor hinder others of that Nation from embracing the Faith, which was then
newly published in the World. And if such things were determined by the
Apostles, their example may be thought a good plea to justify those that
succeeded them in the Government of the Church, if they do no more, than what
must be confessed to have been done by them, in the like cases.

If any should imagine that this power in things indifferent was peculiar unto
them, and such a one as was not to be derived upon their successors: It is
more, I believe, than can be proved, and we have this strong presumption
against it. We know that there were others besides them concerned in the
determinations of that Council; St James that gave the definitive sentence was
none of the twelve; and Paul and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem unto the
Apostles, Act. 15. 2.
and Elders about this question; and upon the result of the debate, they are
called The Decrees that Act. 16. 4.
were ordained of the Apostles and Elders. The other Elders were to be
consulted and gave their voices in the matter of that controversy, as well as
the Apostles; so that these Decrees were not made by any Power that was proper,
and personally inherent only in them; but by such a one as was common to them
with the other Elders; and therefore must be a part of their ordinary
Jurisdiction, which was always to continue in the Church. They were indeed
divinely inspired; but they cannot be more safely followed, than in those
things, in which we know them to have been guided by the Holy Ghost.

Thus I am sure the primitive Christians always understood it. They called
Councils, and made Canons, and had several usages which they thought were to be
observed, though they were not expressly to be found in the Scripture. And when
they injoined any thing of this nature, they did not look upon themselves as
guilty of usurping a Power which God had not given them; and the rest which had
no suffrages in the Case, willingly obeyed and esteemed themselves bound to
submit to their injunctions. And when any controversy happened to arise in
such matters, the question was not whether the Church had any such Authority to
command; but whether the thing commanded were really indifferent or not. So it
was in that famous dispute about the time of keeping of Easter, which caused so
much dissension in the first ages of Christianity; they did not contend against
the Power of the Church to determine things indifferent; but both sides
supposed themselves to be obliged by an Apostolical tradition, from which they
thought it unlawful to depart. But where they judged the matter not to be
contrary to some unalterable rule, they never opposed the commands of their
Governors.

And the Protestant Churches have been all of the same opinion. They have all
made some Ecclesiastical Laws for external order, and discipline, to which they
require obedience from all of their own Communion; though these particular Laws
are not expressed in the word of God, provided they be not repugnant unto it.
And I think our dissenting Brethren themselves do all of them make use of such
a Power; and indeed I do not see how it can be otherwise. For they will all
severally acknowledge that there must be some Power amongst them to which every
person that joins with their Assemblies ought to be subject, in all acts of
Discipline; and these not being particularly determined in the Scriptures, must
be determined by this Power, or else their Discipline cannot be put into
practice. And if it may be thus determined once, it may be so again and again,
and so as often as the like cases shall occur; and therefore it may be passed
into a Law or Rule by which all matters of the same nature may be constantly
decided for the future. And a collection of many such Laws would be so far
equivalent to a Book of Canons, that it would contain diverse Rules, and
determinations of things which the Scripture had not particularly determined.
If this be not granted that some such Rules may be established, then all
determinations not made in Scripture, which will be very many, must be left to
the discretion of those that have the Church Authority in their hands. And then
the only difference, in this matter, betwixt them and us will be this; that we
shall be governed by known and standing Laws, and they by an uncertain
Arbitrary Power. But since where any Power is allowed, some such determinations
must be made, in the one way or the other; it seems clear, that they which do
blame the Church of England for admitting Ecclesiastical Laws, do not only
condemn the Apostolical practice, and all Churches both ancient and modern, but
themselves too.

Besides, this Power we are now discoursing of, seems to have so clear a
foundation in Scripture, that it cannot well be disputed. The Apostle writing
to the Hebrews exhorts them thus, Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves. If they were Heb. 13. 17.
bound to obey and submit, then certainly their Guides or Rulers had Authority
to command. And if they might command in any thing, without doubt they might do
it in things that are not forbidden in the Word of God. For these are not
sinful in themselves neither can they be made so, by being injoined by our
Superiors, unless obedience must be esteemed a Sin: But how can that be when we
are here expressly commanded to obey?

Another place there is which has been always urged to this purpose, and never
yet I think received any full and satisfactory answer. Let all things be 1 Cor.
14. 4c.
done decently and in order. This is spoken upon occasion of some irregular
proceedings there had been in their Religious assemblies at Corinth; and it is
laid down as a rule and expedient whereby they might avoid the like
inconveniences for the future. And that it was to be universally obliging, may
appear from the grand reason of it, which we find mentioned a little before in
the same chapter: Ibid. ^. 33.
God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace; and that not in this, or the
other particular Church; not for this or that time, but in all Churches of the
Saints, in all places, and all ages of the World whatsoever. And then the
precept it self is to be extended to all things, whatever they be that are done
in the Church, they must be done decently and in order. But it is not any where
particularly expressed what is orderly, and decent; and if it may not now, or
at any time be determined what is so; then this great Rule, in which all
Churches of the Saints are concerned, would be wholly void, and of no effect,
as to any use that could possibly be made of it. For though we should
acknowledge our selves obliged to do all things decently and in order, as we
must; yet, if it should be supposed that we may not presume to determine of
this, where the Scripture is silent, as here it is, we could never make any
practical application of this Apostolical command to our own circumstances; and
so it would be all one unto us, as if we had never received it. But if it may
be determined, then it must be done, either by public Authority, or else
according to every man's private judgment: If the former be granted, it is that
which we contend for; that Ecclesiastical Laws may be made for the decent and
orderly administration of all things in the Church: If the latter be allowed,
then every one may determine for himself; and then considering the strange
variety of fancies that there are, especially in matters of decency, we should
scarce find two it may be in a thousand that would be brought to agree in the
same opinion; and by consequence this general Canon of the Apostles, that was
intended for the preservation of good order among Christians, would occasion
the most absolute confusion, that can be imagined. And for the avoiding of
this, the determining what is decent, and orderly, must be left to our
Governors, and it will be our duty to submit, to what they shall injoin, in
such matters as these.

I shall name one passage more which may give some farther light and
confirmation unto this; it is some chapters before where St Paul tells the
Corinthians thus: The rest will I set in order when I come. Here 1 Cor. 11. 34.
it is very obvious to be taken notice of, that there were some things to be
regulated, which he should leave undecided in this Epistle, but designed to
take care about them at his being at Corinth, whither he intended to go the
first convenient opportunity. Now these things it is very probable he did set in
order afterward, as he had promised to do; but we do not know, either what
they were, or in what manner he disposed them; but whatever they were, or
however he determined them, thus much may be reasonably gathered from it; that
there may some things happen in the Church, which may lawfully be set in order,
that are not expressly determined in Scripture. For such are those here
mentioned; which if they are any where determined, it must be in the second
Epistle to the Corinthians; but there it cannot be; for, besides that it would
be difficult to show the place where it is done, that second Epistle was
written not long after the first, before the holy Penman of it, had gotten any
leisure to come amongst them; but these cases were reserved till then, when I
come. He forbore to write any thing of them, because he intended to decide
them, when he should be personally present. But what he did then, we have
nothing in the sacred writings that acquaints us; and therefore it seems that
some things may be determined, which are not entered into those holy records.

This is a matter that has been always esteemed so very plain, that it was
never made a controvesie in former ages. But of late some have been exceeding
jealous of it, because, as they conceive, it seems to derogate from the great
Protestant Doctrine of the fullness and sufficiency of the Scriptures. If I
could see any argument to persuade me that it did so indeed, I should be easily
induced to reject it with as much indignation, as any of those that do contend
the most zealously against it. But we do readily acknowledge that the Holy
Scripture does contain all things necessary Article 6.
to Salvation; that nothing is to be received as an article of Faith, that is
not there clearly revealed; that nothing is to be imposed as a duty in it self
acceptable unto God, which may not be manifestly proved from thence; that
nothing is to be accounted an essential part of divine Worship, which is not
there expressly commanded. All that we attribute to our Governors is only a
Power of determining about Indifferent things, which the word of God has not
determined; and these we hold to have no other influence upon our future
happiness, or misery, but only as we take obedience to superiors to be our
duty, and that we ought not obstinately to oppose them in such things, as we
might have innocently done, if they had not been prescribed by their Authority.
Where the Scripture has forbidden, or commanded any thing, as it has whatever
is necessary, there all the Powers upon earth are bound to submit: Where the
Scripture is silent, as it is in many matters of lesser moment, there we are
obliged to comply with the injunctions of a lawful Power. So that the
sufficiency of the Scripture may be very consistent with the making of certain
Rules for external order and decency.

But some have thought that if we should allow any Power in the Church of
imposing such things, we might by degrees have so many of them imposed, as
might be extremely prejudicial to the state of Religion; and that true Piety
might be stifled, and buried, as it were, under the rubbish of a huge number of
needless Ceremonies. And therefore they think that no such Power ought to be
admitted. But all that can be proved by this way of reasoning will amount but
to thus much; that such a Power may possibly be abused; but it is not well
argued from the abuse of a Power, to the nullity of it. It has been always
supposed that Parliaments had a Power of granting money upon the Subject: But if
any should say, they cannot tell but that they may in time grant away their
whole Estates, and therefore should conceive that they could not grant any
thing at all; such a fond surmize would never be thought to have force enough
to deprive them of their undoubted right. But in Church Power, as it is now
bounded, there cannot be any just apprehensions of such an excess, as is
pretended; for, besides the restraint that common prudence must lay upon those
that have the management of it, it is limited on the one hand by the Scripture,
that it cannot command any thing contrary unto that; and on the other by the
Civil Authority, whose approbation will be requisite to give a validity to
every order of the Church. And here then is a sufficient check to prevent all
exorbitancies that can be feared: If any thing be imposed that is not confirmed
by the Civil Power, it will not be thought obliging; if any thing be prescribed
that is contrary to Scripture, it most not be obeyed.

But if any Constitutions should be made, which are only esteemed Burdensome by
reason of their number, but are not otherwise unlawful; the fault will be in
those that imposed them, and not in those that submit unto them. This is a
thing that has been anciently complained of, but neither those that made the
complaint did separate from the Church themselves, nor persuade others to do
it, upon that account. For where the Imposition is really Burdensome, they are
to be blamed that laid it on; but they that quietly bear it, will make their
obedience the more acceptable, by adding patience and humility unto it. But
this objection cannot be made in our particular Case; the injunctions of the
Church of England are for their nature, innocent, and for their number, not
many. And if they should be judged to be unlawfully imposed, because they may
be excessively multiplied; I think there is no occasion now for such a fear.
However it will be time enough to apply the remedy, when we feel the distemper
growing upon us; but it is always dangerous tampering with Physic, when we
find our selves in perfect health. Every extravagant jealousy of what may
happen hereafter, ought not to shake what is well established at the present.
For if the contrary principle should be allowed, it were impossible for any
Church or State in the World, ever to enjoy one minutes repose. Our Church then
is so far very blameless, that has admitted of a Power of making some Laws for
the more orderly conduct of Ecclesiastical affairs, since it is a thing very
reasonable in it self, very agreeable to the practice of all ages, and very
consonant to the rules of Scripture; from whose fullness it does not detract,
neither can the possibility of its being abused make it wholly null.

I have hitherto endeavored to lay together the sum of what I conceive may
not be impertinently urged in defense of the Church of England, as to the three
principal parts of her Constitution, Episcopacy, Liturgy, and Ecclesiastical
Laws. All which as they are here established, are agreeable to the practice of
the best Churches, consonant to the holy Scriptures, and may therefore be
conformed unto with a good Conscience.

SECT. V.
I shall now give some answer to several objections that have been made against
her, especially those that I have observed to be the most popular, and which
have raised the strongest prejudice in the minds of such as do not approve of
our present establishment. And these are of two sorts, some that are made
against the Constitution it self, and others against the Clergy that conform
unto it. I will a little examine a few of either kind.

And for those of the first kind one is, that in our Church the People are
denied the liberty of choosing their own Pastors; to which some of our
dissenting Brethren do conceive that they have always had an inherent Right.
And besides an example or two they think they can find in the Scripture, they
suppose they have evident testimonies out of Antiquity to confirm this practice
of popular Election. And it is true the Peoples approbation has been always
thought so far necessary, that when hands were to be laid upon any, for their
admission into any sacred function, if they knew them to be of a loose and
scandalous conversation, they might object it, and by that means hinder their
promotion. And so much is still retained amongst us.

But farther, it will not be denied but that in some places very anciently the
Bishop of the Diocese was chosen or nominated by the people of the City where
he commonly resided. But it does not appear that the several Presbyters, that
might be appointed to certain Cures equivalent to our Parochial Churches, were
ever wont to be chosen by the particular Congregations upon which they did
attend. They were appointed by the Bishop, whose office it was to take care of
the whole Diocese, and to see that these Presbyters were not negligent in
discharging the trust that was reposed in them. They were the Diocesan Bishops
that were sometimes chosen by the people; and they that insist stiffly upon
this privilege, must acknowledge the Antiquity of these; or else they must
declare themselves to be very partial, whilst they make use of so much of the
testimony only, as they think makes for them, in the matter of choice, and
reject or overlook the rest, that is clearly against them in the question about
such an Episcopacy. But however it cannot be proved that this custom of the
peoples choice was ever universally received; and where it was, it often
created such disturbances, that the secular Power was quickly forced to
interpose, and nominate the Bishop, for the preservation of the public Peace.
And it was not long before this liberty of choice was wholly laid aside by the
Imperial and Canon Laws. Which is a clear proof that whatever it were, it was
looked upon then, but as a voluntary concession of their Governors, and not
any inherent and unalterable Right. And therefore there can be no necessity,
either that it should be set up, where it never was, or restored again, where
it has been discontinued for so many ages. And there is no doubt but that if it
were generally practiced in this nation, it would infalliby produce such
animosities, and confusion, that the People would soon grow weary of it
themselves, and desire to be divested of such an uneasy Power, and that things
might be let alone to run quietly in the old channel.

But because those that have been pleased to use this argument against our
Church, are not at all to be prevailed upon by the most pregnant Examples of
ancient times in other cases, they ought not, if they could, to make any
advantage of them in this. Let us see then what grounds they have in the
Scripture, for the Peoples choice, which is the only rule by which all sides
must confess themselves to be equally bound. And here I cannot tell that there
is any positive command that was ever urged, and I know but of two Examples
that have been alleged for it; and I will briefly consider them both.

The one is in the Peoples choice of the seven Deacons. Act. 6. 5.
And supposing that they had an original Right of choosing these; this will not
amount to a sufficient proof that they had therefore a right of choosing their
Pastors. The admitting them to name the persons that were to serve in an
inferior Office, does not imply that they are therefore entrusted with the
choice of those that are to be advanced to a greater. And there was particular
reason why the Deacons should be chosen by them; they were to be the dispensers
of the money that was collected for the use of the poor; and the people might be
encouraged to give more liberally, and all occasion of murmuring for the future
might be taken away, when the public charity was distributed by persons of
known integrity, and such as they themselves had chosen. So that this instance
does not seem fully to reach the purpose.

I shall therefore inquire into the other. It is where Paul and Barnabas are
said to have (...). Act. 14. 23.
Ordained them Elders in every Church. A man would wonder how the Peoples Power
of choosing their Pastors should ever be proved from this place. But it is
attempted to be done by a Critical observation upon the Greek word, which is
here rendered, ordained. For it did first signify a popular way of election, by
majority of voices, which was discerned by lifting up of hands. And therefore
some have imagined that these Elders were ordained in the Churches by their
election and suffrage. But this is more than can be manifestly proved from the
word. For though the original signification of it were what I mentioned but
now, yet afterward it began to be used promiscuously, Vid. Hammond. in loc.
not. b.
for the appointing of any one to an office, whether it were by a popular
choice, or by the Authority of a single person. And therefore since this act of
Ordination, or appointment to office, denoted by the Greek word here used, is
many times applied to the Authoritative proceedings of particular men, without
any regard to the suffrages of the People; and since it is here attributed to
Paul and Barnabas, and not to the multitude of believers; it does not appear
from this place, that the whole Community had, or rather it is evident that
they had not any hand in the appointment of these Elders. For I do not believe
that one passage can be produced out of any good Author, where the Magistrate
or other Superior issaid (...), or thus to ordain, when the choice or
appointment of the Officer was in the People, and therefore when Paul and
Barnabas are here said to have ordained, if we should suppose that the voices
of the multitude are employed in this expression, it would be an acception of
the word for which we have not any example.

But if we should yield that by an unheard of straining of the Phrase here, we
might possibly find some little color for the Peoples choice of their Pastors;
it could yet be no more than a favorable concession made unto them upon that
occasion. For that the suffrages of the multitude were not always necessary to
the constituting of Elders, seems very plain from those words of St Paul: For
this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order Tit. 1. 5.
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee. Here Titus is entrusted with a power of ordaining Elders, and
other matters relating to the better regulation of Church affairs. And he was
not chosen to this Office by the people, but appointed unto it by St Paul; and
when he had thus received this Authority from him, we cannot think that he was
to depend upon the People in the exercise of it. For he alone is commissioned
to ordain Elders, without any mention of the suffrages of the multitude. And
there cannot be the least shadow of a conjecture framed to the contrary, from
the nice consideration of the word: For that which is here translated, (...)
Ordain, is not the same with that which is used in the other place; for it
signifies plainly to constitute, place, or set up, without any intimation of
lifting up of hands, or any way of popular Election whatsoever. So that we have
neither precept not Example in the Scripture, for the Peoples right to the
choice of their Pastors.

But if it should be still urged against us, that the Church of England is to
be condemned for want of such a free choice, as may be always pretended, but, I
believe, will never be proved necessary; then to this we do reply, that this
freedom of choice is in some sort retained in our Church; for all the Ministers
in it are appointed according to the known Laws of this Land; and to these
every one of us, by our representatives, have at least virtually given our
consent; and a virtual consent in this case, is allowed to be sufficient, by
some of the ablest Patrons of the People's right of Election.

SECT. VI.
But it is objected farther that the want of Discipline in our parochial
Churches is a very great and unsufferable defect. But there is no cause given
for such an exception; for every Minister has the approbation of those that are
to be admitted, and is empowered to reject scandalous offenders from the Holy
Communion. And these are certainly parts of Discipline, which, with the other
acts of the Ministerial office, show that there is some order and Government in
our parochial Assemblies. If this should not be esteemed enough, because in
them we cannot inflict the highest kind of Ecclesiastical censures; we do not
conceive that there is any necessity that such a power should be granted unto
them, since it is abundantly supplied by the Authority of the Diocesan, which
reaches every particular Church in the whole Jurisdiction. And it would be as
unreasonable to think that there is no Discipline in a Parish, because there
are some acts of it which cannot be there performed; as it would be for the
inhabitants of a village, or hamlet to complain, that they were under no
Government, because they had not the Power of life and death amongst
themselves; for the defects of the one are made up by the power of the Diocesan
Church, and those of the other by that of the Commonwealth, whereof they are
respective parts. I do not find that our Savior or his Apostles have made it
necessary that all offenses should be finally censured by the sole Power of
that Congregation where they were committed. This were to set up an
uncontrollable Authority in every private Assembly; and every twenty or thirty
men, or it may be fewer, that should be pleased to enter into Covenant
together, and call themselves a Church, (as some contend they may) would be
ipso facto invested with a Power of determining all matters of Ecclesiastical
cognizance without Appeal; which is more than most Papists will allow to the
Bishop of Rome. What foundation there is for the erecting such a boundless
power I cannot tell; neither can I guess what good use is ever like to be made
of it, if it should be granted; but this I know, that the Church of England,
which is a society of Christians imbodied under certain Laws and Governors,
cannot be accused for want of Discipline, if she does not permit the full
exercise of it in our parochial Churches. For in all Communities every member
is influenced and directed by the good Constitution of the whole Body; and what
cannot be legally judged in a lower, may be reserved for the decision of a
superior Court.

SECT. VII.
But some are still dissatisfied with the Church of England, because they
imagine it is not a pure Church; and if they have an opportunity of joining
with another which they can suppose to be purer, they think themselves obliged
to do it. For the resolution of this doubt these few things may be considered:
What it is that makes a pure Church? Whether the Church of England be such a
one? Whether we are always bound to join with that Church which we conceive to
be the most pure?

Now that Church questionless may be said to be pure, whose doctrine is
consonant to the word of God, where the Sacraments are duly administered, where
all the fundamental Articles of our Faith are publicly embraced, where men are
not required to profess, or to do any thing that is contrary to the Rule of the
Holy Gospel: Such a Church cannot be denied to be Pure. For here is not the
mixture of any unclean thing, that can taint it with the least imaginable
impurity, or impress any blot or stain upon it.

Then that the Church of England is thus pure, it will not be difficult to show
before any impartial Judge. For what Doctrine does she teach that is not to be
found in the Holy Scriptures? What Sacrament does she deprive the people of,
either in the whole, or in part? What Article of our Belief is it that she
rejects? What is it that is repugnant to the Laws of Christ, which she obliges
us either to believe or practice? Does she tell us that the Elements in the
Holy Encharist are transubstantiated by a few Syllables pronounced by him that
Officiates? Does she teach us to adore Saints, and Images, and to pray for the
Dead? Does she cheat the people with forged Miracles, and impose upon their
credulity with foppish Legends? Does she kindle an imaginary Purgatory fire in
the other world, that she may set up a thriving trade for Indulgences in this?
Can she be accused of these corruptions, or a hundred more that might be named?
Is not her Doctrine confessed to be pure? And is not her Discipline such at
least, as is not forbidden? And if she be sound in both these, I do not discern
from what other fountains any Impurity can be derived upon Her. And for what
has been commonly excepted concerning the use of some external and Indifferent
things, she cannot possibly contract any thing of pollution from these; for if
they do not defile Mat. 15. 20.
a man, much less will they be able to corrupt a Church.

But though the Church of England should be proved and granted to be a pure
Church, yet we are still to inquire, Whether if we can find some other which we
esteem to be more pure, we are not bound to join with that? And to this it may
be answered; that when a Church is so sar pure that it does not exact the
belief, or exercise of any thing that is unlawful, it is certain that we may
safely join with such a Church. And if we were ever admitted members of it; or
if we should be bound by the Laws of the Land, where we are subjects, to
communicate with it, we must not separate from it upon any pretense of greater
purity. For where all things necessary to Salvation are taught, and where
nothing contrary to the word is enjoined, that Church is full as pure, as any
other can be supposed to be. For the Scriptures must be acknowledged to be the
only rule of purity; and then where there is nothing contrary unto them, there
is not any thing that ought to be accounted impure. If we should forsake this,
and judge of these things by other measures, we must leave them to be
determined by every man's particular Fancy. And then one would presently
imagine this to be the purest Church, and another that; and as soon as any one
began to have the least dislike of any thing in his own Church, he would fall
immediately to looking about for one that was purer, and if he chanced to find
such a one, it might not be very long before he might be offended with that
too, and make inquiry after another, and so this principle instead of bringing
him into the purest Church, might at length draw him from the Communion of all
the Churches in the World. There have been instances of this; but if there were
none, it is very apparent whither this opinion may lead us; and we should be
very cautious how we entertain it, since it tends manifestly to the dissolution
of all Church Society, and the endless rending, and dividing of the Body of
Christ. And to avoid being guilty of this, we must fix our selves upon some
firm foundation; which in this case, can be no other than what has been already
intimated; that we esteem nothing impure, but what God has declared to be so.
If any Church impose any thing upon us which is contrary to the word of God, as
that of Rome does, we must not join with it; but if a Church require nothing
repugnant unto that, as ours of England does not, we ought not to separate from
it, though we should think that we had discovered another that was more pure.
For those that are not satisfied with that degree of Purity in a Church
Constitution which is to be found in ours, will scarce ever be contented with
any. If that be not pure enough for them, where no unlawful thing is commanded,
I do not know where they will find one that is. And if they should go on at
such a rate, they may Purisy a Church till they have Reformed it to nothing.
Like an unskilful Chemist that will rectify and refine good Spirits so long,
till he have made them so very volatile, and exalted them to that degree, that
they evaporate and vanish into air. If we cannot tell where we may safely stop,
we may lose the very substance and being of a Church, when we think we are only
purging away the dregs. But if it should still be insisted on, that we ought to
withdraw from the Communion of a less pure Church, where a purer may be had;
then if there should be any Church that holds it unlawful to submit to
Authority in matters indifferent, we are obliged by this Rule to forsake it and
come over to the Church of England; because this Doctrine is a greater Impurity
than any that can be justly charged upon Her.

SECT. VIII.
Another exception that lies against our present establishment is the admission
of Lay-Chancellours and Officials to any Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
concerns. This is a thing that has been often objected, not only by those that
dissent from our Church, but by some that are otherwise no enemies unto it. As
far as I understand the Case, I shall briefly lay down what I judge may be
reasonably pleaded in excuse of this practice. It ought therefore to be
considered that as soon as sovereign Princes had embraced the Christian
Religion, out of the great respect which they bore to Churchmen, they bestowed
upon them many privileges, and amongst the rest, they were pleased to entrust
them with a power of judging in diverse matters, which before did not properly
belong to their cognizance. In this Kingdom, Matrimonial and Testamentary
Causes especially have been always triable in the Spiritual Court. And for the
better dispatch of these affairs, which by the favor of the Prince were
committed unto them, the Bishops were allowed to make choice of certain persons
skilful in those Laws, to be their assistants in their Judiciary proceedings;
and these were anciently called Ecclesiecdici, a Cod. Justin. lib. 1. Tit. ^.
Omnem.
and are thought to have been the same with our Chancellours. Now these
Chancellours whatever they act, do all by virtue of an Authority delegated to
them by the Bishop; and they have not a power of doing any Act that is purely
Spiritual; for upon hearing of the Cause, they only give their judgment when
an offender ought to be censured according to Law, but the sentence is always
pronounced by an Ecclesiastical person. So that I do not understand why it
should be necessary to make so great an alteration in the frame of our ancient
Constitution, as the removal of these would occasion, since they cannot be
looked upon as Invaders but friendly Assistants of the Spiritual Power. That I
may not mention what a prejudice it might be to the public, to give any
discouragement to the excellent Profession of the Civil Law, whereof there is
such an absolute necessity in Maritime causes, Treaties of commerce, and other
negotiations with foreign Princes.

SECT. IX.
I come now to that which I think is the most popular and taking objection that
is wont to be made against our Church; and that is the permitting one person to
enjoy a plurality of Benefices. It is a thing which many do esteem a very great
abuse, and that which ought not by any means to be endured. And I confess I am
not very forward to attempt the making any Apology for it; I would not
zealously defend a custom, where the contrary practice seems to have in it so
much Piety, and self-denial, and care for the Souls of men. But because I
believe that it was not retained among us but upon some good and weighty
considerations, I shall briefly offer what I conceive, may be said in defense
of it; which I shall do by removing the main objections that are ordinarily
made against it. It is argued therefore, that for any man to have more
Benefices than one is a thing unlawful in it self; that it is a particular
wrong to him that supplys the Cure; and that there are other great
inconveniences that do follow upon it. The first of these is the principal
objection, and if there may be any reasonable answer made unto that, there will
be no great difficulty in the other two.

And I do not see how it can be proved absolutely unlawful that one man should
be allowed to hold a plurality of Benefices. The care of Souls is indeed a very
great charge; and such a one as ought not to be lightly undertaken; it requires
our most serious and deliberate thoughts, our firmest resolutions, and our most
earnest prayers for the divine assistance, before we go about it; and when we
are in it, the continuance of the same will be still necessary; to which we
must then add a diligent application of our minds to the actual Execution of
the ministerial office. And this must not be denied to be a matter of the
highest consequence, and concernment; but yet I do not find in the Scripture
that the whole care of every man that enters into the Ministry is of necessity
to be limited and bound down to one particular Congregation. I need not inquire
how long it was before every Diocese began to be divided into distinct
Parishes; but it is certain that in the first ages of Christianity things were
not presently brought to such a settlement. But the Bishops with their Councils
of Presbyters, commonly residing in the Cities, sent some of their number
occasionally into the Countries round about, for the farther instruction and
confirmation of those that did already believe, and to endeavor the conversion
of the rest that were yet in the State of Paganism and Infidelity. Now while
the condition of the Church was such, it is not unlikely but that the same
Presbyter might at diverse times perform the offices of his function in several
Christian assemblies, and have the charge of them committed unto him. There is
nothing in this repugnant to any Rule that I know of; but this is undeniable
that before there were any Parishes formed, there could not be any fixed
Parochial Cures. These were invented by the prudence of after times, and are of
singular use for the more orderly Government of the Church. But as these
distributions were at first made and confirmed by the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Laws, so the manner how the care of them should be managed may be determined by
the same. And seeing that our Laws do allow some persons, duly qualified, to
undertake two of these Cures, in one of which he is obliged ordinarily to
reside, and to settle an able Curate in the other, and to preach there himself
thirteen times every year; and seeing that all the Spiritual necessities of the
Church may be thus provided for, in as good a manner as they can be any other
way; I cannot tell that there is any thing in the word of God that will condemn
such a practice. Neither do I understand why it may not be as well permitted,
as one Church where there is a Chapel of ease, or, it may be, more annexed
unto it.

And if it be not otherwise unlawful, there cannot be any wrong or injustice
done by it unto him that supplies the Cure. It is very speciously urged that he
that does the work, ought of right to have the wages; and that therefore he
that undertakes and discharges the office, has a just title to all the Tithes,
and emoluments of the whole Benesice. And it is so far true indeed that he may
lay his claim to a competent salary, such a one as may be a comfortable
subsistence for him; and to make too strait an allowance in such a Case, is one
of the worst kinds of oppression; but when that is done, the legal Incumbent
may, without any injustice, retain the overplus of the profits for his own use.
For the Gospel requires no more but in the general that every Minister should
have a maintenance; but it does not allot every man his certain proportion,
that is left to be determined either by private agreement, or by the municipal
Laws of the Land. And if these Laws may, without any injury, assign the far
greater part of the Tithes to a secular person, that takes no care at all of
the Cure, as the case is in most Impropriations; then they may, on the same
terms confer them upon a Churchman: And therefore much more if he shall be
obliged to see the Cure constantly supplied, and sometimes personally to attend
it himself.

But though it should be neither unlawful nor injurious, yet it may be
conceived that there are such great Inconveniences that will follow upon the
intrusting of the same man with more Benefices than one, that it ought not to
be suffered in the Church. The only Inconvenience here, that I can call to
mind, is what has been often alleged, that upon this occasion many Cures come
to be exceedingly neglected, and none, or else but weak, or scandalous persons
put into them. But this I know is carefully provided against in many places;
and where it is not, it is a great fault, and ought to be punished by public
Authority. But the original of this miscarriage lies in the admission of some
unqualified persons into holy Orders, which I hope the conscientious care of
our Governors has, and will be very diligent to prevent. But where any such
have crept in unawares, they ought to be discovered, and censured, as they
deserve. Till then, it is most likely that they may be soonest reformed, when
they are under the inspection of a more prudent and sober man. For he that will
not be orderly in another Cure, will be apt to give more offense in one of his
own. He that will not be induced to behave himself soberly and diligently in a
place that he holds at discretion, and from whence be may be so easily removed;
would be more regardless of his actions, if he should be legally possessed of a
Benefice in his own right, out of which he could not be ejected, but with far
greater difficulty. So that this inconvenience will be more probably avoided
where pluralities are allowed, than where they are not.

Nay the permitting of this may have other considerable advantages in it. For
by this means many of the younger sort, after their Ordination, being for a
while under the direction of some graver Divine, might be trained up and
exercised, and in many respects better fitted for the full discharge of a
parochial Cure, than they could be, if they should come into it, before they
had gained some competent experience. And on the other side it might be an
encouragement to men of greater industry, and deserts, to see themselves
capable of some present reward by such an addition to their ordinary
maintenance. And this seems to have been the prime intention of the Law in the
concession of this favor; and thus it is often applied; and where it happens
to be otherwise, it is an error that must not be charged upon the
Constitution. But if there be any that receive the benefit of it, who instead
of being quickened by it to more diligence, do make it an occasion of idleness
and sloth, and grossly neglect both, or either of their Cures; it is a direct
contradiction of the design of this Indulgence, and they are a sort of
Spiritual Droans, that are answerable for it both to God and men. But if a due
regard be had to the first intent of it, it seems plain to me, that the
admitting a plurality of Benefices, would not prove any inconvenience, but
several ways of great advantage to the Church.

SECT. X.
And thus I have confidered some of the principal objections that are commonly
made against the Constitution of the Church of England. I shall proceed now to
the examination of those that are levelled at the Clergy that conform to that
Constitution. For though it be highly unjust to make the Constitution
responsible for the miscarriages of all that are in it, since they cannot be
wholly prevented, and that the best regulated Societies in the world have been
always subject to some personal defects; yet it is very observable that many of
those that dissent from us have been very ready to entertain an ill opinion of
their Conforming brethren; over credulous to believe, and something too forward
to propagate any scandalous rumors that have been spread abroad to their
disadvantage. Whether it be that the want of better arguments is to be supplied
by a strong prejudice, industriously raised, and studiously fomented; or that
they think a charitable judgment ill bestowed upon those that are not in all
things of their own persuasion; or whatever the cause of it may be, the effect
is certainly apparent enough. Of late especially the lives and behavior of the
Conformists have been narrowly scanned; as if there were now some more than
ordinary occasion of rendering them odious and contemptible in the eyes of the
people. I will not inquire what should be the design of some busy men in
striving to undermine the credit of the Clergy at this time: It may be they
would have their reputation lessened, because they cannot be induced to blow
the coals for the heating those Irons, which some cunning ingineers may have in
the fire. But whatever the reason of it is, this is notorious that nothing has
been omitted that might make for their disparagement; they have been charged
with the blackest crimes, and very often without any distinction of the
innocent from the guilty. They are vulgarly accused of Ignorance, Debauchery,
Pride, Covetousness, of being Popishlye affected, of a Love to Arbitrary
Government, and of Mdling with State affairs. These are the things they are
commonly taxed with; most of them qualities very bad in themselves, some of
them particularly aggravated by our present circumstances, others very improper
for men of their function, and all exactly fitted to expose them to the scorn
and displeasure of the multitude. They are indeed heavy accusations, but such
as I am confident cannot be proved. I do not say that there are not any of the
conforming Clergy that may not be something obnoxious in some of these
respects: never any Church was so happy, as to have all its Ministers wholly
unexceptionable. But for the generality of ours, I think they are most unjustly
traduced; as may be made evident, if we shall examine the particulars of the
Charge.

SECT. XI.
The first thing that is objected against them is the Ignorance and
unskilfulness of many of them in the matters of their own Profession. It is
true that those that are acted by Enthusiastical principles are exceeding prone
to despise us for this; when they have raised their Fancies with strange dreams
of rare Discoveries, they are apt to look down upon others with something of
contempt. The meanest and most illiterate Artisan, that has but a tincture of
this conceit, will be ready to pity the blindness of the most learned
adversary, that opposes his follies; and think himself an overmatch for the
best studied, and most judicious Divine. But excepting these, that are not to
be regarded, the English Clergy have been always very well esteemed for their
abilities, by all prudent and sober persons both at home and abroad. And if I
am not very much misinformed, there is not a Church beyond the Seas at this
time, that can pretend to have a more learned, and accomplished Ministry than
Ours is. And if we might have leave to make inquiry what was the state of these
affairs before his Majesty's happy Restoration (when we were told that all
abuses should be reformed) I verily believe that a curious man might have
observed as much Ignorance in those days, as he will be able to discover in
these. But not to look back on what is past: no unbiassed Judge will ever think
that the dissenting Ministers at the present, do generally excel the Conforming
Clergy in any point of useful Learning. It will be a very hard matter to show
what it is wherein the Conformists have not acquitted themselves as well as
their Brethren. They have been as successful in the study of those Languages
and arts, that do prepare men for the knowledge of greater things; They have
been no less diligent and serious in searching and endeavoring to understand
and explain the Scriptures; They have applied themselves as carefully to the
reading both of ancient, and modern Ecclesiastical Writers, and taken as
impartial a view of the state of the Church in all ages; They have used as much
industry in examining all the material controversies in Divinity, and their
sermons have been as practical, and directed as much to the profit and
edification of their Hearers. It must needs be granted that they have been at
least as eminent as their Nonconforming Brethren, in all the several parts of
Learning.

There are indeed many amongst them who in respect of the greater seize
of others, may be said to be comparatively Ignorant, But I think very few that
are not tolerably qualified for the discharge of their Office. For where there
is a charitable, meek and humble disposition, a lower degree of knowledge may
be improved to better purpose, than the most profound and deepest skill, when
it is attended with a supercilious Pride, and a certain scornful haughtiness of
mind. It were heartily to be wished, and public care ought to be taken about
it, that all that enter into holy Orders might be every way sufficiently fitted
for that weighty employment they undertake; but it cannot be expected that they
should be equally furnished with abilities for such a work; and where any not
so well accomplished, as were to be desired, shall happen to have a Cure
committed unto him, he cannot have altogether so bad an influence in the Church
of England, as in some other Constitutions. Because here the instruction of the
people in the fundamentals of Religion is otherwise provided for, and the whole
performance of Divine Service is not left to the discretion of the Minister. So
that his defects, whatever they are, may be better supplied this way, than can
possibly be done, where all depends only upon his personal and present capacity.

But this exception that is taken at our Ignorance is usually most insisted on
by those that have the least reason to reproach us with it; and I esteem it
rather to be the effect of fondness and partiality to their own men, than a
just and equitable censure of Ours. For from whence they may receive their
information I cannot tell; but those that attend more constantly at our public
assemblies can assure them, that they shall not often hear so mean a Sermon
there, from which, by the grace of God, they may not reap some Spiritual
advantage; if they come rightly disposed, ready to be informed or reminded of
their Duty; and not, as the fashion of too many is, merely to sit as judges,
while they are at Church, and give their opinion of the Preacher when they come
home. But this is but a slight and cavilling objection, and, if we pleased,
might be easily retorted upon many of them that are the forwardest to make it.

SECT. XII.
The next is far more considerable; for we are told that great numbers of our
Clergy are men of debauched and scandalous lives, which is a thing that the
very meanest may freely judge of, and if true, is indeed a very great and real
offense. But before I endeavor to give any answer to this, I must needs take
notice of a piece of injustice which, if I mistake not, has been pretty common.
Many there are that will be exceeding severe in censuring the least
miscarriages of the Clergy, which can overlook grosser faults in other men. Nay
some I have heard of that can indulge themselves in riot and intemperance, who
will pretend to be mightily scandalized, if they hear of a Minister that may
possibly be taxed with the like excess. They seem to imagine that a loose and
careless way of living is the unquestionable right of the Layman, and if any
of us presume to tread in their steps, they grow very angry, as if we invaded
their Property, and intended to share with them in their patrimonial estate.
They talk as if they believed it lawful for others to behave themselves as they
pleased, and that the sobriety of the Clergy were to make an atonement for the
sins and licentiousness of all the People. They tell us indeed very truly, that
we are to be Examples to the flock; but then 1 Pet. 5. 3.
they do not remember that they are to be followers of 1 Cor. 11. 1.
us, as we are of Christ. Except the faithful discharge of their particular
calling, which is required of others too in their several stations, I cannot
tell of any thing that Ministers are bound to, which is not the duty of every
other private Christian. It is true that their faults do admit of very great
aggravations; but that does only inhance the degree, not alter the nature of
the guilt. And these aggravations, it may be, are no greater in them, than they
would be in others of eminent place and quality, either Civil or Military,
whose vicious lives may have as bad an influence upon the world as theirs. But
of this there can be no doubt, that they that do pass such a rigorous sentence
upon their failings, and can so easily excuse themselves and others for the
same, or more heinous crimes, do make it appear, that they are no great enemies
to the sin, but that they are something displeased at the men.

Gregory Nazianzen reflecting sadly upon the unhappy dissentions of those
times, and the want of charity, contempt of the Ministry, and the bold
pretenses to knowledge, and the Spirit that arose amongst them, complains that
things were brought to that pass (...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. ^.
that all their Piety consisted in nothing else but in condemning the Impiety
of others. He acquaints us farther, (...). etc. Ibid.
that they were very busy in hunting after one another faults, not to lament,
but to upbraid them, not to heal, but to hurt, and that they might salve their
own credit by wounding their neighbors; (...). Ib.
and that it was not the Life, but the being friends or enemies that gave men
the character of good or bad. These and more such observations were made by
that excellent person upon the Christians that were then of different
persuasions; and where the like prejudice is conceived, it may incline men to
the like censoriousness and partiality in any age. We are often told of the
debauchery of Conformists; and it is our great grief that there should be any
just cause for such an accusation, and I hope that those that make the
complaint will join their hearty endeavors to take away the occasion of it.
But let them make a diligent inquiry whether they may not have some such among
themselves, and whether there were none of that stamp remaining, after the
Church had been purged of so many Centuries of pretended scandalous Ministers?
I will not be curious in making such a search; we need not recriminate for the
defense of a good Cause; we have been always backward to do this, after many
provocations given, and I wish that our Brethren would forbear such
insinuations in their controversial writings. For as the same great Author
says, Wicked men do build upon our backs, and what we invent one of (...). Ibid.
mother, they make use of against us all. Those he speaks of were exposed to
the hatred and scorn of the Heathens, for vilifying and disparaging one
another; and we may be laid open, by the same means, not only to the contempt
of the Papists, but of those too that make a mock of all Religion, who are many
degrees worse than any Heathens.

But after all the clamours about licentious Clergymen, it may be likely
enough that they that make them may be overhasty and credulous in receiving
reports, and not judge with that candor and charity with which we should
examine other men's actions. For allowing some exceptions (which I hope
considering our numbers will not be many) I do not see but that the Conforming
Clergy in the general are of as circumspect sober inoffensive a conversation,
as any of their accusers. It will not be advisable for either side to make
comparisons of this nature. But he that knows of any one in Holy Orders, that
is really guilty of such vices, as make him scandalous; let him not presently
strive to defame him but be careful to pay him the love and respect that is due
to the Character he bears, not for his own but for his Lord's sake. St
Chrysostom discourses pretty largely to this purpose and for our encouragement
to do so he tells us, (...) etc. Chrysostom. in (...).
Though the Priest should be a debauched one, God seeing that by reason of the
honor thou have for him, thou do honor one that is unworthy of it, he
himself will give thee a reward.

But this is only a good intimation to others how they should behave themselves
toward them, and not any thing that can palliate or excuse any man's looseness
and intemperance. Where any of the Clergy can be convicted of such sins as do
openly disparage his calling, let him suffer the severity of the Law to the
utmost rigor. And if those Laws that are already in force be too gentle to
reclaim him, I could wish that others might be made for the infliction of some
greater punishment; provided they were such as might tend effectually to the
Reformation of notorious offenders, without exposing the innocent to be
continually molested by the vexatious prosecutions of restless and malicious
men. If this may be avoided, nothing can be too severe. For there is no greater
public mischief than a scandalous Clergy; it is the highest affront and
dishonor to Almighty God, and will certainly prove the inevitable ruin of any
Church, where they are suffered to increase.

If these papers should happen to fall into the hands of any one that is
conscious to himself of some guilt in that kind, I would beseech him for the
sake of his dearest Savior who died for him, and whose professed Servant he
is, that if he have any regard to his own eternal happiness, or any compassion
for the wounds of a bleeding Church, he would seriously repent of all his
former follies, and endeavor for the future to behave himself answerably to
those many obligations that lie upon him to a holy and blameless life. Vid.
(...). Orat. contra Timarch.
There was an ancient Law at Athens that no man that could be proved guilty of
any gross immoralities, should presume to make a speech to the people upon pain
of death, though he were the most eloquent and taking Orator in the whole City.
That restraint which was thought necessary by the wisdom of a heathen
Republic, would not be unworthy the imitation of a Christian Kingdom; though
by this means we might be now and then in danger of losing a very fine
harangue. But at least in the Church this prudent caution of theirs deserves to
be proposed as an Example for us If it were a Crime amongst them, no less than
capital, for men of debauched lives to speak sometimes in public about secular
affairs; what penalty can be severe enough for such profligate wretches, when
they shall dare adventure to undertake the constant ministry of the Gospel? If
they escape a sentence here, it shall fall the more heavily upon them at the
last day; when the Holy Office they have profaned, and every Sermon they have
delivered shall rise up in Judgment against them. What lamentable gashes must
they give, what violence must they continually offer to their Consciences,
whose unsanctified lives are a direct contradiction to that heavenly Doctrine
they profess to teach? How do they mock the Almighty to his very face, that put
themselves into his immediate service, and talk much of Repentance, and
Mortification, and yet trample upon all God's holy commandments, and go on
obstinately in their disobedience, and lie down and wallow in sensuality? How
can they preach Christ crucified, that are not afraid to crucify him to
themselves afresh, and put Heb. 6. 6.
him to an open shame; that pretend to be his Disciples, and of his family, and
do not only most perfidiously betray their Master, but revile him, and spit
upon him, and nail him to the Cross, which is more than Judas did. These and
the like considerations, if they are not already sunk into perfect Atheism,
should make them tremble at the apprehensions of the divine vengeance, that,
unless they amend betimes, will be poured out in the largest measures, upon
such impudent and horrible impieties.

I have heard that some of those that are the most obnoxious, have expressed an
extraordinary zeal for the Church of England, and inveighed very passionately
against the Dissenters. I would advise them hereafter to spare their pains; we
do not desire, nor stand in need of their help; their examples drive more away,
than their arguments will ever be able to bring back. Such false friends do our
cause more hurt than our open enemies; for these only make a breach in our
Walls, which has been hitherto sufficiently defended, but they carry the Plague
into our bowels that may destroy thousands.

But I hope there are but few of them amongst us; I am sure the infection, God
be praised, has not been universal. And for those that have been tainted, after
they have repented heartily for the Scandal they have given, let them apply
themselves diligently to their studies, and learn to take delight in their
employment; it will be the only way to prevent a relapse. For Idleness and a
certain kind of aversation for a man's own business may be generally observed
to be one of the most fruitful Parents of debauchery. And for those that may be
offended with the lives of any of our Clergy, I would entreat them rather to be
sorrowfully affected with their failings, and labor for their amendment, than
to behave themselves as if they would insult over us for that which is our
greatest trouble, and were glad of any pretense to derive an odium upon us.
This I would desire them severally to consider.

SECT. XIII.
We are told farther by some, that our Clergy are many of them Proud and
Ambitious, of a scornful and fastidious humor. This is a most foolish and
hateful quality, and very unbecoming for any man, especially a Christian that
serves a Lord that was himself the most stupendous pattern of humility and
condescension. But it is most improper of all for those that are the
Ambassadors of this Lord, that act in their places by his special Commission,
that are to advance the interest of his Kingdom, and take care of the meanest
of his Subjects, and are bound to despise nothing, but the allurements and
vanities of the World. Pride that looks every where very ugly, receives some
additional deformities when it is found in them. And I cannot tell but that
some of them may deserve to be taxed for it, but I do not believe that they are
so many that it should justly reflect upon the whole Order. But there are some
faults that men easily fancy, wherever they please to take a dislike. And this
is one of those: The inferior sort when they are angry, will think every one
Proud, whose clothes are a little better than theirs; others will be of the
same opinion, if they are not always treated with flattery and submission, and
the most servile compliance. And the Clergy may lie under this imputation too,
because they may be forced sometimes to vindicate the honor of their Calling,
in an age that loves to have it despised; they may be thought to assume too
much to themselves, when they will not yield it to be so contemptible, as they
would make it, whose glory and interest it is to lay it low.

But the remedy that is prescribed for this supposed distemper is an excellent
good one. It has been imagined by some Projectors, that if the Bishops were
reduced to such a mediocrity, as they should be pleased to allow them, and
Deans and Chapters Lands, and some other superfluities were taken away, the
Clergy then might be humble enough. A very wise and honest contrivance! As if
Poverty were a certain cure for Pride; when they themselves can tell that
discontent, which may be occasioned by the loss of what they legally possessed,
will make men more arrogant, haughty and self-willed, than a very fair Estate,
when it is peaceably enjoyed. This expedient signifies no more but that there
may be some very modest self-denying men that long to be fingering the revenues
of the Church. The encouragements that have been left the Clergy by the Piety
of former times, are not now so very great, as to be the object of any man's
envy; other Professions make far more considerable advantages, which are not so
much repined at by some of their neighbors. But whatever they be, they have as
good a title in law, and as much property in them, as any other Freeholders
have in those Estates they account their own; and the same power that can
deprive them of their Ecclesiastical preferments, may divest any man else of
his paternal Inheritance. They that have any thing to lose will be very
cautious how they shake the foundations upon which the Right to all they have
is built. If a Property by Law be disregarded in one instance, it may be
quickly extended to as many more as some men's malice or necessities shall have
occasion for. Clergy and Lay-Malignants may be easily jumbled together by an
honest confiding Sequestrator. Injustice seldom stops where it begins. Make a
cut in the bank of the Thames, and let out the water, and then stand by and
persuade it, if you can, to run over none but the Churches Lands. I believe
there may be more modern Examples; but I remember in the intended Reformation
of Watt Tyler and Jack Straw, they were the same men that resolved to have none
but Mendicants Tho. Walsingham Richard. 2.
for their Priests, and to dispossess and destroy all other rich and landed
men, as well as the Bishops and dignifyed Clergy. Some that could be contented
to see these last a little humbled by a retrenchment of their income, do scarce
consider whither that Principle does naturally lead them; for if it should be
thoroughly followed, the best Nobility and Gentry in the Nation, may soon be
mated again and overtop'd too, by Cobblers and Draymen. But this is a way of
bringing down the Pride of the Clergy, that is never like to be approved of by
any, but men of desperate fortunes, or very large and pliable Consciences.

There is another thing which the Clergy have been vulgarly charged with; and
that is Covetousness; and some that love money well enough themselves cannot
endure to think that a Clergyman should be guilty of such a thriving sin. And
indeed if he be, I have nothing to say in his excuse. But it is hard to judge
who are really Covetous; unless it be those that will do an unjust action for
their own gain; and those that refuse to bestow something of what they have
upon the poor. These may be censured by us without breach of charity; but for
others we must leave them to the searcher of hearts. But a Clergyman is
commonly esteemed to be Covetous when he will not be tamely cheated of what is
apparently his due; to the impoverishment of himself and family, and all that
shall succeed him. Other men would be unwilling to be tried by these measures.
I cannot tell what occasion any of the Clergy may have given for these
complaints that have been brought against them; but I think I know many of
them, that are so far from enriching themselves by unwarrantable means, that
they would readily part with whatever they enjoy, if the Peace and Unity of the
Church might be purchased with all that they have. But I take these two last
objections of Pride and Covetousness to be nothing else but spightful words
thrown abroad by those that are desirous to revile us upon any pretense; and
therefore I do not think them worthy to be farther considered.

SECT. XIV.
I shall proceed now to matters of greater concernment to the public than
these. Of late especially we have been very much alarmed with a mighty noise,
of no body knows how many of the Conforming Clergy that are Popishly affected;
and we are made to believe that they wait but a fair opportunity to declare
themselves openly for the Church of Rome. And besides a great many other pretty
names that have been invented, by ingenious men, to distinguish these from the
true Protestants, there is one above all that has had the luck to hit the fancy
of the better sort of the refined wits. It is that happy expression of Papist
in Masquerade: some charitable man or other stumbled upon it, I know not how;
but it has flown about like lightning. It was such a quaint Phrase, and so
exactly fit for the purpose, that every body had it in his mouth immediately.
And I confess I do not wonder that it took so strangely; it pleases me so, that
I can never think of it, but I am ready to smile. Well; but since it is
concluded that there must be such things as Papists in Masquerade, it were
worth the while to know where they are. Sometimes we are told how many there
are in and about the City of London, how many in each University, and other
places. Sometimes we hear sad lamentations of the greatness of the danger,
because these ambiguous animals cannot be discovered. They are next to
invisible; like the Chamelion, they put on the color of every thing they
touch. Sometimes, because it is very hard to discern who these Masqueraders be,
some very jealous people suspect us all, and they are half afraid, if the truth
were known, that there are scarce any of us, but that do walk in the same
disguise. Some of the most shrewd and judicious observers, if they do but meet
us in the street, will look so wishtly at us, as if they would see whether we
had not something pasted on upon our faces. It is a very pleasant invention
this, to pretend to imagine that there are considerable numbers amongst us that
appear for the present to be Protestants, but when the time shall serve, they
will pluck osf their vizards, and show what they are. By this device there is
hardly any of the Church of England, that can escape being suspected by some or
other; and so many well meaning people, of an honest and hearty zeal, may be
frighted out of our Communion, by their great fear and hatred of Popery, for
which they are persuaded that diverse of us have a secret kindness. And I could
not blame them, if there were the least occasion for such a jealousy.

But I do not understand what grounds they have for that surmize, who either
do, or else would be thought to believe it. The English Clergy have been always
esteemed very sound Protestants; they have still made a very vigorous
opposition against the innovations and encroachments of Rome. Many of the most
eminent of them suffered Martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary; besore the name
of separation was heard amongst us. Many from the beginning of the Reformation
down to our own times, have continually incountred the Popish adversaries, with
great learning, and answerable success. Since the discovery of the late most
horrid Plot, no men have been more forward than they to declare their
abhorrency of all the false Doctrines and practices of the Roman Synagogue; and
that generally throughout the Nation, as if they had been animated, as I
believe they were, by the same Spirit. Insomuch that it was commonly confessed
that there was no sort of men in the Kingdom that did exceed them for the
worthy discharge of their Duty in that respect. And are not these arguments
enough to assure us of their sincerity? And what should be the reason then,
that they should come to be suspected for favorers of Popery all of a sudden?
I must needs confess I am not able to imagine, if it be not this; that some are
very angry with them, because some of them, taking notice how the clouds did
seem to drive from several quarters, have been a little afraid, that those
tempestuous winds, that were like to shipwreck Church and State, did not all
blow from the same point of the Compass. And some have been most highly
provoked by this conjecture; but I hope their impatience does not argue any
thing of guilt.

However it be, I am sure the Papists themselves do not take us for their
friends, any more than we do them for ours. They have been perpetually bending
the main of their force against the Church, as it is now by Law established;
they have encouraged our Divisions, and to this end have sent abroad their
Emissaries, in diverse shapes, to exercise their pretended Gifts in private; and
of this we have unquestionable evidence, and examples. So that if there be any
Papists indeed, in Masquerade, we may easily know where to find them. They have
been very kind to Dissenters, and pleaded very earnestly for their Liberty. It
is not many years ago since they used what Interest they had to procure them an
Indulgence; and hoped to bring their designs about in that popular way. This
has been proved of late by several Witnesses, and confessed by themselves. The
Conformists were sensible of it at the first; and have been sufficiently
derided, and censured for expressing their zeal against Popery upon that
occasion. After this our dissenting Brethren do best understand what
encouragement they had to make their applications, as some of them did, to some
of the principal men of the Romish faction. It seems to have been either a
confidence of some good will they bore to them, or else a sense of the hatred
they had for us. I will not undertake to determine which of these it might be;
but one of them no doubt it was. But it is very unjust that we should be
thought to be Popishly affected, whom they have endeavored by all means
possible to undermine; when others that have been apparently befriended by
them, pass for good unsuspected Protestants.

Besides, there is not any Principle entertained by the Church of England that
has the least affinity with any Popish Doctrine. But amongst those that have
separated from us, there have been some that have denied the King's Supremacy
in Ecclesiastical affairs; some that have thought it lawful to depose and
murder Sovereign Princes; some that have disavowed the full ness and sufficiency
of the Scriptures, and conceived themselves to be guided by an infallible
Spirit; and if they could but learn the art of being handsomely perjured, and
take Oaths, not according to the plain intent of the Law by which they are
imposed; but with some mental Reservation of their own, I do not see almost
what could be desired farther to make up the complete Mystery of Jesuitism. I
do not say, neither do I believe for all this, that they are so much as
ordinary Papists, either in or out of Masquerade; but if we should give way to
these idle suspicions, we have certainly as much cause to be jealous of them,
as they have of us. But we have a manifest argument how frivilous these
conceits are; for it is well known that in the late Wars, and before, the cry
of Popery was as great, and the Conformists were as confidently accused, as
they are now; but when it came to the test, and they were violently ejected out
of their livelyhoods, and many of them forced to fly into Popish Countries,
there were but very few of them all, and those of no very good Character, that
did embrace the Romish Religion. And what reason is there to suspect that we
should be more inclined that way now, than they were then? But there is no
question but the same men that are so ready to believe us Papists, can as
easily, when it shall be for their turn, make us Turks, or Jews, or Heathens in
Masquerade.

SECT. XV.
Besides this device of Popery, there is another almost as good as that, which
has been much talked of. The people have been possessed with strange fears,
that the Clergy are mighty friends to Arbitrary Government. For it has been one
main Policy of those, whose Projects will never go on smoothly till Conformity
be taken away, to charge us home with those things that are the most odious,
and the least understood by those that serve to make up the cry. But if any men
can be so foolish as to desire to introduce an Arbitrary Authority in the room
of one that is directed by Law; the Clergy of all others have the least reason
to be fond of it. For they cannot but know themselves to ly the most open and
exposed unto it, and that they shall be sure to feel the first and severest
lashes of every usurped and tyrannical power. Of which we have too fresh an
instance to be wholly forgotten in this age. The only occasion that I can
imagine why they should be traduced for this, which is so apparently contrary
to their known Interest, is, because they are not so suspicious, as some others
would seem to be. But those that are bound, by their profession, and the common
rules of Christianity, to entertain the most charitable opinion, that it is
possible, for private men, may deserve to be pardoned, if they cannot be
unreasonably jealous of their Prince.

He that were otherwise a stranger to our Affairs, and should casually hear the
noise there has been for some time about Arbitrary Government, would be apt to
think that either the People were sick of their own happiness, or that his
Majesty were resolved to make himself as absolute as the Grand Seignior, or the
Great Mogul. For if all the gracious Declarations that have been made, and more
than twenty years experience will not convince men of the extravagancy of such
a fear, they may be quickly fit for the Hospital of Incurables. Since the year
Sixty we have had no Committee Men, and Sequestrators; no compounding for
Estates, and decimations after that; no cantonizing of the Land amongst a
company of Major Generals: The supreme power has not been invaded by the fag
end of a House of Commons; nor snatched from them by a Council of Officers, and
tossed from one to another at the pleasure of an unruly rabble of Soldiers.
The Crown has not been fixed on the point of the Sword; but all things have gone
on in a regular and legal way. And if our own knowledge did not sufficiently
assure us of this, we have the testimony of one that has lately written a kind
of Politital Dialogue very full of pretty fancyful speculations, who tells us,
That as we have as Loyal Subjects as are Plato Rediv. v. ^ p. 18.
any where to be found, so we have as gracious and good a Prince. I never, says
he, having yet heard that he did, or attempted to do, any the least Act of
Arbitrary Power, in any public concern; nor did ever take, or endeavor to
take from any particular person the benefit of the Law. This is honest and
plain dealing, and we have no cause to question the truth of these expressions*
For if this Author were not a person of known Integrity and a true Protestant,
it would yet be too great an absurdity for the English Gentleman to impose so
grossly upon the Noble Venetian; and he does not seem so mighty partial to our
present form of Government, that he would be guilty of such an indecorum to
save the credit of all the Monarchs in Europe. But that is a thing that needs
no proof; the moderation and equity of his Majesty's Reign is well enough known
to all the World.

And why should any one think that he can ever desire to alter the temper of
the Government, when it cannot be done without offering a very great violence
to his own? But if such an attempt should be made, and succeed too, (which are
both very unlikely) it would be a great diminution of the Sovereign Power. For
the Prince is the loser, when the Subject is inslaved; and he is in truth far
more Absolute that has the hearts of his People at his devotion, than he that
treads upon their Backs. And how can it be thought that a good King that has
the methods of Governing already laid out by wise and excellent Laws, and that
has Authority enough for the securing his own dignity, and the necessary
defense of his dominions, should forfeit the affections of his Subjects, and
hazard all, by a vain endeavor to overturn the whole frame of the received
Establishment, and set up his own will instead of it; when the most unlimited
Powers are forced to prescribe some Laws to themselves, and necessitated to
govern by certain Rules? It is almost impossible that he that has a legal Right
should ever be Arbitrary, but he that is an Usurper must needs be so. For he
that is not supported by the Law, can be maintained by nothing but a standing
force.

But after all the stir we have had about it, it might be worth the
considering, whether Arbitrary Obedience, be not every whit as dangerous as
Arbitrary Government? For my part I look upon them as the same thing; only that
one is but just springing up, and the other is come to its full growth. I am
sure those that have made the greatest clutter about Liberty, and have been the
most backward to Obey, as soon as ever they have gotten any Power into their
hands, have commonly proved the most mercyless Tyrants. And all wise men will
be very careful that they be not wheedled into slavery, by the threadbare
pretenses of preserving those Liberties, that are not invaded, and removing of
grievances, where there are none. The Government we live under is so
excellently tempered, that nothing can be more prudently fitted to the mutual
happiness and satisfaction of Prince, and People; unless there should happen a
misunderstanding betwixt them, which they that aim at the ruin of both, will
be very studious to foment; But they that enjoy the benefit of such a
Constitution, have all the reason imaginable to be contented. But it is the
highest injustice to accuse the Clergy for favoring an unknown Arbitrary
Power, when they desire to be always governed by the Laws; and such Laws as
have the greatest regard to the Subjects freedom of any in the World.

SECT. XVI.
There is one objection more which is sometimes brought out upon special
occasions, and that is, when they cannot be prevailed with to join themselves
with any number of Malcontents, then the Clergy must be complained of for
being overbusy in meddling with State Affairs, if they do but dare to speak any
thing that may tend to the quieting of men's minds. And if they were indeed
something guilty of what they are taxed with, they might hope to escape in a
crowd of offenders, who are as little concerned, and yet will be offering at
public Business. This is not so much their peculiar blame, as it is the common
fault of the times. Heretofore amongst the wisest nations it was esteemed a
matter of some dfficulty to make a complete Statesmen; it was thought to
require a good natural capacity, great industry, diligent observation, and some
competent age and experience. But of late these Northern parts have been most
wonderfully inspired with Politics. We have a sort of Statesmen that are shot
up, like Mushromes after a thunder-shower; some that never saw twenty yet; and
others as good as they, that can scarce write or read: Some that have picked up
all their skill at the Theater, and the Tavern; and some that have learnt as
much at the Plowtail. You can hardly meet with a man that is not able at least
to entertain you with the News of the times, and make most notable remarques
upon it. Every pert fellow can give his judgment of the whole State of the
Kingdom, more readily and confidently a great deal, than those that have taken
some pains to consider it. It Is a dullpated Mechanic indeed that cannot correct
the mistakes of the Council Table, and tell how every thing ought to be
ordered, and talk shrewdly about it, whether he understand it, or not. This
would have been looked on as a Prodigy amongst the old heavy-headed Senators of
Rome: If their City and Country had bred but one of such monstrous parts, we
should have had it recorded in Livy, and no doubt there had been sacrifices
appointed to avert the Omen. But I do not think that this strange crop of
Politicians that is sprung out of the ground in our days, can portend any Ill;
unless by degrees they should happen to grow too wise to be governed. But in
the mean time the Clergy may be well excused, if they have gotten a spice of
the common disease: where it is become Epidemical, it is hard to escape without
something of infection,

But for all this, I have not observed that they have been so mighty busy in
State Affairs as has been pretended. Many of those that accuse them for this,
may be proved more faulty themselves. And if any one will be pleased to take
the pains to turn over most of the Sermons that were preached, by another sort
of men, in the late Troubles, he will easily perceive that the Pulpits then
were far more zealous to stir up the people to rebellion and bloodshed, than
they are now to persuade them to peace, and submission to their Governors. And
yet this is the main occasion for which many of the Conformists are clamoured
against; they are presently branded for meddling with matters of State, if they
do but teach their hearers to be obedient to Magistrates, and are not furnished
with Jesuitical distinctions to show in what cases, it may be lawful to take up
Arms against the King. They cannot avoid being reviled by some, if upon a
Thirtieth of January they declare themselves heartily against the Murder of our
late Sovereign. They have been reproached, and assaulted too, for coming to
give their voices for some worthy Gentlemen to serve in Parliament; when the
Journey-men and Apprentices of very inferior Trades, have been encouraged to
concern themselves in State Affairs of the greatest importance. It is very hard
that they should be the only persons that may not quietly enjoy the
unquestionable privileges of every freeholder. But the truth is they will not
be engaged on that side that some would have them, and therefore it is
convenient that all their actions should be misrepresented; if they could be
persuaded to wheel about, and join their endeavors with those that now accuse
them, I believe they might meddle with State Affairs, as much as they pleased,
without Offense.

SECT. XVII.
I have now examined some of the most vulgar Objections which use to be made
against the Conforming Clergy; and some of them are so highly improbable, and
very rare, that it would be difficult to prove any particular man concerned in
the charge; and where some few offenders may be found, I do not think that
their Example has spread its influence so far, that it should justly blemish
the reputation of the whole Order. But it might be worth the while to inquire,
what is the great fault, that they are generally-guilty of, which has caused
them to be so publicly traduced under several pretenses? It is not their
Ignorance; of which they may possibly clear themselves as well as others: It is
not their Debauched lives; since many of them are known to be of a very
blameless and exemplary behavior: It is not their Covetousness, nor their
Pride; for though these are very great sins, yet they are not always easy to
be discerned: It is not their being inclined to Popery; against which they have
so constantly declared and given all the assurances imaginable, ever since the
beginning of the Reformation: It is not any favor they can have for an
Arbitrary Power; which must needs be very injurious to them; and which no men
have opposed more than they* by standing firm to the established Laws: It is
not a busy pragmatical humor of intermedling with matters of State, where
they have nothing to do; for I am confident any unprejudiced man will confess,
that there were never fewer Political Questions debated in the Pulpit. But what
can be the reason then, for which they have lien under such strange suspicions,
and been so spightfully reviled, especially by those who have never before
expressed any thing of zeal upon a Religious account, and whose manner of
living and discourse will not suffer them to be admitted into the number of
tender Consciences? He that shall consider the matter best will scarce be able
to find out any other real cause, but only that the Clergy have a great dislike
to all manner of illegal innovations. They judge it unreasonable that the whole
Nation should be involved in troubles and confusion for the security of a few
discontented men, who cannot think themselves safe, and will never be pleased,
till all things be bent to their own humor; and not very long, if that could
be done. They are not inamoured with every fine project, that may be set on
foot; neither do they admire those for the wisest of all, that think themselves
excellent at new-moulding of States. They suppose the King's Title may be good
enough, though they do not know exactly how many Acres of Land may be held
sufficient to confer a Right to the Sovereign Power. They take that man to have
a huge barren Fancy that is not able to invent a thousand pretty models of an
aerie Republic in a twelve months time. But after all they believe that we
might live as happily, if we pleased, under the Form that is already settled, as
in Sr Thomas More's Vtopia, or Plato's imaginary Commonwealth. They understand
very well that there will be some casual miscarriages in the administration of
all humane affairs, but they esteem it more becoming wise men and good
Christians, to bear with those we are acquainted with, than to hazard the
infinite mischiefs, and inconveniences of a Change, which it is impossible
either to foresee, or prevent. And therefore amongst the great uncertainties
and vicissitudes of these earthly concerns, they are verily persuaded that our
common safety will be best preserved by a pious dependence upon the Divine
Providence; which they are not ashamed to own, though they should be laughed at
for it by a few conceited scoffing Politicians. They are satisfied in their
Consciences of the Lawfulness of our present Government, both in Church, and
State, and hold themselves strictly bound to submit unto it, and make use of
the best arguments they can to induce others to a compliance with all the just
commands of their Superiors. And this is all I can tell of, that has opened
the mouths of so many against them; this is the most unpardonable crime; and of
this, as they have hitherto been, so I hope they will always continue to be
guilty.

SECT. XVIII.
Having thus run over, and given some answer* as I promised, to many of the
popular Objections which have been made against the present Church and Clergy
of England; I shall proceed to consider very briefly the Means that have been
proposed for the Uniting of us, and our dissenting* Brethren. This is a very
noble and pious design; and he that does not heartily desire, and pray that all
the World may become Christians, and that all Christians may be joined in the
same holy Communion, wants that Charity* that should make him a lively member
of the Church, and is the greatest Schismatic; at least he has the seeds of
all Schism within him, which will be ready to show themselves upon any
occasion. But there can be none amongst us, that has any sense of Religion,
that does not seriously wish and endeavor for a happy Union and composure of
all our Differences; but we have not yet seen the good effect of such a
disposition. It may be it is because the methods of procuring it, that have
been hitherto propounded, are not fufficient for the attainment of it. Two
things especially have been thought upon as the fittest expedients,
Comprehension, and Toleration; the one, as our present circumstances are, is
not likely to succeed; the other does directly cross the end it pretends to aim
at; as will appear if we consider them singly.

By Comprehension is usually understood some kind of Relaxation to be made by
Law, that some things which are the most scrupled being taken away, some of
those that now separate from us, may be satisfied, and join themselves to the
established Church. This is a thing that has been much discoursed of, and some
thing has been attempted in it by men of several persuasions; and it has been
variously censured, or approved, as the Parties have been differently affected.
And it is confessed that those things that have been appointed merely for
external Order and decency, may be altered when it shall seem good to the same
Power, that first injoined them. But then those that have submitted, and
subscribed unto it, cannot believe that any such alteration is necessary to be
made in our present Constitution; and if it should be made, they are afraid
that it would bring but very few Dissenters into the Church; because they that
scruple what is already in use, may upon the same grounds except against any
thing else that can be prescribed. But yet if the wisdom of our Governors
being, as is reasonable, before hand informed what will give satisfaction,
should judge it expedient to make any concessions of this nature; I know no man
that is not ready to join his hearty prayers that it may succeed, to the
putting an end to all our Divisions, and the lasting peace and security of the
Protestant Religion. But it is justly feared that this would not produce that
happy effect which is so much desired by all good men; because most of those
that differ from us seem now to be resolved against all manner of impositions,
though it should be of things otherwise never so innocent; and then terms may
be altered and enlarged, if it be thought fit, but whatever is done, they that
will be true to this Principle cannot be Comprehended by any thing but their
own pleasure.

Some therefore understanding well how ineffectual this is like to prove, have
thought the only way to Unite us must be by a Toleration; and that either with
some Restrictions, or without. An unlimited Toleration without any
Restrictions, is condemned by most that pretend to any degree of sobriety; and
if every man, as some have thought, have a natural Right to the choice and
exercise of his own way of Worship, then a Toleration must be granted to all;
and it cannot be limited without the manifest injury of those that are, or
shall be excluded from the benefit of it, by such limitation. But however it be
desired, whether limited, or unlimited, (which I think will never be perfectly
agreed amongst those that are for it) the Conformists, out of the kindness they
have for many well disposed people that may be mislead, would be very much
inclined to a Toleration, if besides the other great inconveniences that would
follow, they had not these exceptions against it.

It does not seem to be equal dealing that our Dissenters should lay claim to
such an Indulgence, which all sorts of them have most rigorously denied to
others, wherever they have had the Power to do it; and diverse of them now will
not allow their Children, and Servants that liberty which they expect
themselves, in the exercise of their Religion.

And it is observable, that whereas the best Emperors have made the severest
Laws against all manner of Sectaries, Plaris absolutisque decretis ap^riri
Templa, ari^que hostias admoveri, and reparari Deorum st^tuit c^^tum. Vtque
disposito^^^ (...) ef^^ctum, dissia^^^es C^^^^ianor^m antis^^^^s cum (...) in
palati^m (...), ut civilibus (...) c^nsopitis, qui^que (...) suae (...). Qu^d
^gebat (...), ut dissensiones (...), non time^^t (...) plebem. Am. Marceli^.
lib. 2* 2.
Julian the Apostate, the most subtle and bitter enemy that Christianity ever
had, was the man that set up this way of toleration. For he sent for the
Prelates and some others of the several Sects of Christians, and when they were
come into the Palace, he advises them very kindly, as it might seem, to lay
aside their differences, and that every one should attend upon his own
Religion, and never fear, because no body should hinder any of them of that
freedom. Here was as much liberty, and as readily granted as any man could
wish; but he did not intend any advantage to Christianity by it: No, he hoped
by the license he gave them to increase their dissentions, that so he might
have the less reason to fear their unanimous opposing of his grand Design,
which was to restore Paganism, and Idolatry again. This is hinted in some
Ecclesiastical Vid. (...). lib. 5. cap. 5.
Historians, but no where so fully laid open, as it is done by Ammianus
Marcellinus, who was most likely to know the whole secret of the business; for
he had been a Soldier in Julian's Army, and was a Heathen too, though not so
great a Zealot as his Master. But by this any one may see that the most
implacable, cunning, and dangerous Adversary that the Devil ever raised up to
oppose the Gospel of Christ, did of his own accord, devise and procure a
Toleration, as the most likely means utterly to destroy the Christian Faith,
and to revive a most gross, obsolete, Superstitious, Idolatrous Religion. Which
is enough to show that this fair and plausible invention may be designed for
very bad purposes.

And we have reason to suspect it the more, because is it well known that the
Papists have always endeavored to widen our differences, and when they had
been pretty successful in that, they were of late become earnest Sollicitours
for the Indulging of Protestant Dissenters; but sure no man will believe that
this could proceed from any particular kindness they owed them, more than us.
But only they hoped that by this means our Divisions might be easily
multiplied, and the Church of England by consequence exceedingly weakened; and
then they knew they should have the most promising opportunity of working their
ends upon us all. For when this is done, they may freely send abroad their
Emissaries in the likeness of Anabaptists, Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy men, or what
other shape they please to assume: And when they have broken us into several
scattered independent troops, that are not agreed among themselves in what
manner to resist the Enemy, they may overcome us with less difficulty, than if
we were joined in one regular, entire, well disciplined Body. And that this has
been their grand design is not a mere conjecture of ours; we have evidence, and
witnesses of it, which cannot be questioned. Therefore many Conformists that
take no delight in seeing the Laws severely executed, are yet very apprehensive
of the danger of a Toleration; for they are much afraid that if it were once
granted, the effect of it would rather be what has been hoped for by the Popish
Agents, than what was intended by those, at whose immediate instance it might
be procured.

But whatever the issue should be, it is certain it would be any thing sooner
than an Union; for it would be a plain settlement and encouraging of our
divisions by giving them the countenance and protection of the Law. And if such
a thing should ever chance to pass into an Act; that when it was done, would
only take away the penalty laid upon it by the Civil Power, but could not alter
the nature of Separation, The Church of England requires no unlawful terms of
Communion, and if the withdrawing from such a Church were a sin before, it will
always be so, whatever Statute should be made to allow it. For no humane
Authority can dispense with any of the divine commands. So that though it be
very desirable, especially at this time, that the whole Protestant Interest
should be firmly united, yet this Union which it is feared will scarce be
effected by a Comprehension, will undoubtedly be quite overthrown by a
Toleration.

SECT. XIX.
I have now considered the Constitution of our Church; some Objections that are
wont to be made against that, and the Clergy; and the means of Union that have
been thought the most likely to take effect. I have gone over all with as much
brevity as I could, and without any expressions that can give any just occasion
of distaste; but I have made use of that great plainness, and freedom, that
seldom procures a man many friends. But I hope none can be offended, but those
that are conscious to themselves of some unwarrantable Designs; and if one
chance to hit upon a sore place, men will cry out, and be angry, though you
touch them never so gentlely. What mistakes I may have committed, I am ready and
willing to correct.

I think the Church of England to be the best constituted of any in the World,
according to the Scriptures, and the pattern of the first and purest times. And
if there should be any thing in it that any one could wish amended, it should
be born with patience, till it may be corrected, not by the popular clamours of
private men, but the deliberate Advice of those in Authority.

The Conforming Clergy, for ought I know, are men generally of good worth and
blameless lives; and if there should be any that are not such, they are to be
entreated presently to reform, and by their future behavior to make some
satisfaction for the Scandal they have brought upon their Profession. And if
they have been something wronged by false reports, it will be their most pious
course to make a good use of the most spightful detraction, to be reminded of
their Duty by the malice of their Enemies, and to extract an Antidote out of
the poison of Asps that is under their tongues.

And now for a happy Union, which all Parties pretend to desire, I fear that it
can never be had, or that it will not endure long, till men do lay aside all
prejudice, and passion, and maintain a kind and charitable inclination one for
another; till they have an awful respect for their Superiors, and an humble
reverence For Almighty God. But if this were done, it might be hoped that a
serious application of the mind to the more weighty Duties of Religion, would
in great measure silence the Controversies about indifferent things. The real
Piety of the members of it, is the surest foundation of the Churches Peace.

FINIS.

