The Grounds of Complaint of several Merchants and other Traders of the City of
London, who are humble Petitioners to the Honorable House of Commons, against
the present Managers of the East-India-Company.
IT has always been the Usage and Practice of the East India Company, to make
Public Sale of all their Goods by Inch of Candle, in the East India House
(pursuant to the Preamble, that every Adventurer Subscribes, before he can be
admitted into the Stock.) And to give convenient notice of the time of their
Sale; together with Printed Books, containing the Accounts of the Quantities
and Sorts of every particular Commodity, as they were indifferently disposed
into several Lotts.

The present Managers of the said Company have of late presumed to alter the
aforesaid Usages, by introducing other Methods, in disposing of their Goods by
Private Contracts amongst themselves; Monopolizing those Commodities in best
Demand at under Rates to their own use; and several Goods which have in such
Manner been ingrost by some Members of the Committee, have afterward been
exposed by the Candle at the Public Sale, as still belonging to the Company,
where Brokers have been appointed to bid considerable Advance on the Prices, at
which they were privately bought at, with no other Design, than to impose on
the other real Buyers. Whereby the Petitioners are very much disappointed in
their Affairs, to their great Loss and Detriment, for that Commissions from
abroad cannot be effected, nor Occasions at home supplied.

Moreover, When Public Notice has been given by the aforesaid Printed Books,
of an intended Sale, specifying the several Lots of each Commodity as above;
and the Petitioners have accordingly made Provision with their Correspondents
abroad, and for their own Occasions at home; the foresaid Managers have very
indirectly altered their appointed Lots at the time of their Sale, and put up
the whole Quantities of some Goods to a very great Value in one Lot, to the
great Surprise of all the Buyers; designing thereby to give opportunity to some
amongst themselves, to ingross the same, as they have accordingly done, to the
further prejudice of the Petitioners.

By all which indirect Proceedings, the Joint Stock has been prejudiced in the
space of about two years to the Value of above One Hundred Thousand Pounds and
the Petitioners put out of their Way of Trade, as they are ready to prove, and
humbly supplicate this Honorable House, for Redress of their Arbitrary Abuses.


