THE Grumbletonian Crew Reprehended;

BEING REFLECTIONS UPON The Ungrateful and Unmannerly BEHAVIOR of that
New-upstart Sect:

OCCASIONED By the SCRUPLING to take the NEW OATH of ALLEGIANCE. TOGETHER With
some Good Advice, to such of Them, as are yet Capable of it; and not too far
advanced toward Bedlam.

By Sir P. Philopolites.

Ingratus est, qui gratiam been merenti non reponit. With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Pater Noster-Row.
MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE Grumbletonian READER.
THis Sheet was intended chiefly for thy Perusual, wherein if I have Treated
thee a little roughly, at the beginning; it is only to be Revenged on thee for
using the Government so. But read on, and thou will find, I have endeavored by
a more mild Method, to reduce thee to thy Wits, clogged perhaps at present with
a great many pretended Scruples, which put altogether, make not up one dram of
Sense. I know most of your Tribe, have been lusty enough formerly, to skip over
Blocks; which makes it an unaccountable thing to me, how you come so feeble all
of a sudden, to stumble at Straws. And as strange it is, that they who used to
swallow Camels, should now strain at Gnats. But thus have I seen the same
Horse, that rusheth without fear into the Battle, to start at his own shadow.
And here I shall leave thee, with thy Fellow-brute, like Nebuchadnezzar amongst
the Beasts of the Field, till thy Vnderstandng returns unto thee. Only take
this along with thee (because thou seem so in Love with Misery and
Destruction.) That the Devil is in a very Swine, much more, one would think in
a Man, that should run down a steep Hill on purpose to be choakt. But seeing
thou art now rescued from Ruin, whether thou would or no; be not so fond of
breaking thy Neck, from off another Precipice, which you may yet avoid. The
Government may possibly connive at your Sauciness (to say no worse) at present,
which you connot suppose it will always endure. And consider, how many, some of
you, have been Instrumental formerly, to hang out of the way, for far lesser
Matters, than you now stand Guilty of your selves. I therefore thus Advice, and
bid you,

Farewell and be Wiser 'ere it be too late;
Gibbets you know, are Utensils of State.
THE Grumbletonian Crew Reprehended; BEING REFLECTIONS UPON The Ungrateful and
Unmannerly BEHAVIOR Of that NEW-UPST ART SECT etc.
THIS is our great Year of Jubilee, wherein every Man may return to his
Possession, that was unjustly taken from him; and every Bondman may be made
free, if he pleases. But certainly, they are very fit for Slaves, who cannot
find in their Hearts to be very thankful for their Liberty: which being the
Case of our present Grumbletonian Crew, it were Pity, if they might not have
leave, to transplant themselves into some Catholic Country; where they may have
their Ears bored through to the Door Post, in Token of an Everlasting
Servitude; and may solace themselves with the full Fruition and Enjoyment of
all the good Effects of Popery and Arbitrary Power; which now they have lost
the Benefit of in England.

These Monsters of Ingratitude, outdo the very Devil himself; who was always
pretty quiet, whilst he was in Possession; and never raged till he was in
danger of being ejected. But our Malcontents, seem to be possessed with a New
Sort of discontented Devil, never heard of before, and are such Renagado's from
Common Sense, that they prefer their being turned out of all, rather than such
a Settlement (to the satisfaction of all reasonable and good Men) as England
never had the opportunity of before, perhaps since it was a Nation.

That stiff necked untoward Generation of the Jews, had their Murmurers indeed
amongst them, as well as we; but 'twas always when they were brought to some
Streights: and not immediately upon their Deliverance out of them. A capricious
Giddiheaded Humor ('it is true indeed took them once) of making a Captain, and
returning into Egypt; whilst they were in the Wilderness: But we never read,
that they were such down right Blockheads, as to mention any such thing, after
they came into the Promised Land; though they were forced to fight their Way
through it.

We, thanks be to God, are put into possession all that is dear to us, both as
Men and Christians; upon no harder Terms, than to be thankful. And would not
any one in his Wits that knew, our woeful Condition, but some few Weeks since,
think us all mad, that thought much of that.

But the Truth of it is, we have had a Lucky Age on it, till of late, for Knaves
and Fools; and now good Men dare to lift up their Heads, the other Sort must be
forced to pull in their Horns: which Sort of Discrimination is grievous to
them, whose pretended Loyalty always consisted, in wading through thick and
thin; in Order to keep themselves in a Capacity to do mischief. And now that
Trade fails, the Poor Men are undone all of sudden; and though they never knew
what a good Conscience meant, in all their Lives, yet are now troubled with
such Qualms, as no Man can imagine or believe. A new Oath of Allegiance,
amongst the rest, is that, which every Kitling Critic of this Tribe, takes upon
him to censure, though I could never yet hear of any solid Reason given against
it, by the greatest of their Recusants. Nor can any certainly be given; God and
the States of the Realm, having so plainly pointed out unto us, to whom it is
due; as by many Learned and Judicious Men, have lately, been sufficiently
demonstrated in the Point. So that after all, I cannot see what should hinder
the going down of this new Oath; especially, with a great many of the debauched
Sort of these Murmerators: Unless their Throats be so furred with God Dame's,
that no other Oath will slip: And yet these Sort of strange Foplings, as well
as others, help to make up the number, of these Pretenders to a tender
Conscience in this Matter; and behave themselves so toward Authority, as if
they thought their ill behavior upon that account, would make an Atonement
with God Almighty, for the rest of their flagicious Crimes.

I need not here undertake, by any Arguments of mine, to justify the Public
Proceedings, upon the late miraculous Revolution, that has been done already by
those, who were far more able to perform it. But that which satisfies me as a
private Person (not at all concerned in Public Affairs) and I think ought to
satisfy all others in my Station, is this. That every Soul (according to the
Apostles Rule) ought to be subject to the Higher Power: for that there is no
Power but of God. And that the Powers that be, are ordained of God, and
thereupon whosoever resists the present Power he is under, resists the
Ordinance of God.

Now consider, we who are private Persons, have been only Spectators,
throughout the whole Series of Divine Providence, in this great Revolution. We
have indeed been under terrible Apprehensions a long while, of being destroyed,
by the desperate Steerage of that Pilot, who was entrusted with the Government;
which, when he had Stranded and run a Ground, Abdicated and then forsook the
same, as a Wreck in the Sea. Upon this, there are other Pilots, that are
desired to use their Skill and Gare, in weighing and poising up again this
sameforsaken and sinking Vessel. Truly I am satisfied (as to my own Particular)
in such a Case as this, our Obligation to the first Pilot ceases of course; and
we may enter into a new Agreement and Obligation to the latter, without asking
any Question for Conscience Sake. Allegiance being Naturally due to those that
can and do protect us, and not to him that is out of that Capacity; to say
nothing which may sound more harsh.

We as private Persons, had no Hand either one way or other, in setting up of
the present Power, upon the Declension of the former; but we find it set up to
our Hands. And being set up in such a Solemn manner, as at present we see it
is, I think (according to the said Apostle's Rule) we ought to be subject to
it, for the aforesaid Reasons, given in the Text: and not by a Desperate and
Disloyal refusal, render our selves Obnoxious to the Government, we live so
happily under. And upon this Ground (as the same Apostle farther enlarges) I
think we must needs be subject, not only for Wrath but even also for Conscience
Sake.

And to be a little farther serious in this Matter, do but consider still the
desperate Condition, we were lately in (this cannot be denied, I trow) and also
the late seeming impossibility of our Deliverance, so that we were ready to
conclude with David in his Case, that he should certainly one Day perish by the
Hand of Saul. I say, do but consider this Seriously, in all its Circumstances
(too many to be enumerated) and we must conclude this late Revolution in
England, to be more immediately the Lord's doing, than perhaps is to be
paralleled in any History, since the writing of the Holy Scriptures. And though
we be bound in Matters of Government, to Persons and Families, so long as their
Supremacy continues; yet God the great Proprietor and Lord of all, is not so:
but pulls down one, in Cases of Maladministration, and then sets up another:
Disposing of all the Kingdoms of the World as he pleases. And when this is
done, still I say, all Persons (in a private Capacity especially) ought to
submit, without hesitation or doubt. And truly, all others (be they who they
will) ought well to consider, how they slight such apparent Providence of God,
as have appeared in this mighty Salvation that he has raised up for us; least
whilst they seem to struggle with Men, they fight against God.

But I Will trouble the Reader with no further Arguments upon this Topic, but
shall say something, in Reference to the Laws of our Land (which, so far as
they entrench not upon the Law of God) are the Measures of our Obedience, and
this I hope will tend somewhat farther to every ones Satisfaction in this
Matter. We have now a King and Queen de facto (and de jure too, I do not in the
least doubt) and at present supposing it only de facto; if then by the Law of
the Land (as my Lord Coke says) Treason may be Committed against a King, that
is only so de facto; then sure, Allegiance is due of course to such a King: for
where no Allegiance is due, no Treason can be Committed. And if so, it will
consequently follow, that no reasonable or legal Exception can be made against
taking the New Oath of Allegiance, to our present and truly Gracious King and
Queen, whom God long preserve with Life and Happiness in that Dignity to which
by his own Right Hand and Holy Arm, he has advanced them. And let it ever bear
part in our Magnificate, that he has put down the Mighty from their Seat, and
has exalted the Humble and Meek. And let the Church of England now confess and
say, that his Mercy endures for ever. And that the time is now come about
indeed that she has a King for her Nursing Father, and a Queen for her,
Nursing Mother. And not only Titular, but true Defenders of the Faith.

I know we have at this time, some, who say they are Friends to the Church of
England (and I hope in the main are really so) who yet by their Imprudent and
Undutiful Behavior toward the Government, take the ready way to bring her out
of Credit with it. But let them (as well as Dissenters from the Church) beware,
least they have not false Brethren amongst them, who manage another Interest
than what they intend. Tuta fruquesque via est per amici fallere nomen.

It is not so long since, but that we may very well remember, what Drudgery we
have been put upon; under the Notion of Service both to Church and State, by a
Generation of Vipers, that intended to have eaten through the Bowels of both;
and now have no hopes left them, of retriving their lost Cause, but our
Divisions. Consider what advantage they have taken of it, ever since the
Reformation of the Church of England, from that of Rome. And when we have
considered it, let us behave our selves as those who believe it; so that our
Demeanor and Condescension, one toward another, in this happy Juncture, may
utterly for ever frustrate the languishing Hopes of the common Enemy to us all.

Let us not rip up one another failings (there have been too many on all
sides) but let our Love to one another, cover that multitude of Faults, which
otherwise may go very near to shame us all. For the Truth is, some of us have
been such overgrown Tories, as if there had gone but a pair of Shears, between
them and the worst of Papists; And others, hot Enthusiastical Whigs, as bad as
either of the former. And tho these Devil's Brats, in the time of our late
Heats and Animosities, have been often laid at honest Men's Doors, who had no
reason to own them; yet that there have been, and yet are, some such amongst
us, is but too true and evident. And tho these, possibly may not lay their
Heads together, in order to the Management of their ill Designs; yet like
Sampson's Foxes, they all carry Firebrarnds in their Tails: and by their
running several ways, do more mischief perhaps than if they kept together.

And now I must needs say, I know none but the poor Trimmer, that can plead not
Guilty to this Indictment; tho he has been represented, as one of the worst of
Sinners, and snarl'd at on every side, whilst he has been Industriously
endeavoring the good of all. But further, I must also say, he was not for all
that easily beaten from his Post; but thought it better to be always a Trimmer
than sometimes a Fanatic, otherwhile a Tory, and at last a Papist: as many
others have been, according as their Interests served them. But to say no more
of him at present, let it now suffice; that tho he could never reconcile
himself, to that blundering sort of pretended Loyalty, lately in Fashion; yet
that he is now acceptable in the true Notions of it, to our present King and
Queen, merely for his Principles sake, of moderation toward all Men, is very
evident: And in that alone, he can acquiesce and be content, without Place or
Preferment; the main Stake being secured.

And thus far, my just Indignation, against the Murmurers of our Times, has
carried me; which is farther than I at first intended. But however, give me
leave now to enlarge a little farther, and mildly to recommend to their
consideration over again, the more than ordinary Footsteps of Divine
Providence, so plainly seen in God's late Merciful Dispensations toward us;
and which have been so well set forth and expressed, in some late Printed
Sermons of the most Eminent Divines of the Church of England; to which I refer
them. And in particular, let that twice Auspicious 5th. day of November, and of
the Years of 88, not pass by us, without a due regard, of something very
remarkable in them, upon that account. Upon the Is It 5th of November, we were
delivered with our King, and on the last 5th of November we may well say we
were delivered from him. In the first 88, from ill Designs against us abroad:
And in this last 88, from worse at home.

And now to conclude, let us all as one Man, Purge out that sour Leaven, that
yet remains with many of us; and not abuse that mild and gentle Government,
which now God has set over us: least he should in just Judgment, take away the
Golden Scepter, and reduce us again under the Iron Rod: for then, the most that
we can suffer, will be the least that we deserve. We now may all do well,
exceeding well, if it be not our own faults. But if Jealousies, of no Man knows
what, and strange Fancies and Chimaera's be set up, like Men of Straw to fight
with; to the disturbance in any manner, of that sweet Peace, which otherwise we
might all enjoy; then let the ill Effects thereof (I pray God) lie at their
Doors only, that causes it: and let them be filled with the Fruit of their own
doings.

FINIS.

