The Christian's Work and Reward.


Matthew. 11. 29, 30. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me. For my yoke is
easy and my burden is light. Revel. 2, 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. So run that ye may obtain.
Every man that striveth for ye mastery is temperate in all things: now they do
it to obtain a corrupible crown, but we an incorruptible. THE TRUTH OF
Christian Religion: IN SIX BOOKS.

Written in Latin BY HUGO GROTIUS. AND Now Translated into English, With the
Addition Of a SEVENTH BOOK.

By SIMON PATRICK Dean of PETERBURGH, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty, at
the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXX.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of BEDFORD Knight of the Most Noble Order
of the GARTER, etc.
My very Good Lord and Patron.
My Lord,
IAm so desirous to express my thankfulness to Your Lordship, as for all the
rest, so especially, for the last Favor you have done me, in contributing so
freely to the giving me some ease from that burden which grew too heavy for me;
that I make bold to prefix Your Lordships Name to this Book of a great Man in
another Nation; which I have Translated, and will live, I believe, as long as
Learning and Religion shall last among us.

Whereby your Lordship will see that I have only exchanged, not given over my
Labors; and that I intend not to be less diligent in my station, than when I
preached more: but rather study industriously to serve the Public good some
other way.

Which that I might promote, I have augmented this Work of Grotius, by the
Addition of another Book: not equal indeed in strength of reasoning, and
variety of reading to the foregoing; but in brevity and perspicuity, I hope,
nothing inferior: And, being a building relying, in great part, upon his
Foundations, will stand as firm and unshaken, as those which excel it in
beauty, and neatness of contrivance.

Such as it is, I humbly present it to your Lordship; and praying God that the
whole Work may have some effect for the reclaiming those that are irreligious;
or the settling those who are wavering and doubtful; and the exciting us all, to
hold fast the Truth, as it is in the Lord Jesus, I remain

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and obliged Servant. S. PATRICK.

A PREFACE Giving some Account of the Author, and of this Work.
THE Name of this Author has been so illustrious in these Western parts of the
World, that as there are few persons who read Books to whom it is not known; so
there needs no more to recommend this Work, and procure it entertainment, with
all those that have heard of him. In which he has faithfully laid out those
great Talents of reason and learning, wherewith God blessed him above most
other Men, in the defense of his most holy Religion. Which he has served very
much in other works of his; but in none more than this: because it is of such
General use, and so satisfactory, that it may alone merit those titles of
honor, which the Men of learning have bestowed on him; though they be as high,
as well can be devised.

There is nothing more ordinary in our Seldom, than vir Maximus, vir summus,
the greatest, the chief of Men; when he speaks of Grotius. Upon whom Salmasius
bestows the Title of (...), most excellent; and as if he were in a rapture when
he thought of him, cries out, (...), O most admirable, or wonderful, and
supereminentissime, most supereminent Grotius! to whom he wished much rather to
be like, than to be the most eminent person, for riches and honor, in the
whole World. I shall only add the character, which Baudius gave of him very
early, 1612. in a Scazon he made upon him; where he thus admires him.

Vir magne, vir mirande, vir sine exemplo. In English.

O thou great Man, thou wonderful Man, a Man without example. Yet as great a
Man as he was, he fell into disgrace in his own Country, and was thrown into
Prison (every body knows) in the Castle of Lupstein. In which strict
confinement he meditated many profitable Works, especially in things Sacred.
For, during his long Imprisonment, he found by a happy experience (as he writes
to Barlaeus a great while after) there was a wonderful power in the holy
Doctrines to support the mind, and to keep it erect against all calamities. And
therefore for his own solace, in the first place, (as he tells another Friend)
he set himself to write this little Book: which he intimates both in the
beginning and in the conclusion of it, was then composed, or rather hastily put
together, when his Mind was more free than his Body. And therefore (when after
several Editions he set it forth with Annotations, 1640.) he calls it in an
Epistle to Sarravius, Partum doloris quondam mei, etc. The child of my grief in
time past; now a Monument of my Thanksgiving to God. And as it was written
originally in his own Language; so it was in Verse; that it might be more
popular, and more easily committed to memory, by the rudes people: such as
Mariners, for whom he chiefly intended it. He tells us as much in the Preface;
but we may learn it more fully out of a Letter to him, on this subject, from
Inter Epist. Praest. vir. p. 630.
Episcopius. Who says, that the oftener he read over those Rythmes, the more he
was rapt both into love, and admiration of them. There being nothing in them
which was not most necessary to be known; and was able to incline the hardest
heart to embrace this holy Religion. For it was hard to determine, he says,
whether the Majesty of the things, or the clearness and sweetness of the
expressions were most to be commended: the Majesty of the matter not at all
hindering the clearness of the Verse, nor its being tied to Verse, at all
diluting or enervating the Majesty of the matter. Such a strife there was
between these two, with equal success; that it became a question, whether it
was more divine to be able to have a solid and distinct conception in his mind
of things so difficult and sublime; or, having conceived them to cloth them in
such comely and perspicuous words; that at the first glance every Reader
understood his great sense, though bound up and fettered within the laws of
verse.

Which way I suppose he chose, because it was the ancient manner of delivering
the most useful things; as he himself observes in his Prolegomena to Stobaeus
his Florilegium; which was written not long after this Book. Where, as a proof
of it, he alleges that of Homer; who says, Clytaemnestra, did not incline to
vice, till she had lost him, that was wont to sing to her. For precepts of
wisdom so taught are exceeding charming to the minds of Youth; being not only
more easily imprinted on the memory, but touching the affections more
powerfully, and to the very quick, than when otherwise spoken at large. And
therefore the public Laws were in the most ancient times thus written, as
Aristotle informs us: and that true Religion might be more easily conveyed into
Peoples minds, and fixed there, Apolinarius translated all the Books of Moses
(as Sozomen tells us, L. vi. cap. 18.) and the rest of the History of the
Bible, as far as the reign of Saul, into Heroic verse; in imitation of Homer's
Poems. Suidas says, he put the whole old Testament into such Verse; and it is
not improbable, for what he did upon the Psalms is still remaining.

If it were my present business, I could trace this way of Instruction down to
our own times; and through our own Nation: in which it has been very
effectual, as the story of Aldelmus sufficiently informs us. Who first brought
in the composition of Latin verse among the English, a little before Edward
the Confessors time; and by his excellent faculty in singing, wrought such
wonderful effects upon the People, for the civilizing of their manners, and for
their instruction in the duties of Religion: that Lanfrank by his own
Authority, thought good to make him a Saint.

The very same charms Grotius hoped would have the same effect upon the rude
Seamen of his Country: into whom he desired by his Rymes, not only to instill a
sense of piety; but to enable them to convey it to other Nations, with whom
they traded. And it seems this work was so much famed, that it moved the
curiosity of a great man in France (into which Grotius went after his wonderful
escape, 1621. out of that Prison, or rather Sepulcher, as he calls it in a
Letter to a Friend, wherein it was first projected) to ask him very often, what
the Contents of that Book were, which he had written in Dutch, upon this
subject of Religion. Whom he satisfied, by translating the sense of it into the
Latin Tongue, in the Year 1628. and addressing it unto that excellent Person,
who made the inquiry, viz. Hieronymus Bignonius. Who together with Grotius and
Salmasius, the famous Cardinal Richlieu (a notable Judge of Wits) was wont to
say Epist. Cl. Sarravii. p. 146.
, were the only Persons of that Age, whom he looked upon, as arrived to the
highest pitch of Learning.

In which Translation, he tells Sarravius, in a Letter to him that Year, he
should find, if nothing else, that he had at least endeavored brevity with
perspicuity. Which made it so acceptable every where, though no longer in Verse
but now in Prose, that in the Year 1632. I find (he tells Cordesius another
Learned Man in France Epist. ad Gallos, p. 331. 417.
) it was gone the third time to the Press; with some Additions. But not with so
many, it seems, as some desired; for there were those who wished he would have
answered a Book of Bodins, which seemed to impugn it. This he thought a
needless pains, for whatsoever it is, says he (in a Letter to the same person
Ib. page 407.
) that seems to shake the foundations I have laid (upon which the Christian
Faith relies) I have already obviated it; as far as is necessary to persuade a
Reader that is not pertinacious. As for those Opinions, which are commonly
received in Christianity, but without the exact knowledge of which, we may be
Christians; they do not belong to my Argument.

In the same Year also (1632) I find it Translated here into the English
Language. Which He himself afterward takes notice of, in a Letter to Gerrard
Vossius, 1638 Inter Epist. praestant. virorum, p. 748.
. Where he tells him, that there were (beside the English) two High Dutch
Translations of this Book; one French; and that the English Embassador's
Chaplain was turning it into Greek; and the Romanists themselves into the
Persian Tongue: that by God's blessing it might convert the Mahometans.

None of these could see any Socinianism (or other dangerous heresy) in it;
which some of the duller sort of learned Men, were forward to charge it with
all: because he does not directly prove in this Book the Doctrine of the
blessed Trinity. Of which he gives this account in the forenamed Letter; that
he heard a great Man (who was Franc. Junius, as I take it) condemn du Plessis,
and others, for endeavoring to prove that Mystery by reasons fetched from
Nature, and by Platonical Testimonies; (sometimes not very pertinent) which
ought not to came into a Disputation with Atheists, Pagans, Jews, and
Mahometans: who must all be first drawn to believe the holy Scriptures; that
from thence they may learn such things, as cannot be known, but by Divine
Revelation.

This was the Reason he meddled not with the Doctrine of the Trinity directly:
But if any body doubted of his Orthodoxy in this Point, They might see (he
tells him in another Letter) what his opinion was, in his Poems then newly come
forth; and the larger explication of it he reserved to his Notes.

And for the same cause he did not distinctly treat of some other things;
particularly about the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Satisfaction:
for which omission this Book was blamed, as Sarravius writes to him, by some
who had nothing else to do, but to find fault with the labors of others. To
which Grotius returned such an Answer, as not only gave him, he tells us, most
full satisfaction, in those two Points; but enabled him to silence those
accusers. He does not intimate indeed what that reply was; but as to the former
Point it is apparent from his Annotations, that he believed our Savior to be
indeed God of God. And that passage in the Conclusion of the xxi. Section of
the fifth Book, concerning the Messiah being called in the holy Scriptures by
the Name of God and Lord, I should have translated thus -- The Messiah is
called by that august Name of God Jehovah, and also of Lord, viz. ELOHIM and
ADONAI. For so he explains himself, I have since taken notice, in his
Annotations; and adds this observation, that the Talmud in Taanith says, that
when the time shall come, spoken of xxv. Isa. 8, 9. (i. e. of the Messiah)
Jehovah shall be shown, as we say, with the finger: that is, Men shall be able
to point others to him, saying, Lo there is Jehovah.

And as for the other thing, it is possible his Answer might be to the same
purpose with what he writ to Epist. praestant. Viror. p. 747.
Vossius. In which he tells him, that if any one desired to know (as he had
already signified in a Letter, to one that said he was accused of Socinianism)
what his opinion was in the business of Christ's satisfaction, even since
Crellius had written against him; it would appear plainly enough out of his
Translation of the LIII. of Isaiah, in his Disputation against the Jews: (which
you may find here in the V. Book, Sect. 19.) and from hence also that in the
Conclusion of this Work of the Truth of Christian Religion, he does not
interpret those words, i. Hebr. 3. (...) in the present tense, making a
purgation, or expiating our sins, as Socinus does; but in the past time
expiatis peccatis nostris, having expiated, or purged away our sins. How they
come to be otherwise Translated in his Annotations on that place, put forth
since his death, I can give no Account.

And in like manner, I suppose, he satisfied another doubt about a passage in
this Book, which Sarravius desired him to resolve; though I cannot find his
Answer to it: For he gives a punctual Answer afterward to a Question propounded
by a Minister of Rouen; who asked him, where he had that of Rabbi Nechumias, who
made that public Declaration (mentioned in the Fifth Book, Sect. 14.)
concerning the appearing of Christ, 50. Years before our Savior; to this
effect: That the time which Daniel had prefixed for the coming of the Messiah,
could not be prolonged above those Fifty Years. Which he tells Sarravius Epist.
Claud. Sarrav. p. 52.
is to be found in the Talmud, in the Title Sanhedrin (as he remembered) and he
thought also in Abenada upon Daniel.

This was in the Year 1640. when he first put out this Book with Annotations;
containing the Testimonies of those Authors, in words at length; whom he had
alleged: but had forgotten, it seems, to set down where he had this passage of
Rabbi Nechumias. Nor is it now to be found among the Annotations; and therefore
they that next Print the Book so enlarged, will do well to supply it from
hence, out of Sarravius. Who was the first Person Epist. ad Gallos, p. 460.
to whom he made a present of it, after it came out, with the Addition of
Testimonies: desiring to be admonished by him, if, in the midst of much
business, any thing had escaped him, which was less exactly spoken; while he
studied to serve the Christian cause.

To which He replies immediately, That as he could not but esteem it, a very
great honor to be acknowledged and beloved by the Coryphaeus of all Learning,
both Sacred and profane; so he esteemed this as a Golden Book, wherein Grotius
had joined Learning together with Piety: consulting, that is, the Disease of
the Age; to whose Palate, Piety (of it self) had little savor. And, as for the
immense collection of Testimonies then added, he made it appear by them, that
in all his studies the glory of Christ had always been before his eyes: his holy
diligence and industry having discovered so many, and such things, which had
escaped the sagacious eyes of others.

And not long after he propounded some doubts, according to his own desire; and
mentioned some exceptions, (as was noted before) which some, who had no good
will to him, took at this Golden Book, as he again calls it: and
notwithstanding the harsh censures of some Learned Men, this excellent Person
still persisted in his high esteem of the worth of this Author; and believed
all unprejudiced Men would ever look upon him with great Veneration. So he
tells Salmasius, Five Years after Epist. Claud. Sarrav. p. 146.
(1645) Whether they will or no, Grotius will always be accounted a great Man,
by you and me; and by all that love Equity and Goodness: for he is full of
envy, who denies due praises to such a Hero. And a little while after, hearing
of the news of his death, he most sadly bewails it, Ib. p. 171.
as the extinction of the bright Star of that Age; whose Name would be great as
long as either Books or Learning were in honor. And while he had breath, he
says, he would glory in this, that he once had familiar acquaintance with a
Man, who was re and nomine Magnus, no less great indeed than his Name imported.

This affection he seems to have carried with him to his Grave, and honored
his Memory at such a rate, that in the Year 1648. he still says, he was proud
of the Friendship of that Man; by whom to have been known was glorious, and who
would be reverenced in all future Ages. In conclusion he calls him that Blessed
Soul: even after he himself had pronounced this sentence against Grotius Ib. p.
196.
, that he favored the Papists; and not only yielded too much to them in his
later Writings; but expressed too much disaffection to the reformed in those
Countries. All this he heartily passed over with this censure Ib. p. 146.
He is the best Man who has fewest faults; for there is no body to be found
without some.

And the same favorable judgment; I suppose, all serious and considering men,
will pass upon him now; and not be hindered by any prejudices, which may have
been taken up against him among our selves, from reaping that benefit which
they may receive by reading this excellent Book. Which I present again to the
view of the English World, and have in a manner made a new Translation of it:
the former, which came out near 50. Years ago, being so defective; that there
were few Paragraphs in it, which stood not in need of some amendment, and in a
great number the sense was quite mistaken.

Who the Translator was, I am ignorant; but it is certain, he either did not
understand the Latin Tongue, or did not attend to what he was about, as
appears by innumerable Instances. But one may suffice, in the Third Book, Sect.
3. where he Translates altera Petri, the one Epistle of Peter. Besides there is
plain Arianism in his Translation, (Book V. Sect. 21.) for he says the Son was
not uncreate as the Father is; when in Grotius the words are, the Son is not
ingenitus unbegotten as the Father is.

Yet where the Translation was passable, I have let it go as it was; that I
might not seem to be too curious a Censurer of other Men's labors. And I have
added such passages as were not there; the Book it self having been enlarged by
Grotius, since that old English Translation. I know not how necessary it might
be at that time, when it was first put into our Language; but now I think
nothing can be more: And to make it of larger use, I have added also a Seventh
Book of my own. In which, out of those Principles chiefly, which Grotius builds
upon in his Six Books, I have shown that Christian Religion has suffered very
much by the Church of Rome; and that we need not go thither to be assured of
the Truth of that Religion: but shall be better informed in our own Church by
the Holy Scriptures, and such works as these.

I have not quoted all my Authors, no more than Grotius did in the first
Editions of his Book. And it would have made the Work also too long (I thought)
to Translate his Testimonies, and add the like of my own. Nor would it have
been so useful to common Readers; who do but perplex themselves in abundance of
quotations, and must, after all, believe that we report them truly: and
therefore may as well believe us when we say; that they are ready at hand to
attest every thing, which is here affirmed from their Authority.

Since the finishing of this little Labor, I was informed by a Friend, that
Mr. Clement Barksdale had translated part of this Work into English: and upon
search, I found the three first Books among some other Discourses, Printed
1669. And I am told further by another Friend, that he has lately added
(though I have not seen it) the three last Books. Which if I had known sooner,
it might have saved me, I believe, most, if not all, of the pains I have taken.
But I was perfectly ignorant of it; as I perceive he was of any former
Translation, before his. For in that Edition of his Discourses, where he has
added the Third Book of this Work, concerning the Authority of the Scriptures,
he says, it had not been till then in English.

But it will do no hurt, though the same good thing be reached out to us, by
more hands than one: and so I leave it to Gods Blessing, upon the Readers
serious perusal.

S. P.

A CHRISTIAN PRAYER FOR THE Adversaries of true Religion.
O Merciful God, who have made all Men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live; Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, and take from
them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word: And so fetch
them home, blessed Lord, to thy Flock, that they may be saved among the remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one Fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ
our Lord; who lives and reigns with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, one God,
World without end.

Amen.
To the Honorable Hieronymus Bignonius, The KING'S Advocate in the Supreme
Court of PARIS.
Sir,
YOU are wont very often to ask me, who am sensible how highly you have
deserved of your Country, of learning, and (if you will permit me to add that)
of me also; what the Argument of those Books is, which I wrote in my own
Country Language, in the behalf of Christian Religion. Nor do I wonder you
should make such a question; for you who have read, and that with so great
judgment, all that is worth the reading; cannot be ignorant, what pains has
been already taken in this matter: by Raymundus Sebundus, with Philosophical
subtilty; by Ludovicus Vices, with variety of Dialogues; but especially by your
Mornay, with no less Learning than Eloquence. For which cause it may seem more
profitable to translate some of them, into the vulgar Tongue; than to begin a
new Work upon this subject.

But what other men will judge of this matter I know not; my hope is that before
you, Sir, who are so fair and easy a Judge, I may be absolved, if I say; that
having read not only those Authors, but what the Jews have written for the old
Judaical, and Christians for our Religion; I thought good also to use my own
judgment, such as it is, and to allow that freedom to my mind, which, when I
wrote it, was denied to my body. For I thought that Truth was not to be
contended for, but only with truth; and with such truth also as I approved in
my own mind: knowing it would be but a vain labor to go about to persuade
others of that, which I had not first persuaded my self to believe.

Omitting therefore such arguments, as seemed to me to have little weight in
them; and the authority of such Books, as I either knew or suspected to be
counterfeit; I selected those, both out of the ancient and modern times, which
appeared to me to have the greatest force in them. And what things I fully
assented unto, those I both cast into an orderly method, and expressed in as
popular a manner as I could invent; and likewise included in verse, that they
might be the better committed to memory.

For my intention was to do some good service hereby to all my Countrymen;
especially to seafaring men: that in their long Voyages, wherein they have
nothing to do, they might lay out their time and employ it; rather than, as too
many do, lose and mispend it.

Wherefore, taking my rise from the commendation of our Nation, which for
diligent skill in Navigation much excels the rest, I stirred them up to use
this Art, as a Divine benefit: not merely for their own gain, but for the
propagation of the true, that is, the Christian Religion. For they would
neither want matter for such endeavors, when in their long Voyages they
commonly met, either with Pagans, as in China and Guinea; or with Mahometans,
as under the Turkish Empire, the Persian and the Africans; or with Jews, who as
they are now professed enemies of Christians, so are dispersed through the
greatest part of the World: and there would always be store of impious men, who
are ready upon occasion to vent the Poison, which for fear they keep concealed.
Against which mischiefs I wished that our Countrymen might be sufficiently
armed: and that they who are more ingenious than others, would use their utmost
endeavors to confute Errors; and the rest would at least be so cautious, as
not to be overcome by them.

And that I might show Religion is no frivolous thing, I begin, in the first
Book, at the ground or foundation thereof; which is, that there is a God. Now
that I attempt to prove after this manner.

The First Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. That there is a GOD.
THat there are some things which had a beginning, is clear to common sense,
and by the confession of all: howbeit those things were not causes to
themselves of their own being. For that which is not cannot produce any thing,
neither had it power to be before it was; therefore it follows, that the said
things had their beginning from some other thing different from themselves:
Which may be averred not only of such things as now we see, or ever have
beheld, but of such also as gave original unto these, and so upward until we
come to some prime cause which never began to be, and which (as we say) has
its existence by necessity, and not after any contingent manner: And this, what
ever it be, (whereof by and by we shall speak) is that which is meant by Divine
Power or God head.

Another reason to prove that there is some such divine Majesty, is taken from
the most manifest consent of all Nations, such I mean as have not utterly lost
the light of reason and good manners; and become altogether wild and savage.
For since those things which proceed from Man's pleasure and appointment, are
neither the same among all Men, and are often subject to change; and yet there
is no place where this notion is not found, and it is not changed by the
alterations of times (as Aristotle himself notes, who was not over credulous in
such matters) we must assign some cause of it, that extends it self to all
Mankind. Which can be no other, than either an Oracle of God himself, or a
Tradition derived from the first Parents of Mankind. The former of which if we
admit, the thing in question is granted; and if we affirm the latter, there can
no good reason be given, why we should believe those first Parents did deliver
a falsehood, to all their Posterity, in a matter of the greatest moment.

Moreover, whether we consider those parts of the World which were anciently
known, or those that are lately found out, wheresoever there is (as we have
said) any relics of humanity, there certainly is this truth acknowledged, as
well by such Heathens as have any ingenuity and wisdom, as also by those that
are of a more dull and stupid disposition: The former whereof questionless
could not all be deceived; neither is it likely that these later so silly and
simple should any way devise how to deceive one another.

Neither let any Man here object, that there have been some in many Ages, who
have either believed there is no God; or professed they did not believe it: For
both the small number of them, and the Universal rejection of their opinion, as
soon as their Arguments were understood; make it appear, that it did not
proceed from the use of right reason, which is common to all Men; but either
from the affectation of novelty (such as was in him that would needs maintain
the Snow to be black) or from a corrupt mind, like as Meats to a distempered
Palate, taste quite otherwise than indeed they are. Especially since both
History and other Writings teach us, that the honester any man was, the more
diligently did he preserve the knowledge of God. And further, that this
departure from so anciently a received opinion, chiefly proceeds from the
naughty disposition of those, whose interest it is that there should be no God;
that is, no Judge of humane actions, appears even from hence: that whatsoever
they put in the room thereof; whether a succession of several kinds of things,
without any beginning; or a concourse of atoms; or any thing else whatsoever;
it has not less, if not greater, difficulties, nor is at all more credible (as
is manifest to any Man, that vouchsafes an ordinary attention to the matter)
than that opinion which is already received.

As for that which some pretend, that they cannot believe there is a God,
because they cannot see him; if they see any thing, they cannot but see how
unworthy this thought is of a Man, who does but believe that he has a mind;
which he never saw, no more than he does the essence of God. Nor because we
cannot comprehend the Nature of God by our understanding, ought we therefore to
deny there is any such Nature: for this is proper to every inferior creature,
not to be able to comprehend those Beings which are superior, and more
excellent than it self. The Beasts cannot conceive what Man is, much less can
they know after what manner Men institute and govern Commonwealths, measure
the Stars, and sail upon the Sea; for all these things are out of their reach.
From which very thing, Man, who is raised, and that not of himself, by the
nobility of his nature, above the Beasts, ought to infer; that that being by
whom he is made superior to Beasts, is no less superior to him, than he
himself to the Beasts; and that therefore there is some Nature, which, as far
more excellent, transcends his comprehension.

SECT. II. That there is but one GOD.
WE having evinced that there is a God, it follows that we speak of his
Attributes. The first whereof is this, that there are not more Gods, but one
God. This is gathered from hence, that God (as was said before) is what He is
necessarily, and of Himself. Now whatsoever is necessarily, or of it self, is
considered not in its general notion, but as actually in being. Now things
actually in being are particular. But if you suppose more Gods, you cannot find
a reason in each of them, why they should necessarily be; nor why two rather
than three, or ten rather than five should be believed.

Besides, the multiplication of those particular things that are of the same
nature, proceeds from the exuberancy and fruitfulness of the causes whence such
things more or less are generated: but of God there is neither beginning nor
any cause.

Furthermore, in all particular things, there are certain special and
particular properties whereby the same things are severally did inguished: Now
to make such a distinction in God, is altogether needless, since that he is
most necessary and simple by nature. Neither can any Man perceive any signs or
tokens of the plurality of Gods. For this universal Sphere or circumference
which we behold, makes up but one complete World, wherein there is one most
beautiful and glorious Sun: Likewise in every Man, the little world, there is
but one special governing part, to wit, his soul or mind. Besides, if we should
suppose two Gods, or more, freely acting and willing, what they please, they
might will contrary things; and then one of them might be hindered by the other,
from effecting what he had a mind to have done. But to say that God can be
hindered in what He designs, is unworthy of his Majesty.

SECT. III. That all Perfection is in GOD.
THat we may know the rest of God's Attributes, let it be considered; that
whatsoever is wont to be understood by the Name of Perfection (which word we
must be content to use, since our Language furnishes us with no better, to
express the Greek (...)) is in God, may be thus proved. What perfection soever
there is in things, it either had a beginning; or had no beginning. That which
had no beginning, is the perfection of God: and that which had a beginning, of
necessity must have something, that gave it such beginning. And since nothing
among all the things that have a being, is made of nothing; it follows that
those perfections which appear to be in any effects, were the reason why the
cause thereof could produce any thing accordingly; and consequently are all in
the first cause. Neither must it be here imagined, that the first cause can
afterward be deprived of its perfection; either by some other thing different
from it self, because that which is eternal has no dependence upon any other
thing, neither can be liable and subject unto their actions; or of it self,
because every Nature desires its own perfection.

SECT. IV. GOD is Infinite.
AND we may add further, that these perfections which are in God, are in him
after an eminent and infinite manner; for the nature of every thing is finite
and limited, either for that the cause whence it proceeded has communicated
such a measure or degree of existence, and no more thereunto, or for that the
same nature was not capable of any further perfection; Now there is no nature
that does communicate any thing of its own unto God, neither is he capable of
ought that any other thing can impart; being (as before we said) altogether
absolute, and necessary of himself.

SECT. V. That God is eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, and absolutely good.
AGain, forasmuch as all things that have life, are said to be more perfect
than those without life; and those which have power of acting, than those which
want it; and those endued with understanding superior to such creatures as
lack it; and those which are good better than those that come short in
goodness; it follows from that which has been spoken, that all those
attributes are in God, and that after an infinite manner. Therefore is he
infinite in life, that is, eternal; infinite power, that is, omnipotent; So
likewise is he omniscient, and altogether good without any exception.

SECT. VI. That God is the Author and cause of all things.
FUrther more, it follows from that which has been spoken, that what things
soever subsist, the same have the original of their being from God: for we have
proved that that which is necessary of it self, can be but one; whence we
collect that all other things besides this had their original from somewhat
different from themselves.

Now such things as have their beginning from another, we have seen before how
that either in themselves or in their causes, they proceeded from him which had
no beginning, that is, from God.

Neither is this manifest by reason only, but also after some sort by very
sense: for if we consider the wonderful frame and fashion of Man's body, both
within and without, and how that each part and parcel thereof has its proper
use without the study or industry of his Parents, and yet with such art that
the most accomplished Philosophers and Physicians could never sufficiently
admire it; this verily shows the Author of Nature to be a most excellent Mind:
concerning which matter Galen has written well, especially where he speaks of
the use of the eye, and of the hand. Yea more, the very bodies of mute beasts
do testify the same: for their parts are not framed and composed by the power
and virtue of the matter whereof they consist, but by some superior and higher
cause destinating them to a certain end.

Neither is this plain by man and beasts alone, but also by plants and herbs,
as has accurately been observed by some Philosophers. This further is
excellently noted by Strabo, concerning the situation of the waters, which, if
we consider the quality of their matter, ought to be placed in the middle
between the earth and the air, whereas they are now included and dispersed
within the earth, to the end they might be no hinderance, either to the
fruitfulness of the ground, or to the life of Man. Now to propose that, or any
other end, to any action, is the peculiar property of an understanding nature.
Neither are all things only ordained for their peculiar ends, but also for the
good and benefit of the whole Universe, as appears particularly in the water
but now mentioned, which against its own proper nature is moved upward, lest by
the interposition of a vacuity there should be a gap in the Universe: which is
so framed, that by the continued cohesion of its parts, it sustains and upholds
it self. Now it cannot possibly be, that this common end should be thus
intended, together with an inclination in things thereunto, but by the power
and purpose of some intelligent nature, whereunto the whole Universe is in
subjection. Moreover amongst the beasts there are certain actions observed to
be so regular and orderly done, that it is manifest enough they proceed from
some kind of reason; as is plain in Pismires and especially in Bees, and
likewise in other creatures, which before they make any trial do naturally
eschew such things as are hurtful, and seek after such things as are profitable
for them. Now that this instinct or inclination of finding and judging things,
is not in them by their own power, it is clear; for that they do always operate
after the same manner, neither have they any virtue or efficacy at all to the
doing other things which are no more weighty: wherefore they must needs receive
their power from some reasonable external Agent, which directs them or imprints
in them such efficacy as they have, and this reasonable and intelligent Agent,
is no other than God himself.

In the next place consider we the Stars of Heaven, and amongst the rest, as
most eminent, the Sun and the Moon, both which for the making the earth
fruitful, and preserving living Creatures in their health and vigor, do so
seasonably perform their course of motion, that a better cannot be devised. For
when otherwise their motion through the Equator had been much more simple, we
see that they have another motion by an oblique Circle, to the end, the benefit
of their favorable aspects might be communicated to more parts of the earth.

Now as the earth is ordained for the use and benefit of living Creatures, so
are all terrestrial things appointed chiefly for the service of man, who by his
wit and reason can subdue the most furious creature among them; whence the very
Stoics did collect, that the World was made for Man's sake.

Howbeit, since it exceeds the sphere of humane power, to bring the heavenly
bodies in subjection to him; neither is it to be imagined that they will ever
submit themselves to man of their own accord; it follows therefore that there
is some superior mind or spirit, by whole sole appointment those fair and
glorious bodies do perpetual service unto man, though he be placed far below
them; which same mind is no other than the framer of the stars, even the Maker
of the whole World. Also the motions of these stars which are said to be
Excentrical and Epicyclical (i. e. in a Circle within the Orb of another Star)
do plainly show, not the power of matter, but the appointment of a free Agent.
The same do the Positions of the Stars testify, some in this part, others in
the other part of Heaven: together with the so unequal form of the Earth, and
of the Seas. Nor can we refer it to any thing else, that the Stars move this,
rather than another way. The most perfect form also and figure of the World,
viz. roundness; as also the parts thereof, shut up as it were in the bosom of
the Heavens, and disposed with a mavelous order, do all expressly declare,
that they were not tumbled together, or conjoined as they are, by chance, but
wisely ordained by such an understanding as is endued with super-eminent
excellency. For what Ninny is there so sottish, as to expect any thing so
accurate and exact from chance? He might as well believe that Stones and Timber
got casually together, and put themselves into the form of a House: or that out
of Letters shuffled carelessly as it happened, there came forth an excellent Poem.
A thing so unlikely, that even a few Geometrical figures espied on the
Seashore, gave the beholder just ground to argue, that some man had been
there; it being evident enough that such things could not proceed from mere
chance.

Furthermore, that Mankind was not from all Eternity, but at a certain time had
a common beginning, may be manifested among other things from the progress of
Arts and Sciences; yea, by the very ground whereupon we tread, which was
anciently rude and untilled, but afterward became possessed with Inhabitants:
which also the Language spoken in Islands, derived from adjacent Countries,
does witness. The same is apparent by certain ordinances, so generally received
amongst Men, that the institution thereof may not be thought to have proceeded
so much from the instinct of nature, or evident deductions of reason, as from
perpetual and constant tradition, scarce interrupted in a few places, either by
the malice or misery of Man: such was that of killing Beasts in Sacrifice, used
in former times; and such also are now the modesty and shamefastness about
venereal things, the solemnities of Marriages, and the abhorrence of all
incestuous Embraces.

SECT. VII. Answer to that Objection concerning the cause of evil.
NEither ought we to doubt of that which has been spoken, because we see many
evil things come to pass; the source and cause whereof cannot be ascribed unto
God, who (as before has been shown) is good, after the most perfect and
absolute degree of Goodness. For when we said that God was the author and cause
of all things, we added withal that he was the cause of such things as really
do subsist: And no absurdity (that I see) will follow, if we affirm that those
things which have true and real existence, are the causes of some certain
accidents, as namely of actions, or the like. The Almighty (we know) created
both Man, and those more sublime Minds, the Angels, endued with liberty of
action; which liberty in it self is not sinful, yet by its power some sins may
be committed. Now to make God the author of these evils, which are morally
evil, is no better than blasphemy: howbeit there are other kind of evils, so
called because they afflict some person with grief or loss, and these we may
affirm to be inflicted by God for the reformation and amendment of some sinner,
or for punishment answerable to an offense, which to say is no impiety, since
that such evils have nothing in them contrary to goodness, but rather they
proceed from goodness it self; like a bitter potion from a good Physician.

SECT. VIII. Against the Opinion of two Principles or causes of things.
HEre by the way, it may be noted, that the opinion of those Men is to be
abandoned and avoided, which make two efficient causes, the one good, and the
other evil: for from two Principles opposite to each other, there may follow
the ruin and destruction, but in no wise a well ordered composition of things.
Neither is this to pass for truth, to wit, that as there is something good of
it self, so likewise there must needs be something absolutely evil in it self;
seeing that evil is a certain defect, which cannot be but in a thing that has
existence, which very having of existence, or being is good.

SECT. IX. That God does govern the whole World.
MOreover that this whole Universe is governed by the providence of God, is
evident, for that not only men, which have right reason and understanding, but
also the fowls, and beasts both wild and tame, which have in them some thing
correspondent to reason, do bear a kind of providence, or respectful care over
the issue which they bring forth. Which perfection, since it is a part of
goodness, must needs be attributed to God; and so much the rather, because he
is both omniscient and omnipotent, so that he can no way be ignorant of such
things as are done, or to be done; and can easily direct and order the same as
he pleases. To which also belongs that which we have spoken before, concerning
the moving of things contrary to their proper nature, to serve an Universal end.

SECT. X. Yea, sublunary things.
AND that they are much out of the way, who shut up this providence within the
celestial Orbs, and would have it descend no lower than the Moon, is apparent;
both from the reason now mentioned, whose force extends to all created things;
and also from hence, that the course of the Stars, as the best Philosophers
acknowledge, and experience sufficiently demonstrates, are ordained for the use
of Man. Now it stands but with equity that that Creature should be more
regarded for whose sake another is ordained, than that which is appointed for
another use.

Neither are they less erroneous that say this providence is extended unto
universal things only, and not to particulars; for if they will have God to be
ignorant of particular things, as some of them have professed, then verily God
could not understand himself; neither should he be infinite in knowledge, as we
have proved him before to be, if it be not extended unto every thing. But then,
if God do know these things, why can he not also have care of them? especially
since that particulars, as they are particulars, are appointed for some certain
end, both special and general: And the common essences of things, which by the
confession of the said Authors are preserved by God, cannot subsist but in
their singulars; So that if these singulars, being forsaken by Divine
providence, may perish, then may the whole kinds likewise.

SECT. XI. This is further proved by the preservation of Empires.
ANother forcible Argument of Divine providence particularly over humane
affairs, both Philosophers and Historians acknowledge in the preservation of
Commonwealths: first in general, for that wheresoever the course and order of
ruling and obeying is once admitted, the same always continues there: Then
also, oftentimes in particular, it is evident by the long continuation of this
or that very form of government through many ages, as of a Monarchy with the
Assyrians, Egyptians, and Franks; of an Aristocracy with the Venetians, and
the like. For although Man's wisdom and policy have some stroke in point of
governmeut; yet if we rightly consider the multitude of wicked men, and the
harms that may proceed from without, and the changes that are naturally
incident to humane affairs, it may seem impossible for any State so long to
subsist, unless it were upheld by a constant particular care, and by the power
of a Divine hand. Which is more evidently seen, when it pleases God to change
Empires, and translate them from one to another. For to those Instruments, whom
He thinks good to use in that business, as a thing destined by himself (suppose
Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar the Dictator, Cingi among the Tartars, Namcaa among
the Chinese) all things whatsoever, even those which do not depend on humane
prudence, succeed more prosperously, beyond their own wishes, than is suitable
to the usual variety in humane casualties. Which strange correspondence, and
combination, or conspiring, as we may call it, of events to a certain end, is a
manifest token of a provident direction. Like as at Dice, if a Man now and then
throw a lucky cast, which wins all, it may be no more than a chance: but if he
throw the very same an hundred times, there is no body, who will not conclude,
that this proceeds from some extraordinary Art.

SECT. XII. And by Miracles.
ANother most certain proof of God's providence, may be taken from those
miracles and prophecies which are recorded in Histories: Where though many
fabulous things be related in that kind, yet those that are testified by
sufficient Witnesses living in the time when they came to pass; such I mean as
were defective neither in judgment nor in honesty, are not to be despised as
altogether impossible. For in as much as God is both omnipotent and omniscient,
what can hinder him from signifying what he knows, or what he pleases to do;
and that even beyond the common course of nature, which being made and ordained
by him, becomes subject unto him by the title of creation? Now if any do object
that such things might have been done by subordinate powers and minds inferior
to God; to them we answer, that so much may be granted indeed: but yet this
makes way, that the same may the more easily be credited of God, who is to be
thought either to work by the mediation of those Agents, or else out of his
wisdom to permit them when they bring to pass any such thing. For in well
ordered Kingdoms there is nothing done against the Statutes and common Laws but
by the arbitrament or permission of the Supreme Governors.

SECT. XIII. Specially among the Jews, whereunto credit may be given by reason
of the long continuance of their Religion.
NOW that there have indeed been some miracles seen, though the credit of other
Histories should be questionable, yet it is manifest enough in the Jewish
Religion: which albeit, it has long been destitute of all humane helps, yea,
exposed to contempt and scorn; yet for all that, has still continued almost in
all the climates and parts of the World even unto this day; whereas all other
Religions (saving the Christian, which is the perfection, as it were, of the
Jewish) have either vanished, as soon as the Imperial Power and Authority was
withdrawn whereby they were supported, as all the Paganish: or else are still
perpetually upheld by the same power and authority, as Mahometism. Now if it be
demanded why the Jewish Religion has taken such deep root in the hearts of the
Hebrews, as that it cannot thence be eradicated? no better reason can be given
or conceived than this; namely, that those Jews that are now alive did from
their Parents, as those Parents from their Progenitors, and so upward until the
times of Moses and Joshua, receive those miracles mentioned in Scripture, by
certain and constant Tradition, which miracles were done chiefly at the
departing out of Egypt, and in their journey through the Wilderness, and
entrance into the Land of Canaan, whereof their Ancestors were then
eyewitnesses. Nor is it at all credible, that it could otherwise have come to
pass, that a People who were sufficiently stiff-necked, and of a stubborn
disposition, should take upon them a Law burdened with so many Rites; or that
wise Men out of the many marks of Religion, which humane reason could have
invented, should choose Circumcision: which could not be received without very
great pain; nor retained without the derision of all strangers; and had nothing
in it to recommend it, save only this; that God was its Author.

SECT. XIV. Also by the truth and antiquity of Moses his story.
BEsides, The writings of Moses, wherein those miracles are recorded to
posterity, do gain the greatest credit thereunto, not only because it was
always a settled opinion and constant report amongst the Hebrews, that this same
Moses was commended by the Oracle of God to be a Leader of the People, but also
because it is manifest enough, that he neither affected his own glory, nor
desired their riches; forasmuch as himself reveals his own faults and
delinquencies, which he might have concealed; and also he assigned the dignity
of his Kingdom and Priesthood unto strangers, whence his own Posterity was
brought to the common condition of Levites. By all which it appears, that he
had no reason to forge untruths; Neither does he use any dissembling or
alluring language, such as commonly colors over a lie, but he speaks after a
plain ingenuous manner, according to the quality of the thing he treats of.

Add hereunto the undoubted antiquity of the Books of Moses, to which no other
writings are therein comparable: An argument whereof is, for that the Grecians
(from whom all kinds of learning were derived to other Heathens) do confess
they received their very Letters from others; which Letters of theirs have no
other order, or name, or ancient form than that of the Syriac or Hebrew Tongue:
as also for that the most ancient Grecian Laws, whence the Romans collected
theirs, had their Original from the Laws of Moses.

SECT. XV. And by the Testimony of many Gentiles.
MOREOVER besides these, there are many testimonies of such as were aliens from
the Jewish Religion, which declare that the most ancient reports which passed
for truth among all Nations, were agreeable to what Moses has related in his
Writings. Thus what things he related concerning the beginning of the World,
the same are found also recorded in the most ancient Histories of the
Phoenicians, which are collected by Sancuniathon, and translated by Philo
Byblius; and partly also found amongst the Indians and Egyptians: Hence it is
that in Linus, Hesiod, and many of the Grecians, mention is made of a Chaos,
which some have intimated by the name of an Egg: also of the making of living
creatures, and last of all of Man according to a Divine Image; and of Man's
dominion over other creatures; all which may be read in sundry Authors, and at
last in Ovid, who transcribed them out of the Greek Writers. That all things
were made by the Word of God, was confessed even by Epicharmus and the
Platonicks, and before them by a most ancient Writer (not of those Hymns, which
now go under that name, but) of those Verses which antiquity called Orphean
verses; not because they had Orpheus for their Author, but because they
summarily comprised his Doctrine. Empedocles acknowledged that the Sun was not
the primitive light, but a fit receptacle of light. Aratus and Catullus think
that above the sphere or orb of the stars there is a Divine habitation, wherein
Homer imagined there was perpetual light.

THAT of all things God was the most ancient, because not begotten; the World
most beautiful, because the work of GOD: and that darkness was before the
light, were all the doctrines of Thales out of the ancient Learning. The last
point whereof is found in Orpheus and Hesiod; whereupon the Gentiles that are
commonly superstitious in following old fashions and customs, do number their
particular times by nights, not by days. It was the opinion of Athenagoras that
all things were ordered and disposed by the highest intelligence; of Aratus,
that the Stars were made by God; and after the Grecians, of Virgil, that life
was infused into things by the Spirit of God: and that Man was formed of Clay,
is delivered by Hesiod, Homer, and Callimachus: Lastly, Maximus Tyrius asfirms,
that by the common consent of Nations, it is agreed, there is but one Supreme
God, which is the cause of all things. And the memory of the finishing the
Creation in seven days space, was preserved, not only among the Greeks and
Italians, by the honor they gave to the Seventh day (as we learn out of
Josephus, Philo, Tibullus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Lucian) but among the
Gauls and Indians, who all distinguished their time, by Weeks, i. e. seven
days; as we are taught by Philostratus, Dion Cassius, Justin Martyr; and the
most ancient Names of the days of the Week.

Moreover, the Egyptians taught, that Man at the beginning led his life in all
simplicity, being naked in his body, and not ashamed; whence came the Poets
fiction of the golden age, which was famous even amongst the Indians, as Strabo
relates: The History of Adam and Eve, the Tree, the Serpent was extant, as
Maimonides tells us, among the Idolatrous Indians in his time: And that the
same is found among the Pagans of Pegu, and the Philippin Islands, People of
the same India, the name of Adam also among the Brachmans, and the account of
6000. Years being passed since the World was made, among those of Siam; we have
witnesses of our own age which assure us.

AND that the lives of those who succeeded the first Men, were prolonged to
near a Thousand Years, is reported by Berosus in his Chaldaicks, Manethos in
his Aegypticks, Hiromus in his Phoenician records, Hestiaeus, Hecataeus,
Hellanicus in the account they have left of the Grecian affairs, and among the
Poets by Hesiod. Which is the less incredible, when we consider, what is
reported in the Histories of very many Nations (particularly by Pausanius, and
Philostratus among the Greeks, and Pliny among the Romans) the bodies of Men
were anciently far larger than they are now; as was found upon the opening of
some of their Sepulchers.

Catullus also, after very many Greeks, reports, that heavenly visions appeared
unto Men before such time, as they by the multitude and heinousness of their
crimes did deprive themselves of that sacred acquaintance and familiarity with
God, and his ministering Spirits. The wild life of the Giants which Moses
mentions, may be read almost every where in the Greek, and in some Latin
Authors, It Is to be noted of Noah's Flood, that in its History the memory of
almost all Nations ends; even of such Nations as were unknown till of late
Years: whereupon Varro called all the space before, the hid or unknown time.
But those things we find wrapped up in the licentious fables of the Poets, are
truly, that is agreeable to Moses, delivered by most ancient Writers, such are
Berosus of the Chaldees, Abydenus of the Assyrians, who mentions the sending
out of a Dove; as also Plutarch of the Grecians; and Lucian, who says, that at
Hieropolis in Syria, there is to be seen a most ancient History both of Noah's
Ark, and of those that were saved therein, both Men and Beasts: The same
History was extant also in Molo, and in Nicolaus Damascenus: the latter of
which had also the Name of the Ark; which is found likewise in Deucalion's
History in Apollodorus. To which we may add, that in several parts of America,
as in Cuba, Mechoacana, Nicuraga, there has been preserved the memory of the
Flood; of the Creatures saved from perishing in it; yea, of the Raven and the
Dove; and the memory of the Flood it self, even in that part now called the
Golden Castile, is witnessed by very many of the Spanish Nation.

In what part of the World men lived before the Flood, that note in Pliny of
the building of Joppe before the same Flood does testify. That the place
whereon Noah's Ark rested after the Flood was in the Gordien Mountains, it is
manifest by the constant remembrance thereof with the Armenians from all Ages
until this time. Japhet the Father of the Europeans, whence came Ion, or as
anciently they pronounced the word Iavon of the Grecians, and Hammo of the
Africans, and such like, are names which are found in Moses his writings; as
there are also footsteps of the rest, in the names of Nations and Countries,
observed by Josephus and others. And then the endeavor of climbing up to
Heaven, which of the Poets does not mention? The burning of Sodom is spoken of
by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Tacitus, Pliny, and Solinus. The most ancient use
of Circumcision has been related by Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo, Philo
Biblius; and now is retained by the posterity of Abraham, to wit, not only the
Hebrews, but also the Idumaeans, Ismaelites, and others. A certain History of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, agreeing with that of Moses, was anciently
extant in Philo Biblius out of Sanchuniath: in Berosus, Hecataeus, Damascenus,
Atrapanus, Epolemus, Demetrius, and partly in that old Author of the aforesaid
Orphean verses; and now also there are some remainders thereof in Justin, out
of Trogus Pompaeus: And almost in every one of these Authors aforenamed, there
is some mention made of Moses and his Acts: more particularly, how he was taken
out of the Waters, and how the two Tables was given unto him of God, is plainly
set down in those Orphean verses aforesaid. Add unto these the testimony of
Polemon; also what some of the Egyptians themselves have recorded, to wit,
Manethon, Lisimachus, and Chaerimon, concerning the departing out of Egypt.

NEITHER will it enter into the heart of any wise Man to think that Moses,
(having so many enemies both of the Egyptians, and of other Nations, as the
Idumaeans, Arabians, and Phoenicians) would dare to divulge ought concerning
the beginning of the World, and other ancient things, which either could be
confuted by other more ancient Writings, or were repugnant to the common
received opinion in those times; neither doubtless would he publish any thing
touching the affairs in that Age, which could be justly gainsaid or disproved
by the testimonies of any then living. Of this Moses there is mention made by
Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and Pliny, by Tacitus also; and after all them, by
Dionysius Longinus in his Book concerning sublimity of speech. Likewise Jamnes
and Mambres that resisted Moses in Egypt are mentioned not only by the Authors
of the Talmud, but by Pliny and Apuleius. Amongst others the Pythagoreans speak
much of the Law it self, which was given by Moses, and of the Legal Rites. Both
Strabo and Justin out of Trogus give an excellent testimony of the ancient
Jewish Religion and Justice; insomuch that here (me thinks) it is needless to
produce any further testimony of such things as are found, or have anciently
been found consenting with the Books of the Hebrews, touching Joshua and
others; seeing that whosoever gives credit unto Moses, (which to do no Man can
without great impudency refuse,) the same must needs confess, that there were
indeed wonderful Miracles anciently wrought by God, which is the thing we here
chiefly go about to declare.

As for the Miracles of after Ages, suppose of Elijah and Elisha, and others,
there is the less reason to think them counterfeit; because in those times
Judaea was both more known than formerly; and upon the account of diversity of
Religion, was extremely hated by their Neighbors. Who might have very easily
blasted the fame of such Miracles, if they had been lies, as soon as it began
to be spread abroad. The History of Jonah, who lay three days in the Whale's
belly, is to be read in Lycophron, and Aeneas Hazous; save only that in stead
of Jonah, they have put the name of Hercules: whom they so much honored, that
to make him appear the more illustrious, they were wont (as Tacitus and
Servius, and others have noted) to report of him, whatsoever magnificent things
they heard of in any other places.

Certain it is that Julian, who was an enemy of the Jews, as much as of
Christians, was forced, by the evidence of History, to confess that such Men
lived amongst the Jews, as were inspired with the holy Spirit of God; and that
Fire descended from Heaven upon the Sacrifices of Moses and Elias. And verily
it is well worth our observation, that amongst the Hebrews there were not only
grievous punishments appointed for such Men as did falsely assume to themselves
the Prophetical Function, but also many Kings and great Men, that might have by
that means purchased authority to themselves, and likewise very many learned
Men as was Esdras and others, that never durst arrogate to themselves this
dignity; nor any Man else, for diverse Ages before the times of Jesus.

SECT. XVI. The same is proved by the Oracle and Predictions.
BUT more unlikely it is, that so many Thousand People should be imposed upon,
in the avouching of a perpetual and public Prodigy, (as we may call it) to
wit, the holy Oracle, which after a resplendent manner shined from the
breast plate of the High Priest: The truth whereof was so strongly believed by
all the Jews to have continued until the destruction of the first Temple, that
out of all doubt, their Ancestors had certain knowledge concerning the same.

Like to this from miracles, there is another argument as forcible and
effectual to prove GOD's providence, taken from those predictions of future
events, which among the Hebrews were many and manifest. Such was that prophecy
of his being made Childless who should attempt to re-edifie Jericho: and that
of the overthrow of the Temple at Bethel by a King, named Josiah, foretold
above Three Hundred Years before the thing came to pass. So likewise the very
name and chief acts of Cyrus foretold by Esaiah: the event of Hierusalems siege
by the Chaldeans, foreshown by Jeremiah: So also Daniel's prediction touching
the translation of the Empire of the Assyrians unto the Medes and Persians;
then from them unto Alexander of Macedon, whose Empire should afterward, in
part, be divided among the Successors of Ptolomy and Seleucus. And what evils
also the Hebrew Nation should suffer from all these, but especially from
Antiochus Epiphanes; which were so clearly foretold, that Porphyry who compared
with these Predictions, such Grecian Histories as were extant in his time,
could no otherwise tell how to shift them off, than by saying that those things
which were fathered upon Daniel, were written after such time as they came to
pass; which is all one, as if one should deny that that was written in the time
of Augustus which has been published in Virgil's name, and was always reputed
for Virgil's work. For there was never any more scruple made of the former
amongst the Hebrews than of this latter amongst the Romans.

To these things we may add very many, and most famous Oracles among the People
of Mexico and Peru; which foretold the coming of the Spaniards into those
Countries, and the calamities which should thereupon follow. And hither also
may be referred, not a few dreams, so exactly agreeing with the events, which
both in themselves and in their causes, were wholly unknown to them that
dreamed; that they cannot, without great immodesty, be referred to chance, or
to natural causes: of which kind Tertullian, in his Book Of the Soul, has
collected illustrious examples, out of the most approved Authors. Specter also
or apparitions belong to this head, which have been not only seen, but heard to
speak: as those Historians relate, who are the farthest from superstitious
credulity; and is reported by Witnesses of our own Age, who have lived in
China, and in Mexico, and other parts of America. Nor are public trials of
innocence, by touching of red hot Plow-shares, to be despised: which the
Histories of so many German Nations, and the Laws themselves have remembered.

SECT. XVII. The Objection is answered, why Miracles are not now to be seen.
NEITHER is there any reason to object against such Miracles, because there are
not the like to be seen in these days, neither the like predictions heard of;
For it is a sufficient proof of Divine providence, that such things did come to
pass at any time? which being once granted, it will follow, that God may be
believed with as much providence and wisdom, now to cause them to surcease, as
anciently he used the same. Neither stands it with reason, that those Laws,
which were given to the Universe concerning the natural course of things, and
uncertainty of future events should be lightly or always transgressed: but only
at such a time, when either there was a just cause, as when the worship of the
true God was almost banished out of the World, residing only in a little part
thereof, to wit, in Judaea, where it necessarily was to be (as it were)
fortified with new aids against the impieties wherewith it was compassed about;
or when Christian Religion (whereof by and by we shall speak more
particularly,) was first by God's decree to be published thorowout the whole
World.

SECT. XVIII. And that now there is such liberty in offending.
THERE are those who are wont to doubt of the Divine Providence, because they
see so much wickedness has, like a Deluge, overspread the face of the whole
Earth: which Divine Providence, they contend, if there were any, would have
made its chiefest business to restrain and suppress. But this is easily
answered, considering that when God had created Man with freedom to do good and
evil, reserving absolute and immutable goodness to himself, it had not been
reasonable to have put such a stop to evil actions, as should have been
contrary to that liberty. Howbeit to keep Men from sin, God uses every kind of
means, which is not repugnant to the liberty aforesaid. Such is the ordaining
and publishing of the Law, together with inward and outward admonitions, both
by threats also and promises. Nor does he suffer the effects of wickedness to
spread so far as they might have done: whence it is that all kind of government
could never yet be subverted, nor the knowledge of Divine Laws utterly
extinguished or abolished. Neither may those delinquences which are permitted
to be done amongst Men, be thought altogether unprofitable; Since that (as
before we have touched) they may be used either for the punishment of other no
less lewd transgressors; or for the chastisement of such as sometimes wander
from the way of virtue; or lastly to exact some worthy pattern of patience and
constancy from such as have made good proficiency in the school of piety and
virtue. Lastly, even they whose wickedness seems to be winked at for a time,
are wont to pay dearly for it at last; and to be reckoned withal the more
severely, because they have been long forborne: in so much that it is plain,
they suffer what God would, who have done what He would not.

SECT. XIX. Insomuch that good Men are oppressed.
BUT, and if sometimes there seem to be no punishment at all inflicted upon
profane offenders, and even some good men (which may occasion the weak to be
offended) are sore oppressed by the insolences of the wicked, who many times
make them not only to lead a wearisome and miserable life, but also to undergo
a disgraceful death: we are not presently to banish from humane affairs the
Providence of God, which has been proved, as we have now said, by strong
reasons; but rather (as the wisest sort of Men have thought) we should conclude
and argue thus.

SECT. XX. The same Argument is retorted to prove that the Soul survives the
Body.
FOrasmuch as God has an eye unto all Men's actions, and in himself is most
just, suffering such things to come to pass as we see they do; therefore we
must expect that there will be some future judgment after this life, to the end
such notorious transgressions may not remain unpunished, nor well deserving
virtue be unrecompenced with due comfort and reward.

SECT. XXI. Which is proved by Tradition.
FUrther, to confirm this truth, it must necessarily be admitted, that the
Souls of Men do survive their Bodies. Which most ancient Tradition, was derived
from our very first Parents (for from whence else could it proceed?) unto
almost all civilized People; as is plain by Homer's Verses; and by
Philosophers, not only of the Grecians, but likewise the Druides in France, and
Brachmans in India, and by those relations also which many Writers have
published concerning the Egyptians, and Thracians, and Germans. In like manner
touching God's judgment to come after this life, many things we see were
extant, as well among the Grecians, as also among the Egyptians and Indians, as
we learn out of Strabo, Diogenes Laertius, and Plutarch; whereunto may be added
that old tradition of the consumption of the World by fire, which was anciently
found in Hystaspis and the Sibyls, and now also in Ovid and Lucan, and the
Indians of Siam: of which thing the Astrologers have noted this to be a sign,
that the Sun draws nearer and nearer to the earth. Yea, when the Canaries,
America, and other foreign places were first discovered, this same opinion of
the immortality of Men's souls, and the last Judgment was found among the
Inhabitants there.

SECT. XXII. Against which no contrary reason can be brought.
NEITHER can there any reason in nature be given to disprove so ancient and
common received tradition. For every thing that in this World comes to an end,
perishes either through the opposition of some more forcible contrary agent, as
coldness in any subject, by reason of the more prevalent power and intension of
heat; or through the substraction of that subject, whereupon it depends, as the
quantity of the glass, when the glass is broken; or through the defect and want
of the efficient cause, as light by the Sunsetting. Now none of all these can
be said to happen unto the soul of Man: Not the first, because there is nothing
that is contrary to the Soul; nay, it self is of such a peculiar nature, that
it is apt to receive such things as are contrary between themselves, at the
same time together, after its own, that is, after a Spiritual and Intellectual
manner. Not the second, for there is not any subject whereon the nature of the
Soul has any dependence: if there were, in all probability it should be the
humane body: but that this cannot be, it is manifest, because when the powers
and abilities of the Bodies are tired in their operations; the mind alone does
not by motion contract any weariness. Likewise the powers of the Body are
impaired and weakened by the redundancy or excess of the object, as the sense of
seeing by the full splendour and bright face of the Sun: but the more excellent
objects that the Soul is conversant about, as about universals and figures
abstracted from sensible matter, it receives thereby the more perfection.
Again, the powers that depend upon the Body are only busied about such things
as are limited to particular time and place, according to the nature and
property of the Body it self: but the mind has a more noble object, and
ascends to the contemplation of that which is infinite and eternal. Wherefore
then seeing that the Soul depends not upon the Body in its operation, neither
does it in its essence: for we cannot discern the nature of invisible things
otherwise than by their operations. Neither is the third way of corruption
incident to the Soul, there being no efficient cause from which the Soul
proceeds by a continual emanation. For we cannot say our Parents are such a
cause; since, when they are dead, their Children are wont to live. But if we
will needs make some cause, from which the Soul proceeds, then we can imagine
no other, save the first and universal cause of all things, which as in respect
of its power, is never deficient, so in respect of its will to be defective,
that is, for the Almighty to will the extinction and destruction of the Soul,
no Man can ever be able to prove.

SECT. XXIII. Many Reasons may be alleged for it.
NAY there are many strong Arguments for the contrary, as namely, the dominion
given unto Man over his own actions; the natural desire that is in him to be
immortal; the force of conscience comforting the mind for well done actions,
though very troublesome, and supporting it with a certain hope; and on the
contrary, the sting of a gnawing conscience at the remembrance of ungodly and
wicked actions, especially when the Hour of Death approaches, as if it had a
sense of an imminent, judgment. And this gnawing worm of conscience the most
profane wretches and wicked Tyrants have not been able oftentimes to
extinguish in them, no not then when they most of all desired it, as diverse
Examples do testify.

SECT. XXIV. Whence it follows, that the end of all shall be Man's happiness
after this life.
SEeing then the Soul is of a nature that in it self has no ground or cause of
its own corruption; and seeing also that God has given us many signs and
tokens whereby we ought to understand, that it is his will, the soul should
survive the body; what more noble end can be propounded to Man than the state
of eternal happiness? which in effect is the same that Plato, and the
Pythagoreans spoke of, saying, that it were good for man if he could become
most like unto God.

SECT. XXV. Which to obtain, Men must get the true Religion.
NOW what this happiness is, and how it is to be attained, Men may search by
probable conjectures: but if any thing concerning this matter be revealed by
God, that must be held for a most certain and undoubted truth: which since
Christian Religion pretends to bring unto us above others, it shall be examined
in the next Book whether or no Men ought to give credit thereunto, and
assuredly build their faith thereon.

The Second Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. To prove the Truth of Christian Religion.
IT is not our purpose in this Second Book to handle all the Points of
Christianity; but after our hearty Prayers made to Christ the King of Heaven,
that he would grant us the assistance of his holy Spirit, whereby we may be
enabled for such a Work, we shall only endeavor to make it appear that the
Christian Religion it self is most true and certain. Which I thus begin.

SECT. II. Here is showen that Jesus lived.
THAT there was such a Person as Jesus of Nazareth, who lived heretofore in
Judaea, when Tiberius was Emperor of Rome, is not only most constantly
professed by all Christians, who are scattered over the face of all the Earth:
but acknowledged by all the Jews, who now are, or ever wrote since those times.
Nay, the very Pagan Writers, that is, such as are neither of the Jewish nor
Christian Religion, namely, Suetonius, Tacitus, Pliny the younger, and many
more after them, do testify the same.

SECT. III. And was put to an ignominious Death.
THAT the same Jesus was nailed to a Cross by Pontius Pilate, Governor of
Judaea, is confessed also by all Christians; though it might seem very
disgraceful to them, to be the Worshippers of such a Lord. The Jews also do the
like; though they are not ignorant that upon this account they are very odious
to Christians, in whose Dominions they live: because their Ancestors were the
Men, that moved Pilate, and persuaded him to pass the sentence of Death upon
Jesus. The Pagan Writers also, now named, have delivered the same to Posterity.
Yea, the Acts of Pilate were extant a long time after, from whence this might
have been proved; to which Christians never made their Appeal. For neither did
Julian himself, nor any other adversaries of Christianity ever make doubt
hereof: So that hence it appears, that there was never any more certain story
than this; which (we see) may be confirmed, not only by the testimonies of some
few Men, but also by the approbation of several Nations otherwise disagreeing
and jarring among themselves.

SECT. IV. Yet afterward was worshipped by prudent and godly Men.
ALL which though it be most true, yet we see how that thorowout the remotest
parts of the World he is worshipped as Lord; and that not in our days only, or
those which are lately passed, but ever since the time that this was done; to
wit, ever since the Reign of Nero the Emperor, when many People that professed
this worship of Christ, and Christian Religion, were for that cause tortured
and put to death, as Tacitus and others do witness.

SECT. V. The cause whereof was, for that in his life time there were Miracles
done by him.
NOW among such as professed Christianity, there were always many Persons, who
were both judicious, and not unlearned. Such as (to say nothing now of the
Jews) Sergius, Governor of Cyprus, Dionysius Areopagita, Polycarpus, Justinus,
Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Origin, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, with diverse
others; who almost all being brought up in other religions, and having no hopes
of any Wealth or Preferment by Christianity, yet became worshippers of this Man
that died so ignominious a death, and exhibited due honor to him as God: Of
which no other reason can be given, but this alone; that they made diligent
enquiry, as became prudent Men, in a matter of greatest moment: and found that
what was bruited abroad concerning the Miracles wrought by Christ, was true;
and relied upon firm witnesses. As the curing, and that with his word only, and
before all the People, diverse grievous and inveterate Diseases; the restoring
of Sight to him that was born blind; the multiplying of a few Loaves, more than
once, for the feeding many Thousands, who could testify the truth of it; the
recalling of the Dead to Life again; and many more of the like kind. The report
of which things had then such a certain and undoubted original; that neither
Celsus, nor Julian, when they wrote against Christians, durst deny there were
some Prodigies done by Christ; and the Hebrews in the Talmudical Books do
openly confess it.

SECT. VI. Which Miracles were not wrought either by the help of Nature, or
assistance of the Devil; but merely by the Divine Power of GOD.
THAT these wondrous Works were not wrought by any Natural Power, it is
manifest, by this very thing, that they are called wonders and miracles. Nor is
it possible by the force of nature, that any grievous Diseases and Infirmities
should be cured merely by a Man's voice, or by the virtue of a Touch, and that
even upon a sudden. And if such Works could have any way been ascribed to a
Natural efficacy, it would have been said before now, either by those that were
professed enemies of Christ while he lived upon Earth, or by those that have
been Adversaries of his Gospel since his death.

By the like Argument we may prove, that they were not juggling delusions,
because they were done openly in the sight of all the People: amongst whom
diverse of the Learned sort did malign and bear ill will unto Christ, not
without envy observing all that he did. Add further, that the like Works were
often iterated, and the effects thereof were not transitory but permanent and
durable. All which being duly pondered, it must needs follow (as the Jews have
confessed) that these Works proceeded from a more than Natural or Humane Power,
that is, from some Spirit either good or evil. That they proceeded not from any
evil Spirit, may be proved, because that the Doctrine of Christ (for the
confirmation whereof these Works were wrought) was quite opposite and contrary
to bad Spirits. For it prohibits the worshipping of evil Angels, and disswades
Men from all uncleanness of affections and manners, wherein such Spirits are
much delighted. And this is also plain, for that wheresoever the Doctrine of
the Gospel was received and established, there followed the downfall of the
worship of Demons, and of Magical Arts: and one God was worshipped with a
detestation of Demons; whose power and authority Porphyry acknowledges, was
broken by the coming of Christ.

Neither is it to be thought that any wicked Spirit is so ignorant and foolish,
as to effect and often bring to pass things that are causes of its own hurt and
disgrace, and no way conducing to its honor or benefit. Besides it stands no
way with the wisdom or goodness of God himself to believe that he would suffer
so harmless and innocent Men, such as feared him, to be deceived by the
delusion of Devils: and such were the first followers of Christ, as is plain by
their innocent life, and by the many calamities which they endured for
conscience sake.

But on the other side, if thou affirmest that those works of Christ proceeded
from some good Spirits which are inferior to God; in so saying thou do
confess that the same works were well pleasing unto God, and did tend to the
honor of his name; forasmuch as good Spirits do nothing but what is acceptable
and glorious unto God: To say nothing now of some of Christ's works, which were
so miraculous, that they seem to have God himself for the author of them, and
could not have been done but by the immediate finger of an omnipotent power, as
specially, the restoring diverse Persons from Death unto Life again.

Now God does not produce any Miracle, nor suffer any such Wonders to be
wrought without just cause: For it becomes not a wise Maker of Laws to forsake
and depart from his own Laws, unless upon some good and weighty reason: Now no
other cause of these things can be given than that which was alleged by Christ
himself, namely, that hereby his doctrine might be verified and confirmed. And
doubtless they that were Spectators of his Works, could conceive no other
reason thereof: amongst which since there were (as was said) many godly Men,
piously and devoutly affected, it is horrible impiety to imagine, that God did
work these things only to delude and deceive them. And this was one cause why
very many of the Jews who lived about the time of Jesus, even such as could not
be persuaded to relinquish or omit one jot of Moses his Law, such as those who
were called Nazarenes and Ebionites, did notwithstanding acknowledge that this
Jesus was a Doctor or Master sent from Heaven.

SECT. VII. Christ's Resurrection proved by credible Reasons.
BEsides the Miracles that Christ wrought to confirm his Doctrine, another like
Argument may be taken from his wonderful Resurrection to Life again, after that
He was Crucified, Dead, and Buried.

For the Christians of all Ages and Countries allege the same, not only for a
truth, but also as the most strong ground and chiefest foundation of their
Faith; which could not be, unless those that first taught Christianity, did
persuade their Auditors that the thing was so for certain; And yet they could
not induce any wise Man to the belief hereof, unless they could verily affirm,
that themselves were eyewitnesses of this matter. For without such an ocular
testimony, no Man in his wits would have given credit unto them; especially in
such times, when to believe them was to expose themselves to the greatest
mischiefs and dangers. But that this was their constant assertion, both their
own Books, and other Writings do testify. For out of their Books it appears,
that they appealed unto Five hundred Witnesses that had beheld Jesus after he
was risen from the Dead. Now it is not the fashion of liars and dissemblers to
appeal to so great a number of Witnesses: Neither could it possibly so fall out
that so many Men should agree and conspire together to bear false witness. Or
suppose there had been no other witnesses, save those twelve known Apostles,
the first publishers of Christian doctrine, yet this had been sufficient. No
Man is wicked for nothing. And honor for their lying they could not expect, in
regard that all kind of dignities and promotions were then in the hands of the
Pagans or Jews, from whom they received nothing but reproach and ignominy.
Neither could they hope for any Wealth and Riches, because this profession was
oftentimes punished with the loss of goods and possessions: or if it was not;
yet the Gospel could not be taught by them, unless they omitted or neglected
all care about worldly goods. Neither could the hope of any other worldly
advantage move them to utter untruths; seeing that the very preaching of the
Gospel did expose them to labors, hunger, thirst, stripes, and imprisonments.

To get credit and reputation only among their own Countrymen was not so much
worth, that they poor simple Men, whose life and doctrine was abhorrent from
all pride, should therefore run upon so great inconveniences. Neither again
could they have any hope their doctrine would make such progress, as to win
them any fame; being opposed both by the nature of Man, which is intent to its
own advantage, and by the authority of them, who then every where governed,
unless they had been some way animated and encouraged by the promise of God.

To which we may add, that they had no reason to promise themselves, that this
fame, such as it might prove, would be durable: since they expected (God on
purpose concealing his counsel in this matter) the end of the whole World as
nearly approaching; which both their own Writings, and the writings of those
Christians that followed them, make most evident. It remains therefore that we
say, if they did lie, it was for the defense of their Religion; which cannot
with any reason be laid to their charge, if the thing be rightly considered.
For either they did sincerely believe that this Religion which they professed
was the true Religion, or else they were of a contrary mind. If they did not
believe it to be true; nay if they thought not that it was absolutely the best,
they would never have made choice hereof, and refused other Religions far more
safe and commodious. Nay further, though they conceived it to be true, yet they
would not have professed it, unless they had been fully persuaded, that the
profession thereof was necessary; specially, for that they might have easily
foreseen, and partly they could tell by experience what troops of Men would be
exposed to death for this profession, which without just cause to occasion was
no better than plain robbery or murder.

But if we say, they believed that this Religion was true, and the very best,
and by all means to be professed, and that after the death of their Lord and
Master: surely, that could no way be so, if their Masters promise concerning
his Resurrection had deceived them, and not proved true. For that had been
enough to make any Man in his wits disbelieve, even that which he had already
entertained.

Moreover all Religions, and Christianity more than any other, forbids lying in
bearing false witness, especially in divine things: wherefore they could not
for the love of Religion, and that such a Religion, be induced to tell
untruths. Besides these Men were of an upright conversation; their life was
spotless and unblameable even in the judgment of their adversaries; who had
nothing to object against them, save their simplicity, which of all other
dispositions is the most unlikely to forge a lie. Nay, there were none among
these Primitive Christians (whereof we speak) who did not suffer grievous
torments for professing that Jesus was risen: and many of them were put unto
most exquisite pains of death for bearing testimony of the same. Now granting
it to be possible, that a Man in his wits may be content to endure such things,
for some opinion which he has conceived, and really believes in his mind; yet
that for a falsehood, which he knows to be so, not only some one Man, but a
great many Men, who are like to gain nothing at all by making that falsehood to
be believed, should consent to suffer such cruel torments, is a thing
altogether incredible.

Now that these were not Madmen, both their conversation and their writings do
abundantly testify. Likewise what is spoken of the first Apostles, may also be
said of Paul, who openly taught that he saw Christ sitting in Heaven: who also
was not inferior to any in the Jewish Religion; nor might he have wanted
dignities and preferments, if he would have followed the footsteps of his
Fathers.

Whereas on the contrary, by taking upon him the profession of Christianity, he
became liable to the hatred and malignity of his kinsfolks, and engaged himself
to undertake difficult, dangerous, and laborious travels thorough the World;
and last of all to undergo a disgraceful death and torment.

SECT. VIII. Answer to the Objection, that the Resurrection seems impossible.
SUCH and so great testimonies no Man can disprove or gainsay, unless some will
reply, that the thing it self is impossible to be done: for so are those things
which imply a contradiction, as they speak. Howbeit that cannot be affirmed of
this matter. It might indeed, if one could say that one and the self same Man
lived and died at the self same time: But that a Man may be restored from death
to life, especially by the power and virtue of him who first gave life and
being unto Man, I see no reason why it should be accounted for a thing
impossible.

Neither has it been thought impossible by wise Men; For Plato writes that
this was done to Eris an Armenian. And the like is related of a certain Woman
by Heraclides a Philosopher of Pontus, of Aristaeus by Herodotus; and of
another by Plutarch: all which, (whether true or false) do show that in the
opinion of learned and wise Men the thing was conceived to be possible.

SECT. IX. The Resurrection of Jesus being granted, the Truth of his Doctrine
is confirmed.
NOW if it be neither impossible that Christ should return to Life again; and
it does sufficiently appear by great testimonies (wherewith Rabbi Bechai, a
Master of the Jews was so convinced, that he acknowledged the truth of this
thing) and this Christ himself also, as both his Disciples and others confess,
did publish a new Doctrine, as by a Divine commandment: truly it necessarily
follows, that that Doctrine is true. For it does not consist with the divine
Justice and Wisdom to honor Him after so excellent a manner; who had committed
the crime of falsifying in so weighty a matter. Especially considering that
before his Death He had foretold to his Disciples, both his Death, and the kind
of it, and his Resurrection to Life again: adding this withal, that these
things should therefore come to pass, that they might testify and confirm the
truth of his Doctrine.

And thus much for the Arguments which arise from the facts themselves which
were done: Let us proceed to those which arise from the nature and quality of
his Doctrine.

SECT. X. Christian Religion preferred before all others.
AND here truly we must say, that either all kind of divine worship whatsoever
must be rejected, and utterly banished from among Men, (which impiety will
never enter into the heart of any one that can believe there is a God who takes
care of all things; and withal considers how Man is endued with excellency of
understanding, and liberty to choose what is morally good or evil; and upon that
account is capable, as of reward, so of punishment;) or else this Religion is
to be admitted and approved of for the very best: not only in regard of the
outward testimonies of works and miracles aforesaid; but also in consideration
of such inward and essential properties, as are agreeing thereunto: namely,
because there is not, neither ever was there any other Religion in the whole
World, that can be produced, either more honorable for excellency of reward,
or more absolute and perfect for precepts, or more admirable for the manner
according to which it was commanded to be propagated and divulged.

SECT. XI. For excellency of reward.
FOR to begin with the reward that is at the end propounded to Man, which
though it be the last in fruition and execution, yet is it the first in his
intention: If we consider the institution of the Jewish Religion by the hand of
Moses, and the plain or express covenant of the Law, we shall find nothing
there promised save the welfare and happiness of this life: as namely, a
fruitful Land, abundance of Corn and Victual, victory over their Enemies,
soundness of Body, length of Days, the comfortable blessing of a hopeful Issue,
and surviving Posterity, and the like. For if there be any thing beyond, it is
involved in dark shadows, or must be collected by wise and difficult reasoning:
Which indeed was the cause why many (in particular the Sadducees, who professed
themselves to be followers and observers of Moses his Law,) had no hope of
enjoying any happiness after this life.

As for the Grecians, who received their learning from the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, and had some hope in another World, after this life was ended; they
spoke thereof after a very doubtful manner; as appears by the disputations of
Socrates, by the Writings of Tully, Seneca, and others. And the Arguments they
produce for it are grounded upon uncertainties; proving no more the happiness
of a Man than of a Beast: Which while some of them observed, it was no wonder
if they imagined, that Souls were translated and conveyed from Men to Beasts,
and again from Beasts into Men.

But because this opinion was not confirmed by any testimonies, or grounded
upon certain reason, (and yet it was undeniable that there is some end proposed
to Man's actions,) therefore others were induced to think, that virtue was the
end or reward of Men's endeavors; and that a wise Man was happy enough, even
though he were put into that tormenting brazen Bull made by Phalaris. Howbeit
this fancy was justly distasteful and improbable to another sort, who saw well
enough that Man's happiness, especially the highest, could not consist in any
thing that was accompanied with perils, troubles, torment and death (unless we
have a mind to follow the sound of words without the sense of things:)
Wherefore they placed Man's chiefest happiness and end in such things as were
delightful and pleasing to sense. But yet this opinion also was disproved and
sufficiently confuted by many, as being prejudicial to all honesty, the seeds
whereof are rooted in our hearts by nature: as also because it debases Man, who
is advanced to a higher pitch, and throws him down into the rank of Beasts;
which stoop down and pore upon nothing, but what is on the Earth.

With these and such like uncertainties and doubtings was Mankind distracted at
that time when Christ brought in the true knowledge of the right end: who
promised unto his followers after their departure hence, a life, not only
without death, without sorrow and trouble, but attended with the highest joy
and happiness: and that not of one part of Man alone, to wit, of his Soul, (the
felicity whereof after this life, partly by probable conjecture, and partly
from tradition, was hoped for before) but also of his Body and Soul together.
And this most justly; that the Body, which for the Divine Law, must often
suffer grievances, torments and death, may not be without a recompense of
reward. Now the reward and promised joys are not vile and base, as good cheer
and dainty fare, wherewith the more carnal sort of Jews feed their hopes; or
the embraces of beautiful Women, which the Turks expect to enjoy after death:
for both these sensualities are proper to this frail life, at the best being
but helps or remedies of mortality, the former of them conducing to the
preservation of every particular Man or Beast: and the latter for the
continuation of the same creatures by succession in their kind. But by the
happiness aforesaid our Bodies shall be endued with constant vigor, agility,
strength, and more than a starlike beauty. In the Soul there shall be an
understanding without error, even of God himself and his Divine Providence, or
whatsoever is now hid from us. And a will freed from all turbulency of
passions, busied chiefly about the sight, the admiring and praising of the
Almighty. In a word, all things much greater and better, than can be conceived
by comparison with the best and greatest things in this World.

SECT. XII. Answer to an Objection, that Bodies once Dead cannot be revived
again.
BESIDES the doubt but lately answered, there is another difficulty objected
against this Doctrine of the Resurrection: nakely, how can it be possible for
humane bodies once dissolved into dust and corruption ever to be united and set
together again? But this relies upon no reason. For since it is agreed among
most Philosophers, that howsoever things be changed, there remains still the
same matter, capable of diverse Species or forms; who dare say, that either God
does not know in what places, though never so distant, the parts of that matter
are, which belong to a humane Body; or, that He wants power to reduce them and
set them together again; and do that in his Universe, which we see Chemists do
in their Fornaces, and Vessels, gather together and unite things of the same
nature, though scattered and dispersed? And that a thing also may return to the
form of its original, though the species be never so much altered, we see an
example in the nature of things; as in the Seeds of Plants and living Creatures.

Neither is that knot impossible to be unloosed, which is tied by many;
concerning those humane bodies which pass into the nourishment of wild Beasts
or Cattle; who, being fed with them, become again the food of Man. For we must
know, that the greatest portion of such things as we eat is not converted into
integral parts of our bodies; but either turned into excrements, or humors of
the body, as Fleam and Choler; yea, much of that which becomes our nourishment
is wasted away either by diseases, or by inward natural heat, or by the Air
about us. All which being so; he that so carefully regards all kinds of bruit
Beasts, that none of them perish, the same God with a more special providence
can also provide for humane bodies, that so much of them as becomes the food of
other Men shall no more be converted into the substance of those that eat them,
than are poisons or physical potions; and the rather, because it is in a manner
naturally apparent, that humane flesh was not intended for Man's food. Or
suppose it were not so, but something which has made an accession to the
latter body must be taken from it again; this will not make it not to be the
same body: for even in this life there happen greater changes of particles,
than this comes to. Yea, we see that a Butterfly is in a Worm; and the
substance of Herbs or Wine in some very small thing; from whence they may be
restored to their former just magnitude. Surely, since both these and many
other things may without any inconvenience be supposed, there is no reason that
the restitution of a Body dissolved should be reckoned among impossible things:
which learned Men, Zoroaster among the Chaldaeans, almost all the Stoics, and
Theopompus among the Peripateticks, believed not only might, but should be.

SECT. XIII. The excellency of holy Precepts given for the worship of God.
THE second thing wherein Christian Religion excels all others that are, or
ever were, or can be imagined, is the great holiness of Laws and Precepts; both
in those things that appertain to the Worship of God, and in those that concern
other matters.

The holy Offices of the Pagans throughout almost the whole World, (as Porphyry
shows at large, and the Navigations of our times have discovered) were full of
cruelty: For it was the usage, in a manner every where, to appease the Gods,
even with the Sacrifice of Humane Blood. Which custom neither the Greek
learning, nor the Roman Laws took away; as appears by what we read concerning
the Victims made to Bacchus Omestes among the Greeks; and of a Greek Man and
Woman, and a Man and Woman of Gaul, which were sacrificed to Jupiter Latiaris
at Rome: Those most holy Mysteries also, whether of Ceres, or of Liber Pater,
were as full as ever they could hold of filthiness and obscenity; as appeared
when the secrets of this Religion were once laid open, and began to be
divulged: of which Clemens Alexandrinus, and others, have given us a large
account. Those Festival days also which were consecrated to the honor of the
Gods, were celebrated with such spectacles, that grave Cato was ashamed to be
present at them. But in the Jewish Religion there was nothing unseemly, nothing
dishonest or unlawful. Howbeit lest the People that were prone to Idolatry,
should decline or fall back from the true Religion, it was loaded and burdened
with many precepts concerning such things as in themselves were neither good
nor evil; such were the sacrificing of Beasts, the Circumcision, an exact rest
from labor upon the Sabbath, and the prohibition of eating sundry kind of
meats; Some of which customs the Turks have borrowed from them; adding further
a prohibition for drinking Wine.

But the Christian Religion teaches, that as God is a most pure Spirit; So is
he to be worshipped with pureness of mind and Spirit, together with such works
as in their own nature without a precept are most laudable and honest. Thus the
professors thereof are not to circumcise the flesh, but their carnal lusts and
desires; not to keep Holy day by a rest from all kind of work whatsoever, but
only from that which is unlawful. Nor are we to offer unto God the blood and
fat of Beasts; but if need be, even our own blood for the testimony of the
truth. And what bounty or liberality soever we bestow upon poor and necessitous
persons, to look upon it as given to God himself. We need not now abstain from
any kind of meat or drink, but may and ought to use them both with moderation,
so that our health be not thereby impaired; sometimes notwithstanding subduing
our Bodies to our minds by fasting, that they thereby may be the better fitted
and prepared for more cheerful devotion. But the chief point of this Religion,
it is every where apparent, lies in a pious confidence: by which being composed
to a faithful obedience, we rely wholly upon God, and steadfastly believe the
performance of his promises. Whence there arises a good Hope, and a true Love
both of God and our Neighbors: which makes us obey his Precepts, not in a base
servile manner, for fear of punishment; but that we may please him, and have
Him, out of his great goodness, our Father and Rewarder.

Moreover we are taught to pray, not for riches or honors, or such things as
many times do hurt to those that wish much for them: but first and chiefly that
which tends to God's glory; then for our selves, so much of these perishing
things as nature desires; leaving the rest to Divine Providence: and satisfying
our selves that all shall be well, which way soever things go. But for eternal
things, it teaches us to pray with the most earnest desire; viz. for pardon of
our sins past, and the assistance of his Spirit in time to come; whereby being
strengthened against all terrors and allurements, we may constantly persist in a
pious course of life.

This is the true worship of God in Christian Religion, than which nothing can
be invented more worthy of Almighty God.

SECT. XIV. Concerning the Offices of Humanity which we owe unto our Neighbor.
LIKE to these are the duties we owe unto our Neighbor. As for Mahumet's
Religion, being hatched in Wars, it breaths nothing but Wars, and is propagated
by Wars, and Hostility. Thus the Laws and Statutes of the Lacedaemonians, which
among the Greeks were most applauded, even by the Oracle of Apollo; Aristotle
notes, and blames them for it, were wholly directed to warlike force. And yet
the same Aristotle maintains War against Barbarians to be natural: when, on the
contrary, it is certain that Men were by nature made to friendship and society.
For what is more unjust and unequal, than for single Murders to be punished; but
to vaunt and triumph in the slaughter of whole Nations, as in a glorious
exploit? And yet, that so much celebrated Roman Commonwealth, how did it come
by such a Name, but by Wars? which oft-times were manifestly unjust, as they
themselves confess those were, against Sardinia and Cyprus. And truly
generally, as the best Historians have committed to memory, most Nations
thought robberies and plunders, without the bounds of their own Country, to be
no disgrace at all to them. The exacting of revenge, Aristotle and Cicero make
a piece of virtue: To behold Swordplayers cut and slash each other, was one of
the public recreations of the Pagans: And nothing more ordinary than to expose
their Children.

Among the Hebrews indeed there was a better Law, and more holy Discipline: but
yet to a People of an impotent anger some things were connived at, and some
things indulged. As a violent seizure upon the seven Nations, who had deserved
it: with which not contented, they prosecuted all that differed from them with
a cruel hatred; the signs and marks of which yet remain, in the prayers which
they conceive against us Christians. But to prosecute him that hurt them, by
rendering like for like; and to kill, by their own private hands, him that had
slain any of their Kindred, was permitted by the Law it self. Whereas the Law
of Christ forbids us to revenge any injury that is done us, either in words or
deeds: lest that wickedness which we condemn in others, we should again allow
by its imitation. It would have us do good to all, to the good indeed chiefly,
but to the wicked also; after the Example of God, who bestows the benefit of
the Sun, the Stars, the Rain, the Winds and Showers, in common upon all Men
whatsoever.

SECT. XV. Of the Conjunction of Man and Woman.
THE Conjunction of Man and Woman, whereby Mankind is propagated, is a thing
most worthy of the care of Laws. Which part of them it is no wonder the Pagans
neglected, when they told such lewd stories of the Whoredoms and Adulteries of
the Gods which they worshipped. Nay, the filthy and abominable use which one
Man made of another, was defended by the example of their Gods. Into whose
number, upon that account, Ganymedes was anciently put, and afterward
Antinous. Which flagitious wickedness is now most frequent among the
Mahometans, and is thought lawful by the Chinese, and other Nations. Yea, the
Philosophers of Greece seem to have made it their business, to find out an
honest Name, for that most filthy thing.

Among which Greek Philosophers, the most excellent commending community of
Women; what did they do else, but turn a whole City into one common
Brothel-house? A most unworthy thing: for since there is among some mute
Animals a certain conjugal League or Covenant, how much more equal is it, that
so holy a Creature as Man should not be born of uncertain seed; with the
extinction of all those mutual affections, which are naturally between Parents
and their Children.

The Hebrew Law indeed forbad all filthiness; but both allowed one Man to have
more Wives; and gave the Husband also a right, for any cause, to put away his
Wife. Which the Mahometans at this day use; and the Greeks and Latins
anciently with such license, that the Lacedaemonians and Cato, even lent their
Wives to other Men, to use for a time.

But the most perfect Law of Christ penetrates to the very roots of Vices: and
holds him who only attempts upon the chastity of any Woman, or looks
lasciviously upon her, to be guilty before GOD, the Judge and Searcher of the
Hearts, of that crime, which, though not acted yet, was desired. And since all
true friendship is perpetual and insoluble, He would deservedly have that to be
such, which, with the society of minds, contains also a conjunction of Bodies.
Which, without all doubt, is most profitable also for the right education of
those Children, that are the fruit of that Conjunction. Among the Pagans, some
few Nations were content with one Wife; as the Germans and the Romans. Which
the Christians now follow; that the mind of the Wife being entirely given to
the Husband, may be compensated with an equal retribution: and the government
of the Family may the better proceed under the direction of one Ruler: and
diverse Mothers may not bring in discord among Children.

SECT. XVI. Touching the use of Temporal goods.
AND now to come to the use of those things, which are vulgarly called Goods;
we find that thefts were permitted by some Paganish Nations, as the Egyptians
and Lacedaemonians: and they that did not allow this to private Men, did
publicly little else, as the Romans. Who must have returned to their Huts and
Cottages, the Roman Orator said, if they should have been bound to restore to
every body his own.

The Hebrews indeed had no such custom; yet their Law, that it might suit it
self in some measure, to the humor of that People, permitted them to take
usury of strangers; amongst other things promising the reward of riches to them
that observed the Law.

But the Law of Christianity for bids not only all kind of injustice toward
all sort of Men, but also prohibits us to take any carking and excessive care
for these transitory things, because our mind is not able diligently and duly
to attend unto two several matters; either of which are enough to take up the
whole Man, and oftentimes draw us into contrary thoughts and counsels. Besides,
the excessive care both for getting and keeping riches is accompanied with a
kind of bondage and anxiety, which spoils that very pleasure, which is expected
from riches. Whereas those things that nature is content withal, are both few
and easily acquired, without much labor or charge: yet if God bestow any
overplus upon us, so that we have somewhat to spare, we are not commanded to
cast the same into the Sea, as some Philosophers unadvisedly have done; neither
must we keep it unprofitably, or lavish it out wastfully; but rather therewith
we ought to supply the wants and exigencies of other Men, either by giving, or
by lending to them that would borrow: as becomes those that look upon
themselves not as Lords and Masters of the things they enjoy, but as Stewards
and Dispensers under God Almighty, the Father and Master of all: knowing also
that a benefit well bestowed is a treasure full of good hope; which neither the
wickedness of Thieves, nor the variety of casualties can in the least diminish.

A rare example of which true and unfeigned liberality we find in the primitive
Christians, who sent relief as far as from Macedonia and Achaia to the poor
that lived in Palestine; as if the whole World had been but one Family. And
here in the Law of Christ this caution is added, that the hope of being paid
again, or getting credit by it, do not deflowre our bounty; whose beauty and
grace is quite lost with God, if it have respect to any thing but him. And that
no Man may pretend for a cloak of his covetousness, that he fears he may have
need of all that he has, when he grows old, or falls into any calamity; the
Law promises a special care of such Men as observe these Precepts. And to work
in greater confidence in them, puts them in mind of the conspicuous Providence
of God in feeding the wild Beasts and Cattle; and in adorning the Herbs and
Flowers; and represents withal what an unworthy thing it would be, if we
should not believe so Good and so Powerful a God: but deal with Him, as if He
were a bad Creditor; whom we will not trust any further, than while we have a
Pawn or pledge in our hands for our security.

SECT. XVII. Of Swearing.
THERE are other Laws that forbid Perjury, but this Law of Christ will have us
to refrain also from all kind of swearing, unless we be lawfully called
thereunto upon necessity. Nay, enjoins such faithfulness and sincerity in all
our words, that there may be no need to exact an Oath of us.

SECT. XVIII. Of other Matters.
MOreover there can nothing be found commendable and praiseworthy, either in
the Philosophical writings of the Grecians, or in the sayings of the Hebrews,
and other Nations, which is not contained in the Precepts of Christianity, and
that also established by Divine authority: as namely, concerning modesty,
temperance, goodness, decent behavior prudence, the office of Magistrates and
Subjects, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Man and Wife between
themselves; and chiefly the eschewing those vices which among many of the
Grecians and Romans went under the name and color of honesty; such were the
desires of honors and glory. And to be short, admirable is the substantial
brevity of these precepts, comprehended in these few words, that we ought to
love God above all things, and our Neighbors as our selves, that is, we must
do as we would be done unto.

SECT. XIX. Answer to an Objection touching the Controversies abounding among
Christians.
BUT here peradventure some will object against this, which we speak concerning
the excellency of Christianity, and tell us of the great diversity of opinions
amongst Christians, whereupon there have sprung so many sects and factions as
do now abound in the Church.

For answer whereunto, we may observe that the like diversity of opinions
happens almost in all kind of Arts and Sciences, to wit, partly through the
weakness of humane apprehension, and partly because Man's judgment is hindered
and entangled by his affections. Howbeit this variety of opinions is contained
within certain bounds and limits: for there are some common principles agreed
upon by all, and whereupon they ground their doubts. Thus in Mathematics it is
questioned, whether a circle may be made quadrangular: but not whether after
the taking away of equal parts from equal, the residue will not remain equal.
The same may be seen in natural Philosophy, also in the Art of Physic, and in
other Disciplines. In like manner the difference of opinions that is amongst
Christians does not hinder the common consent and agreement in those
fundamental principles, for which chiefly we have commended Christian Religion;
the certainty whereof appears in this, namely that those which out of mutual
and deadly hatred sought all the occasion and matter of contention they could,
durst not for all that proceed so far, as to deny that these Precepts were
commanded by Christ: no not even those that refuse to frame their lives and
actions according to that rule.

But if there be any Man that will contradict these Principles, he is to be
accounted like to those Philosophers that denied the Snow to be white: For as
these are confuted by sense, so are those convinced by the unanimous consent of
all Christian Nations, and of the Books which were written by the first
Christians, and by those next to the first, and by the Doctors which followed
afterward; even those that witnessed their faith in Christ by their death. For
in the opinion of any indifferent Judge, that must needs be reputed the true
doctrine of Christ, which so many have successively acknowledged and professed;
like as we are persuaded that was the doctrine of Socrates which we read in
Plato and Xenophon; as also that of Zeno the Philosopher, which we find held by
the Stoics.

SECT. XX. The excellency of Christian Religion is further proved from the
dignity of the Author.
THE third thing wherein we said Christian Religion excelled all others that
are, or can be devised, was the manner whereby it was delivered and divulged.
Where first we shall speak of the Author.

They that were authors of the wisdom among the Grecians, confessed that they
could not affirm almost any thing for certain in their doctrine, because (quoth
they) truth lies bid in a deep Pit; and our minds are no less dazeled in the
contemplation of divine things, than the eyes of an Owl in beholding the bright
shining of the Sun: Besides, there was none among them but was notoriously
guilty of some vice or other. For some were flatterers of Princes, others
addicted to the impure love of Boys or Harlots; others gloried in a Dog-like
impudence. And that they all envied one another, their scolding about words or
matters of no moment is a great argument; as this is of their coldness in the
worship of God, that even they who believed one God, set him aside, and not
only worshipped others, but such as they knew were no Gods; making that only
the rule of their Religion which was commonly received and practiced in
public. Touching the reward of godliness they determined nothing for certain,
as appears by the last (farewell) disputation of Socrates at his death.

Mahomet, the Author of a Religion that is spread very far, his own Followers do
not deny, to have been a Man that abandoned himself to lust, throughout his
whole life: But gave no assurance at all, by which Men may be satisfied, that
there shall indeed be such a reward as he promised; consisting in banqueting
and in venery; since they do not so much as pretend that his Body was raised to
life again, but it lies buried at Medina to this day.

And as for Moses the Founder of the Hebrew Law, though he was an excellent
Person, yet he cannot be freed from all blame: since he could scarcely be
persuaded with much rejuctance to undertake the Embassy, which God charged him
withal to the King of Egypt: and expressed also some distrust of God's promise
for bringing water out of the Rock, as the Hebrews themselves confess. And he
did scarce partake of any one of those promises which by the Law he made unto
the People, but was perplexed with continual mutinies and seditions in the
Wilderness; neither was he permitted to enter into that blessed and pleasant
Land, so much desired.

But Christ is described by his Disciples, as a Person without all sin; nor did
others ever produce any testimony to prove that He was guilty of the least: but
whatsoever He prescribed to others, He performed Himself. For there was nothing
that God gave Him in charge, which He did not faithfully perform; being most
simple and void of guile in his whole life; most patient of injuries, nay, of
cruel torments, as He showed in suffering even the punishment of the Cross;
most loving and kind to all Men, even to his Enemies; yea, those Enemies who
put Him to death: on whom he had such compassion that he beseeched God to
forgive them.

As for the reward which he promised unto his Disciples, it is both said, and
proved by undoubted arguments, that He himself is made partaker thereof after a
most eminent and excellent manner. For after he was risen from the dead, there
were many that beheld, and heard, and handled, and felt Him: He also ascended
up into Heaven in the sight of his Twelve Disciples; where He obtained the
highest power, as was evident in that according to his promise made at his
departure, he endued them that were his Followers with ability to speak those
Languages which they had never learnt, and with other wonder-working Powers:
which will not let us doubt, either of his faithfulness, nor of his Power to
bestow upon us the reward which he has promised. And thus we have shown how
that this Religion is more excellent than others, in regard that Christ the
Author of it has himself performed what he commanded; as also in his own
person obtained, and already enjoys the happiness that he promised.

SECT. XXI. Also from the wonderful spreading of this Religion.
LET us in the next place descend to the effects of this doctrine brought by
him to the World: which, if they be well weighed, will appear to be such, that
if God have any care of humane affairs, this doctrine cannot but be believed to
be Divine. It was very agreeable to Divine Providence, to make that which was
best, to be of the greatest and largest extent. Now such was the success of the
Christian Religion; which we see published and taught through all Europe, not
excepting the most Northern Provinces: and no less through all Asia, even the
Islands of it in the Sea: through Egypt also and Aethiopia, and some other
parts of Africa: And lastly, through America. Nor is this only done now, but
was so anciently, as is witnessed by the Histories of all times, by the Books
of Christians, the acts of Synods, and by that old Tradition at this day
preserved among the Barbarians concerning the Travels and Miracles of Thomas,
Andrew, and other Apostles. Clemens, Tertullian, and some Ancients besides,
have noted how far the name of Christ was known amongst the Britains, Germans,
and other most remote Nations in their times. And certainly there is no other
Religion comparable hereunto for ample and large extent. Paganism indeed is
one name, but cannot be said to be one Religion; since that it was neither
agreed upon by the Professors thereof what one thing they should worship; but
some adored the Stars, others the Elements, and a third sort reverenced their
Cattle, others such things as have no subsistence: Nor was this worship
performed by virtue of the same Law, nor from any common Master.

The Jews indeed are dispersed and scattered up and down, yet remain one
people. Howbeit their Religion had never any notable growth or increase after
Christ's Ascension: and their Law was not so much made known by them, as by
Christians.

Then for Mahumetanisme, it is possessed of Land enough, but it is not alone:
for Christian Religion is also professed in the same Countries; where, in some
places there are greater numbers of Christians than of Turks: who, on the
contrary, are not to be found at all, in most parts where Christianity is
planted.

SECT. XXII. Considering the meekness and simplicity of them that first taught
this Religion.
IT follows that we consider by what means this Christian Religion had its
augmentation and increase, that therein it may be comparable, and preferred
before others. We see it commonly true of most Men, that they will easily
follow the examples of Kings and Potentates what way soever they go; specially
if Law and Penalties compel them to it. Hereby were the Religions of the
Pagans, and of Mahumet propagated. But they that first taught the Christian
Religion not only wanted all civil power and authority, but were of mean
condition, no better than poor Fishermen, Weavers, and the like. Yet by such
Men's pains and industry, that doctrine, within the space of Thirty Years, or
thereabouts, was published not only thorowout all the parts of the Roman
Empire, but also among the Parthians and remote Indians.

Nor was it thus only in the beginning; but for almost three whole Ages
together, this Religion was so promoted by the endeavors of private Men;
without any threatenings; without any worldly thing to invite Men to it; yea,
against the will and the most violent opposition of those who then had the
Imperial Power; that before Constantine professed Christianity, this was
become, very near, the greatest part of the Roman World.

Amongst the Grecians that taught morality, diverse there were that commended
themselves also very much by their skill in other Arts. As the Platonists were
famous for the study of Geometry, the Peripateticks for the History of Plants
and living Creatures, the Stoics for Logical subtilty, the Pythagoreans for
knowledge of numbers and harmony: many also were admirable for eloquence, as
Xenophon, Plato, and Theophrastus. But the first Doctors and Teachers of
Christianity were endued with no such art, but used the plainest language,
without enticing words; only after a bare manner or naked form of speech
pronouncing their precepts, promises, and threatenings. Which having no efficacy
in themselves proportionable to such a progress as Christianity made, we must
needs confess, it was either attended by Miracles, or by God's secret power
assisting the business, or both together.

SECT. XXIII. What great impediments there were that might terrify Men from
the embracing or the professing hereof.
HEreunto may be added another thing considerable, namely, that they who
received Christianity from those Teachers had not their minds void of a certain
form and rule of Religion; and so were not by that means ductile and easy to
be drawn, as they were who first received the Paganish worship and Mahomet's
Law: much less was their minds prepared for it, by some antecedent institution;
as the Hebrews by Circumcision, and the knowledge of one God, were made fit to
accept the Law of Moses: But quite contrary were filled with Opinions and
Customs, which are a kind of another nature, repugnant to those new
Institutions; being educated, viz. and confirmed by the authority of Laws and
of their Parents, in the Paganish Religion, or the Jewish Rites.

Besides this, there was another impediment, to wit, the most grievous evils,
which they who undertook Christianity, must expect to suffer, or had reason to
fear, upon that account. For seeing that humane nature abhors such evils, it
must needs follow that the causes of those evils cannot be admitted of without
much difficulty. A long time were the Christians deprived of all honors and
dignities; and likewise much afflicted with diverse penalties, with confiscation
of goods and banishments: which notwithstanding were all but flea-bitings, for
they were condemned to dig in the Mines; and to suffer torments, than which
more cruel could not be devised.

And such multitudes of them were put to death, that there never was a greater
number of Men at one time swept away and devoured, either by famine, or
pestilence, or war, as the writers of those times do testify. Their manner and
kind of death also was not ordinary, but some were buried alive; others
crucified; others endured punishments of the like kind, which cannot be read or
thought of without the greatest horror: and yet this savage cruelty, which
continued without much intermission (and that not every where) till almost the
time of Constantine, in the Roman World, and in other places endured longer;
was so far from diminishing the number of Christians; that quite contrary,
their Blood might be called the Seed of the Church: there sprang up still so
many, in the room of those that were cut off.

Now let us herein also compare other Religions with Christianity. The Greeks
and the rest of the Pagans, who are wont to magnify their own things above
measure; yet give us in but a very short Catalogue of such as suffered death
for the sake of their Doctrine. Some Gymnosophists, Socrates, not many more,
are all they can number. And in those eminent Men, it can scarce be denied, but
that there might be some desire of transmitting their fame to Posterity, which
had a hand in the business. But amongst those Christians that suffered
martyrdom for their faith, there were very many of mean rank, of the common
sort of People, such as were scarce ever taken notice of, or known to their
Neighbors that lived hard by them. There were Women also, Virgins, and young
Men; such as had no desire, nor any probable hope of getting renown in future
times by their sufferings: According as in the Books of Martyrs, we find the
Names but of a few in comparison of the whole number of those that were put to
death, who are only registered in gross.

To which we must add, that by a small compliance and simulation, suppose by
casting a little Frankincense upon the Altar, most of them might have freed
themselves from such punishments. Which cannot be said of those Philosophers;
who, whatsoever they might think secretly in their hearts, in all their
apparent actions, conformed themselves to the vulgar customs. So that, to have
suffered death for the honor of God, cannot well be attributed to any other,
but only the Jews and Christians. And not to the Jews neither, after the times
of Christ; nor before them, but to a few, if they be compared with Christians.
More of which suffered for the Law of Christ in some one Province; than the
Jews ever did; whose patience in this kind, may all very near be reduced to the
times of Manasses, and of Antiochus.

Wherefore, seeing Christian Religion in this particular also so vastly excels
all other, it ought justly to be preferred before them. And from such a
multitude of all kinds, and sexes of People, distinguished by so many several
places and ages, as did not stick to dye for this Religion; we may well gather,
there was very great cause of such constancy: which cannot be imagined to be
any other; but the Light of Truth, and the Spirit of GOD.

SECT. XXIV. Answer to them that require more forcible Reasons.
FInally, if any yet be not satisfied with these arguments abovesaid, but
desire more forcible reasons for confirmation of the Christian Religion; let
such know, that according as things are diverse, they must also have diverse
kinds of Proofs. Thus is there one way in Mathematics, another in Physics, a
third in matters of advice and counsel, and lastly another kind, when a matter
of fact is in question: wherein verily we must rest content when the
testimonies are free from all suspicion of untruth. Otherwise down goes not
only all the use of history, and a great part of the art of Physic, but all
the piety also that ought to be between Parents and Children, which cannot be
known other ways. And indeed it is the pleasure of Almighty God that those
things which he would have us to believe (so that the very belief thereof may
be imputed to us for obedience) should not so evidently appear, as those things
which are apprehended by sense and plain demonstration; but only be so far
forth revealed as may beget faith, and a persuasion thereof in the hearts and
minds of such as are not obstinate: That so the Word of the Gospel may be as a
touchstone, whereby Men's dispositions may be tried whether they be curable or
not. For seeing these arguments, whereof we have spoken, have induced so many
honest, godly, and wise Men to approve of this Religion, it is thereby plain
enough that the fault of other Men's infidelity is not for want of sufficient
testimony, but because they would not have that to be had and embraced for
truth, which is contrary to their affections and desires: It being, that is, an
hard matter for them to make no great account of honors, and other worldly
advantages; which they must do, if they receive what Christ has taught, and so
become engaged to observe his Precepts. Which is discovered to be true by this
very thing; that they take many other Historical Narrations to be true; which
notwithstanding appear to be so merely by authority: and not by any such
footsteps of them remaining at this day, as the History of Christ has; partly
in the confession of the Jews, who are now in being; and partly in those
things, which are every where found in the Assemblies of Christian People; of
which it must needs be granted there was some cause.

Lastly, seeing the long duration or continuance of Christian Religion, and the
large extent thereof can be ascribed to no humane power, therefore it must be
attributed to miracles: or if any deny that it came to pass through a
miraculous manner; this very getting so great strength and power without a
miracle, may be justly thought to surpass any miracle.

The THIRD Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. To prove the authority of the Books of the New Covenant.
AFTER that a Man is once persuaded by the reasons abovesaid, or is induced by
any other arguments to believe that this Religion which Christians profess is
the truest, and absolutely the best; if he desire to learn all the parts
thereof, then must he have recourse unto the most ancient writings that contain
the same Religion, which commonly we call the Books of the New Testament, or
rather new covenant.

For he is very unreasonable, who denies this Religion to be contained in those
Books, as all Christians affirm. Since it is but equity to believe every Sect;
be it good, or be it bad; when it says its opinions are to be found in such or
such a Book: as we believe the Mahometans, that the Religion of Mahomet is
contained in the Alcoran.

Forasmuch then as we have before proved that the Christian Religion is most
true; and it is manifest withal that it is contained in these Books, if there
were no other ground, yet this alone is sufficient to prove and avouch the
authority of those Books.

But if any body requires a more particular demonstration of it, I must first
lay down this Rule, which all indifferent Judges will allow; that it is
incumbent upon him, who will impugn the authority of any writing received for
many Ages, to produce Arguments which prove that Writing to be false: which if
he cannot do, that Book is to be defended, as in possession of its Authority.

SECT. II. Here is shown that such Books were written by the Authors, whose
names they have prefixed.
WE say then that those Books which are not in question amongst Christians, and
carry before them a certain Name, are the very Works of those Authors whose
names they bear; Because those primitive Fathers, Justin, Irenaeus, Clemens,
and others after them do quote those Books under these very names. As also
because Tertullian witnesses that there were Original Copies of some of those
Books extant in his time. And besides, all the Churches received those Books
for authentical, before there were any common public Meetings. Neither did
ever the Pagans or Jews raise any controversy about this, as if these were not
the works of those Men, whose they were said to be: but Julian himself plainly
confesses that those were the writings of Peter and Paul, Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, which Christians under those names have read and received. For as no Man
in his wits can doubt that those Writings, which go under the names of Homer
and Virgil, are truly theirs, because the one has been so long time received
among the Latin, and the other among the Greek Authors: in like manner, it
were more absurd to bring the Authors of those Books in question, which are
granted almost by all the Nations in the World.

SECT. III. Some Books were anciently doubted of.
IN the Volume of the new Covenant, there are some Books indeed now received,
which were not so received from the beginning, as the second Epistle of St.
Peter, that of St. James and Jude, two of St. John the Elder, the Revelation,
and the Epistle to the Hebrews: Yet this is certain, that they were
acknowledged by many Churches; which appears sufficiently from hence, that the
ancient Christians use their Testimonies as Sacred: Which makes it credible
that such Churches as from the beginning had not those Books, either were
ignorant of them, or doubtful: Yet afterward when they were better informed
touching the same, they admitted them into the Canon (as we now see) according
to the example of other Churches.

Neither can any good reason be given why any Man should counterfeit those
Books, since there is nothing comprised in them, neither can ought thence be
collected which is not abundantly expressed in other Books unquestioned.

SECT. IV. The Authority of such Books as have no Titles, is proved from the
quality of the Writers.
AND here let no Man mistrust the verity of the Epistle to the Hebrews, because
the Writer of it is unknown; nor doubt of the two Epistles of St. John and the
Revelation, because some Men do question, whether the Author of them was John
the Apostle, or some other of that name? For the name is not so much to be
regarded as the quality or condition of Writers. Hence it is that we receive
many Books of History, whose Authors are to us unknown; As that concerning the
Alexandrian War by Caesar: because we may perceive that whosoever writ the
same, lived in those times, and was present when the things were done. In like
manner it ought to suffice us, that whosoever wrote the Books we speak of, both
lived in the primitive Age, and were endued with Apostolical gifts. For if any
body will say, that these qualities might be feigned, as the very Names might
be in other Writings; he says that which is not credible, viz. that they who
every where press the study of truth and piety, would for no cause at all make
themselves guilty of the crime of forgery: which is not only detestable among
all good Men, but by the Roman Laws was to be punished with death.

SECT. V. These Penmen writ the Truth, because they had certain knowledge of
what they writ.
THIS therefore must be allowed, that the Books of the new covenant were
written by those Authors, whose Names they bear, or by such as bear sufficient
witness of themselves: To which if we farther add, that they were also well
acquainted with the matters whereof they wrote, and had no purpose to lie or
dissemble, it will follow that the things which they committed to writing were
both certain and true, because every untruth proceeds either from ignorance, or
from a wicked desire to deceive.

As touching Matthew, John, Peter and Jude, they were all of the society and
fellowship of those Twelve whom Jesus did choose to be witnesses of his Life and
Doctrine; so that they could not want notice of those things which they did
relate. The same may be said of James, who was either an Apostle, or as some
think, the next akin to Jesus, and by the Apostles consecrated Bishop of
Jerusalem. Paul also could not err through lack of knowledge, about those
Points which he professes were revealed to him by Jesus himself reigning in
Heaven; nor could he, or Luke either, who was an inseparable companion to him
in his travels, be deceived about those things which were done by himself. This
Luke might easily know the certainty of those things which he writ concerning
the life and death of Jesus: For he was born in the places next adjoining to
Palestina; through which Country when he traveled, he says he spoke with
such persons as were eyewitnesses of the things that were done. For doubtless
besides the Apostles with whom he had familiarity, there lived many others at
that time who had been cured by Jesus, and had seen him both before his Death
and after his Resurrection.

If we will give credit to Tacitus and Suetonius in those things which happened
a long time before they were born, because we are confident that they
diligently enquired into the truth thereof; how much more ought we to believe
this Writer, who says that he received all the things which he relates from
them that had seen the same.

It is credibly reported of Mark, that he was a constant companion with Peter,
so that whatsoever he writ are to be looked upon as dictated by Peter, who could
not be ignorant thereof. Besides, the same things that he writes are almost all
extant in the Writings of the Apostles. Neither could the Author of the
Apocalypse be deceived or deluded in those Visions, which he says were sent
unto him from Heaven. Nor he that writ the Epistle to the Hebrews err in those
things which he professes, either to be inspired into him by the Spirit of
God, or else taught him by the Apostles.

SECT. VI. As also because they would not lie.
THE other reason we spoke of to prove the truth of the said Holy Writers,
because they had no will to tell an untruth, is twisted with that which we
handled above, when in general we proved the truth of Christian Religion, and
of the history of the Resurrection of Christ.

Those that will accuse any Witnesses for the pravity of their will, must
produce something by which it may be thought credible, their will might be
diverted from uttering the truth: but this cannot be averred of the said
Authors. For if any do object and say, that they acted in their own cause, and
did their own business; we must see why this should be thought their cause and
interest. Not that they might get any thing by it in this World, or thereby
avoid any danger: when for the sake of this profession, they both lost all the
goods of this World, and ventured upon all manner of dangers. This therefore
was not their cause and interest, but only out of reverence to God: which sure
does not persuade Men to lie; especially in such a business, whereupon depends
the everlasting Salvation of Mankind.

Such an impious piece of villainy we cannot believe they could be guilty of, if
we consider either their Doctrines, every where most full of piety; or their
life, which was never yet accused of any wicked deed: no not by their greatest
Enemies, who objected nothing to them, but their want of learning and
unskilfulness; which did not qualify them sure for inventing falsehoods. And
indeed, if there had been the least spice, as we speak, of fraud and cheating
in them, they would not themselves have recorded their own faults, and
preserved the memory of them: as of their all forsaking their Master when he
was in danger, and Peter's denial of him three times.

SECT. VII. A Confirmation of the Fidelity of these Authors from the Miracles
which they wrought.
ON the other side God himself gave illustrious testimonies of their Fidelity
by working wonders, which either they or their Disciples with great boldness
publicly avouched, adding also the names of the persons, places, and other
circumstances: So that the truth or falsehood of their assertion might easily
have been discovered by the inquisition of the Magistrate.

Amongst which it is worthy our observation, which they have most constantly
delivered, both concerning the use of Tongues which they had never learned,
among many thousand Men; and their curing the diseases of the body upon a
sudden in the sight of the People. Neither were they any whit dismayed with
fear either of the Jewish Magistrates of those times, whom they knew to be most
maliciously set against them; or of the Romans, who were far from having any
good will to them, and, they were sure, would lay hold on any thing on which
they might ground a charge of their being inventors of a new Religion: And yet
neither Jews nor Pagans, in the times immediately following, durst ever deny,
that wonders were wrought by those Men. Yea, the Miracles of Peter are
mentioned by Phlegon in his Annals, who lived under Adrian the Emperor.
Moreover the Christians themselves in those Books that contain a reason of
their faith, which they exhibited to the Emperors, to the Senate, and to the
Governors, do relate these things as most manifest and unquestionable truths:
yea, they openly report that there continued a wonderful virtue of working
strange effects at their Sepulchers for some Ages after their Death; which if
it had been false, they knew that to their shame and punishment the Magistrates
could have confuted it very easily. But there were such multitude of Miracles
wrought at the Sepulchers I spoke of, and so many Witnesses of them; that they
extorted even from Porphyry a confession of it.

SECT. VIII. The Truth of the Writings confirmed from hence, that many things
are found there which the event has proved to be divinely revealed.
THESE things ought to suffice, but there are other Arguments which we may heap
upon these, to prove the truth and fidelity of these Authors Writings. For many
things are therein foretold, which were impossible for Men by their own power
to know or bring to pass: yet we see the truth thereof wonderfully confirmed by
the event.

Thus it was foretold that this Religion should upon a sudden have a large and
ample increase; that it should continue for ever; and though it were rejected
by most of the Jews, yet should it be embraced by the Gentiles. Thus likewise
was foretold what hatred and spite the Jews would bear against them that
professed this Religion, and what grievous Persecutions they should undergo:
The siege also and destruction both of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, together
with the miserable Calamities of the Jewish Nation.

SECT. IX. As also from God's care in preserving his People from false writings.
BESIDES this, if it be granted that God out of his providence takes care of
humane affairs, specially such as belong to his honor and worship; then it
cannot be that he should suffer so great a multitude of Men, who had no other
design but to worship God after a holy manner, to be cheated with lying Books.
And forasmuch as since the time that so many Sects have sprung up in
Christianity, there has not been one that received not either all or the most
of those Books, (excepting some few that contain no singular matter differing
from the rest) it is a great argument that no material thing could be objected
against these writings; specially since the said Sects were so partial and
spitefully bent against each other, that what one approved, others rejected,
even for this reason, because it was there approved.

SECT. X. Answer to the Objection, that diverse Books were not received by all.
THERE were some indeed, though very few, among those that would be called
Christians, who rejected all those Books, which they saw contradicted their
peculiar Opinions. Such, for instance, as out of hatred of the Jews reviled
their God, the Maker of the World; and the Law which he had given them: or on
the other side, such as for fear of the evils which Christians were to undergo,
chose to lurk and lie hid under the name of Jews; who had liberty, without any
danger, to profess their Religion. But these very Men were renounced, in those
times, by all other Christians throughout the World: when as yet all that
differed in their opinions, with the safety of piety, were tolerated, by the
order of the Apostles, with great patience. As for the former kind of these
adulterate Christians, I think they have been sufficiently confuted, both by
that which we have said before, when we proved that there was but one only true
God, the sole framer of the whole World; As also by those very Books, which
that they might have some semblance of Christians, they did admit of, specially
the Gospel of Luke: wherein is evidently shown that the same God whom Moses and
the Hebrews worshipped, was preached by Christ. And the other sort we shall
more fitly confute, when we come to oppugn those that both are and would be
called Jews. For the present only this I say, that their impudence is wonderful
great, who slight and extenuate the authority of Paul; seeing there was not one
of all the Apostles, that founded and taught more Churches than he did: and his
Miracles were at that time reported to be exceeding numerous, when (as e're
while we said) there might easily have been trial, and inquiry made of the
truth of the matter. If then it be true that he wrought wonders, why may we not
believe him concerning his Heavenly Visions, and instruction received from
Christ himself? to whom if he was so dear, it cannot be that he should teach
any thing inglorious or ungrateful unto Christ, as falsities or untruths would
have been. And as touching that particular, which is the only thing whereof
they accuse him, namely his doctrine of the liberty and freedom which was
purchased for the Hebrews from those Rites and Ceremonies that were formerly
commanded them by MOSES; He had no reason at all to teach it, but only the
truth of the thing which he asserted. For he himself was both circumcised, and
did also of his own accord observe very many things which the Law enjoined. And
then for the sake of the Christian Religion, he both did more difficult and
suffered harder things than the Law required, or could be expected upon the
account of the Law; and taught also his Disciples to do and suffer the like.
Whence it appears that he uttered no flattering or enticing speeches unto his
auditors; who were taught in stead of the Sabbath, to keep every day holy for
divine worship, and in stead of the little expenses which the Law required to
suffer the loss of all their goods, and in stead of the blood of Beasts, to
consecrate their own blood unto God. And further, Paul himself plainly affirms,
that Peter, John, and James, in token of their consent with him, gave him the
right hands of fellowship: which he never durst have spoken, if it had not been
true, because the same Men being then alive might have convicted him for a liar.

These therefore (of whom I have now spoken) being excluded, as scarce
deserving the name of Christians; the most manifest consent of so many
Congregations of Christians, who received these Books; added to what has been
spoken of the Miracles which the Writers of them wrought, and the singular care
which God takes about matters of this kind, ought to be sufficient to induce
any indifferent Men to give credit thereunto: specially considering that they
are wont commonly to credit any other Books of History, which have no such
testimonies; unless they see some plain reason to the contrary, which cannot be
said of any of those Books whereof we have spoken.

SECT. XI. Answer to an Objection, that these Books seem to contain things
impossible.
FOR if any body say, that some things are related in these Books, which are
impossible to be done; the Objection vanishes, when we consider what has been
before discoursed: that there are things which cannot indeed be done by Men,
but are possible with God (such, that is, as include in themselves no
repugnancy or contradiction, as we speak) and that in the number of such
things, are even those Miraculous Powers which we most of all admire, and the
recalling of the Dead to Life again.

SECT. XII. Or things contrary to Reason.
NEITHER are they to be more regarded, who say that some doctrines are
comprised in these Books which are disagreeing to right reason: For this is
confuted first by such a vast multitude of Men who wanted no wit, learning or
wisdom, as have followed the authority of these Books, ever since the first
times. And then all those things which were shown in the first Book to be
consonant to right reason; for instance, that there is one God, who alone is
absolutely perfect, infinite in virtue, life, wisdom, and goodness, of whom all
things that have any being were made: whose care and providence reaches over
all his works, especially unto Men; and who can after this life bountifully
reward all them that obey him: and that we ought to bridle our sensual
appetites: that amongst Men there is kindred and alliance, and therefore they
ought to love one another with sincere affection: All these you shall find most
plainly delivered in these Books. But to assert any thing for certain beyond
these, either about the nature of God, or about his will, by the mere conduct
of humane reason, the contrary resolutions, not only of the Schools among
themselves, but of particular Philosophers, may teach us how unsafe and
fallacious it is.

And it is no marvel: for if Men do so far disagree in their opinions, when
they dispute about the nature of their own Soul, then they must needs much more
dissent, when they go about to determine any thing not revealed concerning the
highest mind, and the most supreme Spirit which so far transcends our weak
apprehension. If (as prudent Men are wont to say) to enquire into the Counsels
of Kings be dangerous, and not to be attempted or attained by us; who then is
there so sagacious, that he should hope to be able by his own conjecture to
find out what God's will is in those things, which he may will freely as he
pleases? Wherefore Plato said very well, that none of these hidden mysteries
could be known without an Oracle. Now there can no Oracle be proved to be an
Oracle indeed by any clearer testimonies than those that are contained in the
said Books of the new covenant. It is so far from being proved, that it is not
so much as asserted, that God did ever reveal any thing to Men concerning his
nature, which was repugnant to these Books: nor can there any later
signification of his will, which is credible, be produced. For if there was any
thing otherwise commanded or permitted before the times of Christ, in such
matters as are either plainly indifferent, or not at all in themselves due, nor
plainly dishonest, it makes nothing against these Books; since that in such
matters the later Laws annul the former.

SECT. XIII. Answer to an Objection, that some of these Books are repugnant to
the other.
THERE are those who are wont further to object against these Books, that there
is sometime a certain disagreement in their sense. But, quite contrary,
whosoever will judge of this matter with an indifferent mind, shall find this
also may be added to the arguments for the authority of these Books, that they
do most manifestly and apparently agree about such things as concern any
weighty point of doctrine or history: Which consent and accord cannot
elsewhere be found among any other Writers that are of one and the same sect
or profession, whether we consider the Jews or the Greek Philosophers, the
Physicians or the Roman Lawyers. All which do not only differ much among
themselves, yea even those that are of the same sect, as Plato and Xenophon;
but oftentimes one shall find the same Writer to affirm now one thing, then
another, as if he were forgetful of himself, or knew not what to resolve upon.
But these Writers, of whom we speak, do inculcate and express the same points
of faith; they deliver the same Commandments; and as for their narration of the
life, and death, and resurrection of Christ, the Sum and substance in them all
is the very same.

As touching some small circumstances, which make nothing to the main matter,
they might happily have admitted a very easy reconciliation; though we now do
not know it, because of the likeness of things done at diverse times, the
ambiguity of names, or more names than one of the same Man or place, and such
like things. Nay this very thing ought to vindicate and free these Writers from
all suspicion of falsehood; it being usual with those that would have lies and
untruths credited, to relate all circumstances by compact and agreement, so as
there shall not appear any color or show of difference. Or if it be so, that
for any small difference, which cannot so exactly be reconciled, a whole Book
shall lose its credit; then we must believe no Books at all, specially those of
history: yet we see that Polybius, Halicarnassensis, Livy, and Plutarch, for
the substance of them are esteemed authentical and true, though in some
circumstances they do not agree: Which makes it the more equal and just, that
no such thing should destroy their credit, who we see by their very Writings
were always most studious of Piety and Truth.

SECT. XIV. Answer to an Objection, taken from outward Testimonies, which make
more for these Books.
THERE remains another way of overthrowing a Testimony, which is by producing
contrary Testimonies out of other Authors.

But I dare boldly say, that there are no such testimonies to be found, unless
a Man will produce the sayings of them that were born a long time after, and of
such also as did so openly profess enmity against Christianity, that they could
be no fit Witnesses in this matter.

Nay, on the contrary, if need were, we could allege many testimonies to
confirm diverse parts of the history which is delivered in the said Books. Thus
both Hebrews and Pagans report that Jesus was crucified, and that sundry
miracles were done by him and his Disciples. Those most famous Books of
Josephus, which were set forth about Forty Years after Christ's Ascension, do
make mention of Herod, Pilat, Festus, Felix, John the Baptist, Gamaliel, and of
the destruction of Jerusalem at large. Herewithal agree that which the Authors
of the Talmud have recorded concerning those times. Tacitus relates how cruelly
Nero used the Christians. And anciently there were certain Books extant, not
only of private Men, as of Phlegon, and others; but also some public Acts,
whereunto the Christians appealed, for that in them there was mention made of
the Star that appeared at Christ's Nativity, and also of the Earthquake and
Eclipse of the Sun (against the course of Nature, it being then full Moon) at
the time of Christ's Passion upon the Cross.

SECT. XV. Answer to the Objection, that the Scriptures were changed.
NOW what can be farther objected against these Books, I see not, unless it be
said that they remained not altogether the same that they were from the
beginning. And indeed it must be granted that what is common to other Books
might happen, nay did happen to those; namely, that by the carelessness, or the
perverse care of the Transcribers, some Letters, syllables or words might be
changed, left out, or added. But it is an unjust thing to bring in question the
truth of such a Book or evidence only, because in so many ages there could not
but be great variety of Copies, since both custom and reason requires that
what appears in the most and most ancient Copies, be preferred to the rest. But
that either by fraud or any other way, all the Copies were corrupted, and that
in point of doctrine, or some remarkable piece of history, will never be
proved: for there are neither any evidences, nor any witnesses of those times,
which attest it. But if, as was said before, there be any thing urged, in much
later times, by those who bare an implacable hatred to the Disciples of these
Books; that ought to be looked upon as a Reproach, not as a Testimony.

And this truly, which we have said, may be well thought a sufficient Answer to
those, who object a change in the Scripture; for he who affirms that,
especially against a writing which has been long, and in abundance of places,
received, ought himself to prove his charge. But to make the vanity of this
Objection more fully appear, we will show, that what they feign, neither was,
nor could be done.

We have proved before, that the Books were written by the Authors whose Names
they bear: which being granted, it follows that other Books were not foisted
into their room, nor was any notable part of them changed. For since that
change must needs have some design, that part would notoriously differ from the
other parts and Books, which were not changed: which cannot now any where be
discerned; nay, there is an admirable agreement, as we said, in their Senses.

Besides, as soon as any of the Apostles, or Apostolical Men published any
thing; there is no doubt to be made, but Christians with great diligence (as
became their piety, and care to preserve and propagate truth to Posterity) took
from thence many Copies for their use. Which therefore were dispersed, as far
as the Christian Name; through Europe, Asia and Egypt, in which Places the
Greek Language was spoken.

And more than this, the Original Copies also, as we said before, were
preserved till Two Hundred Years after Christ. Now it was not possible that any
Book diffused into so many Copies, and kept not only by the private diligence
of particular Persons, but the common care of the Churches; should be altered
by the hand of any falsifier. Add further, that these Books in the following
ages were translated into the Syriac, Ethiopick, Arabic, and Latin Tongues:
which translations are yet extant; and do not differ in any thing of moment
from the Greek Copies themselves.

Besides, we have the Writings of those Men, who were taught by the Apostles
themselves, or by their Disciples, wherein many places are cited out of these
Books to the same sense and meaning, which now we read them. Neither was there
any in the Church of so great authority in those times, as to have met with
obedience, if he would have changed any thing: As is plain enough by the free
and open dissent of Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Cyprian, from those that were
most eminent in the Church. After which times there succeeded many other men,
of great Learning and Judgment, who having first made diligent inquiry thereof,
received these Books, as retaining their original purity. Hitherto also may be
referred what but now we said of diverse sects of Christians; all which, at
least such as acknowledged, God to be the Maker of the World, and Christ to be
the Author of a new Law, did receive and use these Books accordingly as we do
the same. And if any had attempted to alter, or put any thing new into any part
thereof, they should have been accused by the rest for forgery and
false-dealing therein. Neither was there ever any Sect that had the liberty at
their pleasure to alter any of these Books for their own turns; For it is
manifest that all of them did draw their arguments one against another, out of
the same. And as for that which we touched concerning divine providence, it
belongs no less unto the chiefest parts, than unto the whole Books; namely,
that it is not agreeable to it, that GOD should suffer so many Thousand Men,
which sincerely desired to be godly, and earnestly sought after eternal life,
to be led headlong into that error which they could no way avoid. And thus much
shall suffice to be spoken for the authority of the Books of the new covenant,
whence alone, if there were no other helps, we might be sufficiently instructed
concerning the true Religion.

SECT. XVI. For the Authority of the Books of the Old Testament.
NOW forasmuch as it has pleased God to leave us also the writings and
evidences of the Jewish Religion, which was anciently the true, and affords no
small testimonies for Christianity; Therefore it will not be amiss, in the next
place, to justify the authority of the same. First then, that these Books were
written by the same Men, whose Names they bear, is manifest in like manner, as
we have proved of ours before, of the new covenant.

These Authors were either Prophets, or other very faithful and credible men,
such as was Esdras, who is thought to have collected the Books of the Old
Testament into one Volume, during the life time of the Prophet Haggai, Malachy,
and Zachary. I will not here repeat again what is said before in the
commendation of Moses. Both that part of history, which at first was delivered
by him, as we have shown in the first Book; and that also which was collected
after his time is witnessed even by many of the Heathen. Thus the Annals of the
Phoenicians have recorded the names of David and Solomon, and their Leagues
with the Men of Tire. As Well Berosus as the Hebrew Writers, makes mention of
Nobuchadonosor, and of other Chaldean Kings. He whom Jeremy calls Vaphres King
of Egypt, is termed Apries by Herodotus. In like manner the Books of the
Grecians are replenished with Narrations concerning Cyrus and his Successors,
until the times of Darius. And many other things concerning the Nation of the
Jews are related by Josephus in his Books against Appion: whereunto we may add
what before we have touched out of Strabo and Trogus. But as for us Christians,
we cannot in the least doubt of the truth of these Books, out of every one of
which almost, there are testimonies extant in our Books, which are found
likewise in the Hebrew. Neither do we find, when Christ reprehended many things
in the Doctors of the Law and Pharisees of his time, that ever he accused them
of forgery committed against the Writings of Moses, or the Prophets; or that
they used counterfeit Books, or such as were changed.

Then after Christ's time, it cannot be proved, neither is it credible that the
Scripture was corrupted in matters of any moment; if we consider rightly how
far and wide over the face of the earth, the Nation of the Jews was spread, who
every where were the keepers of these Books. For first of all, the Ten Tribes
were led away captive by the Assyrians into Media, then afterward the two other
Tribes: And many of these also, after Cyrus granted them liberty to return,
settled themselves in foreign Countries. The Macedonians invited them with great
promises to come into Alexandria. The cruelty of Antiochus, the civil Wars of
the Maccabees, together with those of Pompey and Sossius from without, did
disperse and scatter abroad many of them. The parts of Africa about Cyrene were
full of the Jews: so were the Cities of Asia, Macedonia, Lycaonia; and likewise
the Isles of Cyprus, Crete, and others. Also what a number of them there was at
Rome, may be learned out of Horace, Juvenal and Martial. Now it is not possible
that such Multitudes so far distant one from another, should be cozened in this
kind; neither could they ever accord all in the coining of an untruth. Add
moreover, that almost Three Hundred Years before Christ, at the appointment and
care of the Kings of Egypt, those Books of the Hebrews were translated into the
Greek Tongue by those that are called the Seventy Interpreters. So as then the
Grecians had the sense and substance of them, though in another Language;
whereby they were the less liable to be changed. Nay more, these Books were
translated both into the Chaldee Tongue, and into that of Jerusalem, that is,
the half Syriac, a little before, and a little after the time of Christ. Other
Greek translations afterward there were, as namely by Aquila, Symmachus and
Theodotion; all which Origin compared with that of the Seventy Interpreters;
and after him others also, who could find no diversity of history, or of any
matter worth speaking of.

Philo lived in the Reign of Caligula, and Josephus survived the times of both
the Vespasians: which two Writers allege out of the Hebrew Books the same
things that we read at this day.

Now in these very times began Christian Religion to be more and more
propagated, being professed by many of the Hebrews, and by sundry Persons that
had learned the Hebrew Tongue; who if the Jews had falsified in any notable
part, could have quickly discovered it by comparing more ancient Copies, and so
have made it publicly known. But they are so far from doing this, that on the
other side they allege many testimonies out of the old covenant, to the same
sense and meaning that they are used by the Hebrews: which Hebrews may sooner
be accused of any other fault, than (I will not say falsehood, but of so much
as) negligence about these Books; which they have so religiously and exactly
described and compared, that they know how often any one Letter is found
therein.

The last, though not the least argument, to prove that the Jews did not
purposely corrupt or alter the Scripture, may be, because the Christians out of
the very Books which are read by the Jews do evince, and as they trust very
strongly, that their Lord and Master Jesus is that same very Messiah which was
anciently promised to the Jews their Forefathers. Which above all things the
Jews would have taken care should not have been done, when the controversy
arose between them and the Christians, if ever it had been in their power to
have changed what they listed.

The Fourth Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. A particular Confutation of the Religions opposite to Christianity.
THE Fourth Book beginning with that pleasure, which many Men are wont to take
in beholding the danger wherein others are, while they are in none themselves;
shows that it ought to be the greatest pleasure of a Christian Man in this
life, not only to rejoice and bless himself that he has found out the Truth,
but to lend his help also to others that wander up and down in the Labyrinths
of Error; and to make them partakers of so great a benefit.

Which we in some measure have endeavored to do in the former Books: (the
demonstration of that which is true, containing in it self the confutation of
what is false) yet in regard that all kinds of Religions, which oppose
themselves to the Christian, Viz. Paganism, Judaism and Mahometism; besides
that which is common to all, have certain errors proper to every one of them,
and their peculiar Arguments which they are wont to oppose us withal; it will
not be amiss to make a particular Disputation against every one of these:
First, beseeching the Readers to free their judgments from leaning to a Party,
and from long custom and prejudice, (as impediments of a good mind) that with
the greater indifferency they may take cognizance of what shall be said.

SECT. II. And first of Paganism, that there is but one God. Created Spirits
are good or bad: the good not to be honored, but as the most high God directs.
TO begin then against Pagans: If they say that there are diverse eternal and
coequal Gods, we have confuted this Opinion before in the first Book, where we
taught that there is but only one God, who is the cause of all things. Or if
they by the name of Gods, do understand the created Spirits which are superior
to Men, they then either mean the good or the bad: if they say the good, first,
they ought to be well assured that such are so indeed, otherwise they commit a
dangerous error in receiving enemies in stead of friends, and Traitors for
Ambassadors. Then it were but reason that they should in their very worship,
make an evident difference, between the most high God, and those Spirits. And
likewise be satisfied what order there is among them, what good may be expected
from each of them, and what honor the most High is willing should be bestowed
on every one of them. All which being wanting in their Religion, it is plain
from thence how uncertain that Religion is, and how it were a safer course for
them to betake themselves to the worship of one Almighty God; which even Plato
confessed was the duty of every wise Man, specially for that to whomsoever God
is propitious and favorable, to them these good Angels must needs be
serviceable and gracious, being the Ministers and Servants of the most High.

SECT. III. Evil Spirits adored by Pagans, and how impious a thing it is.
BUT it was the bad not the good Spirits which the Pagans did worship, as may
be proved by weighty reasons: first, because these adored Angels did not throw
off their worshippers unto the service of the true God, but as much as in them
lay, labored to abolish the same; or at least in every respect required equal
honor with the Almighty. Secondly, because they procured all the mischief they
could to the worshippers of the one most High God, by provoking both
Magistrates and People to inflict punishments upon them. For when it was lawful
for Poets to sing of the murders and adulteries committed by the Gods, and for
the Epicures to take away all divine Providence, and any other Religion (though
never so different in Rites) was allowed, as the Egyptian, the Phrygian, the
Grecian, the Thuscan, and the sacred rites of Rome; Even then generally the
Jews alone were made ridiculous, as appears by Satyrs and Epigrams written upon
them; and sometimes also suffered banishment. And as for Christians they were
afflicted with most cruel punishments: no other cause whereof can be given than
that. both these Sects did worship one God, whose honor was impeached by the
multitude of such Gods as the Heathen adored: who did not so much vie one with
another, as with Him.

Thirdly, this was manifest by the manner of their worship, which no way
beseemed any good and honest Spirit; namely, by humane blood, by the running of
naked Men in the Temples, by Pageants and dancings, full of nasty filthiness:
such as may be seen at this day among some People of America and Africa, who
yet sit in the darkness of Gentilisme.

Yea, which is more, there both anciently were, and now are People, who
worshipped evil Spirits; which they knew and professed to be such: As the
Persians Arimanius, the Greeks, those they called Cacodaemons, the Latins
their Vejoves; and now some Aethiopians and Indians, such like Deities; than
which nothing can be imagined more impious. For what is religious worship but a
testimony of an infinite goodness, that a Man does acknowledge to be in him
whom he worshippeth? which if it be exhibited unto a bad Spirit, it is false
and deceitful, implying in it no less crime than high treason; forasmuch as the
honor due unto the King is not only withdrawn from him, but is conferred upon
his enemy, and one that has traitorously revolted from Him. Moreover, vain is
that persuasion which they conceive of GOD, that he is good, and therefore will
not punish this offense; because they think so to do, were contrary to his
goodness. For mercy or clemency, that it may be just, has its bounds and
limits: and where wickedness abounds beyond measure, there justice does as it
were necessarily require the infliction of punishment. Neither is it less
blameable, that they pretend Fear constrains them to honor wicked Spirits:
since He that is perfectly Good, is as communicative also; and therefore the
Author of all other Natures, which are his productions. And if he be, then it
follows that he has absolute power and dominion over all creatures as over his
workmanship; so that nothing can be done by any of them, which he has a desire
to hinder. Which things being certainly true, we may easily gather that evil
Spirits can no further do any hurt to him, who has God, most high and most
transcendently good, favorable to him; than that God, for the sake of some
good or other, shall think fit to permit.

Nor can a Man obtain any thing of those evil Spirits by his Prayers, which is
not to be rejected: Because he that is evil is then worst of all, when he
feigns himself to be good; and the gifts of Enemies, are mere snares and
treacheries.

SECT. IV. Against the worship, which in Paganism is exhibited to Men after
their Death.
MOreover there were heretofore and now also are Pagans, that tell us, they
give honor and worship to the Souls of Men departed. But first they should
have here also made some manifest distinction between this honor and that
which is due unto the most high God: Then again, all prayers made to them are
but vain and fruitless, unless those Spirits were able to give us something; of
which their worshippers have no certainty: nor is there any more ground to say
that they can, than that they cannot. But another thing is worst of all, to
wit, that many of them to whom such glory is given by the Heathen, in their
life time were notoriously wicked, and addicted to one filthy vice or other:
Thus Bacchus was a drunkard, and Hercules effeminate; Romulus proved a very
villain to his Brother, and Jupiter a traitor to his own Father. So that their
honor redounds to the disgrace of the true GOD, and of Virtue which he loves:
whilst Vices which are enticing enough of themselves, it recommends to Men by
Religion.

SECT. V. Against worshipping of Stars and Elements.
OF more antiquity than this was the worshipping of Stars and of the Elements,
as Fire, Water, Air, and Earth; wherein great ignorance and folly was
committed. For prayers are the greatest part of religious worship, which cannot
without folly be directed to any object save to intelligent natures: but sense
tells us that the Elements (as we call them) are no such things. And as for the
Stars, if any say they are, he will never be able to prove it; since that no
such matter can be collected from their operations and influences which
demonstrate their nature; but rather we may gather the contrary by their
motion, which is not variable like to that in things endued with liberty of
will, but constant and unalterable. Besides we have shown before that the
course and motion of the Stars is appointed for the use of Men, whence Man
ought to acknowledge himself to be both liker to God than they, in his better
part, as also more dear unto him: And therefore much injury should he do to his
own worth and dignity, if he submit himself to such things, as God has given
to be serviceable unto him: whereas on the contrary he ought rather to render
thanks for them which cannot do, or it is not proved can do so much for
themselves.

SECT. VI. Against worshipping of Bruit-beasts.
BUT nothing is so unworthy as this, that Men, especially the Egyptians, sunk
at length into such a sottishness; as to worship brute Beasts. For though, in
some of them there appears some shadow, as we may call it, of understanding;
yet that understanding is nothing, if we compare it with Man's. For they can
neither express their inward conceptions by distinct words, or by writing; nor
do works of diverse kinds, no nor works of the same kind after diverse manners:
much less can they attain to the knowledge of numbers, dimensions, and the
celestial motions. Whereas, on the other side, Man, by the force and diligence
of his wit, catches all manner of Animals, though never so strong; whether wild
Beasts, Birds, or Fishes: and so masters them, that in some measure he makes
them subject to his Laws; as Elephants, Lions, Horses and Oxen. Yea, from those
which are hurtful, he draws to himself some profit, as Medicines from Serpents:
And has this use and benefit from them all (which is utterly unknown to them)
that he contemplates the composition of their Bodies, the situation of their
parts, and comparing both their species and their kinds one with another,
learns from thence also his own dignity; as much as the structure of Man's body
is more perfect and noble than that of the rest. Which things, if any Man
rightly consider, he will be so far from considering other living Creatures as
Gods; that he will rather look upon himself as constituted by the most High
God, a kind of God over them.

SECT. VII. Against worshipping of things that are no substances.
WE find also that the Grecians, Romans, and others worshipped those things
which have no subsistence, but are mere Accidents of other things.

For to omit those uncouth Deities, the Fever, dame Impudence, and the like,
let us name the better sort; such were health, which is nothing but a right
temperature of the parts of the body: good fortune, which is an event that is
correspondent to a Man's desire: The affections also, such as love, fear,
anger, hope, and the rest, which proceed from the consideration of something
that is good or evil, easy or difficult; are certain motions or passions in
that part of the mind which is united to the body, by the blood especially; not
having any absolute power of themselves, but are subordinate hand maids to the
commands of the will, their Mistress at least in their continuance and
direction. Then for Virtues, whose Names are diverse; Prudence, in choosing what
is profitable for us; Fortitude, in undertaking dangers; Justice, in abstaining
from that which is another Man's; Temperance, in the moderation of pleasures,
etc. they are certain inclinations and propensions in the mind unto that which
is right, grown up by long exercise and practice. Which as they may be
augmented in a Man; so may they by neglect be diminished; nay quite lost and
abolished. As for Honor (whereunto we read there were Temples dedicated) it is
other Men's judgment, or good opinion, concerning one whom they supposed endued
with Virtue: which is often bestowed upon bad men, as well as good; by the
natural proneness there is in Men to err in their judgment.

These therefore having no subsistence, and therefore not to be compared in
dignity and worth, with things that do subsist; nor having any understanding of
Men's prayers or veneration; it is most absurd and unreasonable to worship them
as Gods: when for this very thing He is to be worshipped, who can both give and
preserve them.

SECT. VIII. Answer to the Argument of the Gentiles taken from Miracles done
among them.
THE Pagans for the commendation of their Religion are wont to allege
Miracles, but such as in many things may be excepted against.

For the wisest Men among the Pagans rejected many of these, as supported by no
testimony of any credible witness; but plainly counterfeit and fabulous. Other
Miracles, which they said were done, happened in some secret place, in the night,
before one or two, whose eyes the craft of the Priests might easily delude by
false shows and appearances of things. And there are others which raised great
admiration, and passed for wonders, merely because they met with those, who
were ignorant of natural things; especially of hidden properties. As for
instance, such a thing might happen, if one should draw Iron with the
Loadstone, among People who knew nothing of its virtue: in which arts Simon
Magus, and Apollonius, as many have recorded, were very skilful.

I do not deny, but some things greater than these were seen, which by Man's
power alone could not be drawn out of natural causes; and yet did not need a
power which was truly divine; that is, omnipotent: but might be performed by
Spirits that are placed between God and Men. Who by their celerity, efficacy,
subtilty and diligence, can easily carry things far distant from one place to
another; and compound things that are very different; to the working of such
effects, as shall strike Men with astonishment. But that the Spirits, whereby
this was effected, were not good, and therefore neither was the Religion good;
appears already from what has been said before. And from hence also, that they
said they were compelled to do things, even against their wills, by the power
of certain charms: when the wisest of the Pagans agree that there can be no
such virtue in words; but only a power of persuasion, and that no other way
than by their signification.

And it is another token of their wickedness, that they undertook to allure and
draw this or that body, though never so backward to it, into the love of such
or such a Person. Wherein they were injurious to them; either in their vain
promises, or in effecting what they promised: for this also is forbidden by
humane Laws, as a piece of Sorcery. Neither need any Man wonder why God
suffered some marvels to be wrought by evil Spirits among the Gentiles, seeing
they deserved to be cheated with such illusions, who so long time had forsaken
the worship of the true God.

Moreover this is an argument of their weakeness and impotency, that their
works never brought any considerable good along with them. For if any seemed to
be called back to life after they were dead, they did not continue alive;
neither could they exercise the functions of living Creatures. Or if it
happened that any thing proceeding happily from a divine power, did appear to
the Pagans; yet the same was not foretold should come to pass for the
confirmation of their Religion, and therefore there might be other causes, and
far different reasons, which the divine efficacy propounded to it self in the
doing those things. As for example, if it was true, that Vespasian restored
sight to one blind; this was done, that he being thereby made more venerable,
might the more easily obtain the Roman Empire: to which he was chosen by God,
that he might be a Minister of his Judgments upon the Jews. More such like
causes there may be of other wonders, which had no relation at all to their
Religion.

SECT. IX. And from Oracles.
THE very same likewise, in a manner, may serve for answer to that which they
object concerning Oracles; especially what we have said, that these Men did
worthily deserve to be deluded, for contempt of that knowledge which reason or
ancient tradition suggested to every one of them. Then again the words of the
Oracles, for the most part, were ambiguous, and might easily receive an
interpretation, from any event whatsoever. Or if there was any thing more
expressly foretold by them, yet it is not necessary that it should proceed from
an all-knowing mind: For it was either such a thing as might be foreseen by
natural causes then existing, as some Physicians have foretold Diseases that
are a coming; or else some probable conjecture might be made by that which
commonly falls out and usually comes to pass, as we read of some persons well
skilled in civil affairs, that have made notable guesses at future events.
Again, suppose that amongst the Pagans God sometimes used the ministry of some
Prophets to foretell those things, which could have no certain cause besides the
will of God; yet this did not approve or confirm their heathenish Religion, but
rather overthew it. Such for instance are those things, in the fourth Eclogue
of Virgil, taken out of the Sibyls verses; where unwittingly the Poet gives us
a lively description of the coming of Christ, and his benefits. So in the same
Books of the Sibyls it was, that he ought to be acknowledged as King, who
should be our King indeed: and that he was to come out of the East, who should
have dominion over all. We read in Porphyry of the Oracle of Apollo, which
says, that other Gods are aerial Spirits, but the God of the Hebrews is only
to be worshipped: which saying, if the worshippers of Apollo obey, then they
must cease to worship him: if they do not obey it, then they make their God a
Iyar. Add further, if those Spirits had respected or intended the good of
Mankind, above all things, they would have prescribed a general Rule of life to
Mankind, and also given some certain assurance of a reward to them that lived
accordingly; neither of which was ever done by them.

On the other side oftentimes in their Verses we find some Kings commended
which were wicked men, some Champions extolled and dignified with divine honor,
others allured to immodest and unlawful love, or to the seeking after filthy
lucre, or committing of Murder, as might be shown by many Examples.

SECT. X. Paganism decayed of its own accord so soon as humane aid ceased.
BESIDES all that has hitherto been said, Paganism ministers to us a mighty
argument against it self; because that wheresoever it becomes destitute of
humane force to support it, there straightway it comes to ruin, as if the
foundation thereof were quite overthrown. For if we take a view of all the
Kingdoms and States that are among Christians or Mahumetans, we shall find no
memory of Paganism, but in Books. Nay histories tell us, that even in those
times, when the Emperors endeavored to uphold the Pagan Religion either by
violence and persecution, as did the first of them; or by learning and
subtilty, as did Julian; it notwithstanding decayed daily, not by any violent
opposition, nor by the brightness and splendour of lineage and descent, (for
Jesus was accounted by the common sort only a Carpenters Son;) nor by the
flourishes of learning, which they that taught the Law of Christ used not in
their Sermons; nor by gifts and bribes, for they were poor; nor by any soothing
and flattering speeches, for on the contrary they taught that all worldly
advantages must be despised, and that all kind of adversity must be undergone
for the Gospel's sake. See then how weak and impotent Paganism was, which by
such means came to ruin.

Neither did the doctrine of Christ only make the credulity of the Gentiles to
vanish, but even bad Spirits came out of diverse bodies at the name of Christ:
they became dumb also, and being demanded the reason of their silence, they
were compelled to say, that they were able to do nothing where the name of
Christ was called upon.

SECT. XI. Answer to the Opinion of some that think the beginning and decay of
Religions depend upon the efficacy of the Stars.
THERE have been Philosophers, that did ascribe the beginning and decay of
every Religion unto the Stars: But this star-gazeing Science, which these Men
profess to be skilled in, is delivered under such different rules, that one can
be certain of nothing, but only this, that there is no certainty at all therein.

I do not here speak of such effects as follow from a natural necessity of
causes, but of those that proceed from the will of Man, which of it self has
such liberty and freedom, that no necessity or violence can be impressed upon
it from without. For if the consent of the will did necessarily follow any
outward impression, then the power in our soul, which we may perceive it has
to consult deliberate and choose, would be given in vain. Also the equity of all
Laws, of all rewards and punishments would be taken away, seeing there can be
neither fault nor merit in that which is altogether necessary and inevitable.

Again, there are diverse evil acts or effects of the will, which if they
proceeded of any necessity from the Heavens, then the same Heavens and
Celestial Bodies must needs receive such efficacy from God, and so it would
follow, that God, who is most perfectly good, is the true cause of that which
is morally evil; And that when in his Law he professes himself to abhor
wickedness, which a force inserted by him into things themselves will
inevitably produce, he does will two things contrary one to the other; that the
same thing should be done and not be done; and also that a Man offends in an
action, which he does by divine instigation.

They speak more probably, that say the influences of the Stars do first affect
the Air, then our Bodies, with such qualities as oftentimes do excite and stir
up in the mind some desires or affections answerable thereunto: and the will
being allured or enticed by these motions does oftentimes yield unto them. But
if this should be granted, it makes nothing for the question we have in hand.
For seeing that Christian Religion most of all withdraws Men from those things
which are pleasing unto the body, it cannot therefore have its beginning from
the affections of the body, and consequently not from the influence of the
Stars; which (as but now we said) have no power over the mind, otherwise than
by the mediation of those affections. The most prudent among Astrologers exempt
truly wise and good Men from the dominion of the Stars: And such verily were
they that first professed Christianity, as their lives do show. Or if there be
any efficacy in learning and knowledge against the infection of the body, even
among Christians there were ever some that were excellent in this particular.

Besides, as the most learned do confess, the effects of the Stars respect
certain Climates of the World, and are only for a season; but this Religion
has now continued above the space of one thousand six hundred years, and that
not in one part only, but in the most remote places of the World, and such as
are under a far different position of the Stars.

SECT. XII. The chief Points of Christianity are approved of by the Heathen:
and if there be any thing that is hard to be believed therein, the like or
worse is found among the Pagans.
BUT the Pagans have the less to object against Christian Religion: because all
the parts thereof are of such honesty and integrity, that they convince Men's
minds by their own light. In so much that there have not been wanting Men among
the Pagans also, who have here and there said every one of those things, which
our Religion has in a body all together. As to give some instances; true
Religion consists not in Rites and Ceremonies, but in the mind and Spirit: he
is an adulterer that has but a desire to commit adultery: we ought not to
revenge injuries: one Man should be the Husband of one Wife only: the league or
bond of Matrimony ought to be constant and perpetual: Man is bound to do good
unto all, specially to them that are in want: we must refrain from Swearing as
much as may be: And as for our Food and Apparel we ought to content our selves
with so much as will suffice nature, and the like. Or if happily there be some
points in Christianity hard to be believed, yet the like also is found amongst
the wisest of the Heathen themselves; as before we have shown concerning the
immortality of Souls, and of the Resurrection of Bodies. Thus Plato, as he
learned from the Chaldeans, distinguished the Divine nature into the Father;
and the mind of the Father; (which he calls also the branch of God, the Maker
of the World) and the Soul or Spirit, which keeps together and preserves all
things.

Julian, as great an enemy as he was of Christians, thought that the Divine
Nature might be joined to the humane: and gave instance in Aesculapius, whom he
imagined to have descended from Heaven, to the end he might teach Men the Art
of Physic. The Cross of Christ offends many: But what do not the Pagan
Writers tell of their Gods? that some of them waited upon Kings and Princes,
others were Thunderstruck, others cut in sunder. And the wisest of them say,
that the more it costs us to be honest, the more joy and delight it affords us.

To conclude, Plato in the second Book of his Commonwealth, as if he had been
a Prophet, says, for a Man to appear truly just and upright, it is requisite
that his virtue be bereaved of all outward ornaments; so that he be by others
accounted a wicked wretch, and scoffed at, and last of all hanged. And indeed
that Christ might be the Pattern of greatest Patience, could no otherwise be
obtained.

The Fifth Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. A refutation of the Jews, beginning with a speech unto them or prayer
for them.
JUST like that glimmering between light and darkness, which appears to those,
who by little and little are endeavoring to get out of a dark Cave or Dungeon:
such does Judaism present it self to us (who are stepping out of the thick mist
of Paganism, of which we have been discoursing) as a part and beginning of
Truth. I request the Jews therefore not to be averse to hear us.

We are not ignorant that they are the offspring of holy Men, whom God was wont
to visit both by his Prophets, and by his Angels. Of this Nation sprang our
Messiah, and the first Doctors of Christianity: It is their Tree whereinto we
are ingraffed: they are the keepers of God's Oracles, which we do reverence as
much as they, and with St. Paul sigh unto God for them, and pray that the day
may quickly come, when the Vail being taken away which hangs over their Faces,
they with us shall see the fulfilling of the Law; And when (as it is in their
Prophecies) every one of us that are strangers shall lay hold on the Cloak of
him that is an Hebrew, desiring that we may together with a pious consent
worship the only true God, who is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

SECT. II. The Jews ought to account the Miracles of Christ sufficiently proved.
FIRST of all then, we must entreat them not to think that to be unjust in
another Man's case, which they judge to be just and equitable in their own. If
any Pagan demand of them why they believe that Miracles were wrought by Moses,
they can give no other answer save that there was always so constant a report
thereof among their Nation, that it could not but proceed from the testimony of
such as had seen the same.

Thus that the Widows Oil was increased by Elisha: that Naaman the Syrian was
suddenly cured of the Leprosy: that the Woman's Son in whose House he lodged
was restored to life, and other such like, are believed by the Jews for no
other reason than because witnesses of good credit have recorded to posterity,
that such things were done. And they believe Elias his taking up into heaven,
only for the single testimony of Elisha, as a Man beyond all exception. But we
produce twelve witnesses of unblameable life to testify that Christ ascended
up into Heaven. And many more that saw him upon the Earth after his death.
Which things if they be true, then necessarily Christ's doctrine is true also;
and indeed nothing at all can be alleged by the Jews for themselves, which by
equal right or more just title may not be applied to us also. But to omit
further testimonies, it is the confession of the Authors of the Talmud, and
other Jews themselves, that strange wonders were wrought by Christ; which ought
to suffice for this particular. For God cannot any way more effectually gain
authority unto a doctrine published by Man, than by the working of miracles.

SECT. III. And not believe that they were done by the help of Devils.
THESE Miracles of Christ, some said, were done by the help of Devils. But this
calumny has been confuted before, when we showed that wheresoever the doctrine
of Christ was taught and known, there all power of the Devils was broken in
pieces. Others reply that Jesus learned Magic arts in Egypt: but this slander
has no more, nay not so much color of truth, than the like accusation by the
Pagans framed against Moses, whereof we read in Pliny and Apuleius.

For, that ever Jesus was in Egypt does not appear, save only out of the
Writings of his Disciples: who add further, that he was an Infant when he
returned thence. But it is certain by his own and others report, that Moses
lived a great part of his time after he was grown to Man's estate in Egypt.
Howbeit the Law, as well of Moses, as of Christ, frees them both from this
crime, plainly forbidding such arts, as abominable in the sight of God. And
without all question, if in the time of Christ and his Disciples, there had
been either in Egypt, or any where else any such Magical art, whereby Men might
have been enabled to do the like marvels as are related of Christ; to wit,
giving speech to the Dumb on a sudden, making the Lame to walk, and the Blind
to see; then would Tyberius, Nero, and other Emperors have found it out, who
spared no costs and charges in the inquiry after such like things.

Nay, if it were true which the Jews relate, how that the Senators of the great
Council were skilled in Magic arts, that they might convince them that were
guilty of that iniquity; then surely, they being so mightily incensed against
Jesus, as they were, and envying the honor and respect which he obtained
chiefly by his miracles, would either themselves have done the like works by
the same art, or by sufficient reasons would have made it appear, that the
works of Christ proceeded from no other cause.

SECT. IV. Or by the Power of Words and Syllables.
MOreover, that is not only a mere fable but impudent lie, which some of the
Jews have invented concerning the Miracles done by Christ, which they ascribe
to a certain secret name, which (as they say) being placed in the Temple by
Solomon, was preserved safe by two Lions, during the space of One Thousand
Years and more, but afterward stolen away by Jesus. For there is no mention
made of those Lions (though it be a thing most remarkable and wonderful) either
in the Books of Kings and Chronicles, or by Josephus: nor was there any such
thing found by the Romans, who accompanying Pompey, entered into that Temple,
before the times of Jesus.

SECT. V. The Miracles of Jesus were divine, because he taught the worship of
one God the Maker of the World.
IT being then granted, as the Jews cannot deny, that Wonders were wrought by
Christ, it will follow from the very Law of Moses, that he must be believed.
For God says, Deuteron. xviii. 15, etc. that other Prophets after the time of
Moses should be raised up of God, to whom the People should be obedient, or
otherwise become liable to grievous punishments. Now miracles are the most
infallible marks of the Prophets: Nor can any more illustrious be so much as
conceived. But in Deuteron. xiii. it is said, that if any professing himself to
be a Prophet does work wonders, yet He must not be believed, if he go about to
entice the People to a new worship of the Gods. For, though such miracles be
done, yet this is only by God's permission, for trial, whether the People would
persist constantly in the worship of the true God. From which places compared
together the Hebrew Interpreters do rightly collect, that every one must be
believed that works miracles, unless thereby he entice Men from the worship
of the true God; and in that case only miracles are not to be credited, though
in show most glorious. Now Jesus did not only not teach the worshipping of
false Gods; but also expressly condemned it as a most grievous crime, and taught
us to reverence the writings both of Moses and the Prophets that succeeded him.
Wherefore there is nothing that can be objected against the miracles that were
wrought by Christ.

SECT. VI. Answer to the Objection, taken from the difference between the Law
of Moses and of Christ, where is shown that a more perfect Law than that of
Moses might be given.
AS touching that which some allege, concerning the difference between the law
of Moses and the law of Christ, it is but of small moment. For the Hebrew
Doctors themselves make this rule, that by the authority of a Prophet, who
works miracles, any precept whatsoever may be boldly violated and
transgressed, except that only which concerns the worship of the true God. And
surely that power of making laws, which belonged unto God when he gave the
commandments by the hand of Moses, went not from him afterward: Neither can any
Man that of his own right makes laws, be thereby hindered from making the
contrary.

That which they object, that God then would be mutable, is nothing: for we
speak not here of Gods nature and essence, but of his works. Light is changed
into darkness, youth into old age, summer into winter, and all by the work of
God. Thus God at the beginning gave Adam leave in Paradise to eat of other
apples, but he forbad him to eat of the fruit of one tree: Why? even because it
so pleased him. Generally he prohibited Men to kill others, yet he commanded
Abraham to kill his Son. One while he forbad to offer sacrifices apart from the
Tabernacle, another while he admitted of them. Neither will it follow, because
the Law which was given by Moses was good, therefore no better could be given.
Parents are wont to speak half words and stutter with Infants; to wink at the
vices of their childhood; and entice them to learn with a piece of Cake. But so
soon as they come to riper age, their speech is corrected, the precepts of
virtue are instilled into them by degrees, and they are taught what is the
beauty of virtue, what its rewards. Now it is plain that the precepts of that
law of Moses were not exactly perfect, because many holy Men of those times led
a more excellent life than those commandments required. Thus Moses, who
suffered the revenge of a wrong to be exacted partly by blows, and partly by
sentence of the Judges, himself being vexed with most bitter injuries, became
an Intercessor for his enemies. So David willing to have his rebellious Son to
be spared, did patiently endure reproachful speeches cast upon himself. We no
where read that any good Men put away their Wives, which notwithstanding was
permitted by the law. The reason of which is, that Laws are accommodated to the
greater part of a People: therefore in the state and condition they were in, it
was meet something should be winked at; to be reduced to a more perfect Rule,
when God by a greater efficacy of the Spirit was to choose unto himself a new
peculiar people out of all Nations. Yea, all the rewards which are expressly
promised by the law of Moses, belong only to this mortal life: wherefore it
must be granted, that there might some better law be given, whereby the reward
of eternal happiness should be promised, not under any shadows, but in plain
and express terms: which we see is done by the law of Christ.

SECT. VII. The Law of Moses was observed by Jesus, who abolished no
Commandments that were essentially good.
AND here by the way, for the conviction of the Jews iniquity, it must be
noted, that they who lived in Christ's time, used him most basely, and punished
him most unjustly; when as there could no just accusation be laid against him
for transgressing the Law. He was circumcised; he used the same food and
apparel that the Jews used: those that were healed of Leprosy, he sent unto
the Priests: The Passover and other Festival days he religiously observed:
Though he did cure some upon the Sabbath day; yet he showed both by the Law and
by the common received opinions, that such works were not forbidden to be done
upon the Sabbath Day. Then it was, that he first began to publish the
abrogation of some Laws, when after his triumph over Death he ascended into
Heaven, adorning his Disciples upon Earth with illustrious gifts of the holy
Spirit, whereby he made it evident that he had obtained a regal power, which
includes in it the authority of making a Law: And that according to Daniel's
prophecy, chapter 3. and 7. compared with chap. 8. and 11. where he foretold, how
that a little after the destruction of the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, (the
latter whereof happened in the Reign of Augustus,) GOD would give the Kingdom
to a man (who should seem but a vulgar Person) over all Nations and Languages,
which Kingdom should never have an end.

Now that part of the Law, the necessity whereof was taken away by Christ,
contained nothing that was honest in its own nature: but consisted of things
that were indifferent in themselves, and consequently not immutable. For if
those things had had in them any thing of themselves why they should be done;
then would God have prescribed them not to one, but to all People; and not
after that mankind had lived above the space of Two Thousand Years, but even
from the beginning of all. Neither Abel, Enoch, Noah, Melchisedeck, Job,
Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, (though all of them were godly men, and dearly
beloved of God) knew this part of the Law, but were altogether ignorant, or
very little acquainted therewith; yet notwithstanding, for all that, they
received the testimony of their confidence in God, and of God's love unto them.
Besides, neither did Moses exhort Jethro his Father in law to the receiving of
these rites, nor did Jonah the Ninivites, neither did any other Prophets
reprehend the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Sydonians, Tyrians, Idumeans, and
Moabites, for not admitting those ceremonies, though when they writ unto them,
they reckoned up their sins exactly enough. These then were peculiar precepts
introduced either for the avoiding of some evil, which the Jews were prone
unto; or for the trial of their obedience, or for the signification of some
future things.

Wherefore it is no more to be wondered, that these are abolished, than if any
King should abrogate some Municipal Statutes, (which belong, that is, to
particular Corporations) to the end he might establish one law within his
dominions. Neither can there any reason be alleged, to prove that God did so
bind himself, as that he would change nothing of the same.

For if it be said, that these precepts are called perpetual, the same word Men
oftentimes use, when they would signify that that which they command is not
yearly, or accommodated to certain times, suppose of War, Peace, or Scarcity.
Yet they are not thereby hindered from making new constitutions of the same
things, specially when the public good requires it. Thus in like manner some
of the Divine precepts given to the Hebrews were temporary, during the Peoples
abode in the Wilderness: others were strictly tied to their habitation in the
Land of Canaan: therefore to distinguish these from the other, he calls them
perpetual, whereby might be understood, that they ought not any where, or at
any time to be intermitted, unless God signified that it was his will so to be.
Which manner of speaking, since it is commonly used by all people, ought to be
less wondered at by the Hebrews: who know that in their Law it is called a
perpetual statute, and a perpetual bondage, which continues only from one
Jubilee to another: And the coming of the Messiah is called by them the
accomplishment of the Jubilee, or the greatest Jubilee of all. Thus in the
Hebrew Prophets, there was anciently a promise of making a new covenant, as in
Jerem. xxxi. where God promises that he will make a new covenant, which shall
be put into their inward parts, and written in their hearts, neither shall men
have any need, that one shall learn Religion of another, for it shall be
manifest unto all. Yea further, the Lord will forgive them their former
iniquities, and will remember their sin no more: which is as if a King after
great enmity and discord amongst his Citizens and Subjects, should for the
establishment of peace and tranquillity among them, take away all diversity of
Laws, and make one perfect Law common to them all, promising forgiveness of
faults bypast, if hereafter they do amend. And this which has been said might
suffice, but we will survey every part of the Law which is abrogated, and show
they were neither such as in themselves could be well pleasing unto God, nor
ought they to continue for ever.

SECT. VIII. As the Sacrifices, which of themselves were never well-pleasing
unto God.
THE first and chief thing to be considered, are the Sacrifices, which many of
the Hebrews think were invented by Man, before that they were commanded by God.
And true it is indeed, the Hebrews were desirous of abundance of Rites and
Ceremonies, so that there was cause enough why GOD should enjoin them very
many, if it were but for this reason, lest they should return unto the worship
of false Gods, by the remembrance of their sojourning in Egypt.

Howbeit when their Posterity made too great account of them, as though of
themselves they had been acceptable unto God, and a part of true piety; then
did the Prophets reprehend them for it: About Sacrifices, says God by David,
in the fiftieth Psalm, I will not so much as exchange a word with thee; as if I
were desirous to have thy burnt offerings continually before me. I will take no
Buliock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.

For every beast of the forest is mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wila beasts of the field
are mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the World is mine, and
the fullness thereof: think thou that I will eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink
the blood of goats? Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most
high.

Some there are among the Hebrews, who say that this is spoken, because they
that offered those sacrifices, were of an impure mind, and dishonest
conversation. But the words now alleged show another matter, to wit, that the
thing in it self was no whit acceptable unto God. For if we consider the whole
series and order of the Psalm, we shall and that God in these words speaks unto
the godly: for he had said, Gather my Saints together unto me, and hear my
people: which are the words of a Teacher and one that instructs. Then having
ended those words now alleged, as his manner is, he speaks unto the wicked:
But unto the wicked God says. To the same sense we may cite other places, as
in the 51. Psalm. Thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but
thou delightest not in burnt-offerings. The sacrifice of God is a broken
Spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. So likewise
in the fortieth Psalm; Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, but have
tied me to thee, as he whose ear was boared through, to be thy servant:
burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required. Then said I, Lo, I
come: In the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will,
O my God: yea thy Law is within my heart. I have preached righteousness in the
great Congregation: Lo, I have not refrained my Lips, O Lord, thou know. I
have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and
thy truth from the great Congregation. The like we read in the Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 1. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, says the
Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and
I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. When ye
come to appear before me, who has required this at your hand to tread my
Courts? Answerable to this place, and the Interpreter of it, is that in Jer. 7.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt-offerings unto
your sacrifices, and eat their flesh your selves: For I spoke not unto your
fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. But this thing commanded I
them saying Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my People:
and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto
you. Agreeing with this, is that in Hosea 6. To show mercy to men, is more
acceptable to me than sacrifice, to think rightly of God more than all
burnt-offerings. Lastly, in the sixth of Micah, when the question was made,
what was the best way to obtain the favor of God? whether by coming before him
with a great number of rams, or with a great quantity of Oil, or with Calves of
a Year old? to this God answers and says, I will tell thee what is truly good
and acceptable unto me; namely, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God.

By all which places it being apparent, that Sacrifices are not in the number
of those things which God desires for themselves or primarily; and that the
People (a naughty superstition creeping in, as is usual, by little and little
among them) placed a great part of their piety in them, and believed they made
a sufficient compensation for their sins by sacrifices: what wonder is it, if
God at length took away a thing, which was not now in its own nature
indifferent, but whose use was now become a Vice? since King Hezekiah did not
stick to break even the brazen Serpent, erected by Moses; because the People
began to honor it with Religious Worship.

Moreover, there are diverse Prophecies, that foretold these sacrifices, whereof
we speak, should come to an end: which any one may easily conceive, who does
but consider that according to the Law of Moses, only the posterity of Aaron
was to do sacrifice, and that only in their own Country. But in the 110 Psalm,
there is a King promised, whose dominion should be most ample, the beginning
whereof should be out of Sion: and this same King was to be a Priest also for
ever, and that after the order of Melchisedeck. So Isaiah says, chap. 19. That
there shall be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt, where
not only the Egyptians, but the Assyrians also, and the Israelites shall
worship God. And in the 66 chapter, he says, that the People of all Nations
and Languages which are far and widely distant, shall come as well as the
Israelites, and offer gifts unto God, and of them also there shall be ordained
Priests and Levites: All which could not come to pass so long as the Law of
Moses remained in force. Add unto these that in the first of Malachy God
foretelling future things, says he, abhorred the offerings of the Hebrews, I
have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. For
from the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same, my name shall
be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto
my name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the Heathen,
says the Lord of Hosts.

Lastly, Daniel in his 9. chapter rehearsing the Prophecy of the Angel Gabriel
concerning Christ, says, that he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease. And not by words only, but really and indeed God plainly enough shows
that he likes not any longer those Sacrifices which were prescribed by Moses,
seeing that he has suffered the Jews for the space of one thousand six hundred
years and more to be without Temple, without Altar, and without any certain
distinction of their Tribes or Lineage; whence it might appear who they are
that may lawfully offer sacrifice.

SECT. IX. The difference of Meats.
NOW what we have declared concerning the Law of Sacrifices, the same may be
proved of that Law which forbids the use of some kinds of meats. For it is
plain that after the great Deluge, God gave license unto Noah and his
Posterity, to use any sort of victual: Which Right therefore passed not only to
Japhet and Cham, but also unto Sem and his Posterity, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. But afterward when the People being in Egypt were addicted to the
naughty superstitions of that Country; then began God to forbid them the
eating of some kind of living creatures; either because the Egyptians offered
those creatures unto their Gods, and made divination by them; or because in
that ceremonial Law Men's sundry vices were shadowed out by diverse kind of
living creatures.

Again, that these precepts were not universal, it is manifest by that statute
which was made touching the flesh of a Beast, that died of it self, Deuteronomy. 14.
which to eat was not lawful for the Israelites, but it was lawful for the
strangers that dwelt among them, unto whom the Jews by divine command were to
perform all offices of courtesy, as persons esteemed by God. Likewise the
ancient Hebrew Doctors do plainly teach, that in the time of the Messiah, the
Law concerning forbidden meats should cease: when the Sow should be as clean
and pure as the Ox. And verily, in as much as God out of all Nations would
collect unto himself one Church, it was more just and equitable to have a
common liberty than a bondage in such things.

SECT. X. And of Days.
IT follows, that we consider of Festival Days: all which were instituted and
ordained in remembrance of that benefit received of God, when they were freed
from Egyptian calamity, and afterward brought into the promised Land. Now the
Prophet Jeremy, in the 16. and 23. Chapters, says, that the time would come
when more new and greater benefits should so obscure the remembrance of that
benefit, as that afterward there should scarce be any mention thereof. Besides,
that which but now was said concerning Sacrifices is true also of Festival
Days; the People began to put confidence in them, thinking that if they kept
and observed them well, it was no matter though they transgressed in other
matters: whereupon in the first Chapter of Isaiah; God faith, that his Soul
hated their new Moons, and appointed Feasts, and that they were such a trouble
unto him, as that he was weary to bear them. More particularly it is objected
concerning the Sabbath, that the law thereof is universal and perpetual,
because it was not given to one peculiar People only, but to Adam the Parent of
all Mankind at the very beginning of the World. I answer with the most learned
of the Hebrews, that there is a twofold precept concerning the Sabbath; the
first is a precept for commemoration, Exodus 20. 8. and the second is a precept
for observation, Exodus 31. 31. The former is fulfilled by a religious
remembrance of the Worlds creation: and the latter consists in an exact
refraining from all kinds of other labor. The former was given from the
beginning, which doubtless those godly men before the Law did obey, to wit,
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob. The last of which, though they
traveled much, as we read, yet there is no where the least sign or remembrance
of their intermitting their journey for the Sabbath; which after they came out
of Egypt you shall always meet with. For after that the People were brought out
of Egypt, and had happily passed over the red Sea, the next day they
celebrated a Sabbath of rest and safety; wherein they sang a Song of triumph
and rejoicing: from which time that exact rest upon the Sabbath was commanded,
which is first mentioned upon occasion of gathering the Manna, Exodus 16. 23.
Exodus 35. 2. Levit. 23. 3. And in this sense the deliverance from Egypt is
made the reason for the Law of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. By which Law provision
also was made for servants against the severity of those masters, that would
not grant them any rest or relaxation from daily labor, as may be seen in the
places aforesaid. It is true indeed, strangers were bound to observe this Law,
because it was meet there should be one form of rest among all the People; but
this Law of so exact resting upon the Sabbath was not given to other People, as
may appear by this, that in many places it is called a sign, and a special
covenant also between God and the Israelites, as in Exodus 31. 13. and 16. Now
we have proved before by the promise of far greater benefits, that the
ordinances which were instituted for a memorial of the coming out from Egypt,
were not such as ought never to cease. Add moreover, if the Law concerning the
rest upon the Sabbath had been given from the beginning, and in that sense,
that it never might be abolished; then surely that Law had prevailed over other
laws, when there was a clashing between them: which we find was quite contrary,
by its yielding to them. For it is evident, that Infants were rightly
circumcised upon the Sabbath; like, as during the time that the Temple stood,
there were Beasts killed for sacrifice, as well upon the Sabbath, as upon other
days. Yea, the Hebrew Masters themselves show the mutability of this law, when
they say, that by a Prophet's appointment and command a work may be rightly
done upon the Sabbath Day: And this they prove by the taking of Jerico upon the
Sabbath, according to the commandment of Joshuah. And some of them not unfitly
show, that the distinction of days shall be taken away in the time of the
Messiah, from that place in Isaiah, lxvi. 23. where it is prophesied, It shall
come to pass that the worship of God shall be perpetual from one new Moon to
another, from one Sabbath to another.

SECT. XI. Also of outward Circumcision.
IN the next place let us come to Circumcision, which certainly is Elder than
Moses: For it was given in command to Abraham and his Posterity.

Howbeit the commandment thereof was the introduction or beginning of the
covenant published by Moses: For thus we read, that God spoke unto Abraham,
Genesis 17. saying, I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession, and I will be their God. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep
my covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee: every manchild among you
shall be circumcised. But now we know by what has been already said, that in
the place of this covenant, a new covenant was to succeed, which should be
common to all People: For which cause the necessity of that note of
distinction, ought to cease. Besides, in the precept of circumcision there was
a mystical and more excellent signification contained, which the Prophets do
plainly show in that they command the circumcision of the heart, which all the
commandments of Jesus aim at.

Wherefore the promises also annexed to circumcision, are in like manner to be
referred to some greater thing: As that of earthly possessions, to the
revelation of a possession truly eternal; which was never made more manifest
than by Jesus: So that promise of making Abraham a Father of many Nations, has
reference to that time, when not a few, but an infinite number of People
dispersed thorowout the whole World, should imitate Abraham's Faith and
confidence in God, which is so often mentioned in Scripture; and this never
came to pass, but in the time of the Gospel. Now it is no marvel, if the
shadows of an intended work be taken away, when the matter it self is
accomplished. Lastly, that the grace of God was not tied to this sign, we may
easily discern, because not only the more ancient, but Abraham himself having
not as yet received circumcision, pleased God: The Hebrews also, during all the
time of their journey through the Deserts of Arabia, omitted circumcision, and
yet God found no fault with them for it.

SECT. XII. And yet the Apostles of Jesus were gentle in the toleration of
these things.
NO doubt but the Hebrews had cause to yield many thanks to Jesus and his
Ambassadors, for that by Christ they might be freed from that heavy yoke of
ceremonies, and be assured of this their freedom both by gifts and miracles,
such as were not inferior to those that were wrought by Moses.

And yet the first Publishers of our Christian doctrine did not exact so much
of them as to acknowledge this their happiness: But if they would admit of the
Commandments of Christ, which were full of all honesty; they easily suffered
them to follow what course of life they pleased in matters of indifferency: Yet
so, that upon strangers (to whom this law of rites was never given) they should
not impose a necessity of observing them. Which one thing is sufficient to make
it plainly appear, that the Jews do unjustly reject the doctrine of Christ,
under that pretense of the ceremonial Law. Having then answered this Objection,
which chiefly is alleged against the miracles of Jesus: we will now come to
other arguments, which may fitly serve for the conviction of the Jews.

SECT. XIII. A Proof against the Jews, from the promised Messiah.
IT is agreed upon between us and the Jews, that in the predictions of the
Prophets, above many other authors and donors of great good things to the
Hebrews, there was one man promised far more excellent than the rest: whom they
call by a Name common to others, but in the highest sense of it, belonging to
him alone, the MESSIAH. This Messiah we say is come long ago, but they expect
him as yet for to come. It remains then that we seek for a decision of this
controversy out of those Books, the authority whereof we both do jointly
acknowledge.

SECT. XIV. Who is proved to be already come, by the limited time of his
coming, which was foretold.
THE Prophet Daniel, to whom Ezekiel has given a Testimony of exceeding great
Piety, neither would willingly deceive us, nor was himself deceived by the
Angel Gabriel. Now He, taught by the same Angel, in the Ninth Chapter of his
Prophecy has left it recorded, that before five hundred years should be
expired, after the promulgation of the decree touching the restoring of the
City Jerusalem, the Messiah should come. But now since that time above two
thousand years have passed; and yet he, whom the Jews expect, is not come:
neither can they name any other person, to whom that space or time can be
rightly applied; which agrees so fitly unto Jesus, that Nehumias an Hebrew
Doctor, who lived about Fifty Years before Christ, plainly said then; that the
time of the Messiah foretold by Daniel could not be protracted beyond those
Fifty Years then next ensuing. And with this note of time, agrees another note
which we have touched before; concerning the establishing of a dominion over all
Nations by a Divine authority, after that the posterity of Seleucus and Ptolomy
had ceased to reign; the latter whereof ended in Cleopatra, a little before
Jesus was born. The third note is set down in the foresaid ix. Chapter of
Daniel; namely, that after the coming of the Messiah, the City of Jerusalem
should be overthrown: which Prophecy of the Citie's destruction, Josephus
himself refers unto his time; whence it follows, that the time appointed for
the coming of the Messiah, was then already past. Hereunto likewise belongs
that in the second Chapter of the Prophet Haggai, where God by the Prophet
comfort Zerubbabel, the Son of Shealtiel, Governor of Judah, and Joshuah the
Son of Josedech the high Priest, who were sorrowful to see the Temple, which
they built, fall so short of the first Temple; with this promise, that the
glory of the latter house should be greater than the former: which certainly
can neither be meant of the greatness of the work, nor of the matter of the
building, nor of the fabric and artificial structure, nor of the ornaments of
that Temple; as may appear by the history of those times, both in the Holy
Scriptures, and in Josephus, compared with that of the Temple of Solomon. Add
to this, that the Hebrew Doctors note, this latter Temple wanted two of the
greatest indowments, which the former enjoyed, viz. A certain conspicuous
Light, which was the token of the Divine Majesty there, and Divine Inspiration.
But God himself briefly declares, in that very place, wherein the latter Temple
should excel the former; when He promises He would settle, as by a sure
Covenant, His Peace, i. e. his favor and loving kindness, in that Temple.
Which the Prophet Malachi declares more largely in his third Chapter; Behold, I
will send my messenger, who shall prepare my ways. There shall shortly come
into his Temple (now Malachi lived when the latter Temple was built) that Lord
whom ye desire; even that messenger of the Covenant, who is your delight.
Wherefore the Messiah ought to come while the second Temple stood, which in the
account of the Hebrews, comprehends all that time which was between Zerubbabel
and Vespasian: for in the time of Herod the Great, the Temple was not
re-edified out of its old ruins, but by little and little it was repaired,
bearing still the name of the same Temple. And indeed there was so firm an
opinion amongst the Hebrews, and the neighboring People, that the Messiah was
surely to come in those times, that many took Herod, others Judas Gaulonites,
and a third sort others that lived about the times of Jesus, to be the Messiah.

SECT. XV. Answer to that, which some conceive, touching the deferring of his
coming, for the sins of the People.
SOME of the Jews, perceiving themselves to be hard put to it, by these
Arguments, concerning the coming of the Messiah, go about to shift them off, by
telling us, that their sins were the cause why he did not come at the promised
time. But (to omit that those Prophecies express a Decree determined, not
suspended upon any condition) how is it possible, that this coming should be
deferred, by reason of their sins, when this also was foretold, that because of
the many and heinous transgressions of the People, the great City should be
laid waste a little after the times of the Messiah? Moreover, one reason of the
Messiah his coming, was, to cure a most corrupted World, and together with
rules for amendment of life, to bring a pardon for sins past. Whence it is that
Zachariah says, concerning his times, Chap. xiii. that there should be then a
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for to wash away sin and uncleanness. And it is affirmed by the Hebrews
themselves, that the Messiah shall be called Ischcopher, that is, a Reconciler
or Expiator of sins. But it is against all reason, to say, that any thing was
deferred, because of that disease, for which it was precisely destinated and
appointed.

SECT. XVI. Also from the present state of the Jews, compared with those things
which the Law promises.
TOuching this which we affirm, of the coming of the Messiah long since into
the World, the Jews are convinced by very sense. God made a Covenant with
Moses, and promised to them the happy possession of the Land of Palestine, so
long as they should lead their life according to the commandments of the Law:
But contrarily he threatened banishment, and such like calamities to come upon
them, if they did grievously transgress the same. Yet, if at any time when they
were oppressed with miseries, they repenting of their sins, returned unto
obedience; then would he be moved to have mercy upon the People, and cause,
that though they were scattered to the uttermost parts of the Earth, yet should
they return again into their own Country, as we may read, in Deuteronomy. 30. and
Nehem. 1. and elsewhere. But now for the space of one thousand five hundred
years and more, the Jews have wanted a Country and a Temple: And when they
have attempted to build a new one, they have been always hindered: even by Balls
of Fire breaking out in the Foundations, and overthrowing the work; as Ammianus
Marcellinus, a Writer, who was not a Christian, reports. When this People in
times past had defiled themselves with abominable wickednesses, commonly
sacrificing even their children unto Saturn, accounting adultery to be no sin,
oppressing and spoiling the Fatherless and Widows, and shedding the innocent
blood in great abundance, all which the Prophets upbraid them with; then did
they suffer exile, yet not longer than for the space of seventy years, during
which time also, God did not neglect to speak unto them by his Prophets, and to
comfort them with the hope of a return, pointing also at the very time thereof.
But now, ever since they were expelled out of their Country, they continue
banished and contemptible: No Prophet comes unto them: there is no sign or
token of their return. Their Masters and Ring leaders (as if they were blasted
with the spirit of giddiness,) are fallen away to filthy fables and doctrines
very ridiculous, wherewith the books of the Talmud do abound: which they are
bold to call the law given by word of mouth, and are wont to equal or prefer to
that which was written by Moses. For such things as are therein to be read
concerning God's weeping and lamenting, because he had suffered the City to be
destroyed; of his daily care and diligence in reading the Law; of Behemoth and
Leviathan, and many other matters, are so absurd, that it would be irksome even
to repeat them. Howbeit the Jews in all this time have neither turned to the
worship of false Gods, as they did in times past; neither have they defiled
themselves with bloody murders, nor are they accused of adulteries: But by
prayers and fastings they labor to appease God's wrath, and yet are not heard.
Which things being so, one of these two must needs be granted; namely, that
either the covenant that was given by Moses is quite abolished; or the whole
body of the Jewish Nation lies under the guilt of some notorious crime, which
has continued for so many Ages together: which what it is, let themselves
speak; or if they cannot tell, then let them believe us, that this sin is no
other, but the contempt of the Messiah, who was come before that these evils
began to fall upon them.

SECT. XVII. Jesus is proved to be the Messiah, by those things which were
foretold concerning the Messiah.
BY this which has been spoken, it is manifest that the Messiah came many Ages
ago: we add further, that he is no other but Jesus. For what other persons
soever either were, or would have been accounted the Messiah, they have left no
Sect behind them to uphold and maintain that opinion. There are not any at this
day that profess themselves to be followers either of Herod, or of Judas
Gaulonita, or of that great Impostor Barchochebas, who living in the times of
Adrian; said, that he was the Messiah, and deceived some, even of the most
learned. But those that profess the name of Jesus, have continued from the time
that he lived upon Earth, even until this day, and are still not a few only in
this or that Country, but very many dispersed, as far as the World extends.
I could allege many other testimonies anciently foretold or believed
concerning the Messiah, which we believe were accomplished in Jesus, since they
are not so much as affirmed of any other: as namely, that he came of the
posterity of David, and was born of a Virgin; which was divinely revealed to
him that married that Virgin; when he would have put her away, supposing she
had been got with child by another; Also that this Messiah was born at
Bethlehem, and began first to publish his doctrine in Galilee, healing all
kinds of Diseases, giving sight to the blind, and making the lame to walk: but
this one may suffice for many, the effect of which continues unto this day. It
is most manifest by the Prophecies of David, Isaiah, Zachariah, and Hosea, that
the Messiah was to be an Instructor, not only of the Jews, but also of the
Gentiles: that by him the worship of false Gods should fall to the ground, and
a huge multitude of aliens and strangers should be brought to the worship of
the only true God. Before Jesus his coming almost the whole World was
overspread with false worships and religions: which afterward by little and
little began to vanish away, and not only single persons, but both People and
Kings were converted unto the worship and service of one God. This was not
owing to the Jewish Rabbis; but to the Disciples of Jesus and their
Successors. Thus they were made the people of God, that before were not the
people of God; and the saying of old Jacob, Genesis 49. was fulfilled, That before
all civil Authority should be taken from Judah, Shilo should come. Which the
Chaldee, and other Interpreters expound of the Messiah, to whom even foreign
Nations should be obedient.

SECT. XVIII. Answer to that which is objected, of some things that are not
fulfilled.
THE Jews usually object, that some things were foretold, concerning the times
of the Messiah, which are not yet fulfilled. But for answer, those matters
which they allege are obscure, and admit of diverse significations: wherefore
we ought not, because of them, to forsake those things that are manifest. Such
as the holiness of the commandments of Jesus; the excellency of the reward, and
the perspicuous language, wherein it is propounded: to which if we add the
testimony of his miracles, these ought to be sufficient inducements to the
receiving of his doctrine. As for those Prophecies which go under the name of a
shut or clasped Book, oftentimes for the right understanding thereof, there is
requisite some divine helps and assistances, which they are worthily deprived
of, that neglect manifest truths. The places of Scripture which they object are
diversely expounded, as themselves cannot deny. And if any Men please to compare
either the ancient Interpreters, which lived when the People were led captive
into Babylon, or such as lived about Christ's time, with those that writ after
that Christianity began to be hateful and odious unto the Jews, he shall find
new expositions purposely invented, to cross those former, that well agreed
with the sense of Christians. They know well enough that there are many things
in the holy Scriptures, which must be understood by a figure, and not in
propriety of speech; as when God is said to have descended; and to have a
mouth, ears, eyes and nosthrils. And why may not we likewise expound diverse
things, that are spoken of the times of the Messiah, after the same manner; as
that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid, and the Calf and the young Lion, and the fatling together; and the
sucking child shall play with the Serpents: and the mountain of the Lord shall
be exalted above other mountains, whither strangers shall come and worship.

There are some things promised, which by antecedent or consequent words, or by
the very sense imply a tacit condition in them. Thus God promised many things
unto the Hebrews upon condition they would receive the Messiah that was sent,
and obey him: which same things, if they come not to pass accordingly, then may
they blame themselves that are the cause thereof.

Again, other matters were promised determinedly and without all condition;
which if they be not already accomplished, yet may be hoped for hereafter. For
it is evident, even among the Jews, that the time or Kingdom of the Messiah
must endure unto the end of the World.

SECT. XIX. And to that which is objected, of the mean condition and death of
Jesus.
MANY do take exception at the low and mean condition of Jesus: but unjustly,
because in sacred Writ it is often said, that God will exalt the humble, but
cast down the proud. Jacob, when he passed over Jordan, carried nothing with
him, save his staff only; and yet returned enriched with a great flock of sheep.

Moses was a poor exile, and feeding the flocks, when God appeared to him in
the bush, and gave him commission for the conduct of his People. David also was
called to his Kingdom, when he was feeding sheep, and with many other such like
examples does the Sacred story abound. Now concerning the Messiah, we read,
that he should be a gladsome Messenger unto the poor, that he should make no
noise in public, nor use any strife and contention, but deal gently,
forbearing to break the shaken reed, and cherishing that heat which remains in
smoking flax.

Neither ought the rest of his afflictions, no not his ignominious death, to
make him despicable to any. For God oftentimes suffers the godly, not only to
be vexed and disquieted by the wicked, as righteous Lot was by the Citizens of
Sodom: but also even to be destroyed and slain, as is plain by the example of
Abel, who was cruelly murdered by his Brother; of Isaiah, who was sawn in
pieces; and of the seven brethren in the Macchabees, who, together with their
mother, were miserably tormented and put to death. The very Jews themselves
sing the Seventy-ninth Psalm, wherein are these words, The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven: the flesh of
those whom thou love, O God, unto the beasts of the earth. Their blood have
they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and there was none to bury them.
And whosoever considers the words of Isaiah, in the 53. Chapter, cannot deny
that the Messiah himself ought to have passed through much affliction and death,
to come into his Kingdom, and obtain power to adorn his Household or Church with
the most excellent blessings.

The words in the Prophet are these; Who has believed our report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of the dry ground: He has no form or comeliness, and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is
despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs: And
we hide as it were our faces from him. He was so despised, and in so small
esteem among us. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, yet
we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded
for our transgressions: he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we, like sheep,
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way: And the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted; yet
he opened not his mouth. He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. After
imprisonment and sentence passed on him, he was taken away: but who shall
worthily declare his duration when he was restored to life again? For he was
cut off out of the land of the living; but for the transgression of my people
he was stricken; and he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
his death: though he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.
But though it has pleased the Lord to bruise him, and he has put him to
grief; Yet because he made himself an offering for sin, he shall see his seed,
he shall prolong his days; and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand; He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; by taking away their
iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured out his soul unto
death. And he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many,
and made intercession for the transgressors. Who is there either among the
Kings or Prophets, to whom these things can be applied? Surely none. As
touching that shift, which some later Jews have invented, telling us, that the
Prophet speaks here of the Hebrews dispersed through all Nations; that, by their
example and persuasion, they might every where make many Proselytes: this sense
is first of all repugnant to many testimonies of holy Writ, which loudly
proclaim, that no evil is befaln the Jews, which they have not deserved (and a
great deal more beside) for their evil deeds. He also, of whom Esaias treats,
was to deprecate God for the Heathen, which the Jews do not. And lastly, the
very order and series of the Prophetical Discourse, will not bear that
interpretation. For either the Prophet, (which seems more proper to that place)
or God says; This evil happened unto him for the iniquities of my People. Now
the people of Isaiah, or the peculiar people of God, are the people of the
Hebrews, therefore he who is said by Isaiah to have suffered such grievous
things, cannot be that same People.

But the ancient Doctors of the Hebrews more ingenuously confess, that these
things were spoken of the Messiah; whereupon some later among them have devised
two Messiases; the one they call the Son of Joseph, who was to suffer many
miseries, and a bloody death: the other is the Son of David, to whom all things
should succeed prosperously. When it would be far more easy and more consonant
with the Writings of the Prophets, to acknowledge but one Messiah, who was to
pass unto his Kingdom, through many difficulties and death it self; which we
believe of Jesus, and the thing it self declares to be most true.

SECT. XX. And, as though they were honest men that put him to death.
MANY of the Jews are kept back from receiving the Religion of Jesus by a
certain preconceived opinion of the virtue and honesty of their Ancestors, and
specially of the Priests, who out of prejudice condemned Jesus, and rejected
his Doctrine. But what kind of Men their Ancestors oft-time were, (that they
may not think I defame them) let them hear the words of their own Law and
Prophets, wherein they are often called uncircumcised in heart and ears, a
people that honored God with their lips, and with the garnish of Ceremonies;
but their hearts were far from him. It was their Ancestors that went about, and
were very near to have killed their brother Joseph; and, in very deed, sold him
into bondage. It was their Ancestors also, that by their continual mutinies and
seditions, made Moses weary of his life, who was their Leader and Redeemer,
whom the Earth, the Sea, and the Air obeyed. These were they that loathed the
Bread that was sent from Heaven; complaining, as though they had been in
greatest want and scarcity, even when they belched up again the Fowl that they
had eaten. It was their Ancestors that forsaking David so excellent and good a
King, followed Absolon his rebellious Son. It was their Ancestors that slew
Zachariah, the Son of Jehojada, in the most holy place, making their Priest
himself a Sacrifice of their cruelty. Now, as concerning the Chief Priests,
they were such as conspired the death of Jeremy by a false accusation, and had
killed him indeed, unless they had been hindered by the authority of some of
the Nobles: notwithstanding which, they prevailed so far, as to have him
imprisoned until the very moment that the City was taken. If any Man imagine
those were any thing better, that lived in the times of Jesus, Josephus will
show him his error; who describes their villainous acts, and grievous
punishments, such, as the like were never heard of, and yet, as he thinks,
below their desert. Neither may we conceive more favorably of their great
Council or Senate; specially, because at that time the Senators were not chosen
after the old custom, by laying on of hands, but by the pleasure, or sway of
powerful Men: as the Highpriests also were not elected for term of life, but
obtained that dignity only from year to year, and that oftentimes for money. We
need not then wonder, if Men that were puffed up with pride, unsatiable in
their ambition and covetousness, did break out into fury and madness, when they
beheld a Man, that by his holy precepts and upright behavior, reproved their
far different life and vicious conversation. Neither was there any other thing
laid to his charge, but what the best of Men had been accused of long before.
Thus that Micaiah, that lived in the time of Jehosaphat, was cast into Prison,
because he boldly spoke the truth against Four Hundred lying Prophets. Ahab
upbraided Elijah, just as the Priests did Jesus, saying, that he was the man
that troubled the peace of Israel. So likewise Jeremy was accused, as well as
Jesus, for prophesying against the Temple. Add moreover what the ancient
Doctors of the Hebrews foretold, how that in the times of the Messiah, Men
should be as impudent as Dogs, as stubborn as Asses, and as cruel as wild
Beasts. God himself, foreseeing long before, how most of the Jews would stand
affected in the time of the Messiah, said, it would come to pass, that they
should become his people, who were not his people; and of all the Cities and
Towns of the Jews, scarce one or two would go to the holy Mountain: Howbeit,
that which was wanting in their number, should be supplied by strangers: Also
that the Messiah should be a downfall to the Hebrews: and this Stone which the
Builders refused, should be put in the chief place for the joining together of
the work.

SECT. XXI. Answer to the Objection, that many Gods are worshipped by the
Christians.
THERE remain yet two accusations to be answered, which the Jews bring both
against our Christian Doctrine and Worship. The first is, in that they say, we
Christians do worship many Gods.

But we answer, that this is nothing but a wrested explication of another's
opinion, out of hatred. For, why should this be more objected against us
Christians, than against Philo the Jew, who oftentimes makes three to be in
God; and calls the reason or the word of God; the name of God, the maker of the
World; neither unbegotten, as is God the Father of all, nor so begotten as Men
are? Whom both Philo, and Moses the Son of Nachman, call also the Angel or
Ambassador, who takes care of the Universe: Or against the Cabalists, who
distinguish God into three lights, which some of them call by the same names
that Christians do; to wit, of the Father, of the Son or the word, and of the
Holy Ghost. And let me not omit what is agreed upon by all the Hebrews, that
the Spirit wherewith the Prophets were moved and inspired, is not any created
thing, and yet it is distinguished from the sender thereof: as also that which
they commonly call schecina. Now many of the Hebrews have taught, that that
divine power which they term wisdom, shall dwell in the Messiah; whence by the
Chaldee Paraphrast, the Messiah is called the Word of God: As by David, Esaias,
and others, He is honored with that august Name, of GOD and LORD.

SECT. XXII. And that a humane nature is worshipped.
WITH like facility may we answer the other Objection, which they allege
against us, saying, that we exhibit unto the creature that worship and honor,
which is due unto God the Creator. For we say, that no other honor or worship
is given by us unto the Messiah, than is required by the second, and the
hundred and tenth Psalms. The former whereof, after a sort, was fulfilled in
David, but after a more excellent manner belongs unto the Messiah, as David
Kimhi himself, a great adversary of Christians, does acknowledge. And the
latter can be expounded of no other, but of the Messiah. For that which some
later Jews have devised of Abraham, David, and Hezekiah, is but vain and
frivolous. The said Psalm is David's, as the Hebrew Inscription does show: That
then, which David says, was said unto his Lord, can neither be applied to
David himself, nor to Hezekiah; who amongst David's Posterity did excel David
in nothing. And Abraham had no singular Priesthood, but was blessed of
Melchisedeck, as the less of the greater. Likewise that which follows
concerning the Scepter, that should go out of Sion, and come to the uttermost
Coasts, does plainly appertain unto the Messiah, as is manifest by other like
places, which doubtless are meant of the Messiah; Nor did the more ancient
Hebrews and Paraphrasts otherwise understand it. Now I may as well believe upon
the bare credit of his Disciples, because of their most eminent integrity and
honesty, that it is Jesus of Nazareth, in whom properly these things are
fulfilled; as the Jews believe Moses in those matters, which without any other
witness, himself affirmed were delivered to him of God. But besides this, there
are many and most forcible arguments of that most excellent power, which we say
Jesus has obtained; As namely, in that he was seen of many, after he was risen
from the dead: And many beheld him when he was taken up into Heaven: Devils
also were cast out, and diseases were cured only by his name: The gifts of
Tongues were given to his Disciples; which Jesus himself promised should be
signs of his Kingdom.

Add unto these, that his Scepter, that is, the Word of the Gospel being gone
out of Sion, is run through the World (and that not by humane help, but by the
Divine Power alone) to the utmost parts of the Earth: whose people and their
Kings He has subdued to himself; just as the Psalms did plainly foretell. The
Jewish Cabalists place a certain Son of Enoch in the middle, between God and
Men; without any indication of such a power: with how much better reason do we
give Him that dignity, who has so evidently demonstrated that it belongs to
Him?

Neither does this tend, in the least, to the diminution or lessening of the
glory of God the Father: from whom this power of Jesus does proceed; to whom it
must return; and to whose honor also it ministers and serves.

SECT. XXIII. The Conclusion of this part, with Prayer for the Jews.
BUT it is not our purpose in this Work, to make any further curious inquiry
into these matters: neither had we spoken hereof, but only to show, that there
is no wicked or absurd point in our Christian doctrine, which any one can
pretend, why he should not embrace a Religion, which is beautified and
confirmed with so many wonders; commands such honest things; and promises such
excellent rewards. For he that has once received and embraced the same, must
for further instruction in special and particular questions, consult those
Books, wherein, as we have formerly declared, the points of Christian Religion
are contained; which that it may come to pass, we beseech the Almighty to
illuminate the hearts and minds of the Jews with the brightness of his truth,
and to make those prayers effectual which Christ himself uttered for them, even
while he was hanging upon the Cross.

The Sixth Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. A Confutation of Mahumetanisme: the beginning of it.
THE Sixth Book, which is opposed to the Mahumetans, in stead of a Preface,
deduces the Judgments of GOD against Christians, unto the very beginning and
rise of Mahometisme: showing, that is, how that sincere and simple piety (which
flourished among Christians, even when they were most grievously vexed and
oppressed) began by little and little to wax cold; from the time that by the
favor of Constantine, and the following Emperors, that profession was become
not only safe, but also honorable: the World being, as it were, thrust into
the Church.

For first of all, Christian Princes would needs continue fighting, and make no
end of their Wars: even then, when they might have enjoyed peace and quietness.

Among the Bishops also, there were most sharp Contentions about the Chiefest
Sees. And as at the beginning the greatest mischiefs insued, upon the
preferring of the Tree of knowledge, before the Tree of Life; even so then also
was curious Learning more regarded than a godly Life, and Religion turned into
an Art. The consequent of which was, that, after the example of those, who
built the Tower of Babel, a rash affectation of things out of their reach, bred
jarring and confusion in their Language; together with discord one with
another. Which the common People observing, and not knowing oft-times which way
to turn themselves, they threw the blame upon the holy Scriptures; and began to
avoid them, as hurtful and dangerous.

Religion also began every where to be placed not in purity of mind, but, as if
Judaism was brought back into the World, in Rites and Ceremonies: and in such
things as contain rather an exercise of the body, than any amendment of the
mind: and in an eager zeal for that Party and side, which they had once chosen.
Till at length it came to pass, that there were every where many Christians in
Name; but very few in Deed.

GOD did not wink at these Vices of his People, but, out of the innermost parts
of Scythia and Germany, poured forth, like a Deluge, immense swarms of
Barbarous People into the Christian World. And when the vast slaughters, which
they made, proved not sufficient to correct and amend the lives of those that
survived; Mahomet, by God's just permission, sowed a new Religion in Arabia:
and that directly opposite to the Christian Religion; but which in words
expressed, in a manner, the life of the greatest part of Christians.

This Religion was first entertained by the Saracens; who had revolted from
Heraclius the Emperor: and by their Arms subdued, in a short space, Arabia,
Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Persia; and afterward possessed themselves of Africa,
and, beyond the Sea, of Spain also. But the power of the Saracens was abated,
as by others, so chiefly by the Turks; a Nation also very Warlike: which, after
long combats with the Saracens, being invited to Peace, easily embraced a
Religion suited to their manners; and transferred the Majesty of the Empire to
themselves. The Cities of Asia and Greece were taken, and, by the growing
success of their Arms, they came into Hungary, and the Borders of Germany.

SECT. II. The overthrow of the foundation of Mahumetanisme, in denying inquiry
into Religion.
THIS Religion altogether contrived for the shedding of blood, delights much in
Rites and Ceremonies, and would be believed without all liberty of enquiry
thereinto; whence the Vulgar are prohibited to read their Books, that are
accounted holy. Which thing is a manifest argument of the iniquity thereof; For
justly may that Merchandise be suspected, which is obtruded upon this
condition, that it be not looked into.

It is true indeed, there is not in all Men a like capacity or knowledge, and
quick in sight into all things; many being led into error by pride; others by
inordinate passion or affection; and some by custom. But the divine goodness
forbids us to think, that those Men cannot know and find the way to eternal
salvation, who seek it, not for any by-respect of profit or honor, but with
submission of themselves, and all they have unto God, imploring his assistance
for the obtaining of the same. And since that God has implanted in the mind of
Man the power and faculty of judging, there is no part of truth that better
deserves the employment thereof, than that of which we cannot be ignorant,
without the danger of losing eternal salvation.

SECT. III. A Proof against the Mahumetans, taken out of the Books of the
Hebrews and Christians, which are not corrupted.
IT is granted by Mahomet and his followers, that Moses was sent of God; and
Jesus also: and that they were holy Men, which first of all published the
doctrine of Jesus. But in the Alcoran, which is Mahumet's law, many things are
recorded plain contrary to what is delivered by Moses, and by the Disciples of
Jesus. Thus to give one example for many, all the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, with one consent do testify, that Jesus was crucified; that the third
day he was restored to life again, and after that was seen of many. But Mahumet
teaches quite contrary: namely, that Jesus was privily conveyed into Heaven:
and not himself, but something in his likeness was nailed to the Cross; and
consequently; he did not die; but the sight of the Jews was deluded and
deceived.

This Objection cannot be put off, unless Mahumet say, (as he does) that the
Books of Moses, and of Christ's Disciples, have not remained as they were at
first; but have been corrupted. But we have confuted this fiction before, in
the third Book.

Without doubt, if any Man should say, that the Alchoran is corrupted, the
Mahumetans would deny it, and say, that were an answer sufficient to those that
could not prove the contrary: But they cannot moreover, for the integrity of
their Book, allege such arguments, as we do produce, concerning the several
Copies, that were in a short space dispersed thorowout the World; and that, not
as the Alchoran, in one Language; which Copies were preserved by the fidelity
of so many Sects, that varied much about other matters.

The Mahumetans are persuaded, that in the fourteenth Chapter of St. John,
where mention is made of sending the Comforter, there has been something
registered concerning Mahumet, which the Christians have razed out. But here let
me ask of them, whether they think this depravation of Scripture was committed
since the time of Mahumet, or before.

That it happened not after the coming of Mahumet, is plain, because ever since
that time there have been in the World very many Copies, not only in the Greek
Language, but in the Syriac, Arabic, and in parts far distant from Arabia, the
Ethiopick and Latin Tongues of diverse translations: all which do so agree in
that place, as there cannot be shown any diversity at all. And before the time
of Mahumet, there was no cause of alteration: For no Man could know before his
coming what Mahumet would teach. Yea, if the doctrine of Mahumet had contained
nothing contrary to the doctrine of Jesus, the Christians would have made no
more difficulty to receive his Books, than they did to receive the Books of
Moses and the Hebrew Prophets. Or suppose there had been nothing written either
of the doctrine of Jesus or of Mahumet: It is but equity that that be received
for the doctrine of Jesus, which all Christians generally agree upon; and that
for the doctrine of Mahumet, which all Mahumetans do allow of.

SECT. IV. By comparing Mahumet with Christ in their Persons.
IN the next place, let us compare the adjuncts and qualities of both their
Doctrines, to the end we may see whether of the two is to be preferred before
the other: And first, let us consider the authors. As for Jesus, Mahumet
himself confesses, that he was the Messiah, which was promised in the Law and
in the Prophets; whom the same Mahumet calls the word, the mind and the wisdom
of God; saying also, that he had no Father of Mankind. But Mahumet (as his own
Followers believe) was generated and begot according to the ordinary course of
nature. The life of Jesus was altogether unblameable, there being no crime that
could be objected against him: But Mahumet a long time was a Robber, and always
effeminate: Jesus ascended into Heaven, as Mahumet confesses; but Mahumet lies
yet intombed in his Sepulcher. Who then sees not whether of them is to be
followed?

SECT. V. And in their Deeds.
NEXT the dignity of their Persons, consider we their acts. Jesus gave sight to
the blind, health to them that were sick, and made the lame to walk; yea, by
Mahumet's own confession, he raised some from the dead. But Mahumet says of
himself, that he was sent, not with miracles, but with Arms. Howbeit some of
his Followers ascribe to him miracles also: But what kind, I pray? Only such as
may either be done by humane art; as that of a Dove, which came flying to his
ear: or such as had no witnesses, as that of a Camel, which is said to have had
some conference with him by night: or lastly, such as are confuted by their own
absurdity; as that a great part of the Moon fell into his lap, or into his
sleeve; which he, to restore roundness to that Star, sent back again to it.
Now, who will not say, that in a doubtful case, we ought to adhere to that Law,
which has the surer and more certain Testimonies of Divine approbation?

SECT. VI. Also such as first embraced both Religions.
NEXT, let us see who, and what manner of Persons they were, that first
received these several laws. They that first embraced the law of Jesus, were
such as feared God, Men of a plain and innocent life: Now it stands not with
the goodness of God to suffer such men to be gulled and cheated, either by
bewitching speeches, or by an appearance of Miracles. But they that first
received Mahometism were Thieves and Robbers; Men estranged from all humanity
and piety.

SECT. VII. The manner how both their Laws were propagated.
IN the next place follows, the manner how both these Religions were propagated
and spread abroad. As for Christianity, we have shown more than once, that it
was enlarged and amplified by the miracles, not only of Christ, but also of his
Disciples, and those that succeeded them: as likewise by the very patient
enduring of the torments and punishments that Christians suffered. But the
Doctors of Mahumetism wrought no miracles at all: neither did they suffer any
grievous persecutions, or cruel kinds of death for their profession: But it is
a Religion which follows, where Arms go before: of which it is an accessory,
and nothing of it self. Nor do they themselves bring any better argument for
the truth thereof, than their good success in their Wars, and the largeness of
their Empire; than which nothing in this point is more deceitful and uncertain.

They condemn the worship and services of the Pagans: and yet we know what
great victories were won by the Persians, Macedonians and Romans; and how ample
their Dominions were. Neither have the Mahumetans themselves had always good
success with their Armies. The slaughters and great overthrows that they have
received in many places, both by Sea and by Land, are not unknown. They are now
banished quite out of all Spain.

There is nothing that is liable to such uncertain alterations, nothing that
may be common both to good and bad; which can be a certain note of true
Religion: much less can their Arms, which are so unjust, that oftentimes they
fall upon people, that do not any way molest or offend them, nor are known to
them by any injury; in so much that all the pretense they have for their Arms,
is only Religion; which is most irreligious.

For there is no true worship of God, but what proceeds from a willing mind.
And the will is to be wrought upon by good instruction and gentle persuasion,
but not by threats or violence. He that is compelled to believe, does not
believe at all, but plays the hypocrite, and feigns himself to believe, that he
may escape and avoid some danger or punishment. And he that by threats or sense
of punishment, will force another Man's assent, shows by that very proceeding,
that he distrusts his arguments. Again, they themselves destroy this very
pretense of Religion; in that they suffer any people that live under their
Dominion, to use what Religion they please: yea, and sometimes they will openly
acknowledge, that Christians may be saved by their own Law.

SECT. VIII. The Precepts of both Religions compared.
FUrthermore, let us compare the several commandments of both Religions: the
one whereof commands patience, yea and love even to them that hate us: But
the other, revenge. In the one the bond of matrimony is kept firm and
inviolable between the married parties, by a mutual bearing with one another
humors: But in the other there is license granted to depart and be divorced.
Here the Husband performs himself what he requires of his Wife, and by his own
example teaches her to fasten her affection upon him alone: But there they may
have Wives after Wives, there being still new incentives and fresh provocations
to lust. Here, Religion is planted within, and rooted in the very heart and
Soul, that it being well cultivated, may bring forth fruit profitable for
Mankind: but there Religion spends almost its whole force in Circumcision, and
in some other things, that of themselves are neither good nor bad. Finally
here, in Christianity, a moderate use of Meats and Wine is allowed of: but
there in Mahumetism Men are forbidden to eat Swines flesh, and to drink Wine:
which notwithstanding is a great gift of God, beneficial both for body and
mind, if it be soberly taken.

And truly, it is no wonder, if some childish rudiments were taught before the
most perfect law, as that of Christ is: But after the promulgation thereof, to
return again to types and figures were preposterous. Neither can any just
reason be given why, after Christian Religion, which is far the best, it should
be fit that any other should be brought forth.

SECT. IX. Answer to the Mahumetans Objection, concerning the Son of God.
THE Mahumetans tell us, they are not a little displeased with us, for saying,
that God has a Son, seeing he uses not a Wife: As though the word Son could
not have a more divine signification in God. But Mahumet himself attributes
many things as dishonorable and ill-beseeming God, as if he should be said to
have a Wife.

Thus he says, that God had a cold hand, which himself knew by experience:
that God was carried in a chair, and the like.

Howbeit, when we say, that Jesus is the Son of God, we do but signify the
same thing that he means, when he calls him the word of God: For the word is
after a sort begotten of the mind. Add further, that he was born of a Virgin,
only by the operation of God, supplying the virtue or efficacy of a Father:
that by the power of God, he was carried up into Heaven; all which being
confessed even by Mahumet himself, do show that Jesus by a singular prerogative
and peculiar right, may and ought to be called the Son of God.

SECT. X. Many absurd things in the Books of Mahumetans.
BUT on the other side, it would be long to relate how many things there are,
contrary to the truth of history; and many things very ridiculous in the
writings of the Mahumetans. Such is that fable of a fair and beautiful Woman,
that learned a solemn charm or Song of some Angels that were drunk, whereby she
was wont to ascend into the Sky, and likewise descend again; and ascending once
a great height into Heaven, she was caught of God, and there fixed, and made
that Star which is called Venus.

Like to this, is that of a mouse in Noah's Ark, that was bred of an Elephant's
Dung: and a Cat of the breath of a Lion.

More specially, that most notorious fiction, concerning Death to be changed
into a Ram, that must remain in the middle space between Heaven and Hell: And
the Fable of sweating out their good cheer in the other life: When likewise
(they imagine) there shall be whole troops of Women assigned to every Man for
pleasure of carnal copulation. All which are so very egregious absurdities,
that whosoever believes them, deserves to be stupefied and given over to a
reprobate sense for his iniquity; specially such a one as lives where the light
of the Gospel shines.

SECT. XI. A Conclusion directed unto Christians, admonishing them of their
duty, upon the occasion of what has formerly been handled.
AND thus having ended this last disputation against the Mahumetans, there
follows a conclusion of the whole, not to aliens or strangers, but to all sorts
of Christians, of what Name, Nation, or Quality soever they be: Showing briefly
the use or application of what has hitherto been delivered; to the end those
things may be followed and sought after, which are good; and on the contrary,
the evil eschewed.

First of all, that they lift up pure hands and hearts unto that God, who of
nothing made all visible and invisible things; having sure confidence in him,
that his providence and care watches over us; seeing that without his
permission, not so much as a Sparrow falls to the ground. And let them not fear
those which can only kill the body, but rather let them fear him that has like
power both over soul and body. And let them not only trust in God the Father,
but also in Jesus Christ his Son, since there is no other name upon Earth, by
which we can be saved: And this they may rightly do, if they be verily
persuaded that eternal life is prepared, not for such as in word only call God
their Father, and Jesus their Lord, but for such as frame their life according
to the will of Jesus, and their Father which is in Heaven.

Furthermore, Christians are admonished faithfully, and with due care to
preserve the doctrine of Christ, as a most precious treasure: And for this
cause, let them often read and meditate the Books of the Holy Scripture,
whereby no Man can be deceived, unless first he deceive himself. For the
Authors and Penmen of those Writings were more just and full of Divine
Inspiration, than that they would deprive us of necessary truths, or cover and
conceal the same with any clouds.

Howbeit, for the right understanding hereof, we must bring a mind disposed and
prepared to obedience: which if we do, then nothing shall be hid from us, which
ought to be believed, hoped for, or done by us: And by this means, that holy
Spirit will be cherished and excited in us, which is given us for a pledge and
earnest of our future happiness.

Moreover, I deterr Christians from imitating the Pagans: first, in their
worship of false Gods, which are nothing but vain names, which evil Demons use
to alienate our minds and affections from the worship of the true God.
Wherefore we cannot possibly participate with them in their services, and
expect to receive benefit by the Sacrifice of Christ. Secondly, neither may
Christians imitate the Heathen in their licentious and dissolute manner of
life; having no other Law, than what is suggested by lust, and prompted by
sensual desire: from which Christians ought to be far removed; who should not
only far excel the vicious and profane Pagans, but likewise the Lawyers and
Pharisees among the Jews; whose righteousness consisting only in some outward
performances, could never bring them to the heavenly Kingdom.

Circumcision that is made with hands, is now nothing worth, but it is the
inward Circumcision of the heart, the keeping of Gods commandments, the new
creature, faith that is perfected in love, which make Men known to be true
Israelites and mystical Jews, that is, praisers of God, and commendable in his
sight. The distinction of meats, the Sabbaths and feast-days were but types and
shadows of things, which exist in Christ and in Christians.

In like manner, by occasion of Mahumetisme, these Admonitions are given, that
our Lord Jesus foretold, that after his time there should arise false Christ's
and false Prophets, which should lie, and say they were sent of God. But
suppose that an Angel should come from Heaven, yet we may not receive or
entertain any other doctrine than that which Christ has left us, confirmed by
so many testimonies. For God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke
unto the godly that lived in times past, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, the Lord of all things, the brightness of his Fathers glory, and
the express Image of his substance, by whom all things are created that ever
were or shall be; who upholdeth and governs all things by his power, and
having purged our sins, is now set at the right hand of God, and has obtained
a dignity above Angels: and therefore nothing can be expected more magnificent
than this Lawgiver.

Upon the same occasion Christians are remembered, that the weapons of Christ
and of their Christian warfare, are not such as Mahumet used, but spiritual,
able to cast down strong holds, and every thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God. For our buckler, we have the shield of faith, whereby we
may repel the fiery darts of the Devil: For a breast plate we have
righteousness, or integrity of life: The hope of eternal salvation is a helmet,
which may cover the weakest part: And for a Sword, we have Words delivered from
God, which pierce into the most inward parts of the Soul.

After this, follows the exhortation to mutual concord, which Christ at his
departure so solemnly, and with such earnestness commended unto his Disciples.
There ought not to be many Masters and Doctors amongst us, but we must have one
Master, even Jesus Christ. All Christians are baptized unto one name, wherefore
there ought to be no Sects or Divisions among them: for the cure and remedy of
which evils, those Apostolical sayings are suggested; as, let no man think more
highly of himself than he ought to think; but let Men be wise with sobriety,
according as God has dealt to every Man the measure of faith. If any do not so
well conceive and rightly understand all things as they ought, then their
weakness must be born with: that so without any brawlings or fallings out, they
may be sweetly united and knit together with us. If any do excel the rest in
understanding, it is but meet also that they surpass them in love, in holy
affection and endeavors to do them good. And as for those that in some points
are of different opinion from such as hold the truth; God's leisure must be
waited for, until it please him to reveal the same truth, that yet lies hid
from them: and in the mean while those things which are agreed upon, must be
steadfastly kept and duly practiced.

We know now in part only, but the time shall come, when all things shall be
known most plainly, and after a perspicuous manner. This also I beg of every
one, that they do not unprofitably detain the talent committed to them upon
trust; but that they endeavor by all means possible to win others unto Christ.
For which purpose, we must not only use good exhortations, and wholesome
speeches, but also the example of good life; that so the goodness of our Master
may appear by his servants, and the purity of the law by our landable actions.

Lastly, my Discourse returning thither, where it began, I entreat such
Readers, as are my Countrymen, that if hereby they reap any good, they would
give thanks to God for it: And if any thing be less pleasing to them, they
would have a regard both to the common infirmity of man's nature, that is prone
to error; and to the time and place wherein this work was rather hastily
brought forth, than elaborately composed.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion: Against the Present ROMAN
CHVRCH.

The Seventh Book OF THE TRUTH OF Christian Religion.
SECT. I. An Introduction, showing what makes the Addition of another Book
necessary.
IF those Apostolical Exhortations, which conclude the last Book, had been
carefully followed; there would have been no need of saying any more, for the
confirmation of Men's minds in the belief of the Truth and Certainty of the
Christian Religion. But the unhappy differences which are among Christians, and
which are maintained with unspeakable animosities and hatreds (nay with
anathema's also, which one part pronounces against the rest) have made many Men
doubtful which of these hold the true Christian Faith, for which the Apostle
exhorts us most earnestly to contend; and in this doubtfulness, there are some
who embrace none at all.

For we see the Eastern Church disjoynted from the Western: and the Western
divided into three great parts, every one of which condemn the other two: and
all of them are subdivided into several little parties by variety of opinions;
for which they contend with the same zeal, that they do for the Faith of
Christ. Which is thereby disgraced; and reputed by some to be of no greater
certainty, than those dubious opinions.

SECT. II. Divisions among Christians, no such objection against Christianity,
as is imagined.
BUT to a considering Man, this will be no occasion of scandal: but rather
confirm him more in the true Christian Faith; which every one of us ought to
preserve with the greatest care, as a most inestimable Treasure. For, as this
is common to every Religion, to have many disputes about it, and different
opinions in it; and as Christ and his Apostles foretold there would many false
Christ's and false Apostles, and false Prophets arise (as was said before in the
end of the foregoing Book) who would lie, and say they were sent, when they
were not, introducing false doctrines, and calling them by the Name of his
Religion; and as they give us a good reason also why it should be so; that Men's
probity and sincerity might be tried, and brought hereby to the touchstone, and
that their diligence and care in preserving themselves might be exercised: So,
blessed be our Lord, the true Christian Religion is still retained, and kept
entire every where, by all these disagreeing Parties; notwithstanding the
fierce quarrels they have one with another. As appears by this (which is a
short, easy, and certain way to our satisfaction in this matter) that the
Faith into which they are all baptized, is one and the same without any
variation. That is, they all enter into the Church at the very same gate; and
upon the same terms and conditions, neither more nor less, are made members of
Christ, and have a title given them, if they live according to this Faith, unto
Eternal Salvation.

SECT. III. As appears even in the Roman Church, which has given the greatest
scandal.
THE Church of Rome it self, which now makes the greatest differences in the
Christian World, requires nothing more at this day to be believed by those,
that are by Baptism received into the Church of Christ; but only those things
which are contained in the Creed, commonly called the Apostles. This Creed is
recited there by the Priest, and this alone, when he comes to the Font; and he
interrogates the Persons to be baptized (if they be adult) or their undertakers
(if they be Infants) about no other belief. Upon the profession of which, he
bids them enter into the holy Church of God, that they may receive the
Celestial blessing from the Lord Jesus Christ, and have a part with Him and
with his Saints: And having again examined adult Persons, asking them, Do ye
believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. and mentioning no other Articles of
Faith, he baptizes them; and declares them to be regenerate, and to have
remission of all sins. And so do we do here; nor is there any different
practice in any other part of the Christian World; but every where it is
sufficient to consent to this Creed: which is nothing but a brief explication,
what we are to believe concerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in
whose Name we are baptized.

If there were any thing beyond this, which we are necessarily bound to
believe, it should have been then propounded when we were admitted into the
state of Christianity. For Baptism gives us a right and title to Salvation (if
we do not forfeit it afterward by Apostasy, or by a wicked life) and this
Faith (with a promise to live according to it) gives us a right to Baptism.

Herein indeed the Roman Church contradicts it self, in decreeing many other
Articles of belief, without which it declares Men cannot be saved; and yet
receiving Men at Baptism into a state of Salvation, without demanding their
consent to any such Articles. But so they do in many other things, and cannot
avoid it: while they forsake the ancient Universal Rule; and set up their own
private Authority, to impose what they please, under pain of Damnation.

SECT. IV. But both contradicts it self, and departs from the Ancient and truly
Catholic Church.
FOR that no such things, as they would now oblige all Christians to believe,
were anciently exacted, it appears most manifestly by Irenaeus and Tertullian
(to name no others) in several places. Who call the Creed now mentioned, the
Rule of Truth, and the Rule of Faith: which the Church throughout all the
World, says Irenaeus (though it be dispersed to the most extreme parts of the
Earth) received from the Apostles and their Disciples: and believes, as if
there were but one Soul and one Heart, in so many Men: and with a perfect
consent preaches and teaches, and delivers these things, as having but one
mouth. For though there be diverse Languages in the World, yet one and the same
Tradition prevails every where: For neither the Churches in Germany believe
otherways, or deliver any thing else; nor they in Spain, nor they in France;
nor they in the East; nor they in Egypt; nor they in Libya; nor they that are
founded in the midst of the World. But as the Sun is one and the same in the
whole World: So is the preaching of the Truth, inlightning all Men, who will
come to the knowledge of it. And neither he who is most eloquent among the
Governors of the Church, preaches any thing different, (for no man is above
his Master) nor does he that is weakest in speech lessen in the least this
Tradition. For there being one and the same Faith, he that has most to say
cannot enlarge it; nor he that has least, diminish it.

Thus they declared their minds in those early days; when there was no
Catholic Man or Woman in the World, required to believe any of those
Doctrines, now in controversy between us and the Roman Church: (and set down
in the Creed of Pope Pius IV. as necessary to Salvation) but they all contented
themselves with the simple belief of those things which the Apostles have
delivered in their Creed; the greatest Men in the Church delivering no more,
nor the meanest saying less. And with this wise and good Men satisfied
themselves in times succeeding, as appears by this remarkable passage of St.
Hilary, in his little Book, which he himself delivered to the Emperor
Constantius. Where he thus complains, Faith is now enquired after; as if we had
none. Faith must be set down in writing; as if it were not in the heart. Being
regenerated by Faith, we are now taught what to believe; as if that
regeneration could have been without Faith. WE LEARN CHRIST AFTER BAPTISM; AS
IF THERE COULD HAVE BEEN ANY BAPTISM, WITHOUT FAITH IN CHRIST.

SECT. V. Christianity therefore is not there in its purity; but much corrupted.
WHICH is a sufficient Argument to prove that the Christian Religion is not
sincerely preserved in that Church: and ought to withold us from joining with
them, in imposing thus upon the Christian World; and thereby breaking the bond
of Unity; and turning Men away from the Faith, by the palpable falsities and
absurd mixtures, which are brought into it; and that as necessary parts of the
Faith of Christ. To the adulterating of which we ought by no means to consent;
but maintain it in that purity, wherein the Apostles delivered it to their
Successors: as we find it set down in the Works of a great many following
Doctors of the Church; whose Names I forbear, but are ready at hand to make
good what I quoted just now out of Irenaeus. Who acknowledges him for a sincere
Christian, who holds fast (...) (as Epiphanius recites his words, which were
then extant in Greek) that Rule of Faith, which he received in Baptism, firm
and unmovable. He cannot be a Heretic who thus believes on the Son of God, in
the sense wherein the Nicene Creed (not adding any new Article of Faith, but
only declaring what was believed from the beginning) has explained the Word:
But they are Schismatics who call him so; and will not admit him into their
Communion, unless he consent to other things, and hold them to be equally
certain, and necessary, with the Ancient Rule of Faith.

SECT. VI. Answer to an Evasion from the force of the foregoing Argument.
TO pretend that all those Articles of Faith, which they now impose, though not
expressly mentioned in the Creed, yet are contained in one Article of it, Viz.
in the belief of the Holy Catholic Church; is, in effect, to make all the rest
of the Creed unnecessary, and to establish this sole Rule of Faith in the room
of it. For if by believing the Catholic Church, we are to understand, as they
would have us, whatsoever the Catholic Church propounds: then it had been
enough to have said to those Catechumens that came for Baptism, Do you believe
in the Holy Catholic Church? and to add any more had been utterly superfluous.

But the vanity of this further appears, in that none of the ancient Doctors
who have expounded the Creed (and there are many of them) have given any such
sense of that Article of the Catholic Church: Nay, it was not in the most
ancient forms of Faith: nor does the Church truly Catholic teach any thing as
necessary to be believed to Salvation, but what is contained in the Creed. For
we do, in their own sense, believe the Catholic Church; but not the Roman
Catholic Church (which their Creed will have to be the Mother and Mistress of
all Churches:) because, to omit many other absurdities which are in it, there
was a Catholic Church before there was a Roman: and to say, that they believe
the Catholic Church, meaning thereby the Roman, is nothing more than to say,
they believe themselves.

SECT. VII. Their absurd Explication of the Unity of the Catholic Church.
NOTHING therefore can be further from the Truth, than that Explication of the
Unity of the Catholic Church; which is delivered in the Roman Catechism,
published by the Authority of the same Pope Pius IV. in pursuance of the
Council of Trent. Wherein the Catechumen is taught to believe and profess, that
the Catholic Church is one, not only because of one Faith (and other reasons
mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. iv.) and because it is subject to one
invisible Governor, which is Christ: But, because it is subject also to one
visible Governor, who holds the Roman Chair, the legitimate Successor of St.
Peter. Concerning whom it is the unanimous opinion of all the Fathers, that
this visible Head is necessary to constitute, and conserve the unity of the
Church. And to this Head or Pastor, Christ has given the authority of ruling
and governing the whole Church, as the Vicar and Minister of his Power.

Thus that Catechism teaches, in the First Part, the IX. Article, n. 11, 12,
13. Which (besides that it is confuted by the plain demonstration now
mentioned; that Christ had a Catholic Church, which had unity in it self, when
there was no Roman Church) is directly contrary to the constant Doctrine, not
only of the Scripture; but of all the Fathers; (whose consent they falsely boast
of) and of many Popes of Rome; and of Councils also, both General, and
particular; even of the Councils of Lateran and Trent; which by approving the
Five First General Councils, who condemn this Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
do in effect condemn it themselves.

SECT. VIII. Which forbids us to join in Communion with them, upon such Terms.
TO that Church then we ought to adhere, which has kept the Rule of Faith,
once delivered to the Saints; simple, and unmixed with humane inventions. Which
if we admit, as necessary to Salvation; we betray the truth of Christ, and are
false and unjust to innumerable Christian Brethren: who by Baptism are admitted
into a state of Salvation, but hereby unmercifully cut off from the Body of
Christ; though they have that Faith, which makes them true Members of it.

This is the Great Crime of the Roman Church; and may suffice, instead of all
other demonstrations, to prove that they have corrupted themselves, and
departed from the simplicity that is in Christ. For this very Article alone
(which is a part of their Faith) that there is no Salvation, but by union with
the Roman Catholic Church, and that by subjection to it; thrusts out of
Heaven, not only the ancient Christian pious Emperors, who refused such
subjection: But many of their ancient Popes, who acknowledged their subjection
was due to the Christian Emperors; together with the ancient Patriarks and
Fathers, assembled in many Councils; and the most famous Christian Churches;
the most glorious Martyrs and Saints of Christ, that the best times of
Christianity have known; and, to say nothing of after Ages, the present
Christians of Greece, Russia, Armenia, Syria, Ethiopia; who by this Article of
subjection to the Catholic Roman Church, are all excluded from Christian
communion, and must perish everlastingly.

For Bellonius says, that in his travels he met with Nine sorts of Christians
at Jerusalem; Eight of which Nine know nothing of this Universal Bishop, or do
not regard him: and of the Ninth, there is scarce half that acknowledges his
Authority.

And yet there are Men among them, of no mean note and number, who have the
confidence to tell us, that by the Catholic Church, which we are bound to
believe, is to be understood the Bishop of Rome: whose Declarations, when he
will determine any thing to be of Faith, we all ought to receive. And though we
are assured, as much as are that there was such a Person as St. Peter, that
Christ never gave him (much less his Successors) any Authority at all over his
whole Church: Yet now, to deny the Pope's Supremacy is such a Heresy, that let
a Man be never so Orthodox in all other points of the Catholic Faith, this
alone is sufficient to make him be excommunicated and cut off from the Body of
Christ.

Witness our King Henry VIII. who was excommunicated, and his Kingdom given
away for no other fault, by a Bull of Paul the Third: who affirms in the
beginning of that Bull, that herein he acted by Divine authority; which
(according as God says in the Prophet Jeremiah) had set him over Nations and
Kingdoms, to root up and destroy, as well as to build and plant; having the
supreme power over all Kings and People. throughout the whole Earth. Which
certainly is such new Language, never known in the Church for many Ages; that
they who are not convinced thereby of the corruption of Christian Religion in
the Roman Church, have their Eyes blinded with the Worldly Splendour of it.

SECT. IX. But on the other side, not to slight Episcopal Authority.
YET on the other hand, it must be acknowledged, that this enormous power which
they have usurped, is a very strong proof of the high Authority of Christian
Bishops in the Church; and of the great reverence that was paid to them by
Christian People. Who otherways would never have thus submitted to their will
and pleasure; had not the obedience which they had been wont always to yield to
their authority, disposed them to be brought by little and little under an
absolute subjection.

Nor would there have been reason for those Cautions, which St. Peter gives to
the Governors of God's Church (not at Rome, but elsewhere, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.) not
to Lord it over them: if they had not been invested with a power, which all
Christians reverenced so much, that it might more easily be abused, than
contemned; and sooner persuade People to follow them with a blind obedience,
than to slight their judgment, and refuse to conform to their Injunctions.

And therefore whosoever they are that now despise all Ecclesiastical
Authority, we may be sure they have swerved from the true Principles of
Christianity: and they also are altogether inexcusable, who shake off the
Episcopal Government, and refuse to be subject to it, under a pretense that
there ought to be an equality among Christ's Ministers. Which as it is against
the practice of the whole Church for many Ages, from the beginning: So directly
opposes the Institution of Christ, who set his Apostles in a superiority to the
LXX; as his Apostles set such Men as Timothy and Titus in a superiority over
the Presbyteries of those Churches, which they could no longer attend
themselves.

SECT. X. Arguments enough in the foregoing Books, to prove the true Christian
Religion not to be sincerely preserved in the Roman Church: one is their way of
worship.
IT would be easy to show how much the Roman Church has deviated from the
Rule of Faith, by considering particularly the falsity of every one of those
Doctrines which they have added to the ancient Creeds. But it will be more
proper, in so short a Treatise as this, only to bring to the Readers mind some
Principles in the foregoing Books; which direct us as plainly to reject Popery,
(and upon the very same ground) as those false Religions, for whose confutation
he alleges them.

And First, let the Reader again weigh his Arguments against the worship of the
Pagans, and he will find them, in several things, as strong against the worship
of the Roman Church: whose practices, it will hereby appear, are no less faulty
than their Faith. As for example, in the worship of Angels, and Saints.

For the former, They should not only (as he discourses there, Book IV.) in
their very worship make an evident difference between the most high God and
those Angels to whom they commend themselves, (which they do not do in the
Roman Church, but quite contrary, in the external acts of adoration have none
that are appropriated to God alone, but are all common to him with others; as
adoration, invocation, burning incense, nay offering the Sacrifice of the Mass
in their honor, and making vows to them) but be satisfied also what order
there is among the Angels; what good may be expected from each of them; and
what honor the most high God is willing should be bestowed upon every one of
them. All which being wanting; (for there is nothing revealed about such
matters) it is plain from thence, how uncertain that Religion is, and how much
safer it would be for them to betake themselves, as we do, to the worship of
Almighty God alone. Especially for that, to whomsoever He is favorable, to
them the holy Angels must needs be kind and serviceable (though no Petitions be
made to them) being the Ministers and Servants of the most High: who has
revealed this to us, that He has made them all subject to Jesus Christ; to be
sent forth by Him, for the good of those who shall be heirs of Salvation. In
the number of which, they, above all others, have reason to hope to be, who
have so great a respect to His Majesty, and confidence in his Goodness, that
for fear of offending Him, they dare worship none but Himself alone: resting
assured, He will deal well with them, even for this reason; because they have
such a regard to Him, as not to presume without his warrant and authority, so
much as to recommend themselves to Him, by any Angel in Heaven, though never so
great; but by his only begotten Son Jesus Christ alone, who is the Head of them
all, and whom He has consecreated to be our perpetual Intercessor with Him.

The like we may say of the Worship of Saints; to whom all Prayers are
fruitless and vain, unless they be able to do something for their Supplicants.
Of which they have no certainty; nor is there more ground to say that they can,
than that they cannot; but rather less ground: since it is inconceivable how
they should be able to hear and assist so many, as address themselves to the
same Saint, in several far distant parts of the World: without supposing them
to be equal to our blessed Savior (for they have as many, if not more,
Supplicants as He) by such an union as He has with the Divinity.

They worship also, which is still worse, such for Saints, as never were in
being; and others whose Saintship there is too much reason to question, being
apparently guilty of such crimes, as are inconsistent with it. For instance,
our Thomas a Becket (by whose blood, they have prayed our Lord Christ, that
they may ascend into Heaven; and do still pray, (upon December. 29.) that they
who implore his help may have the saving effect of his petitions) whom our
Forefathers, even in the time of Popery, looked upon as a perjured Person, and
as a Traitor: being not only called so by the King; but in Parliament accused
of Treason, the Bishops as well as others being present; and the Bishop of
Winchester pronouncing the sentence against him.

In short, the Devotions of the Roman Church are so like the ancient Idolatry;
that the cunningest Man in the World cannot find any difference, without a
great many nice and subtle distinctions: which in practice make no difference
at all.

SECT. XI. Another is the way of promoting their Religion.
THERE is this Argument also against it (as Grotius speaks of Paganism, Book 4.
Sect. 10.) taken from the Religion it self; that if it be not supported by
humane power, or policy, immediately it falls to the ground. For as the Church
of Rome (it has been observed by wise Men of our own) got and increased its
absolute Authority over Men's consciences, by obtruding on the World
supposititious Writings, and corrupting the Monuments of former times; by false
Miracles, and forging false stories; by Wars also and Persecutions; by
Massacres, Treasons and Rebellions; in short, by all manner of carnal means,
whether violent or fraudulent: so take away these supports, and that Religion
cannot stand by its own strength.

And truly his reason in the Third Section of the same Book against the
Paganish worship, that it was from evil Spirits, because they instigated their
Worshippers to destroy them that worshipped one God; holds good still (if there
be any force in it) to prove the Roman Church not to be acted by the good
Spirit of God; because they would not let those live (had they sufficient
power) who worship only one God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and content
themselves with the Belief before mentioned, into which they were Baptized; not
presuming to superadd any thing else, as necessary to Salvation.

And, which is worse, while they have been most cruel to those, who for fear of
offending God, dare not allow the worship they give to Saints, which they think
belongs to him alone; nor fall down before the Sacrament and adore it, as very
God Himself: They have tolerated such without any censure, who have raised St.
Francis into an equality with, if not superiority unto, our blessed Savior;
and made the blessed Virgin a kind of Goddess; nay called the Pope the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords; giving him such a power over all Kings and
Kingdoms, as sober Men among themselves are ashamed to own. Which is just after
the example of the Pagans, among whom, as Grotius observes, it was lawful for
the Poets, to sing what they pleased, though never so lewd, concerning the
Gods, and for the Epicures to take Providence out of the World: while the Jews
were made ridiculous, and the Christians most barbarously used, as if they had
been the vilest of Mankind. Of which more anon.

SECT. XII. The Romanists themselves overthrow their own Religion.
THAT argument also which he urges for Christianity against the Pagans, that
the chief Points of Christian Doctrine, were acknowledged by some or other of
the best and greatest among them; may be used by us also for the Faith to which
we now hold: there being several learned Writers in the Roman Church, who have
acknowledged our belief to be sufficient to Salvation; and the Points which
they have superadded, having been looked upon by the most excellent Persons
among them, only as mere Scholastical opinions; and not certain Truths, of
which we can have a full assurance.

Here I might show, how the sufficiency of the Scripture has been owned; and
the Apostles Creed likewise confessed to contain all things that are absolutely
necessary to be believed to salvation. But because I would not have this Book
swell above the bigness of the foregoing, I shall let them alone: and instance
only in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which is now pressed with so much
violence upon the Christian World; but most plainly condemned by Gratian in
their Canon Law, and by the Author, or Authors of the Canon of the Mass it self.

About the former we may be satisfied out of the Decretum, if we look into the
Third part, and the second Distinction, concerning Consecration. Where in the
XL VIII. Chapter out of St. Austin and Prosper, he says, The heavenly bread,
which is truly Christ's flesh, suo modo, after a sort or manner is called the
Body of Christ: whereas revera in truth it is the Sacrament of his Body, which
was hanged upon the Cross: and the sacrificing of the flesh of Christ, by the
hand of the Priest, is called his death, and passion, and crucifixion, not in
the Truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery. Which words are so
directly against the present sense of the Roman Church, that no Protestant can
speak more expressly and clearly against it; nor desire a plainer confutation of
it; unless it be that of the Gloss upon those words, which is this: The
celestial Sacrament, which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is said to be
the Body of Christ; but improperly: whence it is said to be so, suo modo, sed
non rei veritate, after a manner, but not in the truth of the thing. So the
sense is, it is called Christ's body; that is, it is signified thereby.

And if we look further into the LII. Chapter, we find he says Christ was
sacrificed but once, in semet ipso, in himself, when he hung upon the Cross,
etc. Yet is offered daily in Sacramento, in the Sacrament, which the Church
frequents in memory of that thing. Which Sacrifice in the next Chapter he calls
exemplum, the example, or resemblance of that upon the Cross, offered in
remembrance of his Death. Which is sufficient to convince us that they believed
in those days, as we do now, and not as the Roman Church does; else He would
not have called that, which he says was truly the flesh of Christ, the heavenly
bread. But to put all out of doubt, let us turn to the lxxii. Chapter, and
there we find these remarkable words out of St. Austin, which fully explain the
business, Because it is not lawful for Christ to be devoured by our teeth,
therefore our Lord would have this Bread and this Wine in a Mystery, by
consecration of the Holy Spirit, to be potentially created his flesh and blood,
and to be daily mystically offered for the life of the World. They are
potentially then or virtually made his Body and Blood, though but Bread and
Wine in themselves: and of this Sacrifice which is thus wonderfully made in
commemoration of Christ, (as he adds out of St. Hierom, Chap. lxxvi.) it is
lawful to eat; but of that which Christ offered on the Cross, secundum se,
according to it self none can eat.

But the Canon of the Mass will more abundantly convince us, that he or they
that made it, did not believe any thing of Transubstantiation. For First, after
the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, the Priest signs them ten times, at
least, with the sign of the Cross: which can have no excuse made for it, (but
is the greatest impudence) if it be indeed Christ Himself who lies before the
Priest, whom he thus crosses; For sure he does not intend to bless Christ, or
to drive away the Devil from him, or any such like thing, for which those
Crossings are used in that Church.

But more than this, (2dly,) it is observable, that after Consecration also,
the Priest still calls Christ's Body, Panem Sanctum, the holy Bread of Eternal
life; which shows that, when this Rule was made, they believed the Bread to be
still remaining.

A further Indication of which, is, that (3dly) the Priest proceeds to beseech
God, that He would vouchsafe to look upon that Sacrifice of his gifts, with a
propitious and ferene countenance; and to accept them, as He did the gift of
his Servant Abel, and the Sacrifice of Abraham, and that which his High Priest
Melchisedeck offered to Him. Which is most absurdly spoken, if the Priest there
offer Christ himself unto God; For then he intercedes with him for our
Intercessor, as if he needed our Prayers: and besides, compares Him with the
first fruits of the Flock, and the spoils of War; which is so incongruous, and
so much below his heavenly glory, that an unprejudiced Man cannot but think,
they who composed that Prayer, looked upon those gifts which they offered, as
still Bread and Wine.

Which appears more fully (4thly) from what follows in the next Prayer, where,
bowing profoundly, and laying his hands upon the Altar, the Priest humbly
entreats God in this manner; Command these things to be carried by the hands of
thy holy Angel, to thy high Altar, into the presence of thy Divine Majesty.
Where there are two plain testimonies against their present doctrine. For
First, nothing but the Bread and Wine can be called haec these things; which in
no propriety of speech can signify the very natural body of Christ. Who
(secondly) can by none of God's Angels be carried into Heaven, being there
already; nor brought more than He is into the presence of the Divine Majesty,
where He was before the Priest said Mass, and sits for ever there at God's
right hand.

Had they that composed this Prayer believed any thing of Transubstantiation,
they would have said, (and could not have said otherways, if they said any
thing of this matter) Almighty God, behold here, before me upon thy Altar, lies
thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, by my sacrifice unto Thee: that very Christ
who is at thy right hand, I now take into my hands to present unto thy Majesty,
under the form of Bread and Wine. Him thou can not reject, nor me his Priest,
who offer Him unto Thee, etc. Or some such like words, more befitting their
present notions, than desiring an Angel may carry what the Priest offers, and
present it unto GOD.

But we find quite contrary, which is the last thing I shall observe, that in
conclusion, the Priest acknowledges, that by Christ Jesus God always creates,
and sanctifies and quickens, and blesses (making a cross upon the Host and the
Chalice, at every one of those three last words) all these good things. Which
can be meant of nothing but the Bread and Wine consecrated to the commemoration
and representation of Christ's body and blood sacrificed for us. For Christ's
own very natural body and blood cannot in any tolerable sense, be said to be
continually created and quickened, or made alive: unless you will suppose him to
have been dead before, nay not to have been at all. For creation implies the
thing not to have been; and vivification, not to have been then alive, when it
was quickened.

Yet this fancy, of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, by
Transubstantiation, against which there are such numerous Testimonies in their
own Communion Service, is now become the main Article of their Religion. For we
all know, to our great grief and astonishment, that when the public Authority
of this Realm was on their side, subscription was not urged to any Article of
their Religion upon such violent and bloody terms, as unto this of the Real
Presence. The Mystery of which iniquity, as a great Man of our own said, in the
Age before us, cannot be better resolved than into the powerful and deceitful
working of Satan; who delights thus to do despite to our Lord, and to his
Religion; by seducing his professed Subjects into a belief of such things as
make them and Him ridiculous unto unbelievers; and engage them in the worst
kind of Rebellion, he could imagine, by worshipping Bread and Wine instead of
their Savior: and all this upon the least occasions and shallowest reasons.

SECT. XIII. Other Instances of it.
BUT besides these plain confessions of that Church against it self, there are
many other things, (which I shall but just name) wherein we have the testimony
of several of their own learned Men (ready to be produced) for our, and against
their belief: proving clearly that the present, is not the old Religion of that
Church; but that they have brought into it many Innovations: by adding to the
Canonical Books of Scripture; by making their vulgar Latin Translation of the
Bible (about which they themselves cannot agree) authentical; by forbidding the
People to read the holy Scriptures in their own Language; and by denying them
the public Prayers in a Language they understand; by giving the Pope, not only
a new Title of Universal Bishop, but an authority and jurisdiction, which was
never heard of for many Ages; by increasing the number of Sacraments, and
altering their nature; by taking away the Cup from the People; and turning the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood into a proper expiatory sacrifice; by
celebrating the Eucharist, without any body to communicate; by setting up
Images in Churches, and ordaining Religious Worship to be given to them; by
invocating Saints and Angels; (as was said before) and by the Doctrine of
Purgatory, and Indulgences, and many other; together with a vast number of
strange ceremonies, in the making holy water, consecrating bells, etc. For
which no antiquity can be pretended.

The woeful effect of which is this (if we may speak the plain Truth) that by
pressing upon Men's belief a great deal too much, and placing great virtue in
trifles, they have tempted Men to believe nothing at all. As is apparent from
hence; that where and when (as an excellent Writer of our own speaks) this
Religion has most absolutely commanded, there and then Atheism or Infidelity
has most abounded. And how should it do otherwise? when, as he observes, so
many lying Legends have been obtruded upon Men's belief, and so many false
Miracles forged to justify them, as are very likely to make suspicious Men
question the truth of all: And so many weak and frivolous ceremonies devised,
and such abundance of ridiculous observances in Religion introduced, as are no
less apt to beget a secret contempt and scorn of it in witty Men: and
consequently Atheism and Impiety; if they have this persuasion settled in their
mind (which is endeavored to be rooted in them from their childhood) that if
they be not of that Religion, they were as good be of none at all: And when a
great part also of the Doctrines now mentioned, so apparently make for the
temporal ends of those who teach them; that sagacious Men can scarce forbear
thinking, they were on purpose devised to serve those designs: That particular
doctrine also of Transubstantiation being so portentous, that joined with the
forenamed persuasion, of No Papists no Christians, it has in all probability
brought more than Averroes to this resolution; since Christians eat that which
they adore, let my Soul be among the Philosophers: And lastly, the pretense
which is so common, that there is no ground to believe the Scriptures, but
their Churches infallibility; and yet no ground to believe their Churches
infallibility, but some Texts of Scripture; being too plain a way to lead those
who discern the labyrinth wherein they are, to believe neither Church nor
Scripture.

SECT. XIV. Whereby they have spoiled Christianity, as the Pagans did the
Natural Religion.
THESE things, which have been already urged by the Writers of our Church, for
the conviction of those who are capable of it, I repeat here again; because
they seem to me very powerful for the preservation of those, who are not
already tainted, or too far gone in that delusion. Which is so great, that (to
sum up all belonging to this Head) we may safely say, Popery is just such a
depravation of the true Christian Religion, as Paganism was of the Natural
Religion. There cannot be a righter conception of it, than this; which appears
too plainly, in the absurd doctrines and opinions, which they have mingled with
the Christian Faith; in their multiplied superstitions; in their fabulous
relations of the Saints, wherein they have surpassed the very Poets themselves;
and (to pass by the rest) in their prostrating themselves before Images; and
giving religious worship to Men departed.

Which last instance, furnished the Pagans of Cochin with this answer to the
Jesuits (as Christoph. Borrus, one of that Order, relates) when they pressed
upon them the belief of one God, and no more. We do believe it, said they; but
those whom you see us worship in their Images, were Men of great Sanctity; whom
pious People therefore worship according to their merit, just as you give to
the Apostles and Martyrs and Confessors diverse degrees of honor and religious
service, as you know them to have excelled in virtue and piety. And that they
might confirm this to be their sense of the Divinity, they bid the Jesuits
observe one part of the Altar in their Temple to be void of Images, and to be
hid in an obscure and dark place; which they said was the proper seat of the
most high God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, who could not be represented in
any form and shape: and that the Images which stood about that place were the
representations of their Intercessors with Him; who having great power with the
most high God, did obtain many gifts and blessings for those that invocated
them. How this differs from the notions of the Roman Church, I do not see;
unless it be in this, that they have sometimes adventured to represent God
himself in a shape. Otherwise the worship is the very same (the dead Men, who
are the objects of it, only changed) and may very well justify us, if we say,
(and therein we speak very moderately) that their worship is an Image, at
least, of the ancient Idolatry. And moves them (to make the resemblance more
perfect) unto the very same rage and violence, which was in the Pagans, against
all those that differ from them, and cannot consent to worship God in that way:
prosecuting them with all manner of cruelty, as if they were utter enemies of
God, and of all Religion.

By which we may certainly know that they are so far from being the only true
Christians, that they are a very degenerate part of Christ's Church: wanting
that great mark of his faithful Disciples, to love one another, even as Christ
loved us. To which they are such strangers, that quite contrary, they not only
hate and persecute, but endeavor, as I said, to root out those from the face
of the Earth; who obediently believe all that they can find our Lord and his
Apostles have delivered; and profess they are ready with all their hearts to
receive and do, whatsoever any body can further teach them, to be his mind:
Nay, are very desirous and diligent to know it; sparing no pains to understand
the whole Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus.

SECT. XV. Answer to what they say about Miracles.
THEY pretend indeed abundance of Miracles wrought in their Church, as a
sufficient condemnation of those who obstinately refuse to invocate Saints, to
worship their Images and the consecrated Host, to believe Purgatory and all
other things, for the proof of which these wonders are alleged. But herein
also they imitate the Pagans, who were guilty of the like deceit: and the same
answer will serve here, which Grotius gives there (L. iv. Sect. 8.) in his
confutation of the old Idolatry. For First, the wisest Men among them have
rejected many of these Miracles, as not supported by the testimony of any
credible witnesses; nay, as plain fictions. Others also of them, which are
pretended to be of better credit, happened in some private place, in the night,
before one or two Persons: whose eyes crafty Priests (as he speaks) might
easily delude with false shows and counterfeit appearances of things. And
further, there are others which only raise admiration among People ignorant of
the nature of things; and are no true miracles.

I deny not, but there may have things been done among them, which no humane
power could effect by the strength of natural causes; and yet no Divine, that
is, omnipotent Power be needful to their production. For those Spirits, which
are interposed between God and Man, are able by their nimbleness, cunning,
activity, and strength to make such strange application of things (very
distant) one to another, as shall astonish the Spectators with wonderful
effects. But there is too great reason to think they are not good Spirits, that
do these feats; because they revive hereby the ancient superstition, or uphold
the Image of it still in the Christian World; to the great dishonor of our
Savior, and the indangering the Souls of his People. Who have been so far
misled, as not only to fancy great Virtue in the Images of the Saints; and to
cry up also some Images, particularly of our Lady (of Loretto for instance) as
endued with some singular power and virtue, which is not to be found in others:
but to honor them so highly, as for one Miracle said to be done by a Crucifix,
to report a hundred to be wrought at such or such a Shrine of hers.

It is very considerable also (to omit the rest) which he notes, in the V.
Book, out of the Law of Moses; that it supposes God might permit some wonders
to be done, only for their trial; whether the People would persist in the
worship of the true God; which had been confirmed by undoubted and far greater
and more numerous Miracles. Read Deuteron. xiii. 1, 2, 3, etc.

This is excellently expressed, and with advantage, by a great Man of our own;
in these words, or to this effect. The Doctrine which we believe, that is, the
Bible, has been confirmed, as is confessed on all sides, by innumerable
supernatural and truly Divine Miracles; and consequently the Doctrine of the
Roman Church, which in many points is plainly opposite to the Bible, is
condemned by them: I mean the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles. And
therefore if any strange things have been done in that Church, they prove
nothing but the truth of Scripture: which foretold, that (God's Providence
permitting it, and the wickedness of the World deserving it) strange signs, and
wonders should be wrought, to confirm false doctrine; that they which love not
the Truth might be given over to strong delusions. So that now we have reason
rather to suspect and be afraid of pretended Miracles, as signs of false
Doctrine; than much to regard them, as certain arguments of Truth. Neither is
it strange, that God should permit some true wonders to be done, to delude
those who have forged so many wonders, to deceive the World.

SECT. XVI. Answer to another Objection.
BUT it is not likely, they say, that Religion should be thus depraved in the
Roman Church; because their Ancestors were Men of greater virtue and honesty,
than to suffer the least alteration.

Which is the very thing that is alleged by the Jews, why they should not
believe our Savior was unjustly condemned, and his Religion rejected by their
Priests and Elders; as Grotius observes in the Vth. Book. Out of which I might
produce several things, as I have done out of the foregoing, to prove the
vanity of the Romish Traditions, as well as of the Jewish; and show also how
they have brought back Judaism, in a great measure, by the vast burden of Rites
and Ceremonies, wherewith they have incumbered Christian Religion: But I shall
wave all this (because I would make this Book as short as the rest) and only
observe, in answer to what was now pretended; that whosoever shall consider (as
he speaks of the Ancestors of the Jews) what kind of Men for several Ages sat
in the Chair of Rome, and how ignorant the People generally were; he cannot
wonder at the corruption, of which we complain.

Let him but read, First, the censures which their own Authors have passed upon
several Popes, as mere Epicures, and Men void of all Religion, etc. And then
the bitter complaints which St. Bernard himself makes (and that while he wrote
to a Pope) of the Vices which were then annexed, even to the very Papacy: and
further, the description which such Men, as Marsilius of Padua make of the
Church of Rome, the whole Body of which, he says, was so infected, by the
plenitude of power, which is allowed to the Pope, that it might be more truly
called a shop of Traffic, nay a Den of Thieves, than a Church of Christ: and
(to come nearer to our own times) the forwardness of their People, even since
the Reformation, to worship Men as Saints; before they were canonized by the
Pope: and he will not think there has been always such care and caution used
about that and such like matters, as they would have us believe.

We have a memorable instance of this thing last mentioned (to meddle with no
other) in the Founder of the Jesuits Order, Ignatius Loiola: by whose merits
People recommended themselves to God (if we may believe the Pope himself)
before he was declared to be a Saint. So Urban VIII. informs us in his very
Bull or Decretal Letters for his Canonization: where several miraculous Works
are said to have been done for those, who fled to his help, and religiously
worshipped his Image, and commended themselves to him (as the words are) with
all their heart. He was made indeed a Beato by the preceding Pope: But the like
stories are told of Xavier, one of Ignatius his Companions, unto whose
intercession the People applied themselves, and hoped in his merits (as the
Bull for his Sainting tells us) even before he was made a Beato. So exceeding
prone they have been of late to run into Superstition; as they were more long
ago in the days of St. Martin, who broke down an Altar, which had been set up
by former Bishops themselves, in honor of a Martyr, as the People called him:
who proved to be no better than a Highway-man (as St. Martin discovered) that
had been executed for his Robberies, and there buried.

SECT. XVII. Popery and Mahometism had the same Original.
WE may safely therefore affirm, that the account which Grotius gives, in the
beginning of the VI. Book, of the rise of Mahometism, may serve as well for the
Original of Popery. Which took its rise from the great decay of true piety; and
the vain jangling that fell out among Christian People, by employing their time
in curious Questions: which made the vulgar at last not know what to believe,
and to lay the fault upon the Scriptures; nay to avoid them as hurtful and
dangerous. And then it was easy to lead them any whither, when they had for
saken the Light which showed them their way: and began also to place Religion,
not in purity of mind, but in Rites and Ceremonies; and to content themselves
with such things, as served rather to exercise the Body, than to amend the Soul.

In short, that false Prophet Mahomet, and an Universal Bishop, sprang up both
together, very near the same time: as Treason and Idolatry settled themselves
also together at the same time in the Age following. For the Pope under the
pretense of retaining Images, which the Constantinopolitane Emperor destroyed,
revolted from him; denied him the tribute that was wont, till then, to be paid
him, even out of Rome it self, as well as other places; and, denying him all
obedience, plainly thrust him out of Italy. This account Zonaras, and others
give of Gregory the II.'s proceeding against Leo Isaurus: and thus the Bishop
of Rome, by his Papal Authority, became the first Author of defection from a
lawful Prince, upon the account of Religion.

SECT. XVIII. And supports its self by the same means.
IF we look further into what was said before about Mahometism, we shall find
that Popery stands, and upholds it self, by the very same shameful means, which
keep up the Religion of that false Prophet. By force, that is, and violence:
compelling Men, where they have any power, to consent to what they say, or
rather to feign a consent to what they do not believe. Which discovers the
weakness of that Religion, and of the reasons of those that profess it: For he
that extorts assent (as was said in the Book foregoing) by sense of pain, or
fear of punishment; plainly confesses, by that very proceeding, that he
distrusts his Arguments.

At the best, they require belief of Men, without all liberty of inquiring into
Religion. For the vulgar (just as in Turkey) are prohibited to read the Books
which are accounted holy: which is a manifest sign of its iniquity (as he there
speaks of the Turkish Religion;) for justly may that merchandise be suspected,
which is obtruded upon this condition; that it must not be looked into, not
examined. This is the way of the grossest deceivers; who will not submit
themselves to a trial, and refuse to give any account: but will have us submit
to their Authority, and take, what such Men as they say, upon trust. Which is
the Method of the Roman Church, who are wont to put doubting of any part of
their doctrine among mortal sins: And so, for fear what the issue may be, will
not suffer their People to try their Religion; with indifference, that is, with
true liberty of judgment, and with a resolution, to doubt of it, if the grounds
of it appear upon examination to be uncertain, and to leave it, if they prove
apparently false.

It is true indeed (as it there follows) there is not in every Man the like
capacity of knowledge, and quicksightedness to discern between truth and
falsehood: Many also are carried away into error by pride; others by inordinate
passions or affections; and some by custom and imitation, or by the weakness
of their understandings, and forwardness to judge without due consideration, or
advice with their proper Guides. But those very Books, which the Roman Church
pretends may mislead Men (and therefore will not let them use) teach them in
the first and principal place to purge themselves from all naughty affections;
and then to be sober-minded, and not too forward to determine things on their
own heads; but to reverence their judgments, who are over them in the Lord: and
not to pretend to Religion, nor imagine they can judge a-right, till they be
humble, and meek, and without any other design, than this alone of saving their
Souls. Now the Divine Goodness forbids us to think, that such Men shall not be
able to find the way to eternal Salvation, who seek for it in God's own Word,
and in this manner; without any by-respect to honor or worldly advantage; and,
with entire submission of themselves and all they have to Him, imploring his
assistance, that they may attain it. Which are in effect, the very words of
Justin Martyr and Origin.

And truly, since GOD has implanted in Men's minds the power and faculty of
judging; there is no part of truth that better deserves the employment of this
faculty about it, than that of which we cannot be ignorant without hazard of
our Salvation. After this, whosoever inquires with a godly mind, he shall not
dangerously err: And where should he enquire after it, but in God's most holy
Word? without which we cannot know whether there be either Church or Priest or
any thing else, wherein they would have us trust.

SECT. XIX. And refuses to be tried by Scripture.
IT is a manifest sign therefore of imposture, that, when they cannot for
shame, but sometimes suffer their Religion to be tried, yet they will not have
it tried by the holy Scriptures: In the reading of which (as was excellently
said in the conclusion of the foregoing Books) no man can be deceived, but he
who has first deceived himself. For the Writers of them were more faithful,
and fuller of Divine Inspiration, than either to defraud us of any necessary
part of Divine Truth; or to hide it in a Cloud, so that we cannot see it.

Why then should any body decline this way of trial? unless they see themselves
so manifestly condemned by the holy Scriptures; that they dare not let their
cause be brought into so clear a light. Which hurts indeed sore eyes; but
comforts and delights those that are sound: showing us so plainly what we are
to embrace and what to refuse, and being so sure and so perfect a Guide in all
such matters; that S. Hilary not only commends and admires the Emperor
Constantius for desiring a Faith, according to what was written: But says, He
is an Antichrist who refuses this; and an Anathema that counterfeits it. And
thereupon calls to him, in this manner; O Emperor, thou seek for faith;
hearken to it, not out of new little Papers, but of the Books of God. There we
must seek for it, if we mean to find it: and if they be silent and can tell us
nothing (says St. Ambrose) who shall dare to speak?

Let us not therefore bring deceitful balances (they are the words of S.
Austin, in his second Book of Baptism, Chap. vi.) wherein we may weigh what we
list, and as we list, after our own liking; saying, This is heavy, that is
light: But let us bring the Divine Balance, out of the holy Scriptures (as out
of the Lords Treasures) and in that let us weigh what is most ponderous: or
rather let not us weigh, but acknowledge those things, which are already
weighed by the Lord.

Yes, say they of the Church of Rome, we will be put into that Balance, and
tried by the Scriptures; but not by them alone. Which is, in effect, to refuse
to be tried by them: for they give testimony to their own fullness, and
perfection and plainness too, in things necessary; and so do all other
Christian Writers that succeeded the Apostles; who do not send us to turn over
we know not how many other Volumes, but tell us here we may be abundantly
satisfied. In so much that the first Christian Emperor Constantine (the Father
of Constantius now mentioned) admonished the Bishops in the famous Council of
Nice to consult with these heavenly inspired Writings, as their Guide and Rule
in all their Debates; because they perspicuously instruct us (as his very words
are) what to believe in divine things, and therefore they ought, he told them,
to fetch from thence, the Resolution of those things, which should come in
question. To which Cardinal Bellarmine indeed is pleased to say, that
Constantine truly was a Great Emperor, but no great Doctor: But as herein he
speaks too scornfully of him; so he reflects no less upon the understanding and
judgment of those venerable Fathers assembled in that Council, which (as
Theodoret tells us in his Ecclesiastical History) was composed of Men excelling
in Apostolical gifts, and many of them carried in their bodies the marks of the
Lord Jesus, and were, for the far greater part, a Multitude of Martyrs
assembled together: who all consented unto, and followed this wholesome counsel
of the Emperor: (as he there testifies) knowing he did but speak the sense of
the truly Catholic Church.

Which did not merely bid Men hear it, and bring all doctrines to its
touchstone: but confessed plainly that even the Church it self must be tried by
the Scriptures. It is the express sentence of the same S. Austin, in his Book
of the Unity of the Church. Where in the second Chapter he says, the question
then was (as it is now) where is the Church? Now what shall we do, says he?
seek for it in our own words? or in the words of our Head, our Lord Jesus
Christ? I think we ought to seek it rather in his words, who is the Truth; and
best knows his own Body. And in the beginning of the third Chapter, thus
proceeds; Let us not hear, thus say I, and thus say thou: but let us hear,
thus says the Lord. The Lords Books there are certainly; to whose. authority
we both consent, we both believe, we both yield obedience: there let us seek
the Church; there let us discuss our cause.

And to name no more, the Author of the imperfect work upon St. Matthew,
(carrying the name of S. Chrysostom) declares this so fully, that it leaves no
doubt in us, what course they took for satisfaction in this business.
Heretofore, says he, there were many ways, whereby one might know what was the
true Church of Christ; and what was Gentilism: but now there is no way to know
what is the true Church of Christ, but by the Scriptures. Why so? Because all
those things which belong properly to Christ in truth and reality; those
heresies have also in show and in appearance. They have Scriptures, Baptism,
Eucharist, and all the rest, even Christ himself; like as we have. Therefore if
any one would know which is the true Church of Christ; how should he know it,
in such a confusion of multitude, but only by the Scriptures? which he repeats
over again a little after, he therefore that would know which is the true
Church of Christ, how should he know it, but by the Scriptures?

To them let us go, and in them let us rest: and if you are the Disciples of
the Gospel, may we say to the Romanists (as Athanasius does to the Followers of
Apolinarius, in his Book about the Incarnation of Christ) Do not speak
unrighteously against the Lord, but walk in what is written and done. But if
you will talk of different things from what are written, why do you contend
with us; who dare not hear nor speak, beside those things which are written?
Our Lord telling us, if you abide in the word, even in my word, you shall be
free indeed. What immodest frenzy is this, to speak things, which are not
written? and to devise things which are strangers to piety?

To which, if we faithfully adhere, there is this to be added for our
encouragement; that though we should mistake in the sense of the Scriptures yet
they secure us, that if we with honest and upright hearts continue to inquire
after the truth, (designing nothing else) that error shall not prejudice us:
But God will either discover to us his mind, or not condemn us for our error of
weakness, not of wilfulness.

SECT. XX. The Vanity of their appeal to Traditions.
AS for Interpretations of Scripture by Tradition, they may be pretended and
talked of; but cannot be produced in most places, where we are desirous of that
help: which we gladly receive, when we can have it by a truly Universal
consent. But as for particular interpretations of the ancient Fathers, they do
not absolutely agree with each other, in their Expositions of those Texts, upon
which controversies of greatest moment are now grounded. Nay, they often times
propound diverse interpretations alike probable. And sometimes plainly intimate
their doubtfulness, and make but imperfect conjectures; in such a manner, as if
they intended to excite Posterity to seek for further resolution. Therefore we
shall not dissent from them, though we do not assent to all their particular
interpretations. Nay, we cannot more dissent from them, than by following their
interpretations on such strict terms as the Romanists would bind us all to do;
when they seem to make for their advantage. For then, there is not the least
surmise or conjecture of any one Father, but must suffice against the joint
Authority of all the rest. To which Rule (of serving their interest) they are
so true, that they stick not to reject any interpretation of the Fathers, when
they think good: and, which is more, to prefer their own expositions before
theirs.

And so they do in the matter of all other Traditions, though called
Apostolical. For instance, the threefold immersion in Baptism, which seems to
have flowed from an Apostolical Canon, is long ago abolished (says their
Canus) by a contrary custom. And so is the custom of giving the communion to
Infants (which prevailed, says their Maldonate, for 600. Years in the Church)
not only antiquated by them, but decreed to be unlawful. Which clearly shows
that they might, if they pleased, make an end of all the controversies that
trouble the Church; without any disparagement (but rather with the increase) of
its Authority. For challenging a power to alter even the Institutions of Jesus
Christ, (as they have done in taking away the Cup from the People in the Holy
Communion) and much more those of the Apostles: what need all this stir about
Apostolical Traditions, or the Decrees of the Church? which they may lay aside
at their pleasure; and have laid aside, as appears by many other instances,
besides those now named, that may be given of it.

But it is sufficient for the direction of every honest hearted Man to know
(which is as certain as any thing of that nature can be, and may be undoubtedly
relied on) that nothing is clearer in the Tradition of the Church than this:
that the Doctors of it declare the Scriptures to be full and perspicuous in all
needful matters. And therefore, there needs no other Tradition, but the
Tradition of the Scriptures: which satisfy us abundantly, in the Truth of all
those things which are universally received.

SECT. XXI. And their guilt in what they say about the holy Scriptures.
THERE cannot therefore be a greater demonstration of their guilt than this,
that notwithstanding such evident testimonies from the Scriptures themselves,
and the concurrent stream of the ancient Doctors of Christ's Church; they have
been forced (to avoid this trial by the Scriptures) to say so many scandalous
things as they have done, in disparagement of the Sacred Writings. Many of them
are commonly known, and I am not willing to repeat the rest; but only say this
great truth: that whether they will or no, their Church, such as it is,
receives all its Authority from the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures from it.
For we can have no notion, as was said before, of a Church, or of its
authority; but from the Scriptures. Which therefore must be of greater
authority, than that which receives authority from them, and be first supposed
to be infallible, before they can make us believe any thing else is so. For we
must be secure of the proof before we can be sure of the thing proved by it;
otherwise it is no proof, but leaves us as much in doubt as we were before it
was alleged.

If they say (and what else can be said, with any color of reason?) that we
must indeed learn their Churches infallibility from the Scriptures; but then
learn the rest from their Church: mark, I beseech you, what follows. Then it is
manifest, First, that they themselves make the Scriptures the Rule of Faith, in
this one Article, at least, concerning the Catholic Churches infallibility.
Which we must therefore believe (and for no other reason) because the
Scriptures which we first infallibly believe, do teach and prove it.

Whence it plainly follows that private Men may, and must be assured of the
Truth of Scriptures (without the help of their Churches Authority) before they
can believe any thing else: because it is the ground for their belief of that
infallibility which their Church pretends; which to them is the General Rule of
Faith.

And from thence it follows further, that the Scriptures, which to us are the
only Rule of Faith, ought to be acknowledged by them to be more than so; even
the Rule of their Rule of Faith. And if it be so; what reason can any Man
allege, why it should not be the immediate Rule of Faith (without sending us
elsewhere to seek it) in all other Articles of the Creed, as well as in that of
their pretended infallible Church.

We may appeal to all the World, and call Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men to
witness, between us and the Roman Church (as a worthy Champion of our Cause did
long ago) whether the Articles of Christ's Incarnation, his Death, Passion,
Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, the Resurrection of the Dead,
and life everlasting, etc. be not much more plainly set down in the Scriptures,
to any Man's apprehension whatsoever; than the infallibility of the present
Roman Church is, in such words as these, Thou art Peter, etc. Feed my Sheep, or
any other from whence they challenge it. And therefore why should we be
required to learn these, or any other part of Christian Faith merely from their
Church, when we learn them so easily by the Scriptures; in which they are to be
found more clearly delivered, than any thing we read about their Church?

Let no Man doubt, but if the Holy Ghost will teach us that Article of the
Churches Infallibility, immediately by the Scriptures without the help of the
Churches infallible Authority (as they themselves are forced to confess,
because else the Church can have no authority;) then He will immediately teach
us by the same Scriptures, any other Article of our Creed, and whatsoever is
necessary to Salvation, which are plainly and perspicuously enough set down in
the Scriptures; without the help and assistance of the Churches infallible
authority, which the Scriptures cannot be supposed to teach, but by places far
more doubtful.

SECT. XXII. It is our Wisdom therefore to adhere to the Scriptures.
TO this Rule then let us stick; keeping those words of our Savior always in
mind, iii. Joh. 21, 22. He that does evil, hates the light; neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
Let that be his Guide, who would not go astray in dangerous Paths; into which
he cannot fall, who keeps close to the directions of the Holy Books: wherein
all necessary Truth being set down, as the most ancient and best Doctors
unanimously agree, we are certain (every way) by believing them, to believe all
necessary Truth; and if our lives be accordingly (without which, they tell us,
our belief will be vain) it is impossible we should fail of everlasting
Salvation.

To these alone (as St. Austin speaks for himself, in his Book of Nature and
Grace) we owe an absolute consent, without refusing any thing they propound to
us. Whatsoever it be (as his words are in his CXII. Epistle) that is confirmed
by the perspicuous authority of the divine Scriptures, those, viz. which are
canonical in the Church; it must be believed without any doubting. But as for
any other witnesses or testimonies, to which thou art persuaded to give credit;
thou may believe them, or not believe them, according as thou perceivest
them to deserve or not deserve to be relied on. A great reverence is due to the
Church and its testimony (though less to the present Church of Rome than
others; because it has so grossly abused the World by false records, and forged
Miracles, and such like things) yet only as to an humane Testimony; which
cannot equal that of the Holy Scriptures.

SECT. XXIII. Which have more manifest notes of certainty than the Church.
FOR if we take their own way and method, to assure our minds that we follow an
infallible Guide, there is no note which they give of the true Church, which
they say ought to be our Guide; but pleads far more strongly for the Holy
Scriptures, that we should rather follow them, and give an undoubted credit to
them. I shall not run over all those Notes, nor examine the certainty of them;
but only briefly name some of them and show, that if they prove any thing, it
is the Authority of the Scriptures above the Church.

First, they say, the very name of the Catholic Church is venerable, and ought
to be regarded. But, as that Name is not proper to them alone, so, if there be
any power in Names to make us respect any thing; what more awful than the Name
of the Word of God, and the Sacred Scriptures, which were always given to these
Books, to which we advise all Christians to adhere.

The next Note, which is Antiquity, is on the side of the Scriptures also;
which more justly claim to be ancienter than all other Books, which pretend to
any Divinity; than the Catholic Church can claim to be ancienter than all
other Societies, which call themselves by the Name of a Church. Nay, the
Doctrine contained therein, must be supposed, as I have shown, to be before the
Church; which is made by belief and profession of that Doctrine: and the Old
Testament certainly written, long before the Church was made Catholic.

As for unity, in that the Church is not comparable to the Scriptures, whose
agreement and consent of parts is admirable. And if we speak of the surest bond
of true Catholic Unity, it is as manifest as the Sun, that the Holy Scriptures
lay the foundation of it, and preserve us in it (if we adhere to them) by
keeping us close to one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: but the Church of Rome,
which has usurped the Name of Catholic, makes this blessed Unity impossible.
For, there being but two ways to it, either that we all agree in our Opinions
about Religion, or that while we differ it be no hinderance to Communion; they
have made the latter as impossible as the former: because they make it
absolutely necessary to communion and salvation, to believe in every thing as
they do.

The like might be said of Holiness and efficacy of Doctrine (which depends
upon the Churches speaking according to the Scriptures) sanctity of the authors
of our Religion (which cannot be known but out of the Scriptures) the glory of
Miracles, the light of Prophecy, and all the rest: but I shall only touch upon
one more, the Amplitude and Universality of the Church, in which they make
their boast. But herein the Scriptures most evidently excel; their Authority
being there sacred, where the Church of Rome (whose Notes these are) is not
known, or not regarded. For all Christians in the World, of whatsoever Sect
they be, believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God: whereas they alone say,
that they are the only true Church of God. All Christians besides, who know any
thing of this pretense of theirs, absolutely deny it; and maintain the Divinity
and Authority of the Scriptures, against all their Cavils.

SECT. XXIV. The great encouragement we have to do so.
BY following the Scriptures then, we follow the surest Guide by their own
confession. For first, by following the Scriptures, we are certainly led by
God; but by following the Church, we are only led by Men. And consequently the
Faith we build upon the Scriptures is a Divine Faith; but the Faith we build
upon the authority of the Church merely, can be no more than humane. For the
Scriptures are fully and amply proved to be of Divine Authority, by all those
Arguments, which are alleged in the Third Book of this Work: the like to which
cannot be produced to prove the infallible authority of the Church. Which
cannot so much as pretend that God has bid us believe it, but by sending us to
the Holy Scriptures; from whence it derives all its Authority.

Which is the second thing to be considered (and here I will take the liberty
to transcribe part of the discourse of a great Man on this Subject, with some
Additions) that by following the Scriptures, we follow that which they
themselves are forced to follow (as was noted before) and on which they
entirely depend, for the proof of their own authority; on which they would have
us entirely depend. Who have reason rather to rely, on that which they rely:
and in so doing tacitly confess the Scriptures are of greatest authority; and
that they are surer of their Truth, than of the Churches Infallibility.

And Thirdly, by following the Scriptures, we follow that which must be true,
if their Church (which they would have us follow) have any truth in it; for
their Church cannot but give attestation to them: whereas, if we follow their
Church we must follow that, which, though the Scriptures be true, may be false;
nay, which, if the Scriptures be true, must be false, because the Scriptures
testify against it.

Further, (4thly) to follow the Scriptures, we have God's express Warrant, and
Commandment; without any color for any prohibition: but to believe their
Church infallible, we have no commandment, much less any express Commandment;
nay, have reason to think, we are prohibited so to do in such words as those,
Beware of false Prophets. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God, etc. Which require us to examine before we trust; and
consequently not to give up our selves blindfold to those who confidently claim
the infallibility of St. Peter; but cannot produce any evidence of it.

Again, (5thly) by following the Scriptures, we shall keep to that which was
always believed, and every where received: But by following the Church of Rome
we shall make our selves guilty of the changes and alterations which they have
made (as another great Champion of our Church has observed) in the Apostolical
Creed, (by making a new one, containing things that hold no conformity with the
Apostles) and in the Apostolical succession (by engrossing the whole succession
to Rome, and making other Bishops to be but the Pope's Deputies, as to their
Jurisdiction) and in the Apostolical Government (by erecting a new and
Universal Monarchy in the Church) and lastly in the Apostolical Communion, by
excommunicating the greatest part of the holy Catholic Church.

By (6thly) following the Roman Church also, we shall be bound to hold many
things, not only above Reason, but against it: whereas by following the
Scriptures, we shall only believe some Mysteries, but no impossibilities, some
things above reason, but nothing contrary to it. For, though there be things in
Scripture, which had they not been revealed, reason could not have discovered;
yet there is nothing there, which being revealed, can by true reason be
confuted.

(7thly) Contrary to flesh and blood indeed there are many things contained in
the Scriptures; and therefore by following them, we shall believe a Religion,
which notwithstanding that great prejudice which Men had to it, prevailed and
enlarged it self over the World in a short time; without any assistance from
worldly power, wit or policy; nay, against all these: whereas the Roman Church
has got all its Authority over Men's Consciences, by no other means, than by
devising false Records, false Miracles and Reports (as was said before) and by
complying with Men's corrupt affections, or by persecuting those that would not
comply; and by all other such like worldly means, whether of policy or force.

(8thly) To which add, that by following the Scriptures, we shall believe a
Religion, whose first Preachers and Professors could have no worldly ends to
serve (as has been demonstrated in the foregoing Books) but rather were to
expect, as they every where found, nothing but disgrace, vile nay cruel usage,
by all manner of punishments: whereas the head of the Roman Church, it is even
palpable, makes their Religion the Instrument of his Ambition, and seeks
thereby to entitle himself, directly or indirectly, to the Monarchy of the
World: And besides, it is evident to him that has but half an eye, as we say,
that most of the Doctrines which they have added to the Scriptures, make one
way or other, for the honor or temporal advantage of the Teachers of them.

(9thly) Again, following the Scriptures, we shall embrace a Religion of
admirable simplicity: whereas the Roman Church and doctrine is even loaded with
an infinity of weak, childish, unsavory Superstitions and Ceremonies: under
which its own Children have groaned and heavily complained.

(10thly) Those Holy Books also teach us, that we must not promise our selves
salvation, unless we effectually mortify all our evil affections and lusts;
and forsaking every sin whatsoever, betake our selves to the practice of all
Christian Virtue: But the Roman Church opens an easier and broader way to
Salvation; permitting at least this to be taught for as good and Catholic
Doctrine as any other; that though a Man have continued all his life long in a
course of sin, without the practice of any virtue, he may notwithstanding be
let into Heaven by an act of attrition at the hour of Death, if joined with
confession, or by an act of Contrition without Confession. And therefore in
this and several other regards, the Religion of that Church is not so holy, as
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles delivered in the Scriptures: and
consequently is not so likely to come, from the Fountain of Holiness and
Goodness.

(11thly) But whatsoever ways they are pleased to devise, to humor Men's
depraved appetites, we are sure of this advantage by following the Scriptures,
which they cannot pretend to by following their Church. That if we happen to
entertain an erroneous opinion, grounded, as we think, upon some place of
Scripture, it is implicitly retracted and condemned, by our precedent full and
entire assent to all things contained in the Scriptures; and our general
resolution to hold nothing contrary to them, nor admit any thing (as necessary
to salvation) that cannot be proved by them. Which makes the error that we
unwittingly and unwillingly hold against the Scriptures, less dangerous:
because our adherence to the Scriptures is nearer, closer and firmer, than it
is to our particular error. Whereas by following their Church, not knowing what
it is (whether the whole Body of People in that Communion, or a General
Council, or the Pope, in, or out of a Council) we shall have no such excuse for
our errors: but they will be rather much aggravated, by our adhering so
strictly to a doubtful and uncertain Rule; unto which the People in that
Communion sticking closer, than they do to the Word of God, it lessens the
value of all the Truths which they believe; and doubles the guilt of all their
errors.

And lastly, as this is a great satisfaction to our selves, so there is this to
be added for the comfort of others also. That by following the Scriptures, we
shall learn to bear with one another in our different opinions, about things
which cannot thereby be determined; nay, in things which are not directly
against it, or wherein we are not yet sufficiently instructed: But by following
the Roman Church we shall be taught to pass the heaviest sentences upon all
those, that believe not in all things, as we do; nay, to take the severest
courses with them, though they be Men of the most innocent and useful lives;
conforming themselves in all things to the Precepts of Christ Jesus, and to the
Authority of their Governors for his sake, where it does not manifestly
contradict Him.

To conclude this, we for our parts are of the same mind, even toward them,
which Grotius before observed the Apostles were of toward the Jews: From whom,
says he (and let the words be taken, as if spoken by us, to those of the Roman
Communion) they would not so much as exact an acknowledgment of their
happiness, in being delivered from the heavy Yoke of Rites and Ceremonies that
lay upon them: But, if they would admit of the Commandments of Christ, which
are full of all goodness, easily permitted them to follow what course of life
they pleased in matters of indifferency; provided they would not impose the
necessity of observing them upon others.

SECT. XXV. Conclusion of all.
UPON these terms we are ready to agree with them; and I conclude all with this
memorable Proposal, which Erasmus made in a Letter to Johannes Slechta, a
Friend of his in Bohemia, at the very beginning of the Reformation, MD XIX.

This would reconcile People to the Church of Rome, if all things were not so
particularly defined, and made a matter of Faith, which we would have to belong
to it: but those only which are evidently expressed in the Holy Scriptures; or
without which we do not see any way to be saved.

To this purpose a few things are sufficient; and a few things may be sooner
persuaded than a great many.

Now out of one Article, we make Six Hundred: some of which are such, that,
without indangering Piety, we may either be ignorant, or doubt of them. And,
such is the nature of Mankind, that what is once defined, we hold tooth and
nail; and will by no means part with it.

But when all is done, the sum of Christian Philosophy lies in this; That we
understand all our Hope to be placed in God, who freely gives us all things by
his Son Jesus; by whose Death we are redeemed, into whose Body we are planted
by Baptism; that being dead to the lusts of this World, we may live according
to his Doctrine and Example; not only abstaining from all evil, but
endeavoring to deserve well of every Body: assd that if any adversity happen,
we bear it courageously, in hope of a future reward; which, without all doubt,
waits for all pious Persons at the coming of Christ: and that we make such
progress from virtue to virtue; as notwithstanding to arrogate nothing to our
selves, but to ascribe all the good, that is in us, or that we can do, unto
GOD.

These things chiefly are to be inculcated, and beaten into the minds of Men;
so that they become, as it were, their Nature. But if any will search into
those things, which are more abstruse about the Divine Nature, the Hypostasis
of Christ, or the Sacraments, that they may raise their minds the higher, and
draw them from things here below; let them do so: provided that every body be
not compelied presently to believe, what seems good to this or that Person.

For as out of large Deeds arise sooner Lawsuits; so are differences begotten,
by very many definitions.

And let us not be ashamed to answer to some things, God knows how it may be
done: it is sufficient for me to believe that it is done.

I know that Christ's pure Body and Blood is to be purely received by those
that are pure; and that He would have this to be a most holy token and pledge,
both of his love to us, and of our Christian concord among our selves. And
therefore I will examine my self, and make a strict search; whether there be
any thing in me that ill agrees with Christ; whether any discord with my
Neighbor.

But how the Ten Predicaments are there, how the Bread is Transubstantiated by
the mystical words, (or, as He explains himself in the latter end of his Book,
upon lxxxiv. Psalm.) how the body of Christ is there, whether under the
substance of Bread, or under the species of Bread and Wine, and such like; does
not much conduce, in my judgment, to proficiency in piety, etc.

By these, and other such innumerable disputations, in which some triumph; the
minds of Men are called away from those things, which alone are to the purpose.

To conclude, it will be of great moment to establish the concord of the World;
if all secular Princes, and especially the Bishop of Rome, would abstain from
all appearance of Tyranny, and of Covetousness.

For Men easily start back, when they see slavery is prepared for them; when
they see they are not invited to piety, but inveigled to be made a prey.

If they perceive us to be harmless, to be beneficent; they will most easily
credit us, and entrust themselves with us. Thus He.

It would not be very hard to make a longer Book on this Subject: But this is
sufficient (as Grotius speaks in the beginning of this Discourse, about the
Truth of Christian Religion) to convince those whose understandings are rightly
disposed, and are not pertinaciously set against all further information. But
no Arguments can be found of force enough to convince a froward will, and
persuade perverse affections: which make Men incapable of Moral Truth, most of
all of Divine. Which will not enter (as the Wise man speaks) into a malicious
Soul; nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto sin. For the Holy Spirit of
Discipline will flee deceit, and remove from thoughts that are without
understanding, and will not abide when unrighteousness comes in.

THE END.
A RECAPITULATION OF THE Principal Things handled IN THIS WORK: According to
the several Sections of each Book.
The Contents of the first Book.
THe Preface showing the occasion of this Work. Sect. I. Proving there is a
God. p. 1 Sect. II. That there is but one God. p. 5 Sect. III. That all
Perfection is in God. p. 7 Sect. IV. God is Infinite. p. 8 Sect. V. That God is
eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, and absolutely good. p. 9 Sect. VI. That God
is the Author and cause of all things. ib. Sect. VII. Answer to that Objection
concerning the cause of evil. p. 15 Sect. VIII. Against the Opinion of two
Principles or causes of things. p. 16 Sect. IX. That God does govern the whole
World. p. 17 Sect. X. Yea, sublunary things. p. 18 Sect. XI. This is further
proved by the preservation of Empires. p. 19 Sect. XII. And by Miracles. p. 21
Sect. XIII. Specially among the Jews, whereunto credit may be given by reason of
the long continuance of their Religion. p. 22 Sect. XIV. Also by the truth and
antiquity of Moses his story. p. 24 Sect. XV. And by the Testimony of many
Gentiles. p. 25 Sect. XVI. The same is proved by the Oracle and Predictions. p.
34 Sect. XVII. The Objection is answered, why Miracles are not now to be seen.
p. 36 Sect. XVIII. And that now there is such liberty in offending. p. 37 Sect.
XIX. Insomuch that good Men are oppressed. p. 39 Sect. XX. The same argument is
retorted to prove that the Soul survives the Body. p. 40 Sect. XXI. Which is
proved by Tradition. ib. Sect. XXII. Against which no contrary reason can be
brought. p. 41 Sect. XXIII. Many reasons may be alleged for it. p. 44 Sect.
XXIV. Whence it follows, that the end of all shall be Man's happiness after this
life. p. 45 Sect. XXV. Which to obtain, men must get the true Religion. ib.
The Contents of the second Book.
Sect. I. TO Prove the Truth of Christian Religion. p. 47 Sect. II. Here is
showen that Jesus lived. p. 48 Sect. III. And was put to an ignominious death.
ib. Sect. IV. Yet afterward was worshipped by prudent and godly Men. p. 49
Sect. V. The cause whereof was, for that in his life time there were Miracles
done by him. p. 50 Sect. VI. Which Miracles were not wrought either by the help
of Nature, or assistance of the Devil; but merely by the Divine Power of God.
p. 51 Sect. VII. Christ's Resurrection proved by credible Reasons. p. 55 Sect.
VIII. Answer to the Objection, that the Resurrection seems impossible. p. 60
Sect. IX. The Resurrection of Jesus being granted, the Truth of his Doctrine is
confirmed. p. 61 Sect. X. Christian Religion preferred before all others. p. 62
Sect. XI. For excellency of reward. p. 63 Sect. XII. Answer to an Objection,
that Bodies once Dead cannot be revived again. p. 66 Sect. XIII. The excelency
of holy Precepts given for the worship of God. p. 69 Sect. XIV. Concerning the
Offices of Humanity which we owe unto our Neighbor. p. 72 Sect. XV. Of the
Conjunction of Man and Woman. p. 74 Sect. XVI. Touching the use of Temporal
goods. p. 76 Sect. XVII. Of Swearing. p. 79 Sect. XVIII. Of other Matters. ib.
Sect. XIX. Answer to an Objection touching the Controversies abounding among
Christians. p. 80 Sect. XX. The excellency of Christian Religion is further
proved from the dignity of the Author. p. 82 Sect. XXI. Also from the wonderful
spreading of this Religion. p. 86 Sect. XXII. Considering the meekness and
simplicity of them that first taught this Religion. p. 88 Sect. XXIII. What
great impediments there were that might terrify Men from the embracing or the
professing hereof. p. 90 Sect. XXIV. Answer to them that require more forcible
Reasons. p. 94
The Contents of the third Book.
Sect. I. TO Prove the authority of the Books of the New Covenant. (...) Sect.
II. Here is known that such Books were written by the Authors, the Names they
have prefixed. p. 99 Sect. III. Some Books were anciently doubted of. p. 100
Sect. IV. The authority of such Books as have no Titles, is proved from the
quality of the Writers. p. 101 Sect. V. These Penmen writ the Truth, because
they had certain knowledge of what they writ. p. 102 Sect. VI. As also because
they would not lie. p. 104 Sect. VII. A confirmation of the fidelity of these
authors from the Miracles which they wrought. p. 106 Sect. VIII. The Truth of
the Writings confirmed from hence, that many things are found there which the
event has proved to be divinely revealed. p. 108 Sect. IX. As also from God's
care in preserving his People from false writings. p. 109 Sect. X. Answer to
the Objection, that diverse Books were not received by all. p. 110 Sect. XI.
Answer to an Objection, that these Books seem to contain things impossible. p.
113 Sect. XII. Or things contrary to Reason. p. 114 Sect. XIII. Answer to an
Objection, that some of these Books are repugnant to the other. p. 116 Sect.
XIV. Answer to an Objection, taken from outward testimonies, which make more
for these Books. p. 118 Sect. XV. Answer to the Objection, that the Scriptures
were changed. p. 119 Sect. XVI. For the authority of the Books of the Old
Testament. p. 123
The Contents of the fourth Book.
Sect. I. A Particular Confutation of the Religions opposite to Christianity.
p. 129 Sect. II. And first of Paganism, that there is but one God. Created
Spirits are good or bad: the good not to be honored, but as the most high God
directs. p. 131 Sect. III. Evil Spirits adored by Pagans, and how impious a
thing it is. p. 132 Sect. IV. Against the worship, which in Paganism is
exhibited to men after their death. p. 135 Sect. V. Against worshipping of
Stars and Elements. p. 136 Sect. VI. Against worshipping of Bruitbeasts. p. 137
Sect. VII. Against worshipping of things that are no substances. p. 139 Sect.
VIII. Answer to the argument of the Gentiles taken from Miracles done among
them. p. 141 Sect. IX. And from Oracles. p. 144 Sect. X. Paganism decayed of
its own accord so soon as humane aid ceased. p. 146 Sect. XI. Answer to the
Opinion of some that think the beginning and decay of Religions depend upon the
efficacy of the Stars. p. 147 Sect. XII. The chief Points of Christianity are
approved of by the Heathen: and if there be any thing that is hard to be
believed therein, the like or worse is found among the Pagans. p. 150
The Contents of the fifth Book.
Sect. I. A Refutation of the Jews, beginning with a speech unto them or prayer
for them. p. 153 Sect. II. The Jews ought to account the Miracles of Christ
sufficiently proved. p. 154 Sect. III. And not believe that they were done by
the help of Devils. p. 156 Sect. IV. Or by the Power of Words and Syllables. p.
158 Sect. V. The Miracles of Jesus were divine, because he taught the worship
of one God, the Maker of the World. p. 159 Sect. VI. Answer to the Objection,
taken from the difference between the Law of Moses and of Christ, where is
shown that a more perfect Law than that of Moses might be given. p. 160 Sect.
VII. The Law of Moses was observed by Jesus, who abolished no Commandments
that were essentially good. p. 163 Sect. VIII. As the Sacrifices, which of
themselves were never well-pleasing unto God. p. 167 Sect. IX. The difference
of Meats. p. 172 Sect. X. And of Days. p. 174 Sect. XI. Also of outward
Circumcision. p. 177 Sect. XII. And yet the Apostles of Jesus were gentle in
the toleration of these things. p. 179 Sect. XIII. A Proof against the Jews,
from the promised Messiah. p. 180 Sect. XIV. Who is proved to be already come,
by the limited time of his coming, which was foretold. p. 181 Sect. XV. Answer
to that, which some conceive, touching the deferring of his coming, for the
sins of the people. p. 184 Sect. XVI. Also from the present state of the Jews,
compared with those things which the Law promises. p. 185 Sect. XVII. Jesus is
proved to be the Messiah, by those things which were foretold concerning the
Messiah. p. 188 Sect. XVIII. Answer to that which is objected, of some things
that are not fulfilled. p. 190 Sect. XIX. And to that which is objected, of the
mean condition and death of Jesus. p. 192 Sect. XX. And, as though they were
honest men that put him to death. p. 197 Sect. XXI. Answer to the Objection,
that many Gods are worshipped by the Christians. p. 200 Sect. XXII. And that a
humane nature is worshipped. p. 201 Sect. XXIII. The Conclusion of this part,
with Prayer for the Jews. p. 203
The Contents of the sixth Book.
Sect. I. A Confutation of Mahumetanisme: the beginning of it. p. 205 Sect. II.
The overthrow of the foundation of Mahumetanisme, in denying inquiry into
Religion. p. 208 Sect. III. A Proof against the Mahumetans, taken out of the
Books of the Hebrews and Christians, which are not corrupted. p. 209 Sect. IV.
By comparing Mahumet with Christ in their Persons. p. 212 Sect. V. And in their
Deeds. p 213 Sect. VI. Also such as first embraced both Religions. p. 214 Sect.
VII. The manner how both their Laws were pro pagated. ib. Sect. VIII. The
Precepts of both Religions compared. p. 216 Sect IX. Answer to the Mahumetans
Objection, concerning the Son of God. p. 218 Sect. X. Many absurd things in the
Books of Mahumetans. p 219 Sect. XI. A Conclusion directed unto Christians,
admonishing them of their duty, upon the occasion of what has formerly been
handled. p. 220
The Contents of the seventh Book.
Sect. I. AN Introduction, showing what makes the Addition of another Book
necessary. p. 229 Sect. II. Divisions among Christians, no such objection
against Christianity as is imagined. 230 Sect. III. As appears even in the
Roman Church, which has given the greatest scandal. p. 232 Sect IV. But both
contradicts it self, and departs from the ancient and truly Catholic Church. p
234 Sect. V. Christianity therefore is not there in its purity; but much
corrupted. p. 236 Sect. VI. Answer to an Evasion from the force of the
foregoing Argument. p. 237 Sect. VII. Their absurd explication of the Unity of
the Catholic Church. p. 239 Sect. VIII. Which forbids us to join in Communion
with them, upon such terms. p. 240 Sect. IX. But on the other side, not to
slight Episcopal Authority. p. 243 Sect. X. Arguments enough in the foregoing
Books, to prove the true Christian Religion not to be sincerely preserved in
the Roman Church: one is their way of worship. p. 244 Sect. XI. Another is the
way of promoting their Religion. p 248 Sect XII. The Romanists themselves
overthrow their own Religion p. 250 Sect XIII. Other Instances of it. p. 256
Sect XIV. Whereby they have spoiled Christianity, as the Pagans did the Natural
Religion. p. 259 Sect. XV. Answer to what they say about Miracles. p. 262 Sect.
XVI. Answer to another Objection. p 265 Sect. XVII. Popery and Mahometisin had
the same Original. p. 268 Sect. XVIII. And supports its self by the same means.
p. 269 Sect XIX. And refuses to be tried by Scripture. p. 272 Sect. XX. The
Vanity of their appeal to Traditions. p. 277 Sect. XXI. And their guilt in what
they say about the holy Scriptures. p. 279 Sect XXII. It is our wisdom
therefore to adhere to the Scriptures. p. 283 Sect XXIII. Which have more
manifest notes of certainty than the Church. p. 284 Sect. XXIV. The great
encouragement we have to do so. p. 287 Sect. XXV. Conclusion of all. p. 294
THE END.

