SPANISH LETTERS: Historical, Satirical, and Moral; Of the FAMOUS Don Antonio
de Guevara: BISHOP of Mondonedo, Chief Minister of State, and Historiographer
Royal to the Emperor Charles V.

Written by way of Essay on different Subjects, and every where intermixed with
both Raillerie and Gallantry.

Recommended by Sir Roger L'Estrange, and made English from the best Original
by Mr. Savage.

Menos fuera.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper at the Black-Boy over against St. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, and F. Saunders in the New-Exchange in the Stra^d.

TO The Right Honorable ARNOLD, Earl of Albemarle, Viscount Bury, Baron of
Ashford in England, and Baron Keppel in Holland, Master of His Majesty's Robes,
etc.
My LORD,
PRoductions of the Brain, like the Noble Fruit of the Vine, have always had
the Fortune to be Coveted and Desired; Yet how Rich and Generous soever the
Crop, the Stock it Sprang from, could never have arrived at sufficient Strength
to sustain its own Weight, and Erect it self, had not Art found out Means to
supply its Wants of Nature by reclining it on, and propping it up with Trunks
of abler Plants: So likewise the Generosity of the Great, in all Ages, has
afforded comfortable Support to the Humble Self-dejected Writer, without which
he must have continued a poor Grovelling Reptile, exposed to the Insults and
Tramplings of Ignorance and Barbarity.

My LORD,

It Is the Sense of this Necessity has so often given Persons of highest Rank
and Merit, the Trouble of this Nature; and which, I must needs own, has wholly
directed me in this Address. Your Lordship could not reasonably expect to lie
hid, after having been so Publicly and Honorably Pointed out, and
Distinguished even by the Wisest, as well as Bravest Prince that ever filled
our Throne: Nor, that the Muses should any longer forbear giving public
Testimony of their Satisfaction in the Advancement of Virtue and Merit. Permit
me therefore, My Lord, to Congratulate both you and the Nation in the Happy
Choice of our most Auspicious Sovereign, who has singled you out for a Title,
which receives as much Luster from your Person, as your Lordship derives from
it.

The World may Envy, but can never Blame me, for this early Endeavor to Plant
my self in so Rich a Soil as your Lordship's Favor; where I may enjoy the
Warmth of the Reflected Beam's of that Sun, whose happy Influence not only
ours, but even the greater Part of the European World, Rejoice and Flourish
under.

It was the Happiness of our Learned Author, whose Version is humbly offered to
your Lordship, to be Favorite and Chief Minister to the greatest Hero, as
well as Prince of his Time; and in that Right, My Lord, he seems very naturally
to have a Claim to your Lordship's Protection, in whose Power it is to
Introduce him to a Greater Hero than any that Age could boast of; A Prince
whose happy Influence makes Virtue spring so fast at home; and whose Prudence
takes care to transplant Merit so from abroad, that, like the most curious
Plants, both Honor and Illustrate our Island: Among these your Lordship must
needs be acknowledged the First and Most Deserving, even by those who envy your
Fortune, whilst the Impartial, of which I am proud to profess my self one, with
Joy Applaud, and wish a long Continuance of it. I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humbly Obedient, And Faithfully Devoted Servant,
JOHN SAVAGE.

CORRIGENDA.
IN the greatest part of the Impression, Page 1. Messeur for Messer; p. 13. l.
22. Reber for Remember; p. 14. near the bottom, Antarxerxes for Artaxerxes; p.
47. l. ult. alwasy for always; p. 131. l. 30. of (left out;) p. 139. l. 15.
consulted (left out) etc. which the Intelligent Reader may easily reconcile,
there being ('it is hoped)* but few remaining.

Spanish Letters.
LETTER I. To Messer Perepollastre, an Italian, the Author's Friend; in which
he proves how ridiculous a thing it is for a Man to be Powdered and Perfumed.
Suspicious SIR, but my very good Friend,
IN the time of Quintus Fabius, then Master of the Knights, Two Noble Romans
fought upon a set Challenge; and the one having cut off the others Arm, the
Conqueror thus spoke to the Vanquished; Unsay what you have hitherto Pretended,
and Retract what you have imposed upon me, or my cruel Sword shall silence your
Unlucky Tongue* To which the Wounded Person immediately Replied; You speak
rather like my Mortal Enemy, than a Roman Knight, since you think I have not a
greater Regard to my Honor than my Life; for tho my Arm fail me to fight, yet
my Heart still encourages me to die in Vindication of a good Name. I have
brought this ancient Example, Sir, as a Parallel to put you in mind of what I am
almost ashamed to Express; That you Swore and Forswore your self about a
Perfumed Wash-ball, which you thought you had left in my Chamber, and which you
would needs have me either to have stolen, or to have concealed or protected
the Thief. And here you did not content your self with telling me the same
thing over and over, but were also pleased to write me a Scandalous Letter,
endicted, I suppose, by your Judgment, as it was signed by your own Hand: The
Contents whereof were as full of unjust Reproaches, as they were void of
Breeding and good Manners. Several Friends of yours, as also Neighbors of
mine, have frequently informed me, you went Murmuring and Complaining to every
Body about the Black Wash-ball; affirming, that in my Chamber you left it, and
in my Trust you lost it; so that by your Letter you Challenge me, and by your
Tongue Reproach me; But, with the aforesaid Roman, I must tell you, you neither
speak like a Friend, nor treat me like a Christian; since you have a greater
regard to a trifling Wash-ball, than my Honor. Sir, upon this Occasion, I have
neither determined to take notice of your Reproaches, nor to Answer your Letter
with Heat, for I value my self much more upon the Habit I wear, than the
Unspotted Race from whence I descend; because, I am well assured, at the
general day of Account, it will not be so much Inquired into, whether I behaved
my self like a Gentleman, as if I lived like a Christian. The Arms that I do,
or would always fight with are these, viz. The Headpiece of Patience, Shield of
Hope, Sword of Abstinence, Gauntlets of Charity, and Breastplate of Humility;
with which I dare die, and without which I will never live. But still
providing, in this Case, I am unwilling to revenge the Affront offered me, yet
it is not just you exclude me from giving my Opinion of it; which I intend to
do here with all the Candor imaginable, and the least or no Reflection.
Whatever Men do rashly or unadvisedly in this Bad World, proceeds from small
Prudence, and a superfluous Hope; for Passionate People ought rather to incline
to what Reason persuades, than what Anger advises. Seneca in his first Book, De
Ira, says, that it is almost needless to give Council to an Angry Person; for we
know he has neither Ears to receive, nor Heart to digest, wholesome
Instructions; but what is yet worst of all, the Words we only use to appease,
prove oftentimes means to fire him the more, because by them we do as it were
bring into his Memory the source of his Disorder. I speak this to you, Sir,
that for the future you may neither be a trouble to your Friends, nor a scandal
to your self, for you and I both know, that one Blot many times stains a whole
Generation. A Vulgar Person's Crime ends with himself, when a Gentleman's
extends to all his Family; It clouds the past, calls in question the present,
and corrupts the Blood of all that are to come.

The Abbot Casiano relates, that a Holy Monk of Scythia, having been much
Abused, in Words and Actions, by Pagans and Ill Men; and at length being asked,
What Profit he got by his Christ? The Good Man immediately answered, Is it not
Profit enough that I am able to withstand your injurious Actions, and Pardon
your Reviling Words? O Noble Expression, and worthy to be engraven in the
Hearts of Men in indelible Characters, since it teaches us the true value of
Patience, and how useful it is to Human Life! How is he to be Esteemed that
Patience does not Govern? What can he pretend to, that cannot endure Reproaches?
How does he live that wants the use of Patience? Of all the Moral Virtues, this
is what we have occasion for every Moment; so many and sudden Misfortunes
happening in our Lives, that to Suffer and Endure are almost of the same
Necessity as to Eat and Drink. Now if I had not been accustomed, more than you,
to bear with Injuries, and put the best Construction upon Words, at the same
time, you writ me such reviling Language, and accused me falsely of so great a
Crime, I might have presently Answered your Bloody Challenge, or sent some Body
to have broke your Head; and that, as well to punish your Rashness, as to
vindicate my own Innocence* What belongs to War, the King is to determine; What
to the Commonwealth, the Law; What to Conscience, the Confessor; What to ones
Estate, Justice; but what to ones Honor, the Sword can only decide: For if it
be just, Sinners Repent, it would not be unjust that false Witnesses should be
Punished. But however, remembering I am a Christian and no Pagan, a Regular
Priest and no Secular, a Gentleman and no Yeoman, I had much rather forget an
Injury than Revenge it: For, as Alexander the Great was wont to say, A Man had
need of more Courage to Pardon a Friend, than to kill him. If you had pleased
to slander me with Stealing a handsome Parrot, a good Mousing Cat, a Thrush that
could Talk, or Canary Bird that could Sing, perhaps I had been Guilty and not
Angry; and you found to be no Liar; because these are Trifles I often ask of my
Friends, and if they will not give 'em, I steal 'em: But to steal a Wash-Ball,
good God! sure 'twas what was never in my thoughts; and a perfumed one too, as
I understand yours to be! Why, if I had stolen it, I could never have carried
it away, or at least given it to any body; and that, either out of regard to my
Conscience or my Modesty. To wear Scents, and Pride one self in Perfumes,
although it be no great Sin, yet it is a superfluous Charge; and it would be
much more commendable for so accomplished a Gentleman as you, to value himself
upon the Blood he lost in the Wars of Africa, rather than the Musk and Civet he
bought at Medina. As all Women naturally have some unpleasing Scents, they
alone may be allowed to smell well, tho not to live ill; for if their Manners
don't exceed their Civet Bags, they cannot properly be said to be Well-bred.
Let your Wash ball be never so well scented, a F -- t will outsmell it; for as
good Fame travels rarely farther than a Kingdom, Ill goes all over the World.
Be a Woman Married, a Widow, Maid, or Girl, she should live very reserved, and
take more than ordinary care of her Honor; for it would be a great Folly, nay,
next to perfect Madness, to have her Clothes smell of Perfumes, when her
Manners stink of a Whore. I have traveled many Kingdoms, and lived in many
Courts, yet never saw that Woman that did not Marry for Perfumes, or some such
foolery, and yet I have seen a great many Divorced for ill Customs, and the
reason is plain; because no body asks whether a Woman be sweet or not, but all
whether she be Rich and Virtuous. Let us now leave the Women, and return to the
Men; to whom all the Philosophers, nay Aristotle himself, forbid Perfumes under
severe Penalties; councelling 'em moreover with moving Words, not to Prink
themselves up with Odours and Ointments; condemning all that did it, not only
for Vain but Senceless. Rome was 300 years without either Spices to eat, or
Scents to smell; but after they grew weak in War, they grew strong in Vice;
from whence we may infer, that had there been no idle People in the World,
there had been no Vic^ous. Livy, Macrobius, Salust, and Tully, begin, and never
cease to Curse, and Lament, the conquest of Asia by Rome; for if the Persians
and Medians were overcome by the Roman Arms, the Romans were likewise conquered
by their Vices and Effeminacies. To make Sumptuous Funerals, Wear rich Rings,
Use Arromaticks in Eating, Drink Wine with Ice, and Carry Perfumes for Scent,
says Cicero, in a Letter to Atticus; These are the 5 Vices presented us by the
Asians in revenge of their Cities we had taken, and their Blood we had spilt.

Greater damage had Rome by Asia then Asia by Rome, for those Countries the
Romans had of theirs they presently lost, but on the contrary their Vices are
still like to stick close by 'em. Escaurus, a Grave Censor once in Rome, said
one day in the Senate; It Is my Opinion and Vote, Conscrib'd Fathers, that we
should fit out no more Fleets to conquer Asia, since you know where we kill but
few of them, they cause most of us to perish by their ill Customs and Habits
introduced among us. He that goes to the Wars to fight, or into the Field to
labor, takes more care to maintain his Family honestly, than to smell of
precious Ointments; from whence we may conclude, that Idle and ill busied
Persons take care to smell well, but are careless of living so. In the 320th
year after the building of Rome, the Senate prohibited the Women to drink Wine,
and the Men to buy Perfumes; so that it was an equal Penalty for the one to
busy themselves in Smelling, as for the other to be found Drinking. Which Law,
were it now in force, I am of Opinion, there would scarce one day escape in
which some Woman would not be Arraigned; for tho I will not say flatly, They
drink now as much as ever, yet, I am confirmed, the Bitch bites full as hard as
the Dog. Further as to Perfumes, Suetonius in his Tenth Book of the Caesar's,
tells you, that Vespatian being about to confirm a benefit to one of his
Courtiers, and smelling a very sweet scent about him, he immediately threw away
his Pen, and tore his Paper, and with an angry Countenance thus Reprimanded
him; I Recall my Grant, and get thee out of my Presence; for by the Immortal
Gods, I had rather thou should smell of Onyons and Garlic, than of those
Effeminate Unguents. Plucius, a Roman Lord, when proscribed by the Triumvirate,
was found out in the Salernian Caves, not by his Footsteps, but the Train of
Odours he left behind him; so that having otherwise clearly escaped his
Enemies, he was merely betrayed by his Scents. Hanibal the Carthaginian, having
been in his youth a Prince of great Courage and Conduct, yet in his old Age,
the Ladies of Capua, and Unguents of Asia, weakened him so in Body, and so
enervated the vigor of his Mind, that from thence forward he was neither able
to gain a Town, nor get a Battle. Aulus Gellius relates, that the Roman Senate
being in debate, what Captain to send against Pannonoa, and the Vote coming to
Cato the Censor, he said; Of the Two you propose, I am against my young Kinsman
Pulius, because I never yet saw him come wounded from the Wars, but have often
seen him go smelling to a Perfumed Handkerchief about the City. Fourteen years
were the Romans besieging the Great Numantia in Spain, and never could take it
till at length Scipio came afresh, and sent great Bribes into the City to
employ their Gluttony, busy their Whores, and burn Perfumes; and then they
took it in a trice, and destroyed it as quickly. Licurgus in his Laws commanded
the Lacedaemonians under severe Penalties neither to buy or sell Perfumes of
Precious Ointments, except for Offerings in their Temples, or Physic for their
Sick. From these, and many more Examples might be brought, it appears, that Men
have always been forbid Odours and Scents; for speaking truth, there is but
little Pleasure got by 'em, when on the contrary, a great deal of Reputation to
be lost. And, I must tell you moreover, this is a very costly Vice; for it not
only occasions pains in the Head, but also a Vacuum in the Purse. What causes
me a great deal of Mirth sometimes, I might better say Disquiet, is to see many
vain fluttering young Fellows, buy Perfumed Gloves of 10 Ducats a Pair for
their Mistresses, yet have not the Heart to give a Crape Gown to a Sister, or
Poor Relation; Whence it comes to pass, that in a Mad Man's House, Fancy rules
the Roast, whilst Reason turns the Spit, If Men would be Advised by me, I would
take care they should smell well without Sweets, for nothing under the Heavens
has a more Odoriferous Savor than a clear and Unblemished Name. Let me
conclude therefore with this Truth, That a good Christian is the Sweet
Ointment, a good Conscience the rich Amber, and a good Life the choicest
Wash-ball, which, I Will assure you, I would only steal or carry about me. No
more, but that God Bless you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

V^lladolid, December. 6. 1520.
LETTER II. To Doctor Melgar, a Physician; in which are handled the Good and
Harm occasioned by his Profession, together with the Progress and several
Interruptions of that Art; as also the Author's Thoughts of it from its first
Original.
Honored Doctor, and Imperial Physician,
YOurs I Received, together with the Recipe enclosed, and you may hereby
satisfy your self or be informed by your Boy, that I have dispatched your
business with the President according to desire; So that as you have dealt by
me like a Physician, I have treated you as a Friend. Now which of us has done
better, you in Physicking me, or I in Soliciting your Assair, all good Men may
judge; for I Will assure you, at the very same time I got your Order Signed, I
was very sensibly Afflicted with the Gout. Sir, I procured the Herbs and Roots,
and bruiz'd and drank 'em according to Order, but better regard may God have to
your Soul than they brought relief to my pains, for they not only fired my
Liver but also benumbed my Stomach. And I must tell you plainly in this
Distemper you have been so far from performing a Cure, that you have done me a
great deal of injury, and every time the Cold of my Stomach ob^iges me to
Be^ch, I presently resolve never to have any more to do with Doctor Melgar,
since he could no^ distinguish a Malady above from one below, for I did not
desire you to purge the Humors but rid me of my Pains, not being able to Guess
why you should Punish my Stomach when all the Pain lay in my great Toe. I once
consulted Doctor Soto about a Sciatica in my Hip, and he prescribed a Blister
on my Ears, but which only occasioned all the Court to laugh, and my poor
Souses to suffer. Another time I had recourse to Doctor Carthagena in Alcala
about the same Distemper, and he ordered me Cow-turds, Rats-dung,
Nettle-leaves, Rose-buds, and fri'd Scorpions to make a Plaster and apply to
the part afflicted: but all the good I got, was, that it did not suffer me to
sleep one wink in Three Nights, and yet I paid the Apothecary above Six Reals
for making it. Whereupon, for the future, I utterly renounce any Man's
Friendship that shall advise me to the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, Maxims of
Avicenna, Experiments of Ficinus, Treatises of Racis, and Recipes of Erophilus,
providing in any of their Writings there be the least mention made of this
Cursed Plaster, which as it suffered me not to sleep or be at rest, so I not
only tore it off immediately but also instantly buried it; for as on the the
one hand it burnt me, on the other it almost struck me down with its stench. I
remember in Burgos, about 20 years since, Doctor Soto cured me of an
intermitting Fever, but withal, made me eat so much Sellery and Barley, and
drink so great quantity of Endive Water, that for a time I was quite deprived
of the use of my Pallat, nay more, could scarce smell. Some few Years
afterward happening to visit the same Doctor when sick at Tordesillas, I
observed he Eat an Orange and Drank a cup of good Canary at the very time his
hot fit came upon him, which I not only wondered, but was very much offended
at, since he treated me after another-guess manner. Whereupon forcing a smile I
thus accosted him, Tell me I beseech you, good Doctor, What is the reason you
Cure your self of your Fever with Wine of St. Martin, and me of mine by Endive
Water? To which he readily replied with a great deal of Assurance, You must
know, Mr. Guevara, our great Master Hypocrates, under penalty of his
displeasure, Commanded us his Successors to recover our own healths with the
Juice of the Grape, when he ordered nothing but Stilled Water for our Patients.
Although this was spoke out of Raillery, yet I am apt to believe it in some
measure true, for I well reber you told me once in Madrid, you never took Purge
or knew what belonged to Stilled Waters in all your Life. Of all Arts, the
Practice of Physicians surprises me most, since they always seem desirous of
Curing others, yet care not to be Cured themselves. But since you desire it of
me, generous Doctor, I will give you my thoughts of Physic in general, as also
what I have read concerning its first Inventors and Origin, and herein I shall
endeavor to comply with your Inclinations without any regard to many others,
for I know Blockheads will be offended where I doubt not the Ingenious will be
pleased.

Of the first Inventors of Physic.
If we may believe Pliny, none of the Seven Liberal Arts were ever so variable
and Falacious as this; for he tells you there was scarce any noted Kingdom or
Nation in the World, where it was not almost thrown out as soon as received. As
Physic is a Foreigner, many are the troubles it will tell you it has
undergone, and more the Kingdoms and Provinces it has traveled through; but the
cause was not that People had then no mind to be Cured, but rather because they
always found that Science very uncertain. The 1st among the Greciansthat
happened upon this Art, was the Philosopher Apollo, and his Son Esculapius;
both which grew so exceeding Famous, that they were Flocked to from all parts
like an Oracle. But at length Esculapius being left young, and therefore not
having yet communicated his Secrets to any Successor, a Thunderbolt at once
deprived him of Life, and the Art of an Instructor. Four Hundred and Forty
Years remained this Science interrupted, for all that time there was no known
Person in the World who bore the Title of Physician, or Cured publicly; and
this was to be computed from the Death of Esculapius, to the Birth of
Antaxerxes the Second, in whose Reign the Famous Hypocrates was Born. Strabo,
Diodorus, and Pliny mention a certain Grecian Woman that flourished in this Art
in those times, of whom they relate many wonderful and improbable things, but
which in my opinion are either Feigned or Preternatural; for, being true, it
must rather have been her business to raise the Dead than cure the Living. Also
in those times another Woman arose in the Province of Achaia, who cured by
Charms and Spells, without any outward or inward Means; but she was soon
silenced by the Senate of Athens, who ordered her to be Stoned and Burnt,
Saying, The Gods and Nature had not placed the remedies of Diseases in Words,
but in Herbs and Minerals only. While as there were no Physicians in the World,
the Grecians, when they made any Experiment with success, obliged themselves to
specify it in a Table, and hang it up in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, to
the end that any might have recourse to, and make use of it upon occasion.
Trogus Pompeius, Laertius, and Lactantius say, the reason how the Grecians
maintained their healths so long without Physicians, was, by gathering sweet
Herbs in May, and keeping 'em hanged up and dried in their Houses; Also by
Bleeding once a Year, and Bathing once a Month: And moreover by Eating but one
Meal in a day. Conformable to which, Plutarch tells us, that Plato, being once
asked by the Athenian Philosophers, what he had seen worthy remark in the
Island Trinacria (Sicily,) Answered, Vidi Monstrum in Natura, Hominem bis
saturum in die. Which imports, He saw a Monster in Nature twice crammed in a
day, meaning Dyonisius the Tyrant, who was the first that introduced Eating
twice in Four and twenty Hours; for in Ancient times they were only wont to Sup
without any other Repast. This we have made curious search into, and read all
the Treatises upon, and find the Jews did only Eat at Noon, whilst all the rest
at Night. But to pursue our design, you must know the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus was the most famous of all Antiquity, yet not so much for the
Magnificence of its Structure, or great number of Priests, as the
Physick-Tables hung up in it to relieve the Sick. Strabo, de situ Orbis, tells
us, that eleven Years after the Peloponesian War, the great Hypocrates was born
in a small Isle called Coe, in which also two Famous Men Licurgus and Bias had
their Births. Of this Hypocrates, ti^ observed, he was small of Body, a little
Pur-blind, had a great Head, spoke Sparingly, was very laborious in Study, and
above all, had an excellent and refined Judgment. From Fourteen to Thirty five
Years, he employed himself in Athens in Contemplation, Philosophizing and
Reading, and although many Learned Men flourished in his time, yet he was justly
Esteemed and Preferred before ^em all. Afterward, leaving Athens, he made a
Progress through many Provinces and Kingdoms, enquiring and searching into
^heProperties and Virtues of Herbs and Plants, all which he took Notes of, and
diligently confirmed in his Memory. He also made strict enquiry whether any
Books had been Written by the Ancients on that Subject, and Reports he met with
some whose Authors did not lay down any general Scheme of Physic, but only
mentioned some particular Cases they had known to succeed.

What Kingdoms and Provinces Physic wandered through.
Twelve Years successively Hippocrates spent in this Progress, and after
returning to the Temple of Diana, he there Translated all the Physick-Tables he
found hung up from many Ages, all which he reduced to a Method, and moreover
added some Observations and Experiments of his own. This Famous Physician was
the greatest that ever was known in the World, as well in regard he was the
first that Writ and put that Art in Order, as also that it is reported of him
he never was deceived in Prognostic he attempted, or Disease he undertook He
was wont to advise Physicians not to meddle with disorderly Persons, and
Counsel Patients not to have to do with unfortunate Men; affirming a Cure could
never fail where a Patient was regular, and Physician Fortunate. This great
Philosopher coming to Die, his Disciples began to cure or rather kill many
People in Greece, the Art being then New, and consequently their Experience but
Little, whereupon the Senate of Athens not only fo^bad any farther Practice but
also commanded 'em forthwith to leave the Country. They being thus excluded
Greece, this Art was not only Banished, but forgot 160 Years, none daring
either to Teach or Learn it, the Grecians having that profound regard to their
Physician Hippocrates, that they affirmd with him it came into the World, and
with him went out of it. But these 160 Years being once past, another
Philosopher and Physician arose, called Chrysippus, who soon became as Famous
among the Argians, as the former had been with the Athenians. This Philosopher,
although he was both Learned and Fortunate, yet failed not to be very Opinionated
and Fancyful in his Judgment; for in all he Writ or said, he made it his Chief
business to lessen Hypocrates and cry up himself; insomuch, that he was the
first that wrested Physic from the Protection of Reason, and placed it in
Custody of Opinion. This Physician dying, there grew great contentions amongst
the Grecians, which of the two Methods was best, that of Hippocrates, or the
other of Chrysippus: But at length they agreed in this, that they would neither
follow one, nor admit the other; affirming, that Honor and Life ought never to
become matter of dispute. Thus the Grecians continued another hundred Years
without Physicians, till Aristrato* Nephew to the great Aristo^le, arose, and
Rescued Physic from Oblivion; and this, not that he was more Learned than his
Predecessors, but rather more Fortunate. This Man recovered the Credit of
Physic by curing A^tiochus the first, of an Infirmity in his Lungs; in return
of which, the King gave him his Daughter, 1000 Talents of Silver, and a Gold
Cup* So that he not only hereby gained great repute through all Europe, but also
considerably enriched his Family. But nevertheless, he first brought a Scandal
upon this Profession, it having been never before known, that any Cured for
Hire, or set a price upon their Art; all before him contenting themselves
either with Friendship or Charity. This Man Dying, his Disciples soon became
more Covetous than Wise, and had greater skill in draining Purses, than
relieving Maladies: insomuch, that the Senate of Athens was once more set at
work to forbid any Physic being Read, or, for the future, Practiced among 'em.

What other Interruptions Physic underwent.
Another hundred Years was Physic exploded in Europe; till the Philosopher
Euperices restored it in the Kingdom of Trinacria, (Sicily.) But he and a Quack
happening to quarrel about curing K. Chrysippus, who then Reigned in that
Island; it was Universally agreed, that for the future, no mixed Potions should
be used, but only Simples Prescribed. A long while was Sicily, and the greatest
part of the World, without knowledge of the Art of Physic, till Herophilus, a
Man of great skill, both in that Art and Astrology, started up in Rhodes. Many
affirm this Person was Master to Ptolemy, and others, that he was but his
Scholar. However, it is certain, he left many learned Astrogical Treatises, and
Educated a great number of Famous Pupils. This Physician was of opinion, the
Pulse was not to be consulted in in the Arm, but Temples; saying, it never
failed to show it self there, when it was sometimes concealed in the Wrist.
This Secret was so Sacred among the Rhodians, that they maintained and
Practiced it always, as long as their Doctor and his Disciples lived; yet, at
length it came to be neglected, although the Physician was never forgot. For
after his and his Scholars Deaths, they would neither suffer themselves to be
cured, nor admit any Practisers among 'em; and this for fear they might vary
from their great Masters Authority, or out of an aversion they had to new
Opinions. After all these, Physic lay dead for almost 800 Years, as well in
Europe as Asia; till the great Philosopher and Physician Asclepiades appeared
in the Island Mitilene, (formerly Lesbos;) a Man Learned enough, but withal
extremely Fortunate. This Person opposed consulting the Pulse in the Wrist, as
now Practiced, and was for those in the Temples or Nostrils, which was not
thought so extravagant, but the Asian Physicians made frequent use of 'em a
long time after. During all this, we do not read of any Physician in Rome or
Italy; for it is well known, the Romans were the last of all the World that had
Clocks, Buffoons, Barbarians, and Physicians introduced among 'em. Four Hundred
and Six Years and Six Months, was the great City of Rome without either
Physician or Surgeon; and the first we read of, was, Antonius Musa a Grecian.
The occasion of whose coming thither, was a Sciatica the Emperor Augustus had
in his Thigh, which he having totally Eradicated and Cured, the Romans, in
Gratitude, raised him a Porphyry Statue in the Campus Martius. Prodigious
Wealth might this Man have got, and arrived to the Fame of a great Philosopher,
had he been contented not to go beyond his Profession, his hard Fate proceeding
from a pretense to Surgery, where his business was Physic: For it being often
necessary in that Art to cut off Arms, Legs, Fingers, sear Flesh, and apply
Cupping glasses, the Romans not accustomed to see such Cruelties, or undergo
such Tortures; instead of Recompencing his knowledge at length Stoned and
dragged him Dead through the City. When they had thus handled this unfortunate
Man, they immediately resolved never to admit Physician or Surgeon more among
'em, which continued till the Reign of Infamous Nero; who, in his return from
Greece brought Physicians and Vices good Store along with him. During whose
Reign, and his Successors Galba, Otto, and Vitellius, Physic was of great
esteem in Italy; but after their Deaths, the good Emperor Titus banished both
Orators and Physicians; his reason being, the former were destroyers of good
Customs, as the latter Enemies of health. He added farther, I Banish Physicians
to prevent Vice, for it is well known, where they reside for the most part, the
people are very wicked. The great Cato Uticensis was very Jealous of this
Profession, especially where they were like to inhabit the Roman Empire; for
once writing to his Son Marcellus, from Greece, he says thus. In yours, and my
Case, it is evident, the the Love of a Father out-does the Duty of a Son; for
where you have forgot to write to me, I not only frequently take care to send
you Letters, but also provide for your Necessaries. If you will not converse
with me as a Father, pray write to me as a Friend; and where you cannot respect
my Gray Hairs, have at least, regard to my good Works. You know, Son Marcellus,
I have been now five Years successively in Greece, and resided for the most
part in Athens, where are the most Famous Philosophers and Celebrated Academies
in the World. If you would know my opinion of these Grecians, it is this. They
talk much, and do little; call all others Barbarous, and themselves only
Learned; are Friends to those who will be guided by 'em, but Enemies to such as
will not; Dissemble Injuries, but never forgive 'em; are constant in Hate but
variable in Love; Hide-bound when they give, and Covetous when they get: And in
a Word, Son Marcellus, they are naturally Proud and Imperious where they
Command, and Slavish when they Ob^y. This is what the Philosophers Teach, and
People Practice, wherewith I thought fit to inform you, that you might have no
Inclinations to leave Rome to come hither; for you know well, the Prudence and
Staidness of our Country, would suit but ill with the Levity and N^velties of
Greece. The day our Sacred Senate shall permit the Greek Ar^s and Sciences to
enter Rome, ou^ whole Republic will be inevitably ruined; for where the Romans
have reason to boast of living well, the Grecians only busy themselves in
talking of it. Although the Grecian Arts are all Dubious, Pernicious, or
Scandalous. Yet, I must tell you, Son Marcellus, Physic is like to prove most
dangerous to our Commonwealth, for the People here, are long since resolved to
Murder those by Potion, they cannot Conquer by Arms. I every day observe these
Doctors quarrelling among themselves, not how they shall Cure, but after what
manner Kill their Patients. But I enjoin you, Son Marcellus, forthwith to
Advise the Senate of the arrival of six Physicians lately sent from hence, that
they may not be suffered either to Read or Practice their Pernicious Mysteries
among ye.

Physic to be Prized and Valued for Seven Reasons.
See here, Sir, the Progress of your Ar^ laid down; as, how it was first found
out, how Continued, how Lost, how Banished, how Received again; and in fine,
how turned out anew to wander through several Countries of the World. By yours
you desire me to acquaint you, not only with what I have Read, but also what I
think of this Profession, which partly to ob^ige, and partly convince you of
the good and ha^m, done by Knowing and Ignorant Physicians, I will endeavor to
comply with

Physic is to be prized, because the Creator of all things designed it as a
Relief to his Creatures in time of need, by placing a Virtue in Plants, Herbs,
Waters, Minerals, and even in Words; to which they might have easy recourse,
and find speedy benefit by.

Physic is to be prized, when it lights into the hands of a Prudent, Knowing,
Discreet, and Experienced Practitioner, who may sooner find out a Distemper,
think of a proper remedy, and Administer it surer than another.

Physic is to be prized, when the Physician only uses it in acute and
dangerous cases; such as a Plurisie, Quinzie, Imposthume, Scarlet-Feaver,
Apoplexy, etc. in all which, means must be diligently sought, and a good Doctor
Credited.

Physic is to be prized, where a Flux of Blood can be cured by Washing, a Head
ach by a good Scent, a Pain in the Stomach by a quilted Stomacher, a heat of
Liver by an Unction, a Scalding of the Eyes by Cold Water, a Tympany by a
Clyster, and a Calenture only with good Diet.

Physic is to be prized, where I could find a Physician that would rather
choose to Cure me with Natural Simples, than Hippocrates his Compounds; and
prescribe fair Water before juice of Endive.

Physic is to be prized, where a Doctor in a Simple-Feaver, not only waits
till the third Day be over, but also looks into the Patient's Water to see if
it be high colored, trys the Spleen if it be stopped, has regard whether the
Lungs be damaged, or Tongue rough, and opens the Eyes, if they be heavy; so
that he never pretends to prescribe, till the Disease be perfectly known.

Physic is to be prized, where the Physician finding the Case dangerous calls
others to his assistance, to enter into Consultation, not Contention and
Wrangling, about the Patient's Distemper.

He that is willing to comply with these Rules, may be safely sent for and
confided in, and moreover ought to be well paid for his pains, Physic chiefly
consisting in Ability to find out a Distemper, and Experience to apply a proper
Remedy.

Of Nine remarkable Injuri^s done by bad Physicians.
I complain to you, noble Doctor, of many Lazy, Blockish, Rash and
Unexperienced Physicians, who for having only heard of Avicenna, etc. resided
in Guadalupa, or being Footboy to the Queen's Physician, presently post away
to the University of Merida, where by a Letter from Rome they soon get to be
Batchellors and Graduates in that Profession, but who nevertheless verify the
Proverb which says, Physicians of Valencia have large Gowns, but little
Knowledge.

I complain to you, Sir, of many Ignorant and Vulgar Doctors, who having to
deal with a dangerous Malady and after Purging, Syruping, Blooding and
Anointing, not knowing what to do next, at length prescribe prepared Brickdust
before Supper, and Clarified Catspiss at daybreak.

I complain to you, Sir, of many Boy-Doctors, who not having the least insight
into their Profession, prescribe the Alphabet quite through for an ordinary
Fever, and often make use of the same dangerous Remedies as are proper against
a Pestilence, insomuch that it were far safer for the miserable Patient to sit
down at quiet with his Distemper, than hope to be cured by such Means.

I complain to you, Sir, of many of your Companions, nay, and Scholars, who
prescribing against a weak Stomach, overflowing of the Gall, common Scurvy, or
a little Flushing of the Blood, all which might be remedied with 3 days
Temperance, Sugar and Water, or Honey of Roses, nevertheless order their poor
Patients to be tormented with Cupping Glasses, plagued with Clysters, Bled in
the Nose, and well Drenched with Juice of Endive, in a manner, that in stead of
easing, they rather keep 'em continually on the Rack.

I complain to you, Sir, of many others your great Cronies, who think
themselves wise, and it may be are so, yet never prescribe any common Remedy
for fear they should be thought not to know what belongs to Foreign Plants and
Distant Drugs.

I complain to you, Sir, of many ignorant Prentices whom their Masters entrust
with their Business, giving 'em an Ephemeris of Critical days, and Symptoms to
walk by it, who nevertheless neither regard when the Distemper began, or
whether it increase or diminish, but still load the miserable Patient with
repeated Doses, till at last they reduce him to great danger of his Life.

I complain to you, Sir, that generally your Profession are at variance one
with another, disagreeing in Humors as in Opinions, which is demonstrable in
that some follow Hypocrates, some Avicenna, some Galen, others Rasis, others
Ficinus, and some none but their own Suggestions and Imaginations. But still
the mischief is, the poor Patient suffers, while the Doctors wrangle and
dispute.

I complain to you, Sir, of many Beardless Practicers, who being Novices in
their Art, and but very slender of Judgment, whatever Experiment they have once
seen tried, heard or read of, they immeadiately prescribe without the least
regard either to their Patients Constitution or Disease.

I complain to you, and even of you, good Doctor, that generally you all wrap
your Recipe's up in such obscure Terms and unintelligible Ciphers, that it is
impossible for any but your own Profession to understand 'em. The reason of
which I cannot guess at, for if your Precriptions be good they need not be
concealed, and if bad, ought not be ordered: Nay, neither ought not to be
unknown to us, since it is our parts both to swallow the Potion, and pay the
Apothecary.

The Author's Thoughts of Physic.
Sir, I have here hinted at the Good knowing Physicians do, and the many
Injuries occasioned by the Ignorant; and to deal sincerely, I am of Opinion,
tho my Misfortunes are many, yet the Villainies of your Profession are more;
since at the hazard of our Lives you both purchase lasting Fame, and heap up
vast Estates. No Power can contend with yours for Pre-eminence, for no sooner
are you entered our Doors but we part with all we have, and approve of all you
do; and where the Surgeon takes but 10 Ounces from our Arm, you infallibly draw
twice as much out of our Chests. After what we bestow on the Poor, nothing goes
beyond what we give to our selves, I mean, part with to good Physicians, that
restore our Healths and ease our Pains: When on the contrary no Money is worse
spent than what a bad Doctor carries away from his ruined Patient, for where
the former ought to be well paid, the latter deserves to be soundly kicked. It
was a Law much in use among the Goths, that the Patient and Physician should
Article together before any thing were attempted, whereby the one obliged
himself to Cure, as the other to Pay; and if the Doctor failed in his Art he
was to satisfy both Patient and Apothecary. I am of Opinion, Sir, that if this
Law were now in force, you and your Fellow Practicers would give your selves
more up to Study, and perform better what you undertook; but as you are paid
whatever happen, if you succed you take the Honor to your selves, and if not
lay all the blame on your Innocent Patient. This is plain, in that you often
affirm we drink small Beer, eat Fruit, sleep adays, neglect what you Order,
walk too much abroad, or catch cold when we are in a sweat, so that for the
most part where you cannot Cure, you will not fail to Slander. I am mightily
pleased with that saying of Hippocrates, That a Physician is little to be
valued if he be not always successful, for from thence we may infer, our Health
depends not so much on your Physic as your Fortune. Little regard must he have
to your Art that aproves of this Maxim, for we are thereby taught to avoid the
Knowing and Unlucky, and have recourse altogether to the Ignorant and
Prosperous. Eighteen years, since being ill at Osornillo, I remember you came
to visit me, and bad me beware how I meddled, you having already killed my
Father, murdered my Uncle, destroyed my Sister, and made away with my Cosen,
so that if I had a mind to Li^t of that Company you could sooner undertake to
dispatch, than cure me. Although you spoke this out of Raillery, yet it
immediately sunk into me for a truth, and I thence-forward resolved never to
trust you with my Pulse, or confide in your Prescriptions. The Miller we trust
only with our Corn, the Farmer with our Horse, Lawyer with our Estate, Tailor
with our Clothes, but the Physician with our Life. How great a Fool must he be
that does not consider well before he admits a Purge into his Bowels, or Lancet
into his Arm; since it often happens he could heartily wish the Potion out, and
Blood again in his Body. There are no healthier People in the World than such
as live regularly, and despise Physic, and the reason is, because Nature
oftener requires Conduct than Help. The Emperor Aurelian died 66 years old, in
all which time he never Purged, Blooded, or Physick'd, any otherwise than by
Bathing once a year, Vomiting once a month, Fasting one day in a week, and
Walking one hour in a day. On the contrary Adrian who was every way debauched
in his Youth, in his old Age became full of Diseases, so that he never went
without Physicians, or was attended without an Apothecary Shop: But would you
know what good they did him* or Remedies prescribed him, you may be satisfied
by what he ordered to be engraved on his Tomb, Perii turba Medicorum; as if he
would say, It not being in the power of my Enemies to kill me, my Physicians
did it in a trice. There is a pleasant Story goes of Galienus the Emperor, who
being grievously afflicted with a Sciatica, and a Physician undertaking to cure
him, performed indeed his Promise, but nevertheless made him undergo a thousand
painful Experiments, whereupon the Emperor one day sent for, and thus said to
him, Take, Fabatus, two thousand Sesterces, but withal be informed, I give 'em
not for curing my Sciatica, but that thou may never cure me more. Wherefore,
Noble Doctor, I think it much more advisable to reward Ignorant Physicians for
doing nothing, than for the greatest Care and Pains they can take, since we
daily see they kill more by their Medicines than their Ancestors destroyed
Moors in the Wars. But to conclude my long Epistle, I Accept, Approve, Commend,
and Bless the Sacred Mystery of Physic, when at the same time I cannot but
Curse, Reprove, and Condemn the Physician that knows not how to make right use
of it, for as Pliny says, Non rem Antiqui damnabant sed Artem; Which to make
plainer may be thus expressed, The ancient Sages did not find so much fault
with the Art, as Artist and Method of Curing, since Nature having placed
sufficient Remedies in Simples, Men altogether confounded 'em by Compounds. No
more, but God keep you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Madrid, December. 27, 1520.
LETTER III. To a Lady, the Author's Niece, who fell sick for the death of a
little Bitch.
Much Esteemed Niece, tho Afflicted Lady,
BEing informed of the slight occasion of your Melancholy, we all thought it
impossible your Grief should ever exceed our Mirth; for so it is, Madam, and
ever will be, that when one perishes, another escapes; one gets repute, another
loses it; and where one Laughs, another Mourns; and the reason is, because
being so many changes in the World, there can scarce two People be found of one
Opinion, and one Condition. For as one part of the Sea is calm, the other
tempestuous; in one Country it Thunders, in another the Sun shines: so it often
happens to Men, some whereof burst their Spleens with laughing, whilst others
break their Hearts with sighing. Since therefore a Calm is as sure to follow a
Storm, as a Storm a Calm, in my Opinion none should puff themselves up with
Prosperity, or be cast down by Adversity; and this because there is no Grief
which shall not be removed, nor Pleasure which will not conclude. We have been
acquainted different ways, of the death of your Lap Dog, which we understand
has not only afflicted your Mind, but also occasioned a Fever to confine you to
your Bed; and to tell you truth, this your Distemper has been the cause of all
our Merriment. All Matters of this Life are to be dealt with three ways, either
to be Lamented, Laughed at, or Dissembled with; Now, this business of yours is
rather to be ridiculed, than flattered, since you fixed your Affection simply,
as you continue it foolishly. My Nephew, and your Cosen, Don Gaspar d^
Guevara, has earnestly entreated me with Words, and conjured me by tender
Expressions, to go see and Comfort you in your Illness; and moreover
endeavored to persuade me, that you were as sensible of the death of your
little Bitch, as I concerned for the loss of my dear Sister Donna Francisca. A
Child when newborn, knows neither how to Walk. Eat, nor Talk, yet is presently
able to Cry; therefore the Crime lies not in that we Mourn, but what we Mourn
for. Our first Mother Eve lamented her Son Abel, Jacob grieved for Joseph,
David for Absalom, Anna for Tobias, Ieremias Mourned over Jerusalem, Mary
Magdalen lamented her Sins, St. Peter his Apostasy, our Savior his Friend
Lazarus; and you, Madam, Mourn for your little Bitch. Tears being as drops of
Blood distilling from the Heart through the Eyes, I hold him as kind that sheds a
few such on a dead Man's Tomb, as that gave him an Estate whilst living. The
Office of the Feet is to Walk, of the Tongue to Speak, of the Hands to Work,
but of the Heart only to Mourn; for the Eyes are but as it were Limbecks that
distill Tears from thence: and as it is Grief is locked up in the very center of
the Body, it can neither make use of the Hands nor Feet; but the Tongue must
declare its Wrong, and the Eyes demonstrate its Misery. We may be confirmed by
the Eyes of the Afflictions of the Heart, for if the one did not Mourn, the
other would never Weep. I say this, Madam, that you must needs love that
Spaniel exceedingly well, since you have showed so great concern for the loss
of it; for to consider a thing, one either loves or hates, regard must rather
be had to the Eyes than Tongue: for this can only reveal what we commonly
think, when Tears discover the deepest Affection; Whence it follows that Words
may be feigned, but Drops from our Heart must be sincere. What Men commonly say
of Women, that their Tears are fictitious, is not true, but nevertheless they
may weep for one thing, and say they do it for another; but to Cry in jest is
neither in their power, nor ought any body to believe it. To lament for one
thing, and pretend it for another, I neither commend nor condemn; for in a
generous and brave Soul nothing ought to be more concealed than what we love
most. I thought fitting to say this in defense of your Sighs, and to favor
your Tears, both which I am apt to believe you bestowed with less devotion than
affection, since I am informed your Fever does not at all increase, and yet you
still keep your Bed. To confess the truth, Madam, I don't wonder you lament,
but am offended at the cause of it, since it would be more both for your Honor
and Interest to Mourn your Sins, than the Death of a trifling Mongrel. You
being descended from so noble a Family, and having the Character of so good a
Liver, great an Estate, Beauteous Complexion, and Wise Conversation, I cannot
have patience to see you fix your love so low, as upon a despicable Bitch; for
a Plato prudently says, Such is the Lover oftentimes as is the Beloved. Love is
of so great force, that both Parties commonly become alike by its power; so, if
I love a Rational Creature, I am Rational; but if a Brute, a Brute; Whence we
may infer, you do not at all differ in this from your Lap Dog. I have been much
ashamed, I could almost say angry, at this Action of yours, which has not only
been admired at by many, but also complained of by a greater number, and for my
part, I think they had reason; for we ought not to place our Affection but only
where it may be both well employed and well received. The best part of the Body
is the Heart, and the best affection of the Heart is Love, therefore if this be
not advantagiously bestowed, the Person must be very unhappy that admits it, it
being impossible he should ever know how to live that knows not how to Love.
Also I cannot imagine what pleasure you could take in loving such a Creature,
or what returns it could make you, unless it were to fill your Clothes with
Hairs, dirty your Rooms, sleep upon your Squab, load you with Fleas, trouble
you to wash her frequently in Summer, and lie upon your Petticoats all the
Winter, steal when you were out of sight, and snarl at the Maids for chiding at
her beastliness. But yet for all this, you did not content your self with
giving her the best bit out of your Mouth, and furnishing her with wrought
Collars and Silver Bells; but would also take it extremely ill if any offered
either to strike or steal her, so that she was both troublesome to you, and a
plague to every body else. Of you two I know not whether was greater, the
Bitches Fortune in being so well beloved, or your Misfortune in doting on so
inconsiderable an Animal. Nevertheless I am satisfied, to keep a Monkey, Dog,
Cat, Parrot, or Thrush, has no harm in it self, so long as we employ our Eyes
only to observe the one, and our Ears to hear the other sing, but the Heart is
never to be made use of on so contemptible an Occasion. To make so much ado
about a worthless Bitch, is neither the part of a Gentlewoman nor Chri^tian;
for a Christian's Tears must rather be employed for Offenses than Losses. If
the Death of your little Bitch, and the Merits of your Life were to be brought
before the Governor of Zaratan, I believe he would determine the one to be
laughed at, as the other lamented; and which neither you nor I ought to take
amiss, because we are both sensible of what we lose, but not enough concerned
for the Sins we commit. It is much greater reason you should remember God that
made you, than a Bitch that died with you; since God gave you a Soul to enjoy,
and an Understanding to know him; but your triflng Favorite had nothing but a
Tongue to bark at you, and Teeth to bite you. The greatest concern you ought to
have for your Bitch is because you did not give her an honorable Burial, by
calling the Frier-Mendicants to your Assistance, for then she might have had
the advantage both of their Absolution and Prayers. We read of Alexander the
Great, that he buried his Horse, Augustus a Parrot, Nero a Thrush, Virgil a
Mosquetto, Comodus a Monkey, and Heliogabalus a little Bird; all whose
Obsequies were performed both with Prayers and other Ceremonies. And I do not
at all doubt, had you either heard or read of these Passages, you would soon
have bu^ied your Bitch with the like Pomp: though to tell you truth, I am of
Opinion you did worse to shed so many Tears, than they to bestow so great
Magnificence on their Animals. Another oversight you committed, in not calling
the Midwife Galliarda to your Bitches Labor, nor going on Pilgrimage to St.
Christophers; for thereby she might have saved her Life, and you your Tears.
But setting aside all farther Raillery, I earnestly entreat you to grieve no
more on such an account, but at length begin to be Wise, for otherwise I shall
think you rather fit to be reclaimed by Hellebore than a Jest. No more, but God
keep you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Burgos, Febr. 8. 1524.
LETTER IV. To the Magistrate Nunnio Tellio, concerning the Qualifications of a
True Friend.
Honored SIR, tho Unadvised Young Man.
HAving read your Letter over and over, I found in it many things worthy to be
Answered, and more to be blamed: for considering what you write, and how you
write, it is impossible but you should weary your Pen, and tire out your
Reason. You ought not only to have regard what, but to whom you Address your
self; for Men of Quality and Slaves are not to be accosted after the same
manner; too much haste and negligence for the most part savouring of
Disrespect. Take it for granted, Sir, the Reader's Authority is very much
lessened by the Writers Assurance; and therefore I would advise you for the
future to sit down, and consider what you are to say, and how you shall express
it before you begin your Letter; for an Absurdity, if it be folly to speak, it
will be much greater to write it. Never begin any Letter of importance till you
have first made a rough Draught of your Design, for otherwise you will write
what will certainly be laughed at, and request what will as surely be rejected.
Sir, you say you desire me for your Lord, yet have chosen me for your Friend,
but I must tell you there is so great difference between these two Offices,
that were you sensible of it, you would neither ask the one, nor think of the
other at the same time: for where a Friend is engaged at liberty, a Lord is
taken through necessity; a Friend serves, a Lord requires Service; a Friend gives,
a Lord takes; a Friend endures, a Lord blusters; a Friend is silent, where a
Lord condemns; and lastly, a Friend Pardons, when a Lord Revenges. So that this
being true, I hold it impossible they should ever agree together; you to be my
Vassal, and I to be your Friend. In making me your Lord, you must serve,
follow, obey, and fear me, all which are both prejudicial to Liberty, and
Enemies of Repose; so that you must often feel disquiet, and likewise cause me
some trouble. It may also happen, where I command you as a Lord, you may think
to obey me as a Friend, and so believe your self justified, where I am
disappointed and wronged. To ask me likewise to be your Friend, is to require
the greatest Slavery imaginable, for I am thereby obliged to be yours all my
life l^ng; for true Friendship cannot be such where the Person beloved does not
continue the same with the Lover. Friends are to be so absolutely united* that
they are to have but one Tongue to talk with, the same Feet to wa^k with, and
but one Heart to produce insepara^le Affections; in a manner that one Lise
supports, and one Death ends 'em. It is very strange for one Friend to tell
another, He will not do such a thing, or, he cannot, when the Laws of true
Friendship oblige him to give all he has, and do all he can. In a Friends House
ought neither to be Weights nor Measures, Bonds nor Bills, Property nor
Thievry, for there we may enter without knocking, and take without asking. He
ties himself up very strictly that enters the Lists of Friendship, for in such
Case he has neither power to den^, nor leave to excuse. I cannot take him for
my Friend, or even a good Neighbor, that when he gives, does it by Weight and
Measure, and sometimes when I ask, refuses me; for where is the reason that he
should not partake of my Wants, who is the only Object of my best Wishes?
Seneca in his Book, De Ira, says* A Wise Man ought to have but one Friend, and
likewise must take care he have no Enemies. Which was well advised, since
Enemies are dangerous, and too many Friends troublesome; for the Rules of
Friendship are so very nice, that where many pretend, few are able to perform
'em. A True Friend's Motto is that He would sooner suffer for our Honor, than
be relieved by our Fault. The Philosopher Mimus said, He had a greater regard
to the Love in his Friends Heels, than Grief in his own Heart. Also true
Friends are obliged to have the same sense of another Misfortunes, as they
have of their own; and at the same time are not only to be sensible, but also
assisting in a Remedy; for otherwise where they accept their Tears, they will
have reason to complain of their Stinginess or Neglect. The Philosopher
Eschines being asked, What was the greatest trouble of this Life? answered, To
lose what one Wins, and part from what one Likes: Which was happily spoken, for
in the one a Man loses his pains, and in the other his pleasure. It is another
privilege of Friendship, that we resent a Wrong done to a Friend in the same
degree as to our selves; for no sooner can he be afflicted than we are to be
disquieted. We ought to make choice of such as are Discreet to Advise, and
Powerful to Defend; for if they want Discretion, we shall need Council in
^rosperity; and if Power, Relief in Adversity: so that even amidst our
Pleasures we may as well be lost, as in our greatest Troubles ruined. Great
occasion has every Man for a true Friend, who may assist when present, and
defend him when absent, insomuch that he that has met with such a one may well
boast himself possessed of the greatest Treasure upon Earth; for he is to
Relieve him with his Estate, Council him with his Prudence, Defend him by his
Power, and Correct him when he does amiss; so that it is both his Duty and our
Happiness to keep us from falling when staggering, as to lift us up when down.
It is also required in a true Friend to be both Discreet and Secret; for if he
be a Fool he is not to be endured, and if a Babbler may soon ruin us. Our
Estate, Person, Conscience, or Life may be entrusted with a Relation,
Acquaintance, or Neighbor, but our Secrets must only be confided to a Friend.
It also comes under the Rules of Friendship not only to conceal all one hears,
but also to be silent of all one sees; For Men have ever valued themselves upon
holding their peace, when they generally repent of too much talking. Never must
one Friend flatter another, for the more we love, the more we are obliged to
Favor, Defend, Counsel and Correct. Also never reproach for Benefits done, but
be satisfied with our bare trouble for a Reward; for the Heart is never more at
ease than when it has discharged it self honorably to a Friend. Also in a
dangerous Distemper we must not always expect a Friend should ask our
assistance, for oftentimes he may grieve long before he cares to complain.
Virtue has sometimes Friends, and Prosperity is never without 'em; but be they
what they will, they are both known in Adversity, for where the better sort
follow Virtue, the greater part will be sure to wait upon Fortune. All
Acquaintance are not proper for Friends, for tho they may be honest enough, yet
they are generally indiscreet; and where we may be allowed to have a respect
for their Persons, it will not be prudence to trust 'em with our Secrets. These
and many other Qualities are to be required in a true Friend, all which tho you
may find in my Mouth, yet I would not advise you to expect '^m in my Heart, and
therefore you would do wisely neither to think of me for your Lord, nor choose
me for a Friend; for as to one, I am not powerful enough, and the other not
good enough. No more, but God Preserve you, and give me Grace to serve and obey
Him.

Logronio, May 3. 1526.
LETTER V. To the Abbot of Monserrat; in which he Treats of the Oratories of
the Ancients, together with some few Reflections on the Court.
Most Reverend and Holy Abbot,
THe Eleventh of May, a Monk of yours, Father Roderigo, gave me your Reverences
Letter, which I not only received with Joy, but also Read with Pleasure; and
that because sent from so Noble a Friend, and brought by so good a Brother. Of
the Emperor Aurelian, it is reported, that the Consul Domicius his Dispatches
were so very troublesome to him, he would run 'em over slightly indeed, but
never take any farther notice of 'em; when on the contrary, those of the Censor
Annius Turinus, he not only Read deliberately, but speedily Answered with his
own Hand. In truth, Sir, there are some Men so very troublesome in
Conversation, and impertinent in Writing, that one would sooner choose to endure
a Calenture, than either hear them Talk, or Read their Letters. But this is not
to be wondered at, since the various Constitutions and Conditions of Men, often
occasion the Heart to desire what it should hate, and be indifferent in what it
should Love. I mean, I am always too negligent to hear from Monserrat, and yet
am still pleased at Court. You desire to know, Reverend Father, if the Ancients
had Oratories like us, and where they were to be found; in which I will
satisfy you, as to what I have Read, or can at present Remember. The Oracle of
the Sicilians was Bacchus; Of the Rhodians, Ceres; of the Ephesians, their
great Diana; of the Philistines, Belus; of the Greci^ns, Delphos; of the
Numidians, Juno; of the Romans, Berecinthia; of the Thebans, Venus; and lastly
of the Spaniards, Proserpine; whose Temple was in Cantabria, now Navarre. What
we Christians call an Hermitage, they then named an Oracle, which was always
placed in some Remote part, or City of great Veneration. There one Priest
always attended close locked up; for they that went on Pilgrimage thither, were
to kiss the Walls, and pay their Devotion without entering, except the Priests
only, and Foreign Ambassadors. Near this Oracle were Trees planted, within it
Lamps continually burning, and the Roof of it was all of Lead. At the Door
stood a great Image to receive Devotion, near which was an Altar placed for
Sacrifice, and a House built to lodge Pilgrims. Plutarch exceedingly commends
Alexander the Great, because wherever he Conquered he ordered Temples to pray
in, and Oracles to Visit. King Antigonus, once Page to Alexander, and Father of
Demetrius; tho he was blamed by Historians for being Arbitrary and Dissolute,
yet they greatly magnified him for his Devotion, in going once a Week to the
Temple, and once a Month to the Oracle. The Senate of Athens honored Plato
much more after his Death, than when he was Alive; and their Reason was,
because he at length, retired from Study and Books to the Oracle of Delphos,
where he Lived, Died, was Buried, and afterward adored for a God. Archidamas
the Grecian, Son of Agesilaus, having governed the Commonwealth of Athens 22
Years; and moreover, obtained many Signal Victories both by Land and Sea; at
length caused a Famous Oracle to be Built upon the steep Mountains of Argos,
where he ended his Life; as also chose a Sepulcher. Of all the Oratories of the
Ancients, that in the Isle of Delphos was the most Famous; for thither all
Nations had recourse, brought most Offerings, and there made most Vows, and
received most Answers from their Gods. When Camillus had overcome the Samnites,
the Romans vowed to make an Image of Gold and send it to theirOracle; Whereupon
the Ladies tore off the Chains from their Necks, Bracelets from their Arms, and
the very Rings from their Fingers, to promote so Pious a design, whereby they
received great Honor, as also some Privileges. I thought fit to give you these
Examples, Reverend Father, that you might know, it is no new thing to have
Oratories and Oracles; The difference betwixt ours and theirs being, the one
was appointed by Men, and the other chosen by God. I never pass by your thick
Woods, daring Mountains, frightful Precipices, and gaping Gulphs, but I
immediately dispose my self to Devotion; and would to God I could continue the
same here: But woe is me! Woe is me! Father Abbot, that the older I grow, the
worse I am; for in Wishes I am only a Saint, where in Works I still continue a
Sinner. I know not whether it be because Friends advise me, Parents importune
me, Enemies misguide me, Business hinders me, Caesar imploys me, or the Devil
tempts me; that the more I resolve to retire from this bad World, the more I
find my self engaged in it. But, is there any sincere Pleasure in the Court? No
certainly. For here we suffer Hunger, Cold, Thirst, Weariness, Poverty,
Sadness, Trouble, Disgrace, and Persecution; and this, because we have no body
to deprive us of our Liberty, or take account of our Ease. Believe me, Father
Abbot, Your Country is much safer to live in both for Soul and Body than ours
here; for at Court it is better to Hear than Act, See than Reflect, and Suffer
than Resent. At Court he that is Poor is soon forgot, and hethat is Rich is
quickly Persecuted. At Court the Poor Man has nothing to Eat, and the Rich
rarely any Virtues to boast of. At Court there are few Live satisfied, yet all
are Ambitious of it. At Court every body is for displacing, and no body for
obeying. At Court none care for dying there, yet all are for keeping there. At
Court most do what they should not, but few what they ought. At Court all rail
at it, yet none care to leave it; and lastly, I affirm, what I have oftentimes
Preached, that the Court is only fit for Laics that may get by it, and Youth
that can abide by it. If on these conditions, Reverend Father, you have a mind
to come hither, I am ready to change with you for Monserrat, when you please:
But nevertheless, as my Friend, must tell you at the same time, you will sooner
repent being a Courtier, than I an Abbot. From the Hands of Father Roderigo, I
received the Spoons you sent, and return you a Book in Exchange: So that as I
shall not want where-withal to Eat, you may stand in need of nothing to Pray.
As for what you write about the Monastery, do you Importune GOD as my Friend,
and I Will Solicit Caesar as yours. No more, but God keep you always under his
Sacred Protection.

Valladolid, Ian. 7, 1535.
LETTER VI. To a particular Friend of the Author's, Advising him not to be
Covetous and Griping, illustrated with severe Reflections on that Vice.
Much Esteemed, tho Covetous SIR,
THE good Emperor Titus, Son of Vespatian, and Brother of Domitian, was so v^^y
well beloved throughout the whole Roman Empire, that when he died, these Words
were engraved on his Tomb, Deliciae Moriuntur Generis Humani; The Comfort and
Delight of Mankind is Deceased. Of which Excellent Person it is related by
Suetonius, that being once at Supper with diverse Princes and Ambassadors, he
all of a sudden fetched a deep sigh, and cried out, Diem Amisimus, Amici; which
he might have made clearer by saying, Let not this day be reckoned amongst the
rest of my Life, since I have done no manner of good in it. Also Plutarch
writes of Alexander the Great, that many Philosophers disputing in his Presence
about the Happiness of Human Life, he delivered his Opinion thus, Believe me
Friends, and do not doubt it, the greatest Pleasure in this World is having
wherewithal to give, and wanting a Heart to Punish. Likewise the same Author
tells you of Theopompus the Theban, that being asked by a Soldier for
Subsistence, and not having any Money, he gave him the very Shoes off from his
Feet, saying, If I had any thing better thou should have it, but having not,
be contented with these for the present, and I will take care for thy Pay; for
I think it much more just that I should go Unshod than thou Unfed. Dionysius
the Tyrant coming one day into his Son's Chamber, and seeing great Treasure
every where heaped up, reprimanded him severely in this manner, Son I gave you
not these Riches to hoard, but distribute, there being no Person so Potent as
the Liberal and Generous, for he thereby both preserves his Friends, and gains
the good will of his Enemies. Sir, I have made use of these several Examples to
hint something of moment to you, which had you been in Castile as you are in
Andaluzia, I had not writ but whispered in your Ear; for tho we may have
liberty to correct our Friends, yet we are by no means to scandalize 'em. Some
Andalusians have acquainted me here, and others informed me from your parts,
that you are lately grown very Covetous and Griping, both which I Will Assure you
have not only Afflicted, but extremely Affronted me: for Covetousness and
Honor are so very Incompatible, that they never reside in one Person, or ever
come under one Roof. All other wicked People have their pleasures in Vice,
except the Miser only, who grieves for what others possess, yet will not enjoy
what he has of his own. The Curse of a Covetous Man is, that he is always
jealous his Tenants will not pay him, his Cattle cannot eat Stubble, that Hunters
will break down his Hedges, or Thieves rob his House, and yet he can never wish
to keep his Money safer from any one than he does from himself. The Miser's
chiefest delight is in weighing his Gold, counting his Silver, selling his
Wine, storing his Granary, starving his Family, and Multiplying his Cattle;
nay, his greatest glory is to Get, and not Spend; Ask and not Give; Lend and
never Borrow with design to Repay. But still he is not to be envied, for his
plagues are much greater when you ask him a Farthing for Matches, a Penny for
Small Beer, a Halfpenny for Pot Herbs, Twopence for Oil, and as much for
Sallet; for then he will soon fill the House with Clamor, and give his Wife
and Children to the Devil for the sake of a little Mammon. No common Bounty
does God bestow upon such as are generous; for could the Miser once taste of
their Satisfaction in giving, he would scarce ever after retain Necessaries for
himself. The generous Person cannot possibly give more than will be given him,
for whatever Favors he bestows, he is still sure to have his Liberty to
himself: Also he is Lord where ever he lives, and Master where ever he comes,
for being assured of a Noble Return, no Person will ever deny him any Request.
When it fares quite contrary with the Miser, whom none care to talk to, deal
with, or come near; he having always his House Nasty, Stockins out at Heels,
Clothes greasy, no Company, nor any thing either to Eat or Drink. How can he be
expected to relieve another's Misfortunes, who will not keep the Water out of his
own Shoes? How can he be supposed to give Alms that regards not his own Wants?
Who can think he will Entertain Strangers freely, who starves his own Flesh and
Blood? How can the Poor expect Wood from him that stifles himself with Muck?
Or, why should they hope to have any of his Corn, when he designs none of it
for his own Use? Who dares be Friend to a Covetous Man, when he is so great an
Enemy to himself? How many People do we see daily, to whom God has given
Ability to get Riches, Discretion to Preserve 'em, Wisdom to Protect 'em, Life
to Possess 'em, but not a Heart to Enjoy 'em; so that having it in their power
to become Masters of another's Wealth, they are nevertheless Slaves to their
own. How much better were an honest Poverty, than such cursed Avarice; since
the Poor can be contented with little, when the Rich will not be satisfied with
much? What greater Plague can happen to any Man, than to desire what others
possess, yet to want what he has in his own power? What can he be said to enjoy
that does not enjoy himself? The Miser has his Eyes always busied on his Vines
he is Planting, his Hands on his Money he is receiving, his Tongue on his
Factors he is trusting, his Feet on his Cattle he is Visiting, his time on his
Snares he is preparing, his Ears on his Accounts he is taking, his Body on his
Bargains he is making, and his Heart on his Treasure he is hoarding, so that
whilst he thus neglects himself he may well be said to have the least share of
himself. Whilst Covetous Men have not the Heart to relieve or entertain their
Friends, can it be expected they should afford any thing to themselves? No
certainly, for they will think all such Expenses as ill bestowed as Money upon
Thieves that Rob 'em. It Is false to say, a Miser is rich; since he has not
possession of Wealth, but rather that of him, He having only the trouble of
getting, danger of keeping, plague of defending, and torment of paying out; and
if it were not for very shame, I believe he would sooner content himself with
Bread and Onyons, than rob his Purse of a single Farthing. The Covetous
Person's condition is not so good as the Potters, for where he makes profitable
use of Dirt, the Miser will not so much as touch his Gold. Also the one gets
his living by selling Pots, whilst the other forfeits his honor by heaping up
Riches. The safer a Miser keeps his Wealth, always the more satisfied he is,
and where three Locks suffice his Chest, a hundred will scarce content his
Heart. A generous Person ought to take a great deal of care not to fall into
this Vanity, for where once it has taken the least possession, it will cause a
Man to degenerate more and more every day. To revenge ones self on a Covetous
Man, the best way were, to wish he would live long, for certainly no Penance
under the Sun can equal his rigid self denial. May I never be credited, if when
I was Visitor at Arevalo, I did not know a very rich Man, who of all his Plenty
eat nothing but the rotten Fruit, perished Grapes, tainted Flesh, Moldy Corn,
sower Wine, Mouse-eaten Cheese, and rusty Bacon; so that he lived upon only
what he could not sell, or otherwise dispose of. Also I confess I went often to
visit him, but more out of a desire to observe than have to do with him; for I
always found his Rooms full of Cobwebs, Doors off the Hooks, Windows shattered,
Sashes torn, Floors full of Holes, Roofs until'd, Chairs broken-back'd, and
Chimneys ready to drop; so that his was a Hovel fitter to burn than live in,
and more proper for an Almshouse than a Gentleman's. Although it be pity to
prosecute my ill nature farther, yet I cannot help telling you moreover what I
heard from his Neighbors, that whenever any Friend or Relation came to visit
him, he was wont to make use of their Houses, and borrow all his Entertainment.
Very miserable must Avarice needs be, since an ill Reputation cannot repress,
nor thoughts of Death prevent it; The Covetous and Griping Person's business
being only to seek out Cares for himself, Envy from his Neighbors, Jealousy
from his Enemies, Plunder for Thieves, Danger for his Body, Damnation for his
Soul, Curses from his Heirs, and Suits for his Children. All these things, Sir,
I have thought fit to put you in mind of, that you may know what a wretched
Profession you are engaged in, and how extremely you have been misled; which as
to your Friends it is Matter of Disquiet, to your self it will likewise be
indelible Scandal. Reclaim therefore your past Obstinacy, and resolve for the
future to live after another manner; for where a Gentleman may casually suffer
some breach in his Estate, he is to endure none in his Honor. If
notwithstanding all has been said you are still bent upon being Miserable and
Covetous, be assured from this very moment I renounce your Friendship, and
disclaim any knowledge of you; not thinking it at all for my Reputation to be
acquainted with a Man that will Lie, or Hoard up his Money. I send you this
Letter without either Head or Feet, for being on a Subject of Anger and Satyr,
I could not think it reasonable it should either be known to whom writ, or by
whom written. No more, but God keep you, and give me Grace to serve him.

Medina, Apr. 4. 1535.
LETTER VII. To Don Henrique Henriquez; in Answer to several pleasant Questions.
Much Respected SIR, and my good Old Friend,
VAldivia your Solicitor gave me lately a Letter, which I presently ghest to be
yours by its few Lines, and many Blots: And cannot but think, had God made you
a Scrivener, as he did a Gentleman, you would have been much more expert at
dying Cordavant Felts, than Writing either Bills or Bonds. Always endeavor,
Sir, whenever you write, to keep your Lines straight, Letters even, Paper
clean, Folding exact, and Seals clear; for it is a received Maxim at Court,
that by what one Writes is shown one's Prudence, and in what Manner our
Breeding. In yours were contained many Questions in few Words, and therefore my
Answers cannot be expected of larger extent. You first Ask me, what made me
come to Court? To which I Answer, theCause was rather through Necessity than
Inclin^tion: for in the Suit I then had with the Church of Toledo, it was
absolutely necessary I should come to defend my self, and promote my right. You
next enquire what it is I do here? Why, setting aside grapling with my Enemies,
and enlarging my Business every day, I do nothing but undo my self. Then you
have a mind to know what is my chiefest Employment? Why, truly according to a
Courtier's Office of Wishing ill, Sowing Strife, Blaspheming, Epicurizing,
Lying, Undermining, and Defaming, I may rather be said to be ruined than
Employed. Next, you would be informed who I most converse with; To which I
answer, that from our Childhood our chiefest business here is not to seek whom
we may converse with, but rather whom we ought to avoid. We have scarce time
sufficient to defend our selves from our Enemies, and yet you would have us
employ the greatest part in looking after new Friends. In Princes Courts there
may indeed be Conversation, but seldom any Association; for there Enmity is
generally a Native, when Friendship is an utter Stranger. The Court is of that
pernicious Quality, that they are always worst thought on who are visited
oftenest, and worst dealt by who are spoken best of. Those who have a mind to
live at Court, if they will be curious and no Fools, may find many things to
stand in awe of, but more to desend themselves from. You Enquire, Sir, how
stand the Differences between the Admiral and Count de Miranda? in which I can
satisfy you no farther, than that they both still find wherewithal to keep
one another in play. You also ask, what News from the Empe^our? Whether will he
speedily return or not? As to both which, all we know at present is, that the
Turk is retreated, Florence Agree^, the Duke of Milan reduced, the Venetians
have furled up their Topsails, the Pope and Emperor have a right Understanding
between 'em, the States of Naples are divided, the Cardinal of Colonna is dead,
the Marquess of Villafranca made Viceroy, the Prince of Orange Murdered, and
the Chancellor and Confessor have each a Cap given 'em. Other secret News they
write from thence, as it may be pleasant for us to hear, it must needs be much
more grievous to them that suffer; and which is, that many of those Gallants
that waited on the Emperor into Italy are there fallen deeply in Love, and have
fooled away most of their Money; but in this case I can assure you, their
Ladies are resolved to be even with 'em, for if they leave any great Bellies
behind, they must expect to find the like here when they come home. You desire
moreover, Sir, to know how our Provisions hold out this Lent? To which I
answer, that thanks be to God we are neither like to want Store of Fish, nor
Sins to confess. You likewise Enquire, whether things with us be dear or cheap?
As to which I must inform you what my Steward the other day told me, that from
October to April I had spent above 140 Ducats in Wood and Coal, and the reason
was, because this City of Medina is rich in Holidays, but poor Woods, in a
manner that here our Fires almost stand us in as much as our Feasts. There are
other things to be had at a much easier rate, such as dreadful Lies, ridiculous
News, Debauched Women, Feigned Friendship, continual Envy, Ungenerous Malice,
Vain Words, and false Hopes, all which we have in so great Plenty, that we
might even set up a Fair on their single account. You likewise ask, whether
Matters are easily dispatched at Court, you having occasion to solicit
something? I answer, that in regard all things here are either Weighty, Irksom,
Prolix, Costly, Intricate, Unfortunate, Hunted after, Wished for, Lamented, or
Disordered; Of Ten you shall get well dispatched, you shall find above Ninety
nine succeed otherwise. Then you would know if our Fair be extraordinary? Why,
in good Faith, as I am a Courtier, and deeply engaged in Law, I have neither
Merchandise to sell, nor any Money to buy; and therefore where I cannot
commend, I find no occasion to blame: But however I sometimes walk a turn or
two among the Shops, and observe so many rich things, that as I have a kind of
pleasure in the bare sight, so I must needs own I have no ordinary uneasiness
in not being able to purchase 'em. The Empress was pleased the other day to
honor it with her presence, but as a most wise Princess, would carry not so
much as one of her Ladies along with her, well knowing their Sparks to be so
very poor, and Inclinations so fervent, that where it might be proper to a^k a
Fairing, they would infallibly be obliged to pay for it themselves. You next
enquire, whether the Court be healthy or not? Why truly, as to Corporal
Infirmities, we are pretty well in health, except the Licentiate Alarzon only
who talking the other day earnestly in Council, dropped down dead of a sudden,
whose death, tho it frighted all, yet reformed none. But as to Spiritual
Maladies we have good store, such as Anger, Envy, Lust, Malice, Pride,
Covetousness, Gluttony, Villainy, Perjury, and what not; all which are not only
damage to the Body, but also pernicious to the precious Soul. I have often had
recourse to your Letter, to consider whether I had answered it fully or not,
and find there is nothing left but to tell you it seemed to me rather a parcel
of Interrogatories to Examine Witnesses, than an Epistle sent to a Friend. I
have nothing more to add, but that I am very weary, and quite tired out; and
that not with Answering, but Construing your confounded Letter. God keep you,
and give me Grace to serve Him.

Medina del Camp^, June 5. 1532.
LETTER VIII. To the Duke of Alva; Of Sickness and its Benefits.
Most Illustrious and highly esteemed Sir,
AT the time Palomeque your Servant came to visit me, and brought your Grace's
Letter, I was seized with so violent a Fever, that I had neither power to
Read, nor so much as Inclination to speak a word; But afterward, my fit a
little abating, I had more leisure to Peruse, and was exceedingly Obliged by
your Grace's kind Wishes for my Health, and Concern for my Misfortune. Believe
me, Sir, whilst my Fever was on me I had much greater desire to Drink than
Read; for I Will assure you, I would then have given all my Library for but a
glass of Cold Water. By yours I understand your Grace has also been ill, and
that you are therewithal very well satisfied, both because happily recovered,
as also for the future resolved to keep even with your Sins, and abstain from
all manner of Excess. For my part, my Lord, I am extremely sorry for your
Sickness, as I am exceedingly pleased with your Pious Resolutions; although it be
true, I should be much more contented to see you fulfill, than hear you Promise;
for where Sick People always abound with Vows and Wishes, Paradise admits only
of good Works. But however, in my opinion, there is nothing shows a Wise Man
more than to behave himself well in Adversity, and to benefit by his Infirmity.
As there is no greater Madness than to Misemploy one's health, so there is no
Wisdom exceeds his that is the better for his Illness; for as the Apostle said,
Cum infirmor tunc fortior sum. The Weaker I am the Wiser I grow. The Prudent
Sick Person being neither swelled by Pride, nor Combated by Luxury, assaulted
by Avarice, nor Molested by Envy, raised by Anger, nor Abased by Sloth; nor, in
a Word, is he ever troubled with points of Honor or any such Fooleries. Would
to God, My Lord Duke, we could become when well, what we promise to be while
Sick. All the concern of a bad Christian when ill, is, to get soon well; not
that he may repent, but rather Sin on and take a farther glut of the World:
when the chief desire of a good Man, is, to recover his health, only that he
may have more time to amend his Life. In time of Sickness, we are neither
sensible of Kindness or ill will, either of Friends or Enemies; mind neither
Riches nor Poverty, Honor, nor Dishonor, Delights nor Disgusts, Commanding
nor Obeying, heaping up Wealth nor losing it: Nay, in fine, would be willing to
part with whatever we had been getting all our Lives time, to be but rid of a
single pain in the Head. When ill we cannot have the least relish of Pleasure,
and when well the greatest fatigue is tolerable. What can he be said to want
that has his health, or he to enjoy, that stands in need of it? What does it
signify to have a Down Bed, if we cannot take a wink of Sleep on it? Or the
best Wine if our Physicians forbids us the taste of it? What does it avail to
have many Dishes set on our Table, if the bare sight offends us; or our Chests
full of Gold, if the greatest part must be spent upon Doctors and Apothecaries?
Health is so great a Treasure, that we must not only watch diligently over it,
but pray continually for it; which, nevertheless is commonly neglected, since
we find that Blessing is seldom sufficiently known, till lost. Plutarch,
Nigidius, Aristonius, Dioscorus, Plotinus, Nicephalus, and others, have writ
many Tracts and Discourses how to restore and preserve health: Yet I am of
opinion, where they have once happened to be in the right, they have a hundred
times rel'yd barely upon Fancies and Conjectures, which generally prove
ineffectual. Believe me, my Lord Duke, in what I am going to affirm by
Experience; that the best and surest means to Establish Health, and abate most
Maladies, is, to avoid Discontent, and eat but verysparingly. How exceedingly
advantageous must it needs be, both for our Souls and Bodies to live without
Epicurizing or Melancholizing; for excess in Eating corrupts the Humors, and
too much trouble Enervates the Mind. If Men would neither exceed in Eating or
Grieving, Diseases would not find wherewithal to Prey upon us, nor vexations to
torment us; for if we observe, the common cause of all our Misery proceeds,
either from our Appetites or our Fancy. Experience teaches us every day, that
Madmen, Fools, and Blockheads, are the only healthy and happy People; for they
neither trouble themselves with Honor, nor are sensible of any affront: When
on the contrary, the Wise and Discreet are not only concerned for what Men say,
but also, for what they imagine they think. There are some so very conceitedly
acute, that they will not content themselves, to put their own constructions
upon Words, but also think it for their Honor to guess at other Men's
thoughts; which only occassions them to be a plague to themselves, and to
deserve the Ill Will of every body else. I dare affirm no Poison can prove so
pernicious to Humane Life, as prosound Melancholy, for then the Afflicted Heart
wearies it self out with Sighing, and bursts it self with Sobbing. And
moreover, I will be positive, that amongst the wisest of this World, cares
occasion more Distempers than Gluttony, for we may every day observe the Brisk
and Sprightly to be fat and well Complexion'd; When the Melancholy and Heavy
are for the most part Thin, Lean, and Consumptive. I must confess to your
Grace, upon this occasion, that the late Fever I had, proceeded rather from
Thoughts than Victuals; for if I had not perplexed my self about a trifling
assair, I might now have been able to eat a Belly full without any danger You
write me, Sir, you have got a great Rheum by Sleeping on the ground in this hot
Month of August, and I am much of your opinion; for where Sweating sometimes
relieves, it oftener occasions Coughing that does us a great deal of injury.
Also I understand by your Letter, you would have me send you some News; But I
must inform you, that in this Court there is little to be trusted to Paper, and
much to be spoken in the Ear; for matters belonging to Princes and great Men,
may indeed be heard, but withal, must never be divulged. Here and elsewhere, I
have often observed, Men profit themselves by silence, when others have been
ruined by their Babbling: Wherefore I must needs beg your Grace's Excuse for the
present, and when we next meet, my Tongue shall endeavor to make good the
defaults of my Pen. No more, but God keep your Grace always under his Sacred
Protection.

Burgos, October. 15. 1524.
LETTER IX. To Don John Parelloso: That we may be serviceable to Women in their
Husbands Absence, but are not to Visit 'em.
SIR,
ALexander the Great being in Egypt, a poor Man, named Biancius, came to Ask
his Leave and Charity to Marry his Daughter, both which the good Prince not
only readily granted, but also gave him moreover the Command of a very rich and
populous City; whereupon the frighted Egyptian thus spoke to the generous
Emperor: Consider mighty Prince what you give, and to whom you are so
bountiful, for otherwise, perhaps, it may one day happen you will think your self
as much deceived in the Person, as I am supriz'd with the Gift. To which the
Noble Monarch instantly replied, I am not overseen in what I proffer, nor to
whom I give; neither am I ignorant of what you Ask: Take therefore the City,
and be silent, for where you request only like Biancius, I grant as Alexander.
The most Serene Queen Cleopatra, tho she were to be blamed for the looseness of
her Life, yet the generosity of her Gifts were much more commendable; for they
seldom barely sufficed to relieve a Necessity, but also frequently extended to
support a Noble Title. I mention these two Examples, Sir, because in return for
my News of the Emperor's coming into Spain, I asked a Pot of Portugal
Marmalade, and you sent me a strong Mule; in a manner that herein I might be
said to represent Biancius the Egyptian, as you Alexander the Great. All that
hereafter hear or read of this will praise my Modesty, where they will surely
extol your Bounty, for if I have showed my self little Covetous by my Demands,
you have been abundantly more Generous in your Gift. I was some time since to
see your Present, and have often proved and approved of him, and find him of so
good size, and so very gentle, that in my Opinion he deserves to be bestrid not
only by a Mitre, but even by a Cardinal's Cap. My Servant nevertheless brings
you him again, and this Letter testifies my hearty Thanks for the use of him;
for tho Friends may be allowed to be serviceable to one another, yet they are
by no means to spur a free Horse to death; so that as you have been
sufficiently generous in lending your Mule so long, I think my self no less
obliged to return him as soon as I have done. True Friends are to be sparing of
Words, but prodigal of good Works; and therefore I promise on the Word of a
Christian, when the Emperor pays me for my Services, I Will recompense you for
your Civilities. By yours you desire to know, how Messer Angelo's Wife does,
and whether I have heard from her Husband since he went for Italy; and this
because she is your Aunt, and he was formerly my Neighbor. But hereupon I must
tell you, I have neither seen, nor intend to see her, unless she sends for me:
For tho we are obliged to be serviceable to Women in their Husband's absence,
yet we are by no means to Visit 'em. Two things are neither to be lent nor
trusted, and they are the Sword you wear, and a Wife you have Married; for in
Spain a Husband looks but very awkward without either a Sword by his Side, or a
Wife in his Bosom. The Chaste Lucretia's Husband Colatinus being in the Camp
against the Volscians, Dissolute Tarquin would needs Visit her, from whence
ensued his Incensing Rome, the ruin of their Army, the Heroine's Suicide, and
his own Destruction. I say this, Sir, because where we may be allowed to assist
our Friends Wives with Money during their Husband's absence, and solicit any
Affair for 'em when desired, we are by no means to assume a liberty of Treating
and making 'em Visits; and this because the Malice of Men is diligent, as the
Honor of Women nice: therefore we must take more than ordinary care, we
neither give their Neighbors cause of suspicion, nor Husbands of Jealousy. As
to what you farther desire, I will speak to the Lord Chancellor with all my
Heart, and if he does not happen to comply with your expectations, you shall
soon have an account. A Man that has to do with the Court must neither want
Patience, nor abound with Assurance, for there an Ounce of Fortune is always
worth more than a Hundred weight of Desert. We see every day here Matters of
greatest Right overruled, when such as have the least pretense shall be almost
sure to succeed, in a manner, that at Court we are not to Hope upon any Merit,
nor Despair upon any Defect. I would not have you think, I say, this to be
excused from serving you, but rather that you may not be disturbed when
disappointed, nor concerned if your Business goes amiss; for where Matters of
Honor require the greatest Grief, our Estate may be prejudiced with more
indifference. No more, but God preserve you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Burgos, Ian. 30* 1523.
LETTER X. To Don Hernando de Toledo; Concerning what the Egyptians were wont
to do for their Dead Friends.
Magnificent and Discreet SIR,
IF my Answer to yours be short, impute the fault wholly to my Cursed Gout,
which as it suffers me neither to Walk nor Sleep, has also absolutely deprived
me of the Use of my Fingers; nay more, has left me nothing sound in my Body,
except my Heart, wherewith I Sigh, and my Tongue, with which I Complain. Our
common Compliment to one another when we meet, is, How do you do? How do you
find your self? How have you done a great while? and the like; all which are
highly commendable, and never to be forgot; for he that has a Real to spend,
and Health to enjoy, has neither cause to be afflicted, nor reason to be
offended. Your noble Brother my Lord Duke of Alva, came the other day to visit
me, and afterward sent me a precious Ointment, for which I pray God both to
preserve his Person and Enlarge his Fortune, since his Unction gave me a great
deal of Ease, and his Presence afforded me no less Comfort. Sir, I give you
abundance of Thanks for the Letter you sent, and the Money you ordered me:
although it be true that where you designed it to buy Books, the greater part must
be expended on Doctors and Apothecaries. Moreover, your Bounty has been so very
liberal upon this Occasion, that you have not only enabled me to pay my Debts,
and cure my Ailments, but also furnished me wherewithal to regale my self when
well; wherefore I cannot but Promise, that in me your Family shall never want a
faithful Friend, nor your Virtues a loud Herald. You say, Sir, that having
heard me Preach the other day before the Emperor in his Chapel; You now desire
I would repeat with my Pen what I then uttered with my Tongue, which I will
endeavor to comply with, tho it be both contrary to my custom, and repugnant
to my inclination. The Text was in the 19th of Levit^c^s, the 27th and 28th
Verses; where God Commands the Israelites neither to round the corners of their
Heads, nor Mar the Points of their Beards: To make any Cuttings in their Flesh,
nor Print any Marks upon it on account of the Dead. For the clearing of which
Command, it is to be understood, the Children of Israel lived so long in Egypt,
that they contracted many ill Habits from those People, who were all naturally
Negromancers, Magicians, Wizards, and A^t^ologers. Of all Nations none we read
of made so much ado about their Dead as the Egyptians, who whenever a Friend
died, always showed him far more respect than while he lived; ins^much that if
a Father lost a Son, a Son a Father, or one Friend was deprived of another,
they used to shave off half their Hair as a Hieroglyphick, to demonstrate they
had parted with half of themselves. And therefore 'twas God commanded the
Israelites neither to shave their Heads, nor mar their Beards, and this, that
they might not become like the Egyptians. Also the Egyptian Women, when their
Husbands, Children, or Relations died, were wont to tear their Flesh, and flaw
their Faces with their Nails; and therefore 'twas God forbid his People
disfiguring themselves, that they might not be like to them. Likewise the
lesser Priests at the Funerals of the greater, were accustomed to mark their
Flesh with red hot Irons, either on their Hands, Arms, or Breasts; to the end
that whenever they beheld those Scars, they might immediately be disposed to
lament their Loss. In like m^nner they had a Custom, that whenever a King or
Prince died, all his Officers were instantly obliged to lash themselves with
Kniv^s in some visib^e part of their Body; insomuch that he who was observed to
have most Wounds, was always looked upon to b^ the greatest Mourner. And hence
it is, that God forbad the Israelites both Marking and Cutting their Flesh; all
which Ceremonies being i^ themselves superstitious, and no doubt invented by
the Devil, for that they were not only a damage to the Living, but also no
advantage to the Dead. Gods Prohibiting these and many things more in the old
Law, such as, Not to Plow with an Ox and an Ass; Not to Sow Wheat or Barley in
the same Ground; Not to Couple an Ass and a Mare; Not to Wear Linen and
Woollen; and the like; let no Man think were frivolous and trifling, but on the
contrary highly Mysterious; for these Ceremonies being customary among the
Egyptians, God would by no means have his People to make use of 'em.
Nevertheless we must not hereby understand, that he forbad 'em lamenting their
Dead after another manner; since shaving their Heads, flawing their Faces,
marking their Limbs, and wounding their Bodies, was wholly in their Power to
do, or let alone; when a Decent Sorrow for the loss of a Friend was not
possible to be avoided. As a Man is to be known by his Heart, so God made him
with a Heart, that is, gave him liberty to be sad, and forbad him not to
Complain; the Heart of Man being in it self tender, and not able to part with
any thing it loves without Concern. Moreover Experience teaches us every day,
even in Brutes, that take away one, and the other will be sure to mourn; which
is demonstrable in that the Lion roars, Wolf howls, Cow lows, Sheep bleats, Hog
grunts, Dog Barks, and Cat Mews, either for the absence or death of their
Companions or Young: We being therefore of a far superior condition, why may
not we be allowed to shed Tears, and lament over the Graves of our Friends?
Mimus the Philosopher was wont to say, A Man died as often as he saw his Friend
buried; which was true, in that being but one while they lived, it is just they
should continue the same when one died. This, Sir, is what I preached to his
Majesty in his Chapel, which, if inferior to what I then uttered, I hope you will
excuse on account of my Gout; for if I have not now the use of my Hands to Eat,
how can it be expected I should take any great pleasure to Write. No more, but
God Bless you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Burgos, March 6. 1523.
LETTER XI. To Dr. Coronel, his familiar Friend; in Answer to some Demands.
Good DOCTOR,
YOur Servant brought me Orders lately to take care of your Business with the
Chancellor, which I immediately set about, and have so far succeeded in, that
he professes himself ready to do any thing for your Good, as I to continue
always the same Zeal for your Service. The rest of your Letter I will Answer
briefly and succinctly as possible. According to desire I was to wait on
Captain Cerrato, to make Interest for your Nephew to be his Servant, but found
him so cold both in once and twice going, that I had no farther mind to
occasion his Affronts, For Faciem frigois ejus quis sustinebit? Who is able to
endure the Indifference of his Looks? Generous Minds and Bashful Countenances
resent a Denial much more, where the Person deserves not to be asked, than when
they themselves pretend not to merit his Consent; since he may boast of the
Honor, where they must blush with the Shame. Nothing is dearer bought than
what a Man must beg for, since he gives more that wrecks his Modesty but for a
minuit, than that purchases any thing with his whole Estate. As great, said the
Divine Plato, as is the Satisfaction in Giving, so extraordinary is the Torture
we endure in Asking; for where we give, we purchase another's Liberty; and when
receive, lose our own. The Books you left I have got bound, but the Money you
sent for that purpose I herewith return you; and my reason is, because a
Friend's Charge or Trouble must never be otherwise gratified than by his
Correspondent's Acceptance. Friendship founded upon Interest, commonly ends
with want; When among true Friends there is neither bounds to be put to their
Service, nor limits to their Expense: Your sending the Three and twenty Reals
gives me occasion to think, that either your Fraternal Affection fails, or,
that you believe my Liberality lessens. You write me word, you desire to know
how the Affair goes between me and the Abbot of Compludo; to which I answer,
that it is no common Vexation to have to do with such as can never hold their
peace, nor ever be at quiet. Men who are loose in their Tongues, and turbulent
in their Lives, for the most part ruin the Country where they reside, and
torment themselves into the Bargain. Nothing equals a Man's torturing himself;
for where we cannot live easy in this World, we may at worst live satisfied. I
say this, Sir, because our Lord Abbot in this Affair behaves himself something
like a wild Colt, that stands still to be loaded, and kicks when his Burden is
off. There are a sort of Men that are not only ignorant how to avoid troubles,
but also run in the very Mouths of 'em. There are many likewise require more
care to keep at rest, than would be necessary to make others work. As to what
you say, Sir, of Francis Mercado, I have no more to answer, than that where he
lost his Person, Family and Estate, we in him are deprived both of a sweet
Conversation and obliging Behavior. Also, that I believe we are more concerned
for his Worth, than he for his Loss: And were it now in my power to Relieve
him, as it was formerly my Charge to Advise him, I would soon make him as
sensible of my Friendship as I am, without him, of my solitude. As to what you
farther require, I intend next opportunity to convince you, that it is neither
in your Power to Write, nor Ask any thing in vain. No more, but God keep you,
and preserve me.

Medina, May 8. 1523.
LETTER XII. To Don Pedro Giron; in which the Author gives some hints of the
Ancients manner of Writing; but Chiefly consisting of Iocular Reflections on a
bad Scribe.
SIR,
VIlloria, your Servant and Solicitor, gave me a Letter of yours, here in
Burgos, Writ at Ossuna the 14th of August, which tho it was dispatched in that
Month, came not hither till the 15th of November; so that I find your Letters
are so Discreet and Provident, as to see the Harvest in, and Vintage over,
before they set out. But were it hung Beef, as it was a Letter, it had had time
sufficient to be well seasoned, and leisure enough to hang in the Smoke.
Hereafter, do not suffer the Letters you are to send, and the Daughters you are
to Marry to grow stale; for in my Country we keep nothing so, but the Bacon we
are to Eat, and the Wine we are to Drink. Much shorter way is it between Ossuna
and Burgos, than Rome and Constantinople; and yet the Emperor Augustus ordered
all his Lieutenants in the East, that if they did not, within Twenty Days from
the Date, receive his Letters, they should afterward take no notice of them;
giving for reason, that during that interval something else might intervene,
which might wholly require things to be otherwise disposed. Tiberius also,
unless his Dispatches from Asia came in Twenty; from Euro^e in Fifteen; from
Africa in Ten; from the Coast of Illrium in Five; and from all parts of Italy
in three days, would neither Read, nor give any Credit to 'em. From
henceforward therefore, you must agree with your Letters beforehand, that they
make more have, or they will never be received at the Emperor's Court; for to
deal Ingeniously with you, had they been Timber of the Woods of Soria, as they
were Epistles from Ossuna, I will answer for it, they had been so well seasoned
before they came hither, they had been fit for nothing but Doors and
Window-shutters. Though I receive many Letters together, I presently know yours
from all the rest, and that, because they are always rumpled like a Rag, r^sty
as Bacon, Moth eaten like Cloth, and Sweaty as an old Wastcoat; and what is yet
more, there needs no strength nor force to tear them in opening, because the
Seals are already loose, and Wax generally broken. Philostratus in the life of
Apollonius Thianeus, says, it was a custom among the Ypimeans to date their
Letters on the outside, by the Superscription, to the end, that if they were
fresh, they should be Read; but if stale, be Torn. Nay, were you an Ypimean, as
you are a Christian, you might be assured, of a Hundred Letters you Write,
Ninety Eight would be torn to pieces; nay, I question also whether the other
two would be Read. But being granted your Letter was stale, can we say the Hand
was either good or legible? No, so far from that, I swear per Sacra numina, it
rather looked like Mosaic work than any Gentleman's Writing; so that if the
Tutor who had the care of your Youth, had not better instructed you how to
Live, than your Master to Write, your Life had been as offensive to God, as
your Writing was to me; For I must tell you plainly, if you do not know it
already; much rather had I uncipher Characters than Read your Letters. Writing
was first invented and improved by degrees; for, as Strabo De situ Orbis, has
it, Men first writ upon Ashes, then on Barks of Trees, then upon Stones,
Laurel-leaves, Sheets of Lead, Vellom, and last of all upon Paper. It is also
to be observed, that in Stone they writ with Steel, on Leaves with Pensils, on
Ashes with their Fingers, on Barks with pointed Knives, on Vellom with Reeds,
and on Paper with Pens. The first Ink used by the Ancients was taken out a Fish
called Xibia; afterward they made it of Mulberries, then of Soot, then of
Vermillion, then of Verdegris; and lastl^, of Gum, Galls, Copperass and Wine.
Sir, I have mentioned these Antiquities, the better to consider whether your
Epistle was writ with Knife, Steel-Bodkin, Reed, or Finger; for being so
unintellegible I Am certain could neither be with a Pen nor Pensil. Moreover,
Sir, the perfections of your Letter were, that the Paper was course, Ink white,
Lines awry, Letters confused, and Words blotted; so that either you writ it by
Moon light, or else some Child that goes to School did for you. Well, but though
the Letter was Stale, Open, Sweatty, Torn, and Blotted; Yet it would have been
the more tolerable, had it been short, but on the contrary, it was so far from
that, there were above two Sheets and half close Writ; so that when I unfolded
and looked upon it, I took it rather for a Bill in Chancery preferred against
me, than a Letter writ to me. I cannot conceive to what purpose your Letters
are Closed and Sealed; for to deal freely, I look upon 'em much safer open,
than your Money locked up. I gave your Epistle to Peter Colonel, thinking it
might be Hebrew; to Signior Prexamo, to know whether it was Chaldea; to Hamet
Abducarin, to be informed if it was Arabic; to a Sicilian, to see whether he
could make Greek of it; to Signior Alaya, to tell me whether it contained any
Figures of Astrology; and, in fine, I showed it to Germans, Flemings, English,
Scotch, and French; who all agreed it was either a jest put upon me, or else it
had been Enchanted. Most People affirming, it was certainly possessed; I resolved
presently to send it to the great Negromancer Johannes Barbota, desiring him
either to Read, or Exorcise it: but he answered, he had conjured and put it
into a Circle, yet all he could find by his Art was, there were no Spirits in
the Letter; but rather, that he who Writ it was bewitched. By the Love I bear
you, and Obligations I owe you, I beg for the future you would either mend your
Hand, or keep Intelligence with this Learned Negromancer; otherwise your
Letters will pass as undefiled out of my Hands as Potiphar's Wife did from
Joseph, Sarah from Abimelech, the Shunamite from David, the Carthaginian Lady
from Scipio, Phocius his Wife from Dionysius, Darius his Daughter from
Alexander, and Queen Cleopatra from Augustus: In fine, Sir, I must tell you,
that either I know not how to read, or you how to write. Had the Letter King
David sent his General Ioab, concerning the Death of Uriah and Adultery of his
Wife, been writ in this Hand, the King had saved the Sin, and Innocent Uriah
his Life. Had the Articles between Escaurus and his Accomplices, in the
Conspiracy of Cataline, been so ill writ as your Letter, neither had they been
put to Death, nor so infamous a War begun in Rome. Would to God you had been
Secretary to Manicheus, Arrius, Nestorius, Sipontinus, Marius, Ebius, nay, to
Luther, and all the other Heretics that have been in the World; for then
though they had forced you to write their accursed Heresies, neither we, nor
any body else could have understood 'em. All ancient Authors severely reprove
Pliny in his Natural History, Clebius in his Astrology, Pitus in his
Philosophy, Cleander in his Arithmetic, Stilpon in his Morals, and Codrus in
his Politics; for that they all writ many things easy to read, but very
difficult to apprehend. But, Sir, you may very well List among these Excellent
Men, and enter a Member of their Society; for as their Writings are not to be
understood, it were impossible yours should ever be read. I often reflect and
consider how most things in use amongst us, in process of time, have been
renewed or amended, except the Alphabet only, which since its first institution
was never yet either increased or corrected. The Alphabet contains Four and
twenty Letters, eighteen whereof were invented by Nestor, and the other six by
the General Diomedes, at the Siege of Troy; and it is worth observing, that
neither the Eloquence of the Greeks, nor Curiosity of the Romans; the Gravity
of the Egyptians, nor Wisdom of the Philosophers, could ever find out any
Letter to add, or so much as alter; but, that though all Nations differ in
other things, yet their Alphabet continues still the same. As Columbus,
Ferdinando Cortez, Pedrarias, and Pizarro, have in India discovered a new World
to inhabit, so you, perhaps, may have found out a new Alphabet to write by; yet
I fear none will go to your School to read, if your Doctrine be no better writ
than your Letters. I am satisfied your Cloth will never fell well by that
Pattern. I Will say no more as to your Letter, only desire, that the next time
you write you will take this for a Copy, and not let yours grow moldy; and
moreover, that you will be pleased to mend your Hand, for I have learned long
since to read, but never yet to divine. It has come into my thoughts, that
perhaps you purposely sent this Letter out of waggery, to provoke me to answer
after the same manner; if that were your design, you might well be assured,
that such as you sowed, you should not fail to reap. There is little worth
Writing from this Court, but rather much to rail at. The greatest News at
present is, that the Emperor has conferred Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
and Viscounts, on many of his Subjects, of great Desert, as well for their
Personal Merits, as antiquity of their Families. But if you would know what
Revenues they enjoy, or Lands possess, I dare not meddle in it; for certainly
some of their Estates are so very small, that did they belong to the Friars of
St. Hierome, they would undoubtedly Wall 'em in. Roderigo Giron, your Kinsman,
and my very good Friend, desired me in his own Name, and commanded me in yours,
to speak to Signior Antonio de Fonseca, about a stop that was put to some
Payments: I did it as became your Authority and my Fidelity; what is since
become of that business, I know not: but this I can assure you, that if he is
as intent upon getting your Order, as he has been in playing away his own
Money, you will be as well dispatched by the Tellers, as he was the other night
by the Gamesters; for, as one of them told me, Roderigo Giron lost the very Cap
off his Head, and Spurs from his Heels. My Blessing on the Man that takes so
much after his Parents, and follows the footsteps of his Family; for as I well
remember I knew his Father, when Alcayde of Montauches, often keep his Bed; not
that he was Sick, but because at Madrid he had Gam'd and lost all he had. God
preserve you, and give me Grace to serve him.

Burgos, Sept. 15, 1523.
LETTER XIII. To Don Alonso Manriquez, Archbishop of Sevill, and Don Antonio
Manriquez, Duke of Najara; upon their choosing him to Decide a Controversy
between them: Wherein he wittily exposes their Ignorance, declares which was
Numantia, and which Saguntum; and moreover relates both the Origin, and
Destruction of the Former.
Very Illustrious Lords,
DON John Manriquez delivered me two, different Letters from your Lordships,
whereby you give me to understand you have chosen me Judge in a Controversy
between you; and which you have not only argued your selves, but also stiffly
maintained on both sides. My Lords, I admit your choice, and will be Arbitrator
in your Dispute, upon condition neither appeal from my Judgment, but shall pay
Costs and a Fine. In the first place I must blame, and almost chide your
Illustrious Lordships for being so positive and obstinate in your way of
arguing; for where Persons of your Rank may be allowed to Discourse, they are
by no means to Wrangle. Genti^ity and Wrangling are incompatible in a generous
Person, when Folly and Positiveness are nearly allied. To a Philosopher it
belongs to prove, and even to be obstinate in his Assertions; but a Gentleman
must always defend without being positive A Man of Courage, Resolution, and
Valor, will never be passionate till he draws his Sword; for he well knows,
that a great Talker seldom proves a brave Performer. But to come to our
purpose; you write, that all your Dispute was about deciding, whether of these
two Cities, Siguenza or Monviedro, was the great Numantia. You also inform me,
you have not only argued, but laid a good Wager about it; whereupon, My Lords,
I must tell you, with due Reverence to so great Personages, that if one
understands no better what belongs to Praying, and the other to Fighting, than
you are both acquainted with ancient Histories, it is pity as one is Archbishop
of Sevill, the other should be Duke of Najara. As much difference as was
between Elia and Tire, Bizantium and Memphis, Rome and Carthage, Agrippina and
Cadiz, is there between Numantia and Saguntum; for the ancient Numantia was
built in Castile, when the noble Saguntum was seated near Valencia. Numantia
and Saguntum were two most ancient Cities in Spain, very famous and renowned;
of different Factions, distinct Kingdoms, in Places far distant, disagreeing in
Names, and far more different in Inclinations. Saguntum was built by the
Greeks, Numantia by the Romans; Saguntum was always in Amity and Confederacy
with Rome, and moreover a Mortal Enemy to the Carthaginians; when Numantia was
neither Friend nor Confederate with either, it never submitting to any, but
always continued a Sovereignty of it self. Saguntum was seated four Leagues
from Valencia, where Monviedro now stands; and whoever says the Town of
Siguenza in Castile was formerly Saguntum, may, perhaps, have Dreamed, but
never Read it. Being Inquisitor at Valencia, I went often to Monviedro, as well
to visit the Christians there, as Baptize the Moors; and considering the
uncouthness of its situation, antiquity of the Walls, distance from the Sea,
the grandeur of its Buildings, and stangeness of the Tombs, any Man might
easily perceive Monviedro was the same with Saguntum, and the Noble Saguntum
what is now Monviedro. Among the ruinated Buildings in the Fields of that City,
are found many Stones with Inscriptions and Epitaphs of the Hannonians and
Asdrubalians, who all died at the Siege thereof, and which were two famous and
renowned Families in Carthage. Near Monviedro also was a Town in those days
called Turdetani, now Torrestorres, whose Inhabitants being Mortal Enemies to
the Saguntians, Hannibal joined with 'em, and by their assistance besieged,
reduced, and burnt Saguntum to Ashes; which was neither then offered to be
relieved by the Romans, nor ever after rebuilt. Thus it is plain, My Lords,
your Dispute was about which was Saguntum, and not which Numantia; for Soria
and Zamora contest for Numantia, whilst Monviedro and Siguenza lay claim to
Saguntum. To conclude then, and draw an inference from what has been said,
after considering the Merits of your Cause, and hearing what each has alleged
for himself; I pronounce and declare, for my definitive Sentence, that as the
Archbishop of Sevill was not in the right, so the Duke of Najara was in the
wrong: and therefore adjudge each of them to forfeit a good strong Mule for the
use of him who shall make appear which was the great Numantia, who the Founder,
in what place, and after what manner built, how long it stood, and how came to
be destroyed; And all this because it is an Antiquity pleasing to read, worthy
to be known, grateful to relate, tho exceeding grievous to hear.

Of the Great City, Numantia, in Spain.
The Great Numantia was founded by Numa Pompilius, second King of the Romans,
in the Eight and fiftieth year after the building of Rome, and Eighteenth of
his Reign; so that from Numa, the Founder, it undoubtedly took its Nomination.
It was an usual thing in those times for Founders to give their own Names to
the Cities they built; so Jerusalem took hers from Salem, Antiochia from
Antiochus, Constantinople from Constantine, Alexandria from Alexander, Rome
from Romulus, and Numantia from Numa. Rome had but Seven Kings, whereof the
first was Romulus, and last Tarquin; but the best of all the Seven was this
Numa Pompilius, he being the first that introduced Religion into Rome, enclosed
the Vestals, built Temples, and gave Laws to his Subjects. The Seat of this
City was near the Banks of the River Duero, and not far from the Springs
thereof, on an Eminence, not mountainous, but little raised: It had no Towers
nor Walls, but only a very deep and broad Ditch to surround it: The Inhabitants
whereof being about 5 and 6000, two parts of which were employed in War, and
the third Tilled the Ground: To be always in action was accounted with them
very commendable, and idleness and laziness as much condemned; and, what is yet
more Praiseworthy, they were not covetous of Riches, but extremely ambitious
of Honor. The Numantians naturally were rather Phlegmatic than Choleric,
Patient, Subtle, Crafty, and given to Dissimulation; so that what at one time
they connived at, the same they revenged at another. In this City there was but
one Tradesman, and he was the Farrier; for Goldsmiths, Drapers, Brokers,
Fruiterers, Innkeepers, Fishmongers, Bakers, Butchers, and the like, were not
permitted to live among them, saying, every one ought to furnish himself with
those Necessaries, and not be beholding to another. They were so resolute and
desperate in Battle, they never turned their Backs, or ever gave ground, being
always resolved rather to dye than fly: They were not permitted to go to War
without leave of their Government, and such as went must serve all together on
one side; for where one Numantian happened to kill another, he was infallibly
put to death when he came home. The Romans accounted four sorts of People in
Spain hard to Subdue, viz. The Meridones of Merida, the Gaditani of Cadiz, the
Saguntini of Monviedro, and Numantians, being those of Soria. The difference
between which was, that the Meridones were hardy, Gaditani resolute, Saguntini
fortunate, but the Numantians both hardy, resolute, and fortunate all together.
None of the Roman Generals who waged War in Spain for a Hundred and eighty
years, could ever subdue the Numantians, or so much as cared to fall out with
them. Of all the Cities in the Worlds, this only never acknowledged Superior,
nor admitted Lord. Numantia stood somewhat high, and was but half fortified,
had no Towers, was not very populous, and had no riches, yet none durst make
her their Enemy; but all rather chose her for their Friend: and the reason was,
because the Fortune of the Numantians was still superior to the Power or Policy
of the Romans. During the Wars between Rome and Carthage, and the Factions of
Rome among themselves, there was no King or Kingdom but engaged on one side or
other, except the haughty Numantia only; which always answered those that
solicited her Assistance, That she was not to be made a Party under any Head,
but rather they to follow her as Supreme. In the first Punick Wars the
Numantians could never be brought to follow the Carthaginians, or assist the
Romans; for which reason, or rather without any, the Romans resolved to make
War upon Numantia, and that not through any fear of their Power, but mere envy
of their Fortune. The Romans besieged Numantia the space of Fourteen years
without intermission, during which the Numantians sustained great damage, and
the Romans lost several brave Commanders; such as Caius Crispus, Trebellius,
Pindarus, Rufus, Venustus, Escaurus, Paulus Pilius, Cincinnatus and Drusus,
Nine Consuls of very great Note, as also Experienced Generals. These Nine, and
many other Romans being slain, it happened the Twelfth year after this Siege,
that Anneus Fabricius, a Roman General, concluded a League and Amity with 'em;
and agreed upon a Truce till the Articles could be Ratified from Rome: But the
Senate perceiving this Capitulation tended altogether to the Honor of their
Enemies, and was a perpetual Disgrace to them, caused the Prudent Consul to be
immediately put to Death, and the War as instantly continued. The next year,
which was the Thirteenth of the Siege, they sent Scipio their Consul, with a
fresh Army against Numantia. The first thing he did was to banish the Camp all
useless Men, and debauched Women; saying, That Pleasures allowed, are more
dangerous to a great Army, than known Enemies. Scipio besieged this City a year
and seven months; in all which time he never gave any assault, or made the
least attack, but only busied himself to cut off their Relief and Provisions.
One of Scipio's Officers one day asking him, Why he never attacked them within
the Town, nor fell upon those that came out, he answered, Numantia is so
fortunate, and the Numantians so very successful, that we may well hope to tire
out, but must never expect to conquer their Fortune. The Numantians made
frequent Sallies on the new-come Romans, and one day, of all the rest, the
Fight continued so long and bloody, it might well have been termed a pitched
Battle; and the Romans were so hard put to it, that had not the Fortune and
Conduct of Scipio been on their side, that day the Glory and Power of Rome had
undoubtedly ended in Spain. Scipio therefore perceiving the Numantians grew
bold, and the Romans slackned, drew back about a mile and half from the Town,
to the end that he might not be so subject to surprise; so that the distance
being greater, he might thereby receive the less damage. The Numantians thus
having lost many of their Men, and Provisions growing short, at length
unanimously made a Vow to their Gods, never to break Fast unless on Roman
Flesh; nor drink Wine or Water, till they had tasted of their Blood. It was
monstrous then to see, as it is still to hear, how they every day sallied to
hunt Romans, as if they had been going to shoot Rabbets; and how they did
afterward as savourily eat and drink their Flesh and Blood, as if it had been
Beef or Mutton. Then it was the Consul Scipio daily sustained very great
Losses, for besides that the Numantians preyed on the Romans like Wild Beasts,
they likewise fought no longer like Enemies, but as Men in despair. No
Numantian ever gave Roman Quarter, nor so much as suffered 'em to be Buried,
but as soon as any were killed, they immediately carried 'em where they were
flayed, quartered, and weighed out in the Market; so that with them, a Dead
Roman was then more worth than a Live one. Scipio was often persuaded,
entreated and importuned by his Officers, to raise the Siege and return home;
but he was always so far from consenting, that he would not so much as endure
to hear it proposed: And this, because, as he came from Rome, a Priest had bid
him not be discouraged or desist, though he should run great hazards; for that
the Gods had decreed, the end of the fortunate Numantia should be the beginning
of his Glory.

How Scipio took Numantia.
Scipio perceiving he could neither gain the Numantians by fair means, nor
subdue 'em by force, caused a vast Trench to be made round the Town, which was
seven Fathom deep, and five in breadth; so that no Relief could possibly come
to 'em, neither could they make any Sallies. He often courted 'em to try the
Clemency of the Romans, and rely upon his Word; But they always answered, That
having lived free Three Hundred Thirty three Years, they were resolved not to
die Slaves. The Clamours of the Women in the City were sent up to Heaven, the
Priests called upon their Gods, and all the Men cried out to the Consul Scipio,
to suffer them to come out and fight like Men, and not to be shut up and
starved like Beasts. Also the more to move him, they said, Is it becoming you,
O Noble Scipio, who are a Roman Youth, Brave and Resolute, to keep us here
penned up like Sheep, which is only a Stratagem of Policy; when it would rather
redound to your immortal Glory, if you let us come out, and overcame us in
Fight? When the Numantians saw themselves thus miserably enclosed, and their
Provisions daily consuming, The ablest among 'em met and Killed all the old
Men, Women and Children; then gathered the Wealth of the Town and Temples into
one great heap in the Marketplace, and having themselves first taken Poison,
immediately fired every corner of the City; so that the Riches, Houses,
Temples, and Inhabitants, of Numantia perished altogether in one Day.
Prodigious were the Actions of the Numantians in their Lives, and no less
wonderful at their Deaths; for they left not Scipio any Riches to Plunder, nor
so much as a Man or Woman to Triumph over. During all the time this Famous City
was Besieged, no Numantian was ever made Prisoner by the Romans, for they all
chose rather to die than take quarter. Now when Scipio saw the City on Fire,
and entering it, found all the Inhabitants Dead and Burnt, he was very sensibly
grieved, and the Tears falling fast from his Eyes, he said, O happy Numantia,
which the Gods have indeed suffered to Perish, but never to be overcome! The
Prosperity of Numantia lasted 466 Years, for that was the interval between the
building of it by Numa Pompilius, and its destruction by the great Scipio
Africanus. In these Ages there were Three Cities that gave most trouble to the
Romans; Elia in Asia; Carthage in Africa; and Numantia in Europe: All which
were at length totally subverted, but never Conquered by them. Prince Iugurtha
being then but Twenty two Years of Age, came out of Africa to the assistance of
Scipio, and behaved himself with so great Bravery, that he was extremely valued
by the Consul, and afterward highly honored at Rome. All who have writ of
this Siege, say, the Romans never sustained greater losses, had so many Men
destroyed, spent so much Money, nor suffered so great disgrace as there; and
the reason they gave was, because their other Wars were always grounded upon
some wrong received; when this against Numantia, was merely raised through
envy. To say the City Zamora was ever Numantia is both false and ridiculous,
for unless all Histories deceive us from the building of Numantia, till Zamora
was founded, there were 733 Years. Did Pliny, Pomponius, Ptolemy and Strabo
say, that Numantia was near the River Duero; it would be dubious whether Soria
or Zamora were it: But on the contrary these Authors affirm, it was built near
the Springs of Duero; whence may be concluded, that Zamora being Thirty Leagues
from these Springs, and Soria but Five, it must be Soria and not Zamora. Yet
there are three different opinions concerning its Situation; some saying it
stood where Soria does now; others, that it was on the other side of the River
on a Hill; and others, that it was a League from thence, where is now a Town
called Garray. And in my Judgment, by what I have seen of the three places,
this last is the most probable Assertion, many pieces of Antiquity being there
found, and many Ruins of Stately buildings there to be seen. Those who have
writ concerning Numantia, are, Pliny, Strabo, Ptolemy, Trogus Pompeius, Pollio,
Trebellius, Vulpitius, Isidorus, Justin, and Marcus Ancius.

LETTER XIV. To Don Alonso de Albornoz; showing it sign of ill breeding not to
answer a Letter; Also laying down the dangers of Matrimony; and likewise,
containing some pleasant News from Court: The whole embellished with biting
Railleries, and serious Reflections.
SIR,
IF the Lady Donna Maria, to whom you are contracted, admires your Person as
much as I blame your laziness, you may safely Marry without danger of
repenting; and yet I think I am not a little bold, when I say, you will not
repent Marrying, for in Truth, I could wish I were as sincerely sorrowful for
my Sins, as some are penitent after entering into that State. To Marry a Woman
is very easy, but to hold out to the last, in my opinion, very difficult, and
from thence it comes, that those who Marry for Love, commonly live in Sorrow:
For considering the frequent distasts that happen in a Family; the burden of
the Wife, care of Children, wants of the House, charge of Servants,
importunities of Relations, and adoration which Fathers-in-Law commonly expect;
if all these things will not oblige a Married Man to repent, at least, I Am sure
they must needs tire him. The Philosopher Mirtus being asked Why he did not
Marry? Answered, Because, when I take a Wife, if she be good, I shall not care
to lose her; if bad, must endure her; if poor, maintain her; if rich, bear with
her; if ugly, shall hate her; and if beautiful, must watch her: But what is yet
worst of all, I must then resign my liberty to one that will never thank me for
it. Riches produce Care, Poverty Afflictions, the Sea Dangers, Eating too much
Surfeits, and Travels Weariness. But nevertheless, these Troubles are divided
among many, when Married people have them altogether; for the Married Man is
commonly full of Care, Sad, Weary, Surfeited, nay, and Frighted to Boot; I say,
Frighted at the imagination of what may befall him, or his Wife attempt. He who
meets with a Wife that is Foolish, Wild, Talkative, Loose, Licke^ish, Mutinous,
Lazy, given to Ramble, Incorrigible, Jealous, Imperious or Lewd; that Wretch
had much better been a Slave to a good Man, than Husband to such a Woman. It is
hard, it is true, to humor some Men, but much more difficult to know any Woman;
The reason is, because they have neither measure in their Love, nor bounds in
their H^te. I will not, perhaps I dare not, say more as to this particular; for
should I set about it and let my Pen run at liberty, I might want time, but
never matter to write upon. It is not without cause I have said I was offended
at your laziness; for it is now about half a year since I writ to you, and yet
you never answered me one line, and John de Ocana came afterward, and then you
did not write; so that on the one hand you may well be termed Lazy, and on the
other negligent. Take it for a Rule, never to neglect answering him that took
the pains to write to you; for to answer our Superiors is an act of necessity,
our equals, demonstration of good will; but to write to our Inferiors is no
ordinary Virtue. Alexander the Great was wont to write to Pulio his Farrier;
Julius Caesar to Rufus his Gardner; Augustus to Pamplilus his Smith; Tiberius
to Scaurus his Miller; Tullius to Myrrhus his Tailor; and Seneca to Gyphus his
Baily; whence we may infer, it is no disgrace either to write to, or answer
mean Persons. Paulus Emilius writing to his Plowman, uses these Words, I
received your Message by Argeus, and my answer is, that I send you an Ox to
Yoke with the other, and the Cart new mended; therefore Plow the Land well,
Prune the Vine handsomely, clear the Trees from Caterpillars, and always
remember the Goddess Ceres* Curious Dentatus being in the Army against Pyrrhus
King of Epirus, writ to a Carpenter after this manner; Cneius Patroclus told me
you were at work on my House; take care the Timber be well seasoned, make the
lights toward the South, let not the Roof be high, but Rooms light, the Bath
close, and Chimney not smoaky; make two Windows, and but one Door. Alexander
the Great writing to his Farrier, said, I sent you a Horse that was presented
me by the Athenians; he and I were Wounded in the same Fight; walk him well
every day, dress his Wound carefully, pare his Feet sparingly, and have a care
of nailing him; slit his Nostrils, wash his Tail, and let him not grow over
fat; for no Horse that is foul can endure me in the Field. We read of the
famous Tyrant Phalaris, that never Man did him service which he did not
requite, nor sent him Letter which he did not answer. Historians do not relate
as a Reflection upon 'em, that these great and Renowned Princes writ to such
mean and inconsiderate Persons, but rather as a thing commendable and meriting
praise. In this and all other cases, you may make bold with me as with your own
self; but, if you persevere in the same practice toward others, perhaps, as
Friends will only blame your neglect, strangers may accuse you of Arrogance.
Caesar wanted no Valor, since he overcame so many Nations; no Clemency, since
he forgave so many Enemies; no Generosity, since he gave whole Kingdoms; no
Learning, since he writ so many Books; nor did he want fortune, since he became
Lord of all: But still he had need of good manners, which is the surest
foundation of a quiet life. For it being a custom among the Romans, when the
Senators came into their Emperor's presence, that they should make profound
Reverence, and he to return the like civility; Caesar either wilfully or
carelessly omiting so to do, within few days was stabbed in three and Twenty
places; so that great Man lost his Life only for want of a little breeding.
Suetonius relates the contrary of Augustus, who, when he was either in the
Senate or Amphitheater, never sat down till they were all seated, and still
showed them the same respect they did him; and whenever his Sons came among
them, he neither suffered them to sit down nor the Senators to rise up. Sir, if
for the future you will avoid being esteemed arrogant, or rather mad, behave
your self civilly; for, good manners more than any thing else, win the hearts
of Enemies, and preserve the good will of Friends. I have spoke to the Pope's
Nuncio about the dispensation you writ for, in order to Marry Donna Maria,
which is agreed upon for 60 Ducats; but he being a Venetian and no Fool,
expects to be paid before your business shall be dispatched. I spoke also to
Perianez, concerning expediting the immunity of your Estate; but he being
extremely Deaf I was forced to raise my voice higher than I use do when I
Preach. The present News at Court is, that the Empress desires the Emperor to
return speedily; The Ladies would fain all be Married; Men that have business
would have it quickly dispatched; The Duke of Vejar has a great mind to Live;
Antonio de Fonseca would needs grow young again; Don Roderigo de Borja would
willingly inherit; and Friar Dionysius as hastily be a Bishop; when, for my own
part, I have all the qualifications of a Litigious Miscreant; for I am busy,
full of care, thoughtful Monyless, Suspicious, Importunate, Uneasy, and quite
tired out; My Lord Archbishop of Toledo and I having been a good while in Law
about the Abbey of Baza, in which Affair, judgment has already been once given
for me. No more, but God keep you, and give me grace to serve Him.

Medina del Campo, March 12 1523.
LETTER XV. To Don Diego de Camina; How all Men are subject to Envy.
Magnificent and Right Christian SIR,
YOU write, you are much concerned, for that many Malicious Persons have
censured your Works, and lessened your Actions; and herein, I confess, you have
cause of surprise, tho, in my Judgment, no reason to be dissatisfied, since it
is much the lesser evil your Neighbors should Envy, than Friends Pity you. The
ancientest Vice in the World is Envy, the most common Envy, and it is Envy will
never cease reigning while the World endures. Adam and the Serpent, Abel and
Cain, Jacob and Esau, Joseph and his Brethren, David and Saul, Job and Satan,
Achitophel and Hushai, and lastly, Haman and Mordecai, did not prosecute each
another on account of Riches, but merely out of Envy. The Hatred grounded on
Envy is much greater than that which proceeds from some wrong done; for an
injured Person is often diverted, where the Envious never leave persecuting.
The Wars between the Romans and Carthaginians were much more bloody, and lasted
longer than those of the Greeks and Trojans; and this, because the latter only
fought to revenge the Rape of Hellen, when the former strove for the Empire of
Europe. The irreconcilable Enmity between Caesar and Pompey proceeded not from
Injuries, but was wholly occasioned by Pompey's envying Caesar's Fortune in
War; and Caesar, on the other side, Pompey's great Conduct in Matters of
Government. Two sorts of Men were equally Renowned and Honored among the
Romans, who were the Dictators that governed with Prudence, to whom they raised
Statues; and the Consuls, who were successful in War: and to these they granted
Triumphs; for while Rome was in it is glory, no Merit passed unrewarded, nor
Guilt unpunished. There are but few Men subject to all sorts of Vices, and yet
fewer free from all; so if any be good he is envied, and if bad he is envious;
for of necessity in this World we must either persecute, or be persecuted. We
can secure our selves against a Liar by not conversing with him, a Proud Man by
avoiding him, a Sluggard by not adhering to him, a Luxurious Person by not
keeping him Company, a Glutton by not eating with him, a Quarrelsom Man by not
contending with him, and against a Covetous Person by not dealing with him; but
there is no way to fly an envious Person, nor possibility of prevailing against
him: Envy is of that subtle nature, there is neither difficulty but it will
surmount, nor Fence but it will break down; no Policy but it will subvert, nor
Power but it will oppose; nor, in a word, is there any Man but it will assault.
If in one Person could be met the Beauty of Absalon, Strength of Sampson,
Wisdom of Solomon, Swiftness of Azael, Riches of Croesus, Liberality of
Alexander, Valor of Hector, Fortune of Caesar, Manners of Augustus, Justice of
Trajan, and Eloquence of Cicero, it is most certain he could never be so highly
accomplished, as he would be cruelly persecuted by Envy. Wolves follow Sheep,
Crows dead Bodies, Bees Flowers, Flies Honey, Men Riches, and the Envious
Person Prosperity. We naturally pity the Unfortunate, so we likewise envy the
Prosperous* No body ever envied, but rather pitied Socrate's his being
Poisoned, Eschines Banished, Croesus Hanged, Darius Ruined, Pyrrhus being
Unfortunate, Cataline Infamous, and Sophonisba Unhappy. One thing whereby I
discover how far the Malice of Men extends is, that where no body offers to
support or lift up the Wretched* every one lays a Snare to make the Rich and
Mighty fall. The Great and Fortunate may assure themselves, their Grandeur and
Prosperity will never come up to the Envy of their Neighbors. Sir, I have put
you in mind of these things, that you may not think much to pay your Quota,
since you are admitted into this Fraternity of Envy. You must understand, if as
yet you are ignorant, that the chief business of this Brotherhood is to bury
the Living, and rake up the Dead. This Corporation is noble and great, since
Heathens and Christians, absent and present, rich and poor, both the dead and
living have been enrolled of it. This Fraternity enjoys many great Privileges
and Immunities, which are, That they meet not in Churches, but their own
Houses; do not speak ill of the Poor, but Rich; do not assist, but hinder; do
not give, but take; do not Pray, but Rail; do not watch their Enemies but
Friends; and in fine, who have liberty continually to defame, but never to deal
fairly. Though this be a troublesome Brotherhood, yet it is a sign of very ill
Fortune not to be admitted of it; for it is a plain case, A Man must be very
unhappy whom no body ever cared to Envy. Plutarch, in his A^othegms, speaking
of the Famous Grecian General Themistocles, says, that being once asked, Why he
was so Melancholy? He answered, I am Melancholy, because, being Two and twenty
years of Age, I cannot think I have yet done any thing deserving Memory; since
I find no Man in Athens envies me. Ancient Authors relate, the first Tyrant of
Sicily was Herion, the second Celon, the third Dionysius Siracusanus, the
fourth Dionysius the younger, the fifth Taxillus, the sixth Brudanus, and
seventh Hermocrates, of which Seven the Sicilians, do, to this day, as heavily
complain, as the Grecians formerly boasted of their Seven Wise Men.
Nevertheless, the last of which Tyrants, Hermocrates, lying on his Deathbed,
is recorded to have thus said to his Son; My last Words to you, Son, are, That
you never be envious, but rather endeavor to perform Actions worthy to be
envied. These Words did not at all savor of a Tyrant, but on the contrary
expressed great Prudence; for thereby he not only charged him to be Virtuous,
but also forbad him being Malicious. I told you at the beginning of this
Letter, that allowing you had Provocation, yet you had not sufficient Reason to
be afflicted or discouraged; for it is a much lesser evil to suffer good
actions to be censured, than to forbear doing well. There is little of moment
to write from hence; but only to let you know, as you have Slanderers with you,
so here also are plenty of ill Tongues, insomuch, that some are so very
virulent, they neither spare God, nor their King. I have twice spoke to the
Cardinal of Tortosa about your Business, and if I be not mistaken, he is to the
full as forgetful, as I have been all along careful. We that live at Court,
content our selves with doing what is in our power, where we cannot obtain what
is in our will. God keep you, and give me Grace to serve him.

Valladolid, Oct. 26. 1520.
LETTER XVI. To Don John de Moncada; Describing Anger, and Extolling Patience.
Much Esteemed and Magnificent SIR,
IF you think I answer your Letters late, lay the blame on Palomeque, your
Servant, who is lame; the Horse you gave him limps, the way is long, the
Weather bad, and I am very busy, though I get little by it. But, however, if
he spends much time in coming and returning, the chief reason, as I suppose,
is, that he is in Love; and if so, you might well imagine, how much more intent
he would be in gratifying the Affections of his Heart, than expediting the
Letters in his Pocket. If you will believe me, never trust Men in love, for
they do not so much care to employ themselves in carrying, as writing Letters,
watching their Mistresses, serenading, climbing Walls, and gazing at Windows. I
shall be obliged to answer yours more briefly, I fancy, than you expect, and
yet at the same time, more largely than I can conveniently afford; being at
present engaged to give my Vote at the Inquisition, Preach at Court, and Write
every day the Emperor's Chronicle; so that where I abound in Business, I am
very much abridg'd of leisure I swear, I much rather envy the time many idle
Courtiers mispend, than the Riches they enjoy. But to come to the purpose, I
protest on the Word of a Friend, I have been as much concerned at your
Misfortunes, as if they had been my own; for as Chilo the Philosopher was wont
to say, we are not only to remedy our Friends Disasters, but also to bewail
'em. Agesilaus, the Grecian, being asked, why he lamented more the loss of his
Friends than death of his Children, said, I do not deplore the want of a Wife,
loss of Goods, and death of Children, because they are only parts of me; but
grieve the death of a Friend, as he is my other self. This, I say, Sir, because
since I cannot be present to condole you, nor have power here to relieve you, I
am at least resolved to write something to comfort you; for sometimes the Pen
of a Friend is no less lenitive, than the Sword of an Enemy offensive. To
advise you not to resent what you have so great cause to be concerned at, would
give occasion for me to be thought unmannerly, as for you to be accounted Mad:
Therefore my Council in this case is, that you resent as a Man, and bear like a
Christian. The best remedy were to let fall wrongs of Honor, where they are
done by those on whom we ought not to be revenged. If under these Misfortunes,
you will rather act like a Christian, than Gentleman, you will not so much
regard who offends you, as lift up your Heart to God that suffers it, and
before whom you will find your self so very criminal, that all you can endure
is nothing in respect of what you have deserved. You must also consider, the
Afflictions God permits to fall upon us, are not designed to destroy, but only
try us; for none are enrolled in his Book, but such as are fit for Sufferings;
when on the contrary, none are entered on the Worldly Records, but those that
are addicted to Pleasure. You desire me to describe and give a definition of
Anger, to try whether by those means you can Master the indignation you have
conceived. It is very requisite to know what this Passion is, and to endeavor
to curb it accordingly; for in truth, oftentimes, it is much safer to put up a
wrong, than revenge it. Aristides says, Anger is nothing but heat of Blood, and
a commotion of the Heart. Possidonius, that it is only a short fit of Madness.
Cicero, that what the Romans call Anger, the Grecians termed desire of Revenge.
Eschines, that Anger is raised by steem of the Gall, and heat of the Heart.
Macrobius, that there is a great deal of difference between Anger and Passion;
for that Anger proceeds from Provocation, and Passion from ill Nature. Plato,
that the fault did not lie so much in Anger, as the cause of it. Laertius, that
when the Punishment is greater than the Crime, it is Revenge, and not Zeal of
Justice; but on the contrary, the Crime exceeding the Punishment, it is no more
Revenge, but Justice. Plutarch says, the Privileges of Anger are not to
believe Friends, to be violent in Action, have the Cheeks red, make use of the
Hands, let loose the Tongue, speak Maliciously, fly out upon slight Occasions;
and lastly, to hear no Reason. Solon Salaminus being asked, Who might properly
be said to be in Wrath? answered, Only he who valued not losing his Friends,
nor creating new Enemies. After what so many and grave Philsophers have left
upon this Subject, I can only add, That it is easy to write of, no way
difficult to persuade, copious to preach upon, fit to advise upon, but
extremely hard to curb. We may reasonably exclaim against Vice in general, but
much more may be said upon Anger; for that does not only deprive us of our
Reason, but also renders us odious to all the World: To moderate Anger is a
great Virtue, but to lay it quite aside is much more safe; because it is easier
to resist what is evil, than totally to cast it off. At first we have power to
admit, or reject many hurtful things; but having once admitted 'em, if Reason
stands not our Friend, they will undoubtedly keep their ground, and plead
possession Anger is of that perverse temper, that wherever we have once
resigned our will, it afterward enforces us to what we would not. We blame not
those who have the administration of Government so much for being slack or
severe, as showing too much Passion in their Proceedings; for tho they have
Authority to Punish, yet they have no Liberty to express their Anger. It is but
reasonable those who transgress should be chastis'd, but still the Penalty must
not look like revenge; for be a Man never so brutish, he is ever more sensible
of Malice showed him, than of the greatest Punishment can be inflicted on him.
A Lash, or Blow of a Hand or Cudgel, which all light upon the Flesh, tho they
smart, yet soon wear off; but an abusive Word immediately sinks into the Heart,
and is scarce ever forgot. To have a power of bridling ones Anger, is not a
Human, but Heroic and Divine Virtue; for certainly no Victory is so great as
that which a Man obtains over himself. Socrates, the Philosopher, having lifted
up his Hand to strike a Servant, held it in that posture, and cried, Because I
consider I am a Philosopher, and am now angry, I do not punish thee as thou
deservest. An Example worthy to be remembered, and much more to be imitated; and
from whence we may infer, that whilst Anger is predominant, we must not offer
to speak, much less chastise. The Lawgiver, Licurgus, ordered those who had
the Government of the Commonwealth, to condemn and punish all they found evil
and pernicious: Nevertheless, they were by no means to hate Offenders,
affirming, there was no Plague so destructive, as a Judge, whose Reason was
drowned in Passion. Very few follow this Advice, at present, and many practice
the contrary; for now adays no body is angry with Sin, but the Sinners. It
must needs be a great trouble to any who have to do with furious and impatient
Men; for they are both insupportable to those that serve, and dangerous to such
as are their Familiars. Now I have told you what Anger is, and the ill
Consequences thereof; let us see what Remedies may be prescribed against it;
for my design here is not to teach you how to be angry, but rather how to be
appeased. I am of Opinion, one great Remedy against Anger were to bridle the
Tongue when in a Passion, and put off Revenge till another time; for an angry
Person oftentimes does, says, and threatens, what he afterward could wish,
with all his Heart, he had never thought on. We ought not immediately to
importune a Man, in Passion, to forgive an Injury, but first pray him to
respite his Revenge; for as long as the heat lasts, we can never expect he will
Pronounce a Pardon. It is either through want of Sense, or over-diligence, we
endeavor to reduce a Man in Fury to Equity and Justice; for Passion, when
high, and a Heart when enraged, will neither receive Comfort, nor give ear to
Reason. I do again and again, charge and advise every Man of Sense, not to be
too busy with Persons in Wrath; for if they do, the best they must expect to
come off with, will be either some reproachful Language, or a broken Head. Tho
a Man be Friend to him that is Angry, yet it is better to let him alone, than
speak or offer to assist him, for at that time he has more need of a Bridle to
hold him in, than Spur to set him forward: More Art than Force is required to
deal with one in Passion, for tho his Anger swelled all of a sudden, he must
nevertheless be appeased by degrees. Plutarch in his Commonwealth, advises the
Emperor Trajan, to be patient in Sufferings, easy in Business, and calm
toward Furious Men; assuring him, Time settles many things, which Prudence
cannot. We have seen great Animosities between Mighty Men, which could not be
reconciled or appeased by interposition of Friends, threats of Enemies,
presents of Money, or multiplicity of Sufferings; and yet in process of time,
when each had thought better on it, they have been made up alone among
themselves: In fine, I say, that where a Man sees his Friend in Fury, he must
rather throw Water to quench, than Fuel to heighten his Passion. Sir, I have
stretched out this Letter much longer than either I designed or desired; but
your great Sorrow and Afflictions, I must confess, made me the more free of my
Pen. Endure, say nothing, take no notice, let a little time pass, and the
business be somewhat forgot, and I am much mistaken if you will not see that
same Fire rage in their Bowels, which they cast into your House. Solomon the
Wise says, A Prudent Man has his Tongue in his Heart, when an Angry Person has
his Heart in his Tongue. Agis the Grecian was wont to say, A Mad Man was
troubled for what he suffered, and valued himself upon what ^e said; but ^he
Wise Man was sorry for what he said, and proud of what he suffered. Now or
never make use of your Learning, Prudence and Judgment; for, I Will Assure, it is
no small Weakness to know how to cure others, and yet neglect to apply a Remedy
to ones self. I have not forgot when my Sister Donna Francisca died at Torre
Mexia, you sent me such wholesome Advice as sufficed to ease my Grief, tho not
wholly to eradicate the Memory of my Loss; I must now therefore put you in mind
hereof, since it is but reasonable you should reap some of the Fruit you had so
plentifully sowed in my Ground. I have no more, at present, as to any other
particular, but that I give the same power to your Servant to Answer, as you
gave him to Inform me. God Bless you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Toledo, Apr. 6. 1526.
LETTER XVII. To the Ambassador Don Geronimo Vique; showing the ill Effects of
overmuch Liberty.
Very Magnificent Lord and Imperial Ambassador,
I Received yours here in Granada this 20th of July, and must needs say, it
made good haste to arrive so soon from Valencia, being sent but on Saturday,
and reaching hither Monday night. Since you come from so remote a Place as
Rome, and have passed the dangerous Gulf of Narbonne, I will not ask, whether
you arrive in health, but rather bless God you are come home alive;
nevertheless, could wish you returned as healthy in Body, and clear in Soul, as
you went out from hence; new Countries commonly producing new Manners. Licurgus
commanded the Lacedonians, they should neither go abroad to Trade, nor suffer
Strangers to come among them; saying, that as Kingdoms grew rich by Foreign
Dealings, so they always grew poor in Virtue. To tell you truth, My Lord, I
have seen few come from Italy, but were become haughty and lewd, and the cause
was, not that the Country wants hallowing by Saints, but by reason it is now
Peopled with Sinners. It is the quality of Bells to call People to Mass, and
yet never be in the Church themselves; such, in my Opinion, is the nature of
Italy, where there are many Holy Places to stir up Devotion, yet the Natives
have no Piety at all. Many say, the happiness of Italy consists in being free,
but on the contrary, I affirm, the ruin of it proceeds from its being subject
to no Body; for the freedom of doing what they will, oftentimes brings Men to
do what they ought not. If Trogus Pompeius does not deceive us, when the Romans
would have made the Bactrians free, for aiding their Consul Rufus in the War
against the Parthians, they would not accept their proffered Liberty, saying,
However they became free, they might nevertheless afterward commit something
to be made Slaves. To speak truth, there is no Commonwealth so depraved, as
where the People are most free, for it is the nature of Liberty to be coveted
by many, but well used by few. Where there is no submission, there is no King;
where no King, no Law; where no Law, no Justice; where no Justice, no Peace;
where no Peace, there is continual Discord; and where there is continual
Discord, the Commonwealth cannot long subsist: Neither the Greeks, nor
Carthaginians, Gauls, nor Huns, Epirots, nor Sabines, Samnites, nor the other
People of Italy, could ever subdue or conquer Rome; yet at length it was both
vanquished and destroyed, by its own pride in governing, and excessive
licentiousness in Wickedness. Plato observing the Athenians to grow loose, used
often to say to them, Look to your selves Athenians, do not lofe through
Viciousness, what you have gained by Valor; for I must tell you, as much
Prudence is required to preserve Liberty, as Valor to procure it. Experience
teaches us, in a free Commonwealth, there are daily more Mischiefs done,
Blasphemies uttered, Crimes committed, Scandal given, good Men defamed, and
Villainies perpetrated, by two or three Libertines, than could be by as many
hundred kept under subjection and awe. For we may observe those only are
Pilloried, Whipped, Banished, Beheaded, Hanged, and Imprisoned, who mispend their
time, live like Vagabonds, and make their Liberty serve merely to support their
Vices. There is nothing in this Life so precious as Liberty, yet at the same
time nothing so dangerous, if Men know not how far to make use of it. Liberty
is to be diligently sought after, earnestly procured, bought, maintained* and
defended; But I advise and warn him that has obtained it, not to use it upon
every slight fancy, but only on well grounded Reasons: For otherwise, where a
Man imagines he has gained it for his whole Life, it will never last him one
Month. The Libertinism of Phalaris ruined the Greeks, of Roboam perplexed the
Jews, of Cataline disquieted the Romans, of Iugurtha annoyed the Carthaginians,
and of Dionysius destroyed the Sicilians; But nevertheless, at length, the
Commonwealths were eased of their Troubles, and both they and their Tyrannies
expired together. Many Men forbear doing ill, because they will not do it; but
more, because they cannot: Many refrain out of Conscience, but more out of
Shame: Some are kept under by Reputation, but more by Fear: Many curb
themselves because they will be good, but more because they would not be
infamous. Whether it be out of Love, Fear, Conscience, or Shame, we ought
always to incline to what is good, and refrain from too much liberty; for where
we give a loose to Sensuality, and take the full swinge of our Inclinations, we
shall soon find enough to talk of all day, and lament all night. Sir, I have
put you in mind of these things, that since you come from Rome you may not
value your self* upon the Customs and Habits of that place; for, you must
understand, it is much pleasanter to describe the Manners of Italy, than
imitate them. If you happen to reflect on the Grandeur of Rome, liberty of its
People, variety of Strangers resorting thither, beauty of the Ladies, delicacy
of Eating, goodness of Wines, splendidness of Entertainment, and plenty of
Markets; remember withal, that there the Estate is lavished, Conscience
burdened, and Soul very often lost. Many of the Italians are good, but
Strangers in Italy for the most part naught; for where there are but few go
thither on account of Devotion* on the contrary, very many Travel to gratify
their Lusts. Rome now under Christians is not the same as heretofore under
Heathens; for whereas it was then Mistress of all Virtue, it is now become the
worst School of Vice. Yet, notwithstanding the Libertinism and Viciousness of
Rome, it is not wholly to be laid upon the Popes, for besides many of them have
been Saints, and some in our days have been Virtuous, yet there is none so
wicked, but he will endeavor to behave himself well in his own Government. But
allowing this, what shall we say of a poor Priest who crosses all Spain,
France, and Lombardy, to go to Rome; yet before he can have his Business
dispatched, falls into a thousand Snares, spends his Money, and commits
innumerable Crimes. For my own part, I must confess I went to Rome, saw it, was
conversant there, and considered it thoroughly, and where I observed many things
that moved me to Devotion, as likewise which raised my Admiration. But, Oh! how
great and infinite is the difference between the Customs of Italy, and the true
Laws of Christianity; for the one bids you do what you please, the other what
you ought; The one to deny every body that you may thrive, and the other to
deny your self that you may be saved; The one to have much regard to your
Conscience, the other to be ashamed of nothing; The one to labor to become a
good Christian, the other to study how to grow rich; The one to make Virtue
your Rule of Life, the other to mind nothing but Libertinism; The one not to
speak an untruth upon any account whatever, the other to make no account of
Truth where your Interest is concerned; The one to live upon your own, the
other to make use of another's; The one to remember always you are to dye, the
other never to be troubled you are not to live; The one to employ your self
always in Learning, the other to apply your Mind only to grow great; The one to
share what you have with the Poor and your Friends, the other always to lay up
for Old Age; The on^ to be very Circumspect in talking, the other to value your
self much upon your Tongue; The one to believe only in Christ, the other to
make it your business only to get Money. If upon these Twelve Conditions, My
Lord, you are willing to be a Roman, much good may it do you; but, no doubt, at
the day of Judgment, you will rather wish you had been a Plowman in Spain, than
Ambassador to the Holy See. I will say no more, but pray God to keep you, and
give both you and me an happy end.

Granada, July 20. 1525.
LETTER XVIII. To Doctor Micer Sumier, Regent of Naples; in Answer to several
Moral Questions.
Magnificent SIR, but Importunate Friend,
NEither is it Untrue, nor am I Sorry for Saying and Affirming, that as I make
it my Business to Serve you, you do nothing but Study to Plague me; which is
demonstrable in that you now send me anew Questions never thought on, nor I
believe, ever so much as heard of before. Nevertheless, I am of Opinion, you do
not so much Ask out of a desire to have 'em Answered, as to try my Ability; and
therefore must tell you, that on one hand your Letter caused me a great deal of
Mirth, and on the other no less Disquiet; you being in some places extremely
Pleasant, when in others extravagantly Curious. I would not have you Proud,
because I say you are Curious, since you do not fail to show at the same time,
you have little else to do. As it must be allowed you are Prudent in most you
say, so it will as easily be granted, you are over-capricious in what is said
to you; for should I take the same liberty as you have done, no doubt, you
would soon conclude, I had either too much leisure, or too little Judgment.
Nevertheless, where you seemed to Write but in Jest, I am resolved to Answer
you in good Earnest, imitating herein the ancient Orators, who were always wont
to exert their Eloquence most, where they found the least Occasion. You first
Ask me, Sir, How one Man shall do to know another, so that he may either safely
receive, or carefully avoid him? I Answer 4 ways; By his Undertakings,
Productions, Words, and Companions; For the Man that by Nature is Proud, in
Business Negligent, in Words a Liar, and who keeps bad Company, I am sure, is
neither fit to be Trusted, nor proper to be Believed. You Ask me, How many
things in this Life can have no Equal? I Answer, Four, which are our Liberty,
Learning, Health, and Good Works: For Liberty lightens the Heart, Learning
enriches the Mind, Health preserves the Body, and Virtue saves the Soul. You
Ask me, What are those things that most easily deceive a Man, and soonest ruin
him? I Answer, Four; Desire of having much, Inclination to know much,
Over-experience of the World, and too great Presumption of ones Abilities. For
too much Knowledge ends in Madness, too great Wealth creates Pride, Living long
makes Men Negligent, and Self-conceit renders 'em Unmindful of their Frailties.
You Ask me, Sir, What is to be required in a good Judge? I Answer, Four
Qualities; That he hear with Patience, Answer with Prudence, Condemn with
Justice, and Execute with Mercy. For he that is impatient in Hearing, Foolish
in Answering, Partial in Sentencing, and Cruel in Executing, I am sure, is
rather fit to stand at the Bar to be Tried, than sit on the Bench to Determine.
You Ask me, What makes a Man Discreet in his Behavior, and Wise in his Words?
I Answer, Four things; Reading many Books, Traveling many Kingdoms, Suffering
many Hardship, and Managing great Affairs. For to raise a Man to the true
Estimation of Wisdom, he must have seen the World, been conversant in Books,
Undergone Troubles, and Exercised no Ordinary Employments. You Ask me, What are
those things a Man thinks himself frequently possessed of, and yet generally
wants 'em? I Answer, they are Four; Many Friends, Much Knowledge, Great Wisdom,
and Extraordinary Power. For there is none so Great, but may be Vanquished; so
Wise, that do not sometimes Err; so Knowing, but are often Ignorant; nor so
Happy, but have many Enemies; Therefore we may well be said, to have fewer
Friends than we imagine; To know less than we Fancy; and in fine, to have both
our Power, and even our Wisdom, but very imperfect. You Ask me, Sir, What
frequently ruins a Man, and from which he rarely recovers? I Answer; To
Neglect his Business, Forsake the Council of a Faithful Friend, To meddle with
what he has nothing to do; and lastly, To spend more than his Income. For he
that is Negligent in what he Undertakes, Rejects the Advice of his Wise Friend,
Concerns himself in another Affairs, and Spends more than he has, shall soon
have a downfall and find no body to raise him. You ask me what are those things
a a Man would rather die than suffer? I Answer, in my Opinion they are Four;
Poverty in old Age, Sickness in Prison, Infamy after Honor, and Banishment
from his own Country. For, to be Poor when old, Sick in Prison, Infamous when
Honored, and Banished without hopes of return: A Brave Man would sooner accept
a Virtuous Death, than such a Miferable Life. You ask me, Sir, Who are those
that both God Abhors, and Man Abominates? I Answer, a Proud Beggar, a Rich
Miser, an Old Leacher, and Young Rakeshame. For, where Youth loses its Modesty,
Age its Chastity, Riches its Charity, and Poverty its Humility, there can be no
Virtue Cherished, much less Practiced. You ask me, Sir, Who are those that may
properly be said to have true Friends? I Answer, Four sorts of Men; which are,
the Eloquent, Liberal, Powerful, and good Natured. For, they who speak with a
Grace, give with a free Heart, are wise in their Commands, and Courteous in
their Conversation, shall live in every Bodies esteem, and never want Friends.
You ask me, What are the greatest troubles of this Life? I Answer; the Death of
ones Children, Loss of ones Estate, Prosperity of ones Enemies, and weakness of
ones Friends. For, it must needs be a grear Torment to Bury a Child one has
bred, lose an Estate one has got, be subject to an Enemy, or have a Fool to
ones Friend. You ask me, Sir, What are those trials wherein a Man commonly
loses his Patience? I Answer; to Serve and not Please, to Ask and not Receive,
to Give without Thanks, and Hope without Success. For, a Man's endeavors to be
ill Rewarded, his Petitions Rejected, his Debts withheld, and Hopes
Frustrated; he may, indeed, Suffer, but nevertheless, can never prevail with
his Tongue to conceal 'em. You ask me, Sir, What are those things that sooner
cease to be, than care to be satisfied? I Answer, Four; the Ears with Hearing,
Hands with Hoarding, Tongue with Talking, and Heart with Coveting. For, be a
Man never so Old and Diseased, his Ears are never tired with Novelties, his
Hands with scraping up Riches, his Tongue with uttering Vanities, nor his Heart
with desiring Superfluities: You ask me, What a Man is neither able to Conceal
nor Dissemble? I Answer; Love, Grief, Riches, and Ill Will. For, Love is
discovered by Sighs, Grief bursts out in Complaints, Riches appear in the
Countenance, and Hatred shows its self in the Eyes. You ask me, Sir, what may
easily be lost, and yet can never be Recovered? I Answer, Four things;
Virginity, Time, a Stone cast, and a Word spoken. You ask me, What a Man has
most reason to value himself upon? I Answer; Being a good Christian, sincere in
his Actions, Patient in his Sufferings, and Secret in his Intentions. You ask
me, Who are those that most readily get Friends, and most easily lose 'em? I
Answer; Rich Men, Young Men, Powerful People, and Favorites. For, How soon do
the Rich grow Contemptible when Poor, the Youth when Old, the Potent Person
when he loses his Power, and Courtier when his Prince withdraws his Favor. You
ask, How many are the qualities required in a Servant? I Answer, Four; To be
Diligent, Patient, Faithful, and True. For he that is willing to learn what he
knows not, can suffer when Rebuked, discharges his Trust honestly, and makes
use of no falsity; Let a Master make much of such a Servant, and that Servant
never doubt Preferment. You ask me, What the more a Woman desires, the less she
is contented? I Answer; fine Clothes, Beauty, Freedom, and Credit. For, above
all things she loves to be well dressed, Esteems her self Handsome, Longs to go
where she Lists, and would have every Body believe what she says. You ask, Sir,
What a Man must have regard to, before he parts with a Benefit? I Answer, to
the Thing, Person, Reason, and Time. For, he must consider the thing, that he
may not be Niggardly; The Person, that he may Relieve or Refuse according to
Merit; The Reason, that he may Exercise his Charity; and the time, that he may
not be tardy in Necessity. You Ask me, What are the best Qualities in a Prince?
I Answer, Four; Courage to Suffer, Generosity to Give, Justice to Reward, and
Clemency to Pardon. All other Imperfections are the easier born with, where
there can be found in him Mercy, Justice, Liberality, and Patience. You Ask me,
What a Gentleman ought most to avoid, and which soonest brands him? I Answer,
Covetousness, Cowardice, Lies, and Injustice. You Ask me likewise, What
Properties a Virgin must have to get a good Repute? I Answer, Four; To be
Handsome, Honest, an Enemy to Liberty, and Despiser of Bawds. Thus, Sir, are all
your Demands Answered, and where I have not happened to come up to your
Expectations, I hope, you will, at least, Accept of my Endeavors. No more, but
God keep you, and give me Grace to Serve him.

Valencia, Oct. 11. 1528.
LETTER XIX. To the Governor Don Lewis Bravo; occasioned by his falling in Love
in his old Age: being a familiar Satyr on such fruitless attempts; as likewise
a serious warning to all Old Men not to go beyond their strength.
Noble, but Inconsiderate Sir,
TO Style you Noble, or right Noble, Virtuous, or right Virtuous, Magnificent,
or very Magnificent, were doing you a palpable wrong without the least Honor;
since, at the Age you are of, joined with the Life you lead, there appears
neither Nobility in your Person, nor Modesty in your Manners. The Letter you
sent, plainly shows it was product of your own Brain, and work of your own
Hand; since it is thereby demonstrable, how little account you make of Honor;
and, at the same time, how void you are of Shame. If you did not deceive me,
and your Brother spoke truth, you wanted then but two Months of Sixty three,
allowing First Fruits to the Bishop of Cordoua, and all the Tithes to the
Parson of your Parish. It were but reasonable therefore, to expect at so great
Age, you should at length have recovered your Wits and come to your self: But
such is the obstinacy of hardened sinners, they still run on to the end of their
Lives before they think of mending. I am obliged to say this, Sir, tho 'not so
much troubled at what you write, as that you give me cause to answer it after
an ungrateful manner; for since you treat of a subject so Mal a propos, I may
well think my self at liberty to answer with severity. To come to the point
then, I must tell you, it seems to me a mere jest; that being a Christian,
Divine, Preacher, Priest, Religious Person, and even the strictest of St.
Francis's Order, you should now talk to me of Love, and even enroll me among
the Gallants; For, where I grant it my duty to hear your confession, I do not
think my self at all obliged to guide you in your Amors. You writ me one
particular you ought have been ashamed to propose, since I cannot but blush to
answer it; and that is, that at Seventy Years of Age, you are now fallen deeply
in Love; and moreover, would needs have me to send you a Love-Letter for your
Mistress, as well to persuade her to yield to your desires, as to suspend her
Duty to God for a while. Sir, in the mean time, since I am not acquainted with
your Mistress, nor so much as know who she is, I should be very glad if you
would communicate to her this Letter; which being carefully read and rightly
understood, I need not doubt being revenged on your imprudence; your being
informed of your folly, and she convinced of your madness. But lest I be
thought all this while in Jest, it is high time my Pen should freely tell you
my th^ughts on the whole matter.

At your Age, it is great falsehood to say you Love, since you cannot so
properly now be termed Amorous as decrepit, a Gallant as Leacher, Pleasing as
Doting. At your Age you should rather observe theNine-a-Clock Bell to go to
Bed, than four-a-Clock Chimes in the Morning to go home at. At your Age, perhaps
you may Love, but it is ridiculous to say, you are beloved; since the wretch
you Court, gives not ear to you for the sake of your Person, but is wholly
enamored on your Fortune. At your Age, all you can say becom^s a Jest; for
where Women entertain Young Men for Pleasure, they only give old ones the
hearing to laugh at. At your Age, you are unfit to write Songs, Serenade, climb
Walls, make a figure in the Streets, or quarrel in the Dark; and yet, Vain and
Conceited Women will not only think to be Courted, and well paid in private,
but also expect to be Gallanted and Defended in Public. At your Age, it is not
proper to wear thin Shoes, a Hat high-cock'd, a straight Coat, large Steenkirk,
and your Mistresses Favors; and yet these sort of Animals will not barely
require a Man should write wit, but also, be very Beauish in his Dress. At your
Age, it is impossible to endure the continual Importunities of asking, and
everlasting impertinence Messages; for crafty Mistresses soon change their
Passion into Slights and Complaints, if all they ask is not given, and all they
write answered to their minds. At your Age it is hard to feign Sorrow,
counterfeit Sighs and frame Groans; whereas, Worldly loose Women presently fall
out and are at variance with Lovers that do not write in doleful manner, and
often sigh in their presence. At your Age, it is not tolerable to be employed
in seeking variety of Dainties to Treat with, and new Rigging and Jewels to
present; For Women are so very full of Francies, and hard to please, they will
presently hate those they formerly loved, and laugh at such as they made much
of before, if they do not every Week give them something new to Wear, and every
Day send a choice bit to Eat. At your Age, it is not allowable to give account
of what you do, nor let any body know what affairs you have in hand: But which,
notwithstanding, your Mistress will require; For, unless every Night you relate
the transactions of the Day, nay, and what you so much as thought on, you may
be assured she will soon turn her back in Bed, and perhaps be sullen at Table.
At your Age, it is not fit to walk in Fear, and be confined to a place, so as
not to dare go whither you list, nor frequent what company you fancy: Yet
which, your Mistress will nevertheless expect from your Hands, for whenever she
understands you visit another, she will immediately forsake you, and defame
her. At your Age, you ought to have no body oversee your Estate, or Govern
above you in your Family: But which, you must nevertheless condescend to, if
you are disposed to Court; since such is the nature of a Mistress, that you
must not only give her all she will ask, but also allow her whatever she can
steal. At your Age, it is no longer tolerable to be extravagant and lavish in
Expenses, which he that sets up for a Gallant must be, or never please his
Mistress; for whenever you keep a Woman, she will not thank you for her
constant allowance, unless you are daily feeding her extravagancies besides. At
your Age, it is highly scandalous to leave business of moment, and weight for
such as is only trivial and of no advantage, and which, only tends to Pleasure
and Lewdness: But which, nevertheless, your Mistress will require at your
Hands; for that sort of Cattle are apt to believe the Affairs you have
indifferent, and may be omitted, in respect of those, to attend and wait upon
them. At your Age, it is not proper to exclude Friends, or forbear visiting
Acquaintance, though your Mistress will neither allow you to admit one, nor see
the other; expecting you should refrain all company for hers, and make it your
chief Study to conform your self to her humor. At your Age, it is a shame to
Marry, much more pretend to Court; for though a Woman be never so Vain and Wild,
she will still think one of Seventy much fitter to give Advice, than get
Children. At your Age, it is not Lawful to conceal Truth, or flatter any body;
which, nevertheless, the Man who Courts is obliged to do, and every Mistress
expects; for, whenever you shall presume to commend another's Beauty or good
Qualities beyond hers, she will soon fly in your Face, shut the Door against
you, not suffer her self to be seen; and besides, talk largely of you upon the
least occasion* At your Age, if you proceed in making Love, either you will be
Deluded, or she Cheated; for, if the wretch condescends to your desires, she
undoubtedly casts her self away; and if she treats you as such old Fellows
deserve, you will as surely find your self imposed upon and bubbl'd At your
Age, there is no enduring the cold Dews and nipping Frosts you must undergo;
for where it is often requisite you come in late to avoid being seen, you must
likewise be gone early to prevent discovery. Sir, I will defer the rest till I
see how you can digest this; for, if what I have said should prove too harsh
for your Stomach, the next, perhaps, may be somewhat more Lenitive. No more,
but GOD assist you always with his Divine Grace.

Toledo, Oct. 8, 1524.
LETTER XX. To the same; concerning the Qualities required in an Old Man; As
also, how difficult it is to remove Love from a Heart, where it has once taken
root; Nevertheless prescribing some few Remedies against it.
Right Noble SIR, and Repenting Old Gentleman,
BY yours I understood, how effectually my last moved you, and am exceeding
glad it was so well tempered, as to purge, but not overcome your Soul. Tho I
then repented stiling you Noble, I now think you well deserving that Title,
since you have done all that became the Nobility of your Blood, and amended
what was amiss in your Life. You say, Sir, my Words pierced your Heart, and
touched you to the very Quick; wherewith, to deal ingenuously, I am
extravagantly pleased, since I writ 'em not with intent you should only read,
but also be thereby the more sensibly affected; yet at the same time, must
assure you, on the Word of a Gentleman, and Christian, my design was not to
affront, but rather incline you to Amend. Sir, you say, as soon as ever you
read my Letter, you burnt your Mistresses Favors, tore her Billets-doux,
turned off her Boy who was wont to go between you, kept away from her House,
and instantly discharged the Bawd: All which I cannot but commend, and shall
highly extol, if you persevere; for it is so very hard a thing to root out
Vice, which has once taken possession, that where we imagine it quite
destroyed, it frequently sprouts out again anew. Sir, I return you hearty
Thanks for what you have done, and beg your Pardon for what I have said; tho I
must tell you, in case you Amend, I shall not greatly value your Anger, it
being much easier to appease Wrath, than thoroughly banish Vice. You desire me,
since I sent the Qualifications of an Amorous Old Man, I would now acquaint you
with those that are required in a Discreet one; that as the one may see the
dangers he is to avoid, the other may know the way he is to follow. Sir, I am
very willing to grant your Request, tho, I can by no means, promise my Wit
shall prove so mature, and Pen run so smooth in giving Advice, as Reproving;
for many are dull at Councelling, who are commonly very witty when they Rail;
nevertheless, I shall discharge my Conscience to the best of my knowledge,
assuring such as happen to meet with my Precepts, they will find far more benefit
by practicing, than pleasure in reading. Old Men, at your years, ought to be so
very exact in what they say, and regular in what they do, that they must not
only not be seen to commit any ill Action, but also not to speak the least
unseemly Word; A lewd and impudent Old Fellow, being singly sufficient to
corrupt a whole Country. Old Men, at your years, must not only give good
Example, but also good Advice; for as it is the Nature of Youth to wander, it
ought to be the Property of Age to walk uprightly, and council others to do the
like. Old Men, at your years, must be meek, modest, and peaceable; for if once
they occasioned Disturbances and Broils, they are now by all means to promote
Unity. Old Men, at your years, are to instruct the Ignorant, and support the
Weak, and where they cannot Relieve, they ought, at least, to Comfort; for many
times an Afflicted Heart receives greater Consolation from Words well spoken,
than whatever can possibly be given. Old Men, at your years, must busy
themselves in settling Affairs at home, and bewailing their Sins abroad; for he
may very well be assured of his Salvation, who in his Lifetime does what he
ought, and at his Death the best he can. Old Men, at your years, should be very
sparing of Words, and brief in Relations, neither must they be addicted to tell
Romances, or repeat Drolls; for if young People on this acc^unt are termed Wild
and Lewd; Old, assuredly, will be esteemed Madmen and Buffoons Old Men, at
your years, should avoid all manner of Litigiousness, and, if possible, buy off
Lawsuits at any rate, thereby to save themselves much trouble; for Young
People only endure such Fatigues, whilst Old cannot help fretting incessantly
at the least Disappointment. Old Men, at your years, must converse with People
of good Inclinations, and no ill Conditions, in whom they may safely Repose,
and with whom they may securely Discourse; nothing in this World being so great
ease to the Heart of Man, as pleasing Conversation. Old Men, at your years,
must seek out and choose Virtuous Persons for Friends, and be very careful such
as they pitch upon, and converse with, be neither over-given to talk, nor
importunate in asking, Friendship and Importunity being for the most part
incompatible. Old Men, at your years, ought not to entertain any other vain, or
Worldly thoughts, than those of Managing their Estates, and looking after their
Families; for he that does not mind his Estate, will certainly starve, and who
neglects his Family, will as surely never want Misfortunes. Old Men, at your
years, are obliged only to be clean and decently Dressed; for where gayety is
commendable in Youth, in Age it is greatly to be despised. Old Men, at your
years, must very cautiously avoid quarrelling with Enemies, or wrangling with
Neighbors; because, where they happen to have abusive Language given 'em, the
mischief is, they may have Sense enough to resent, but have not strength
sufficient to revenge. Old Men, at your years, must be very Charitable and
Compassionate; for, as raw young Fellows, being infatuated with the Affairs of
the World, think it enough they are called Christians; Old Men, who have had
more Experience, and are undeceived, may assure themselves, God will never have
Mercy, where they want Charity. Old Men, at your years, ought to have Pious
Books to improve their time, and History to divert them; for since Age will
neither permit travel nor labor, they must otherwise, of necessity, be all day
idle and thoughtful; therefore 'twere much better they should employ their time
in reading, than tiring themselves out with reflecting on times past. Old Men,
at your years, are to avoid sitting in Council, or meddling with Government;
because, the Business there, is, for the most part, managed by turbulent
Youths, and biased Persons; Men of Sense being seldom or never believed, and
ancient People as rarely regarded. Old Men, at your years, when either advised
with, must not be rash, loud, nor positive; because Youth is only permitted to
be Headstrong, where Age is always to be governed by Reason. Old Men, at your
Age, must be sober, peaceable, and chaste, and rather value themselves on their
Virtues than Years; for in these, and all other times, Men have been still more
Respected for good Lives, than living long. Old Men, at your years, after
taking necessary care of their Souls, must next have regard to their Bodies;
for as Galen says, Old Age is of that wonderful Nature, it is neither an
absolute Disease, nor perfect Health. Old Men, at your years, must endeavor to
have a House airy and open to the Sun, that it may be both wholesome and
pleasant; for, I am of Opinion, no Money is better laid out, than what an
ancient Person parts with that way. Old Men, at your years, must not only be
sure to live in a good House, but also to lie on a good Bed, and take care, as
the one be made soft, the other be kept warm; for an ancient Man being always
tender and sickly, takes more harm by a little Air at a Cranny, than he did,
when young, in a Frosty Night. Old Men, at your years, must beware they have
but few Dishes on their Table, as also, that the Meat be tender and well
seasoned; for otherwise, if they eat much, and love variety, they will always
be sickly, and seldom be at rest: for tho they may have Money wherewithal to
buy, they rarely have Stomachs sufficient to digest. Old Men, at your years,
must have a warm Bed, a Room well hung, a soft Fire, and Chimney that does not
smoke; for the Life of Old People depends chiefly on being cleanly, keeping
themselves warm, and living easy. Old Men, at your years, must be cautious of
living over Water, standing on moist Ground, and sleeping in windy Places;
because, being tender as Children, and naturally infirm, the Air penetrates
their Pores, and Dampness soon seizes their Spirits. Old Men, at your years,
upon pain of Death, must be moderate at Dinner, and abstinent at Supper;
because their Stomachs being weak and cold, cannot digest two Meals a day: when
that greedy old Person, who presumes to do the contrary, will both belch much,
and sleep little. Old Men, at your years, to prevent Sicknesses, and growing
fat and unweildy, must lighten themselves sometimes with Exercise; otherwise,
perhaps, they may once happen to be seized by an Astma, which will so choke 'em
up, they shall rather seem to blow than breath. Old Men, at your years, should
be very cautious of giving ill Language to Servants, and must bear sometimes
with Failings, and, besides, pay 'em duly their Wages; and this, that they may
live easy, and not dissatisfied; for otherwise they will be negligent in
performing their Duty, and very often subject to Steal. Old Men, at your y^ars,
must make it their chief business to go to Church; but if any one thinks much
of this Injunction, I require it no oftener of him than he went to see his
Mistress, when young. To conclude, Old Men, at your years, must endeavor to
wear their Clothes neat, Linen clean, keep their Houses decent, and Beds
sweet; for he who is Ancient, and would be esteemed Wise, if he desires to be
healthy, and live contented, must keep his Body free from Lice, and Mind from
Disgusts. At the end of your Letter you write, that though you have cast off
your Love, and discarded your Mistress, yet the Pain still remains with you,
and therefore desire I would prescribe a Remedy, or, at least, send you some
Comfort; for tho you have already turned it out of your House, yet it ceases
not often to knock at your Door. In this case I must refer you to Hermogenes,
Ctesiphon, Dorcacius, Plutarch, and Ovid, who have all spent much time, and
writ many Books of Instructions how to Love, or avoid that Plague. But let
Ovid, Dorcacius, and the rest, say what they please, in my Opinion, the surest
Remedy against Love, were never to begin it; it being a Beast so very untoward,
that it will be taken with a Thread, where it can never be frighted away with a
Sword. Let every Man be cautious what he goes about, consider what he does, be
careful in what he Undertakes, mind whom he Visits, and observe where he
settles his Affection; for tho it was in his choice to enter, it will hardly be
in his power to return safe. He that ventures upon Love will meet with
Precipicies, Bogs, Briers, and Whirlpools in the way, where many are cast down,
stuck, torn, and drowned; so that even the Man who escapes the best, for the
most part, comes off but very scurvily. How often did Hercules wish he were
well quit of his Mistress Mitrida, Menelaus of Dortha, Paris of Hellen,
Alcibiades of Dorbeta, Demophoon of Phillis, Hannibal of Sabina, and Marc
Antony of Cleopatra, from whom, nevertheless, they could never be parted, but,
at length, were all jointly lost together. In Love let no Man trust another, or
rely upon himself, for it is so very natural to both Sexes, and the desire of
being beloved so agreeable, that whenever it joints, it is a cement that seldom
gives way. Love is such a hidden Cancer, it fixes not on the Face where it may
be seen, nor pulse where it may be felt; but on the poor Heart, where, tho it
be very pungent, yet none dares discover it. After all, the best Remedy I can
think of against Love is, that it be not permitted to take root in the Mind,
that the Eyes be kept from gazing, the Ears be stopped against Procurers, no
Familiarity be entertained with Women, that, if any come, the Doors be shut
against 'em, and that a Man be not abroad after day shut in; for thus, if Love
be not totaly Cured, at least, I Am sure, it will be considerably Eased. Sir, if
you will weigh well all has been said, and make your advantage accordingly, you
will infallibly prevent much trouble, and save a great deal of Expense; it
being much more proper for your Age, and my Gravity, to know where are the best
Taverns, than the finest Ladies. Sir, let your acquaintance, the Licentiate
Burgos, be a Warning and Check to you for the future; who being old, as you
are, and in Love likewise, died last Saturday, in so strange a manner, it was
both a terror to all in general, and an exceeding Grief to his Relations
besides. I will say no more, at present, but pray God to Preserve you, and give
me Grace always to Serve him. Amen.

Burgos, Febr. 24. 1523.
LETTER XXI. To Don Alonso Espinel Corregidor of Oviedo, a very Neat and
Pleasant Old Gentleman; wherein the Author hints, how much the Ancients always
Honored Age: Together with several Privileges peculiar to Old People,
exceeding Pleasant, and no less Reforming.
Very Illustrious SIR, and Honest Old Gentleman,
SOlon, Prometheus, Licurgus, and Numa Pompilius, chief Lawyers of the World,
tho they differed in many things, yet all agreed in these; That Men should
worship the Gods, be Merciful to the Poor, and Honor Old Age. There has no
Nation been hitherto heard of so Barbarous, or People so Inhuman, where the
Worship of a Deity, Relief of the Poor, and Respect to Age, was forbid; for
these Three things are in themselves so very Essential and Natural, that they
require no Law to authorize, nor Prince to enforce 'em. Eschines the
Philosopher, in a Speech to the Rhodians says, there were but Seven Laws in the
Islands Baleares, which were, That they should Worship the Gods, Take Pity on
the Poor, Honor Ancient People, Obey their Princes, Oppose Tyrants, Kill
Thieves, and None of them Travel in Strange Countries. Aulus Gellius, lib. 2.
cap. 25. writes, that among the Romans, those who had acquired great Riches, or
attained to high Places, were not so much honored and respected as such who
had lived to a great Age, and behaved themselves always with a stayed Gravity.
In those times ancient Men were held in so high esteem, they reverenced them
almost as Gods, and honored them as Loving Fathers. It is certain the Romans
took the Custom of paying such Deference to Age from the Lacedaemonians, among
whom it was an established Law, that only ancient grave Men could be
constituted Judges to punish, and Censors to direct. The Philosopher Pantheon,
who was Master to Empedocles, being asked by a King of Thebes, called
Circidacus, How he should do to govern his Dominions? answered, if you will
have your Kingdom well Managed, and People live quiet, cause the old Men to
govern, young to go to the Wars, and Women to Spin and Bake at home; for, if on
the contrary, you permit Women to take up the business of Men, young People to
live idle, and old to to be laid quiet aside, you will soon suffer much trouble
in your Person, and the Commonwealth be likewise in great danger of
destruction. The Veteran Romans enjoyed five singular Priveledges in Rome,
which were, That if they came to Poverty, they should be maintained by the
Public; That only they could sit down in the Temples, wear Rings on their
Fingers, Eat in private, and have a Robe down to their Feet; all which were
Religiously observed from Numa Pompilius down even to the Dictator Quintus
Cincinnatus. After the Romans were defeated by Hannibal, at the three famous
Battles of Trebia, Thrasimen, and Cannae, there being but few left to maintain
the Commonwealth, and fewer fit to endure the hardships of War, the Senate
ordered none should remain in the City, but such as were Married, and had Wife
or Children to maintain; so that no Person then could continue in Rome without
keeping either a Wife or a Mistress: Also, that Men might the better be
encouraged to Marry, it was then ordained, that for the future all Honors and
Dignities in the Commonwealth should be conferred only on such as maintained a
Family; so that it thereby came to pass, they were most esteemed who had most
Children, and not those who were eldest. This was called Lex Cimica, which also
Enacted, That in case there were several Competitors who had got some more,
some fewer Children, and lost some in the Wars, that then regard should not be
had to him that had got, but him that had lost most, because the Romans held
all that died in defense of their Country, in the same Veneration we do those
that become Martyrs for the Faith. Now, to come to the purpose, I say, and
affirm, you have merited all these three Honors, and they ought worthily to be
conferred upon you; since in Age you are Seventy five, as to Mat^imony have had
Eleven Children, and then four of them been killed in the Wars of Granada:
Nevertheless, I am of Opinion, you would willingly resign the Honors you have
gained by living so long, having so many Children, and losing four in the Wars,
providing you could but have escaped the vast Troubles you have under-gone; for
in this unhappy World Reputation every day grows less, when Troubles daily
increase. Sir, I have computed my Age, and find I am but Forty four; yet, as I
hope to be saved, am so very full of Discontent, and exceedingly tired out with
Sufferings, that I covet not so much to live a great while, as to Repent
sincerely of my Sins, and this because our Salvation depends not upon a long,
but Virtuous and Pious Life. Vivere erubesco, and mori pertimesco, cried St.
Anselm, as who would say; Comparing the wickedness of my Life, with the
Punishment I deserve for it, on one hand I am ashamed to live, and on the other
afraid to dye; for with God no Merits pass unrewarded, nor Guilt unpunished.
Suitable to the saying of which Saint, I protest, when I stand to consider how
long I have lived, and how little good have done, I can neither forbear
Sighing, nor give over Weeping, reflecting, how at the hour of my death a
strict Account will be taken, not only of the ills I have committed, but also
the good Actions I have declined. I find but one good quality in my self, and
that is, I commiserate my own Failings, and envy the Perfections of others; and
would to God I could with the same ease amend, as I can discover, my own
Faults; for then, I assure you, the Crime would be no sooner committed, than I
should begin to do Penance for it. Therefore now, since you are past Seventy,
and I am onwards of Fifty, methinks, it is no ill Advice we should begin to lay
aside superfluous Care, and put in execution our good Purposes; for frequently
the best part of our Life is spent only in designing to grow better; But yet
when we least think of it, death often preven^s us before we have begun, and so
leaves us in a State of Perdition. Remember, Sir, in how many Wars you have
been, how many Famines have seen, how many Friends have lost, and how many
Plagues escaped, from all which dangers Almighty God has delivered you, not
because you have not deserved a thousand deaths, but that you might have more
time to repent. In order to be Healthy, and prevent Diseases, I confess a Man
must live temperate, and somewhat indulge himself; yet, at the same time, I
avouch, we are neither to attribute to our Physician, nor Care of our selves,
the length or shortness of our days, for that depends only on the will and good
Pleasure of our Maker. Sir, I entreat and charge you to be moderate in
Discourse, temperate in Eating, charitable in Giving, and grave in Advising; so
that you may value your self more upon your Gravity than Age; otherwise, as you
reckon your Years, others will not fail to count your Vices.

I remember this time twelve month, when you were laid up of the Gout, and I
came to visit you, you then requested the same thing you now write about, that
is, to inform you of the Privileges and Immunities of old Men. This, Sir, is
what might very well have been asked of somebody else, who were wiser, and had
more Years over their Heads; chiefly considering, though I am past my Youth, I
have not yet arrived at Old Age; for as Aulus Gellius says, the Romans enjoyed
not the Privileges of Age, till they were Forty Seven Years Old. Nevertheless,
I am willing to perform what you so earnestly desire, on condition, you shall
neither be offended nor dissatisfied; for, I intend to write and acquaint you
only with the Prerogatives of humoursome old Fellows, without offering in the
least, to touch upon any, whose Gravity and Age are equal; and by whose
Prudence States are frequently Governed, and Youth as often directed. It is
only just, my Pen should launch out upon such as me, who am a Vagabond, you
that are Humoursome, Alonso de Ribera who is an eternal Babbler, Pedro de
Espinel a continual Gamester, Roderigo de Orejon newly set up for a Spark,
Sancho de Najara for an Epicure, and Gutierre de Hermosilla who is most
immoderately Fretful. Tullius, Possidonius, Laertius and Polycrates spent many
Hours, and writ several Treatises to prove, that Old Age was Profitable and
Advantageous; and yet how far were they from the Truth, and how little was
their knowledge of what they affirmed, since we find by experience, it is
nothing less than a Disease, whereof we never recover, and a sickness, which,
at last, deprives us of our being. Sir, I will here reckon up some of the
Privileges which Old Men enjoy, and Age carries along with it, which yet, will
be nothing, in respect of the many infirmities attend gray Hairs; being so
exceeding numerous, and very grievous, that they can hardly be comprehended,
much less recounted.

Several Remarkable Privileges of Old Men, full of Raillerie, and Facetious
Reflections.
It is a Privilege of Old Men to be short Sighted and blear Eyed, and very
often where there is not a Cloud to be seen in the Air, they are to be found in
their Eyes. It is the Privilege of Old Men to have a ringing in their Ears,
and to be much troubled at their not hearing well; and this is discernable in
that they often turn their Heads on one side to listen, and understand not what
is said without hollowing. But still, the worst is, they frequently imagine
what is spoken, and which, they do not understand; to be a design upon them,
and in their Prejudice. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to have their hairs
fall off without Combing, and Itch grow in their Necks without Sowing;
wherefore will stand a whole day sunning their Heads, and complaining the
Dandrif makes 'em scratch, when, for Cure, they should be washed in Chamberlye,
but dare not, for fear of the weakness of their Pericranys, It is the
Privilege of Old Men, to want Teeth in their Mouths, to have some Loose, and
others Rotten; but still the worst is, that many of 'em complain when they
Drink, and Lif^ when they Talk. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to put
Pepper-Corns into their hollow Teeth, and afterward to take a little Wine and
Rosemary to wash their Mouths, It is the Privilege of Old Men, I mean such as
are past Threescore, to give largely to Young Wenches to pick their Heads, and
scratch their Backs. It is the Privilege of Old Men, whenever they complain or
Limp, by reason of some Swelling in their Legs, hard Nodes, nails grown under
the Flesh, or their Veins being full of Wind, if any Neighbor ask what they
ail, they may Swear, and Forswear, it is but a scratch. It is the Privilege of
Old Men, to wear their Perriwigs a-wry, Cravats two Inches from their Necks,
Stockings wrinkled, Shoes wide, and to go often in Slippers; and this, not to
appear Careless or Modish, but because they are Gouty or have got the Pox. It
is the Privilege of Old Men, I mean Rotten and Consumptive Fellows, when they
design to spit on the ground, to drivel on their Wastcoats; and which, does not
always proceed from Love of Nastiness, but sometimes mere weakness of Lungs. It
is the Privilege of Old Men, never to be out of a Chimney-Corner when the
weather's Cold, and to Sun themselves after Dinner if it be fair; the pleasure
of which is, that the heat dries up their Mouths, and they are therefore often
forced to send after the Vintner's Wife. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to
have their Heads and Hands shake; so that they cannot sip Broth without
greasing themselves, nor d^ink Wine without spilling. It is the Privilege of
Old Men, to sit in Elbow-Chairs with Backs, that they may lean and loll, and
sometimes divert their Catarrhs with a Nap. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to
Dine at Eleven, have a Collation at Two, and Sup at Six; also, to be very
punctual in going to Bed with the Hens, and rising before day to call the
Maids. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to limp about House with a Cudgel in
their Hands, that the Stick may walk as well as carry; also, sometimes to stir
up the Fire with it, and now and then to strike a Servant. It is the Privilege
of Old Men, without my Lord Mayors leave, and inspight of both Sheriffs, to
fasten their Handkerchiefs to their Girdles, and wear a Slabbering-bib at
Table; Also, a double clout about their Necks in Bed, on which, for want of
better, they may wipe their Hands and blow their Noses. It is the Privilege of
Old Men, to Eat leasurely, Drink often, and tumble their Meat from one Jaw to
another; also, if the Guests stay long, in the mean time they are allowed to
taste the Wine, and cut a slice off the Spit with a safe conscience. It is the
Privilege of Old Men, to ask, whether Moon or Starlight when they go to Bed?
and early in the Morning, whether the Sun shines, it has Rained, or is a Frost?
They punctually observe the change of the Moon, and if the weather be dry or wet
at that time; but in case they forget, their Bones and Corns soon put them in
mind. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to complain they counted all hours in
the Night, and to enquire 'ith' Morning which way the Wind stands? For if
Southerly, they say, it makes 'em faint, and, if Easterly, disorders 'em. It is
the Privilege of Old Men, to set a Board under their Feet, and lean their
Elbows on a Cushion; and, if they happen to fall a sleep, lying back in their
Chair, or leaning on a Table, I am told, they cannot well be called to account
for it. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to use all defensive shelter against
Cold, as their Mortal Enemy, and to avoid walking against Wind: But, what I
most admire, was, their great Prudence in the hard Winter, to keep their Doors
shut, and Windows close. It is the Privilege of Old Men, not to go to Bed
without a Spitting Dish, Chamber Pot at Beds-Head, and Close-Stole at its Feet,
and if their Doxy will so allow it, to have a Man or Maid always lie in the
Room to be ready when they call, or cover them warm when the Clothes fall off.
It is the Privilege of Old Men, to wash their Feet every Saturday, pare their
Corns and Nails close, and put on a clean Shirt at Night; and if it happen to
be a fair Day, to Court the Maid to Comb and Scratch their Heads. It is the
Privilege of Old Men to pass the time after Dinner at Whisk, Cribbidge, or
Tables in their Neighbors Houses, if they can go abroad, or else send for them
to their own where they cannot: But, the best on it is, as long as they play
they will be sure to have Fruit and Wine on the Table, and that, none of the
worst in Town. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to lean against a Shop, walk in
the Church Porch, sit on some Bench in the Market, or on a Chair at their own
Doors; and this, only to hear what News about Town, and talk with all that pass
by; which custom their Neighbors often Curse, and their Servants Damn; and
this, because they would not have them over-hear what they say, or overlook
all they do. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to complain to their Neighbors,
and chide their Servants, because the Bread's stale, Meat not tender, their
Diet ill dressed, the House not clean, Maid saucy, and their Wives Gossips; All
which complaints are sometimes occasioned by their being ill-attended, but
oftener by their being ill conditioned. It is the Privilege of Old Men, without
fear of being Indicted, Quod suadente Diabolo, etc. or incurring the penalty of
disobeying any Proclamation, to pare of the Crusts from their Bread, and to put
no Water to their Wine: Also, it is an Essential part of their Prerogative if
past Threescore, that the Morsels they Eat may be reckoned, but not how many
times they Drink. It is the Privilege of Old Men to chide Servants for
laughing loud, and to enquire what they are talking of when they speak low; and
the reason is, because they think they laughed at them when they laughed out, or
talked ill of them when they spoke low. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to
grumble or chide their Maids, both when they stay at home or go abroad; saying,
they never come in time when they are sent out, and seldom do any thing to
rights when they are ordered. But, the pleasantest thing of all is, that by the
by, in their Wive's absence, they will make Love to them, and show themselves
oftentimes jealous of the Men. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to complain
eternally their Knees pain 'em, that they are troubled with heat of Liver,
their Kidneys molest 'em are sick at Stomach, the Gout torments 'em, Sciatica
keeps 'em waking, and above all, that Poverty oppresses 'em; so that there is
scarce one Old Man in a hundred, who is not loaded with Pains and Aches, and
who does not always pretend want of Money. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to
ask all they meet, What News? as also to be observed, that be whatever they
hear true or false, they will presently tell it again for a certainty, add
something of their own, and embellish the whole with their pithy
PoetickRemarks. It is the Privilege of Old Men, at least once a month, to open
their Coffers, shut the Doors, and all alone to survey their Treasure; counting
their Money two or three times over, laying the Guinea's by themselves,
Crown-Pieces in one place, and Broad Gold in another, but of which they would
not part with a single Piece either to save their Souls, or relieve their
Bodies. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to be naturally Covetous, Niggardly,
Penurious, and Close, and that not only in regard to their Neighbors, but even
to themselves; which is plainly discernable, in that they keep their best
Clothes to wear the worst, sell their best Wine, and drink the poorest, and
part with their best Wheat, to eat the coursest; so that they live poor to die
rich, and all that they labored to purchase whilst living, is afterward sold
by Outcry. It is the Privilege of Old Men, when called to Council, Weddings,
or at Church, to take the upper end of the Table, and propose first what they
think proper to be Debated; but still the mischief is, that most are so very
tedious in their Narrations, and various in their Sayings, that they rather
exact Scorn and Contempt, than Respect and Veneration. It is the Privilege of
Old Men, to Speak without being spoke to, Answer without being Asked, Give
Advice without being Consulted, Take any thing without being offered, Go into
any House without being sent for, and sit down at Table without being invited;
which I happening once to reprove in a Friend of mine, he answered; Sir,
trouble not your self with matters of such small importance, for you know well
all Places are free to Honorable Age. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to be
naturally Quarrelsom, Passionate, Melancholy ill Humored, Jealous, and hard to
please; and the reason is, because through Age their Blood being cold, Choler
corrupted, and Humors changed, they take more Satisfaction in Quarrelling than
Laughing. It is the Privilege of Old Men, in long Winter-nights, and Summer
Holidays, to sit down, and tell what Countries they have traveled through,
Wars been in, Voyages made, Dangers escaped, and Amors have had; but yet they
will never tell you how many years they are old, or how long it is since those
Passages happened; but if you chance to mention any such thing, they
immediately turn the Discourse another way. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to
be always in Apothecaries Books, often dealing with Physicians, consulting old
Women, to be Skilled in the Qualities of many Herbs, to Understand Distilling
of Waters, Sunning of Bottles, and to keep Pots of Physic in their Cupboards:
But notwithstanding, all those of my Country, which is the Mountains, are much
better acquainted with Vintners Buts, than Apothecaries Books. It is the
Privilege of Old Men, to hate sower, and love sweet things; such as Dates of
Oran, Citron of Candia, sweet Lemmons of the Canaries, Marmelade of Portugal,
and Preserves of India; yet, I know some old Fellows so very healthy and
robust, that they will prefer a good Westphalia Ham to all the Sweetmeats in the
Universe. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to extol past Times, and rail at
present, saying, in their Youth they were acquainted with such and such, who
were Brave, Resolute, Generous, Noble, and Stout; but now the World is so far
degenerated, that Men are all Cowards, Niggards, Liars, Misers, and Knaves: The
cause of which Discontent is, that being then in the heat of their Youth, they
liked every thing, but now grown Aged, nothing is pleasing to 'em. It is the
Privilege of Old Men, by Authority, or through Necessity, to wear a Fox-Skin
on their Arms to dry up the Rheum, and next their Head a Quilted Cap to suck up
the Sweat; Then to lie on a soft Feather-bed to keep 'em warn, and wear at
night a Linen Wastcoat for fear they should be uncovered in Bed; also a
Scarlet one by day to please their Eyes; and lastly, a warm Stomacher to help
Digestion. It is the Privilege of Old Men, in Winter to put on as many pair of
Stockings as they please, Shoes with Cork and Hat in them, and Galloshes over
all; They may also wear Woollen, Leather, and Fur Gloves, all at once; Nay,
they may at the same time wear Doublet, Wastcoat, Coat, Surtout, and Cloak, and
on their Heads a Cap, Wig, and Hat; They may likewise lie on a Down Bed,
Quilts, and Feather-bed, and be covered with Blankets, Rugs, and as much
Bedding as they please; They may also lie in an Alcove Matted, keep a Fire
there, and have their Bed well warmed; But still, notwithstanding this, the
Wretches never cease coughing all night, nor grunting all day. It is the
Privilege of Old Men, when they go to Bed to have their Shins scratched, and
Backs rubbed; and, if it be a neat Old Fellow, he sees his Breeches first well
looked, and has his Legs stroak'd after which he cries to the Maid, I pray thee
Mary open the Bed, and bring me a Dram. It is the Privilege of Old Men, when
at home alone, or awake in Bed, they may think on their Youth past, and all
their old Acquaintance gone; also, how useless Age has made them, and how
little they are now to be valued; The Memory of which oftentimes makes 'em
Heavy and Melancholy, because they see they must die without remedy, and rot
without redemption. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to talk often with the
Parson of the Parish about their Funeral, and frequently consult their Lawyer
concerning their Will: But the Jest is, there is hardly one hour in a day in
which they do not alter their Resolution, about being buried in this or that
place, and leaving what they have to this or that Body. It is the Privilege of
Old Men, to be known wherever they come, and heard wherever they go, that
is, by Coughing as they Walk, dragging their Feet, and many times by the Noise
they make with their Cane, but most commonly by muttering and scolding at their
Men. It is the Privilege of Old People, to turn every Bit they eat a long time
from one side of their Mouths to 'tother before they swallow it, and to hold a
Glass of Wine the mean while in their Hands, so that their Throats being better
at swallowing, than Jaws at chewing, their greatest comfort is to take two or
three gulps with every Morsel; for tho what they eat may be but ill chewed, yet
then it must needs be well soaked. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to carry
the Keys of their Money close in their Fobs, and those of their Wine and Corn
in their Pockets; so that when they are to give out Corn to Grind, or Money for
usual Expenses, they frequently make the House ring, and often spoil their
Wives Dinners. It is the Privilege of Old Men, to be peevish to those that
ask, how old they are? and pleased with such as talk of their past Amors; but
the worst is, they could even murder such as do not honor them for their
years, and yet are always angry with those that compute 'em; so that they love
the Respect due to them, but conceal their Age which is the Occasion of it. It
is the Privilege of Old Men, to complain to every body they cannot eat, their
Meat's not well seasoned, they have no Dainties, their Bed's not well made,
that the Gout continually torments, and Suppers do 'em harm, and lastly, that
they have not slept one wink all night; and yet, on the other hand, it is
hardly day when they begin to quarrel with every body, because they have not
brought them their Breakfast. This is all, only I pray God to keep you, and
give me Grace to serve him.

Valencia, Febr. 12. 1524.
LETTER XXII. To Don Antonio de Zuniga, Prior of St. John's; informing him,
that though a Gentleman be subject to Failings, he ought to be guilty of
nothing Dishonorable; With several Encomiums on this Prior's Valor in his
Command at the Siege of Toledo: As likewise a Promise to recommend his Prowess
to Posterity.
Illustrious Lord, and very brave Commander,
YEsterday, being St. Lucy's Day, Lopez Ossorio gave me your Lo^dship's Letter,
dated from the Camp before Toledo, with which, in truth, I was extremely
pleased, and set a high value upon it, both because writ by such a Hand, and
sent from such a Place; for in time of so great Revolution as this, a Gentleman
must not write from his House where he is at ease, but the Camp where he is
fighting. The Priest must value himself on his Surplice, and Countryman on his
Plow, but the Gentleman chiefly upon his Sword* so that in a well-governed
Commonwealth the Priest Prays, Countryman Plows, and Gentleman Fights. A Man is
not a Gentleman for being only well born, powerful, rich, and having many
Vassals; for a Tradesman may have Qualifications, and a Jew sometimes buys
them: But what makes a Man deserve that Character is Moderation in Speaking,
Liberality in Giving, Temperance in Eating, Honesty of Life, Easiness in
Forgiving, and Valor in Fighting. Tho a Man be never so well Born, and possess
never so large an Estate, yet if he be lavish of his Tongue, an Epicure, Proud,
Malicious, Covetous, Impatient, or a Coward, we may well say he is fitter for
the Plow than Sword. Baseness, Sloth, Covetousness, Malice, Falsehood, and
Cowardice, are always incompatible with Gentility; for tho in a true Gentleman
there may be some things found blameable, yet still there ought to be nothing
infamous. There has been no time in our Age so proper for a Man of Honor to
show himself as this; for since the King is out of the Kingdom, the Queen sick,
Council fled, People in Rebellion, Governors in the Field, and all the Kingdom
in an uproar; it is now or never that Gentlemen must labor and expose their
Lives to settle their Country, and serve their Prince. Every good Gentleman now
turns his Gloves into Gauntlets, Mules into Manag'd-Horses, Buskins into
Jack-boots, Hat into a Helmet, Wastcoat into a Coat of Mail, Silks into Armor,
Gold into Steel, and his Hunting into Fighting; so that he must now value
himself not so much on a good Library, as a good Armory. It is as nece^sary for
public Good that Gentry Arm, as that Clergy put on their Vestments; for as
Prayer wipes away our Sins, so Arms frequently deliver us from our Enemies. I
have said all this, my Lord Grand Prior, to make you sensible, we know here not
only all you do in the Camp, but also all you say. Nevertheless, for your part
you have no cause to be concerned, since every body praises your Conduct, and
magnifies your Fortune. Judas Machabeus is highly commended, for that being
once advised by his Men to save himself by flight, when he was about to give
Battle, he cried, God forbid we should bring our Fame into question by such
Baseness, when we may all dye here this day in defense of our Law, vindication
of our Brethren, and to avoid living with Infamy. The Greek Historians greatly
magnify their King Ogiges, being ready to engage the Lycaonians, and his Men
telling him they were very numerous, he answered, The Prince that will command
many, must fight many. Anaxandridas, General of the Spartans, being asked, Why
his Men chose rather to be killed than taken? answered, Because they are better
pleased to die free, than live Slaves. The great Prince Bias being at War with
Iphicrates King of the Athenians and falling unawares into an Ambush of his
Enemies, his Men, ready to fly, asking, What they should do? he replied, Go
tell the Living I dye Fighting, and I will acquaint the Dead you saved your
selves by Flight. Le^nidas, Son of An^^andridas, and Brother to Cleomenidas,
b^ing told by his Men in a Battle, That the Enemi^s Arrows flew so thick they
even darkened the Sun* he readily answered, If their Arrows hide the Sun* we
shall surely fight in the Shade. Carilus, Fifth King from Licurgus, being in a
pitched Battle against the Athenians, and hearing one of his Captains ask
another, Whether he knew the number of the Enemies; he replied for the other,
Brave and Courageous Officers must never ask, how many their Enemies are, but
where they are; for as the one shows a disposition to run away, the other does
only an inclination to fight. Alcibiades, the famous Athenian General, in his
Conflict with the Lacedaemonians, hearing his Men cry throughout the Camp, To
Arms! to Arms! for we are fallen into the hands of our Enemies, he said, Have
Courage, Friends, and fear nothing, for it is not we that are fallen into their
hands, but, on the contrary, they into ours. I have thought fit to mention
these few Matters of Antiquity, that all that are with you may know, and all
that are from you understand, that your Illustrious Lordship well deserves to
be ranked among these noble Heroes, since it appears they have outdone you
neither in Words or Actions. For we have been lately informed, how those of
Toledo making a Sally to surprise a great Convoy going to your Camp; and many
of your Men beginning to fly, and advising you to do the like, you, my Lord,
like a brave Soldier, and expert Captain, rushed boldly through the thickest of
your Enemies, crying out, This way, Gentlemen, this way; for shame! for shame!
Victory! Victory! for if we overcome we obtain our desire, and if we dye we do
but our Duty! Words worthy to be remembered and carved in Letters of Gold upon
your Tomb Stone, ^ince that day it appeared you not only killed above Seven
with your hand, but also overcame as many thousands by your Valor and Conduct.
Tr^gus Pompeius often Remarks, the great Victories obtained by the Romans, were
not so much got by the Strength of their Armies, as Prudence of their Generals;
and this may the easier be credited, since we daily see the success of a Battle
is not so much attributed to the Army that fought, as the General who
commanded. The Assyrians boast of their Commander Belus, the Persians of Cyrus,
Thebans of Hercules, Hebrews of Machabeus, Greeks of Alcibiades, Trojans of
Hector, Egyptians of Ogiges, Epirots of Pyrrhus, Romans of Scipio,
Carthaginians of Hannibal, and the Spaniards of Viriatus. This Viriatus was a
Native of the Province of Lusitania, (now Portugal;) in his youth he was first
a Shepherd, then Farmer, then Highwayman, afterward a General, and the best
and greatest Defender of his Country that ever was. The Roman Authors
themselves confess, that in Fifteen years he maintained War against 'em, they
could neither kill, take, nor defeat him; whereupon, being unable to subdue him
by Force, they, at length, contrived to destroy him by Poison. I thought
convenient. My Lord Prior, to put you in mind of this Piece of History, that in
this Civil War we are engaged in, you may prove as a new Machabeus among the
Hebrews, and a second Viriatus among the Spaniards; and, that as our Enemies
may have Matter to relate, we likewise may have a General to commend. Let the
conclusion be therefore, that you labor to withstand Vice manfully, as you
have hitherto courageously opposed Our Enemies; for, but a few blots in Persons
so remarkable as your Lordship, will alone Eclipse the Glory of many Victories.
As to what Don Ferdinando de Vega recommended to me in your behalf, That since
you signalized your self so eminently in War, you might not be forgot in my
Chronicle; assure your Illustrious Lordship, that if your Sword prove equal to
that of Achilles, my Pen shall endeavor to be like that of Homer. No more, but
God Bless you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Medina de Rio seco, Febr. 18. 1522.
LETTER XXIII. To Don Ignigo de Velasco, Constable of Castile; showing, that
Anger and Passion ought never to be permitted to reign in the Heart of a Man of
Honor; condemning communicating Letters; Instructing how and when to Advise;
And lastly, Writing some Iocose News from Court.
Very Illustrious Lord, and Compassionate Constable,
I Have reason to say of your Lordship, what the Holy Ghost did of the
Synagogue, Curavimus Babyloniam, and non est curata; Ergo relinquamus illam. We
have taken care of Babylon, and she would not be healed, therefore let us leave
her. I say this, my Lord, because it is a pleasant Jest, when having desired
you would not let my Lady Duchess know one word of what I writ, you not only
presently showed her my Letter, but were also pleased to make sport with it.
Nevertheless, I think I am even with you in that particular, for I immediately
communicated yours to the Earl of Nassau; so that if mine served to divert you,
yours was as good as a Play among the Flemings, Portugueses, Germans, and
Spaniards. It was very proper the Duchess should ridicule my reflecting on her
Sex; for I have reason to commend her Discretion, where I must needs blame your
Rashness. For the future, I beg your Lordship, not to make so much trial of the
worth of my Letters, but having once read, you would either tear, or burn them;
for otherwise some Persons may happen to hear or see 'em, who not being
over-wise, or good natured, may wrest that to my prejudice, which was designed
both for their and your Advantage. But to say no more of this, you tell me, for
my sake you are willing to be reconciled to that Gentleman, which I value
equally as if you had pardoned me the Affront; being so much my Friends Friend,
that I place to my own account whatever service is done either for him or his
Family. Besides, granting my Request, you performed but your Duty, for Princes
and great Men are to be so far from doing wrong to others, that they must not
so much as revenge Injuries to themselves; for you well know, what in Inferiors
is termed Rage, in great Persons is accounted Pride; and farther, what among
those is esteemed a just Punishment, among these is reckoned but Revenge. Every
time you compare your Nobility and Conscience together, you will be pleased at
the Wrongs you have forgiven, and be troubled for the Injuries you have
revenged. To pardon Offenses is a great Satisfaction, when desire of Revenge
carries along with it a heavy Discontent; I mean, that sometimes a Man striving
to revenge some small Affront, comes off with great shame. There are Injuries
of that nature, they must not only not be revenged, but also not be so much as
owned; for Honor is so nice, that whenever a Man confesses an Affront
received, he is thereby presently obliged to answer it The Consul Mamilius once
asking Julius Caesar, What he most valued himself upon, and whereof the memory
was most dear to him? Caesar replied, I swear by the Immortal Gods, I deserve
Honor on no greater account, nor am so much pleased on any, as pardoning those
that wrong me, and rewarding such as serve me. A Sentence worthy of praise,
grateful to hear, and fit to imitate; for, tho Julius Caesar believed like a
Heathen, yet he acted as a Christian; When, on the contrary, we believe as
Christians, but act like Pagans. It is not without reason I say, we believe as
Christians, and live like Pagans; for the malice of Man is now come to that
height, that many would forgive their Enemies, but dare not for fear of their
Friends; for as soon as one mentions forgiving, they presently ascribe the
cause rather to Cowardice, than Conscience. But let every one say what he
pleases, in this Affair your Lordship has acquitted your self both like a good
Christian toward God, and a good Friend toward me; and what more can be
required in this World, than to be faithful to ones Maker, and true to ones
Friend? My Lord, as to the Memorial you sent, containing some Cases of
Conscience, as likewise several Points relating to your Estate, I will look
over it at leisure, and answer it with deliberation; for I must always
endeavor so to give Advice, as no Scruple may afterward remain on my
Conscience. He that asks Council, must be quick and diligent, otherwise it
sometimes happens Affairs are so far gone, and in such desperate plight, that
there is more need of Violence to redress, than Prudence to Preserve 'em. But,
who gives advice is to take a quite contrary method, that is, be very Prudent
and very Slow; for, Counsel not given with deliberation, is, for the most part,
soon followed by repentance. Plato Writing to Origas the Grecian, has these
Words; My Friend Origas, you write me to advise you how to behave your self in
Lycaonia, and yet on the other hand, press for a speedy answer, both which, tho
you dare ask; yet, I must tell you, I cannot grant: for I Will assure you, I
study much more where I am to Counsel my Friends, than when I am to Read to the
Philosophers. Counsel is to be asked, and given by a Man of sound Judgment,
well Read, who has seen much, had Experience in the like Case, that is not
concerned, lest Malice sway him nor self-interested lest Covetousness pervert
him; in short, I say, a modest and generous Person, must bestow his Money on
his Friends frankly, but his Counsel maturely. Allowing these Conditions
requifite in one that is to give Advice, as no doubt they are, we may boldly
infer, Counselling is a thing frequently Pactis'd, but very rarely understood.
An unfortunate Man comes to ask Advice of his Friend, on which, perhaps, his
Life, Fortune, Honor, or Conscience depends; yet this Friend, without either
stirring from his place, or making the least reflection, as positively directs
what he is to do, as if he had found it in the Bible. I mention this, Sir,
because sometimes you are angry, and fret incessantly, if I do not immediately
answer your Letters, and solve your Doubts. As to what you write about Marcus
Aurelius, all I can answer is, that I long since translated and presented it to
the Emperor, tho not perfect, from whom, soon after, Laxao stole it; The Queen
got it from Laxao, Tumbas from the Queen, Donna Aldonza from Tumbas, and your
Lordship from Donna Aldonza; so that you have all, except his Majesty, unjustly
possessed the Fruits of my Labor. The News at Court is, Secretary Cobos is made
a Favorite, the Governor of Bresa says nothing, Laxao Mutters, the Admiral
Writes, the Duke of Vejar Hoards, the Marquis de Pliego Games, the Marquis de
Villafranca Bustles, Count de Osorno Serves, Count Siruela Prays, Count de
Buendia Sighs, Gutierre Quixada Exercises, and the Magistrate Ronquillo Lashes.
No more, but God Bless you, and give me Grace to serve Him.

Madrid, Ian. 6. 15^4.
LETTER XXIV. To the same; wherein is hinted, that a wise Man ought not to
trust a Woman with any Secret; occasioned by Communicating a Letter of the
Authors.
Very Illustrious Lord and good Constable,
DON Diego de Mendoza gave me your Lordship's Yesterday, written with your own
Hand, and sealed with your own Seal; but, I could heartily wish you were as
careful in concealing mine, as I am prudent in laying up your Letters; for, I
know not whether by your Fate, or my Misfortune, I scarce ever write any thing,
but what all your Family soon knows. As I am pleased the World should be
acquainted I am your Friend, so I am likewise concerned to have any Secret of
mine disclosed, and that chiefly, where it is any matter of moment; for, when
once your Wife and Children come to understand you advise with me in your most
important affairs, they will grievously complain against me, if I do not always
direct you to their advantage. My Lady Duchess lately signified to me some
distaste, saying, I opposed the business of her House of Tovarle; but which,
notwithstanding your Lordship knows, I neither so much as spoke or thought of;
and I hope you will be my security, that I value my self much more upon
persuading Men to be Generous and Virtuous, than by intermedling with their
Estates. You know, my Lord, whenever you come to confession, or ask my Council,
I always tell you, a Gentleman is obliged to pay what he owes, and distribute
what he has; and, that it is both requisite to use conscience in Paying, and to
be Prudent in Giving. If any thing more passes between us, it is below your
Grandeur, and little suiting with my Authority to suffer it to be revealed;
for, matters of so great consequence, and which, require so much secrecy, though
we cannot altoget^er prevent Surmises, we may at least take care they be not
thoroughly known. Your letting fall some Words, or dropping some Letter of mine,
must needs be the cause my Lady Duchess was so offended, and I do not at all
wonder she should; for, neither understanding your Words, nor my Language, she
might well fly into a passion till undeceived. Believe me, my Lord Constable,
you must never trust Women with secrets, for they will discover any thing only
to gain a better reputation with the World. I look upon those Husbands less
Fools that hide money from their Wives, than that trust them with Secrets; for
in Money they only hazard their Fortune, but with Secrets they li^ewise venture
their Honor. The Consul Quintus Furius discovered all Catilines Conspiracy to
Fulvia Torquata, a Roman Lady, who told it to a Friend of hers; and so from
Hand to Hand it soon came to be known to all the City; whereby Quintus Furius
quickly lost his Life, and Catiline both Life and Reputation. Hence you may
collect, it is not only unfit to trust that Sex with matters of high concern,
but also to discourse of 'em in their hearing; for, as it is no advantage to
them to know, so it may be a great prejudice to their Husbands to have 'em
known. It is not to be thought, much less said, that all Women are a-like in
this particular; for many, it is well known, are Discreet, Modest, Virtuous and
Close, and some Husbands so very Weak and Foolish, that it were much safer to
trust the Women than such Men; Yet, without wronging the Ladies that are
Discreet and can keep Council, to speak in general, I affirm, they are, for the
most part, much fitter to Breed and Educate Children, than to be confided in.
To conclude, I warn you for the future, not to talk before any Man, much less
Woman, of those things we have debated and agreed upon, lest it may both
occasion you Trouble and me Disgrace. There is nothing at present new at Court,
only, that I am a little angry at what you did, and something astonished at
what your Duchess writ. Wherefore, I beseech you, as my Lord, and command you
as my God-son, that you reconcile me speedily to your Lady or, instantly
discharge me your Family. No more, but God preserve you, and give me Grace to
serve Him.

Valladolid, Aug. 8. 1526.
LETTER XXV. To the same, containing many Pleasan and Profitable Remarks on
Nobility of Birth, Stature of Body, Long Prayers, and Tedious Sermons; as
likewise hinting the Brevity used by the Ancients in Writing.
Very Illustrious Sir,
I Received your Lordship's Letter of the 30th of September, on the 4th of
October, in this City of Valladolid, and considering the great distance betwixt
us, and short time it was on the way, I am of opinion, had it been a Trout it
had come fresh enough. Pyrrhus K. of Epirus was the first that invented Posts,
wherein he was so extraordinary diligent, that having 3 Armies on Foot at a
time, in three several Countries, and he residing at Tarentum, News was brought
him from Rome in a Day, from France in Two, Germany in Three, and Asia in Five;
so that his Messengers seemed rather to Fly than Ride. The Heart of Man is so
very fond of Novelties, that the more strange and new the thing it apprehends,
the more pleased and delighted it is; for, as all that is old nauseates, so
what is new still provokes our Appetites the more. You that are Great have this
advantage over Inferiors, that you can soon write to what place you please, and
hear from thence almost as speedily: But nevertheless, I believe sometimes it
so falls out, that what is brought in three Days, you would not care to have
heard in three Years. There is no Pleasure, Content, nor Satisfaction in this
World, but which are allayed with some inconveniences; for, in one Day we
often pay for all we have Feasted on and enjoyed in many. My Lord, you have
good reason to value your Gentleman, Mosen Rubin, who, I find, by the date of
yours, Traveled hard, and Slept but little; for when I received it, 'twas so
very fresh, the Ink was scarce dry. You write me, to inform you what is the
cause, that I, who am born of an ancient Family, am of a tall Stature, make
such long Memento's at Mass, and Preach such tedious Sermons, should be so
short in my Letters, especially my last from the Monastery of Fresdelval;
which, you say, had not above Four Sentences, and Eight Lines. But, however, in
this you now write, you furnish me with sufficient occasion not to be so short
in my answer; therefore if I be rather tedious, impute it more to my desire to
comply with you than gratify my own wishes. As to your Quaeres; first,
touching the antiquity of my Family; your Lordship well knows, my Grandfather's
Name was Don Beltran de Guevara; my Fathers, the same; my Unkles, Don Ladron de
Guevara; and mine, Don Antonio de Guevara; and, you are not likewise ignorant,
there were Earls in our Family, before Kings in Castile. This Family of Guevara
came formerly out of Britany, and is now divided into Six distinct Houses;
which are, the Count de Onate, at Alava; Don Ladron de Guevara, at Valdallega;
Don Pedro Veler de Guevara, at Salinas; Don Diego de Guevara, at Paradilla; Don
Carlos de Guevara, at Murcia; and Don Beltran de Guevara, at Morata; all which
are Men of worth as to their Persons, though they possess but indifferent
fortunes; so that is plain, those of my Family value themselves more on their
ancient descent, than greatness of Estates. For, a Man to be well descended
from Noble Progenitors, and an ancient stock, is a great addition to his
Honor, and no impediment to his Salvation; For, as Infamy inclines Men to
despair, Honor always stirs 'em up to mend. Christ would not come from the
Tribe of Benjamin which was the least, but the mighty ones of Judah, the
greatest and Noblest. There was a Law among the Romans, called Prosapia, (of
Genealogies) which ordained in case there happened any Dispute about the
Consulship* those who descended from the Silvij, Torquati, and Fabricij should
be always preferred; and the reason was, because, they were the most Ancient
and Renowned Families in Rome. Those descended from Lycurgus at Lacedemon; Cato
at Utica; Agesilaus in Licaonia, and Thucidides in Galatia did not only enjoy
especial Privileges in their own Countries, but were also honored by all
Nations; and that, not so much for Merit of the the Living, as Deserts of their
Ancestors, the Dead. It was also a Law established in Rome, that none of the
Race of the Tarquini, Escauri, Catilinii, Fabati, and Bitini should ever have
any Command, or so much as live within the Walls of that City; and this, only
in hatred to King Tarquin, the Consul Escaurus, Tyrant Catiline, Censor
Fabatus, and Traitor Bitinus; all who, had been great Oppressors and Enemies of
their Country. This I have thought fit to mention, My Lord, in regard it is a
great shame to be Vicious when well Descended; when on the contrary, To be both
well Bo^n and Act well is a great Honor; for Men are altogether unlike Wine,
which, sometimes tastes of the Cask, and sometimes of the Grape. Valor never
to fly, Generosity in giving, Modesty in speaking, Resolution in daring, and
Easiness in forgiving, are Qualities and Virtues seldom met with in base
Extraction, whilst they are very common amongst Honorable Families. As the
World now goes, when every body is prying into, and over-looking his Neighbors
Concerns, methinks it is a great happiness to be well descended; for he will
still have something to value himself upon, when others may want the contrary,
to upbraid him with. You say, My Lord, that of Body I am tall, slender, and
very straight; upon which Properties I may rather boast, than think the worse
of my self: for tall, dry, and straight Timber is always most esteemed, and
sold dearest. Had bigness of Body been displeasing to God, he would never have
made Pallas the Numidian, Hercules the Grecian, Milo the Italian, Sampson the
Hebrew, Pindar the Theban, Hemonius the Corinthian, nor Goliath the Philistian;
all who were of such vast and prodigious Bulks, that others, in comparison,
looked like Locusts. The first King of Israel, from the Shoulders upwards, was
taller than any in his Kingdom. Julius Caesar was tall and lean, tho not over
Beautiful. Of the Emperor Augustus it is said, he was so very tall, he gathered
Fruit from high Trees standing on the Ground. It is also Recorded of Sylla,
that he used to stoop at all Doors he came in at. Livy relates, Scipio
Africanus was so large of Stature, that as none equaled him in Courage, so no
body exceeded him in Height. Plutarch writes of Alexander the Great, that
according to the Grandeur of his Heart, the World seemed to have enough in him,
and he thought all the World too little for him. Of two Inconveniences, to be
tall or very short, the least is that of the former, since a long Coat is soon
cut shorter, when that which is too short can never ^e pieced, without being
scandalous. Alonso Enriquez, Alvar Gomez, Salaya, Valderravano, and Figueroa,
are all Men of small Stature, but no small Courage; whenever I meet them about
Court, they seem to be always Proud, Peevish, and Angry, but which I do not at
all wonder at, since little Chimneys are soonest apt to smoke. I met the other
day in the Monastery De los Toros de Guisardo, with a very little Friar, who
because I called him three times successively, chid me very severely; whereupon
I told him, he had but very little Patience; To which he surlily answered, I
had much less good Manners; I entreated him earnestly to give me some Drink,
and cease Chiding; To which he answered, Though you see me, you do not kn^w me,
and I must inform y^u, so little as you think me, yet I am as hard as Steel,
and if such great unweildly Fellows as you speak to me by day, they as
certainly dream of me at night; for I was measured but lately, and my Heart
seemed to be by five yards longer than my Body. To this I replied, It is very
requisite Father, your Heart should be five yards in length, since your whole
Body is not above two cubits and half in height. Upon this, indeed, the Friar
gave over quarre^ling, yet left me without my Drink. Believe me, My Lord, short
Pieces is soonest burst, small Towns are easiest besieged, many People drowned
in shallow Seas, more lost in narrow Ways, straight Clothes soonest rent,
little Men are soonest angry, and small Beasts not so strong or graceful as
large; For the Elephant, Dromedary, Ox, Buffalo, and Horse, being great and
bulky Creatures, are also serviceable in their Kinds; when the Flea, Mouse,
Lizard, Fly, and Grasshopper only molest, and are of no use to us at all. You
also upbraid me, My Lord, wi^h being too tedious at Mass, and making long
Memento's; Whereupon I assure your Lo^dship, if I am long at Mass, you also are
not over-sparing of Talking: for I have often (...) you begin a Discourse,
which I have never yet dared stay to see ended. I always endeavor to suit the
Memento's of my Mass to the Sins of my Life, and think it but Reason, where I
Offend so much, I should not Pray a little. The C^eator and Redeemer of the
World was moderate in all things, except Prayer, but in that he spent much
time; which appears by his Orizons in the Garden of Gethsemani, where the
heavier the Agony grew, the longer and more earnestly he Prayed. -- Your
Lordship also complains, my Sermons are Long and Tiresom; To which I answer, no
Sermon can possibly be so, where the Hearers assist rather like Christians than
Critics. I remember last Lent, when I was with your Lordship, some Salmons of
Penamelera were presented you, which you said were good, but very small, so
that I find, my Lord, a Salmon can never be long enough, nor Sermon too short
for you. It is now Eight and thirty years since I first came to this Court,
where I have known every thing increase, except Sermons, which always continue
at one stay: The reason, I suppose, being, that more time is spent in Eating,
more allowed for Sleeping, Clothes take up more Cloth, Garments are more
costly, and Men more Vicious; in fine, no bounds are prescribed to talking any
thing else, only a Sermon must not exceed an hour. As to what your Lordship
says of my shortness in Writing, I answer, That in my Opinion there needs
nothing to Talk well but a quick Wit, where a great deal of Judgment is
required to Write so; for to know whether a Man have Sense or be Mad, there can
be no better trial than putting a pair of Spurs on his Heels, or Pen into his
Hand. I confess I am generally larger in every thing than Writing, which I do
not repent of, since I can recall a Word spoken, but can never deny my Hand. To
speak any thing silly, is heedless; but to put ones Hand to it, extreme folly.
Salust says, if Catiline and his Accomplices had not signed the Conspiracy, tho
accused, they could never have been condemned; by which it appears, the Pen
kills sometimes as well as the Sword. If Laertius, Plutarch, Pliny, Vegetius,
Vulpicius, and Eutropius, do not deceive us in their Histories, many Poets,
Orators, Philosophers, Kings, and Great Men, in former Ages, were very copious
in Discourse, but at the same time exceeding brief and correct in Writing.
Caes^r, in a Letter writ to Rome from the Persian War, had only these Words,
Veni, Vidi, Vici. Augustus Writing to his Nephew Cajus Drusus, says only, Now
you are in Illirium, remember you are one of the Caesar's, were sent by the
Senate, are young, my N^phew, and a Citizen of Rome. Tiberius writ to his
Brother Germanicus in this manner, The Temples are Venerated, Gods Served, the
Senate is Unanimous, Commonwealth Prosperous, Rome Healthy, Fortune Favorable,
and the Year Plentiful; This is what occurs in Italy, the same we wish to you
in Asia. Cicero writes to Cornelius thus, Rejoice that I am not sick, and I
shall be glad to hear you are well. Divine Plato writing from Athens to
Dionysius, has only these Words; To kill your Brother, impose new Forces,
oppress your People, forget your Friends, and to be an Enemy to Phocio, are
actions that savor of a Tyrant. Pompey the Great writ from the East to the
Senate after this manner; Damascus is taken, Pentapolis subdued, Syria made a
Colony, Arabia become Confederate, and Palestine Conquered. The Consul Anneus
Sylvius writing of the Battle of Pharsalia to Rome, says, Caesar overcame,
Pompey died, Rufus fled, Cato killed himself, the Dictatorship is at an end,
and Liberty lost. This, My Lord, was the Method used by the Ancients in Writing
to their Familiar Friends, so that where their Brevity is worthy to be
imitated, our Tediousness ought to be no less Censured. God keep you, and give
me Grace to Serve him.

Valladolid, Oct. 8. 1525.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
LETTER I. TO Messer Perepollastre, an Italian, the Author's Friend; exposing a
Calumny cast upon him, and defending his Innocence. Page 1. LET. II. To Dr.
Melgar, a Physician; in which are handled the good and harm occasioned by his
Profession, together with the Progress and several Interruptions of that Art;
as also the Author's thoughts of it from its first Original. p. 11. LET. III.
To a Lady, the Author's Niece, who fell sick for the Death of a little Bitch.
p. 32. LET. IV. To the Magistrate Nunnio Tellio, concerning the Qualifications
of a true Friend. p. 38. LET. V. To the Abbot of Monserrat; in which he treats
of the Oratories of the Ancients, together with some few Reflections on the
Court. p. 43. LET. VI. To a particular Friend of the Author's, advising him not
to be covetous and griping, illustrated with severe Reflections on that Vice.
p. 48. LET. VII. To Don Henrique Henriquez; in answer to several pleasant
questions. p. 55. LET. VIII. To the Duke of Alva; of Sickness and its Benefits.
p. 60. LET. IX. To Don John Parelloso; that we may be serviceable to Women in
their Husband's absence, but are not to visit 'em. p. 65. LET. X. To Don
Hernando de Toledo; concerning what the Egyptians were wont to do for their
dead Friends. p. 69. LET. XI. To Dr. Coronel, his familiar Friend; in Answer to
some Demands. p. 74. LET. XII. To Don Pedro Giron; in which the Author gives
some hints of the Ancients manner of writing; but chiefly consisting of Iocular
Reflections on a bad Scribe. p. 77. LET. XIII. To Don Alonzo Manriquez,
Archbishop of Sevill, and Don Antonio Manriquez, Duke of Najara; upon their
choosing him to decide a controversy between them; wherein he wittily exposes
their Ignorance, declares which was Numantia, and which Saguntum; and moreover,
relates both Origin and Destruction of the former. p. 85. LET. XIV. To Don
Alonso de Albornoz; showing it sign of ill breeding not to answer a Letter;
also laying down the dangers of Matrimony; and likewise, containing some
pleasant News from Court. The whole embellished with biting Raileries and
serious Reflections. p. 97. LET. XV. To Don Diego de Camina; how all Men are
subject to Envy. p. 103. LET. XVI. To Don John de Moncada; Describing Anger,
and Extolling Patience. p. 108. LET. XVII. To the Ambassador Don Geronimo
Vique; showing the ill effects of overmuch liberty. p. 116. LET. XVIII. To Dr.
Micersumier, Regent of Naples; in answer to several Moral Questions. p. 122.
LET. XIX. To the Governor Don Lewis Bravo; occasioned by his falling in Love in
his old Age: being a familiar Satyr on such fruitless attempts; as likewise a
serious warning to all Old Men not to go beyond their strength. p. 129. LET.
XX. To the same; concerning the Qualities required in an Old Man; As also, how
difficult it is to remove Love from a Heart, where it has once taken root;
Nevertheless prescribing some few Remedies against it. p. 135. LET. XXI. To Don
Alonso Espinel Corregidor of Oviedo, a very Neat and Pleasant old Gentleman;
wherein the Author hints, how much the Ancients always honored Age; together
with several Privileges peculiar to old People; exceeding pleasant, and no
less Reforming. p. 144. LET. XXII. To Don Antonio de Zuniga, Prior of St.
^ohn's; informing him, that though a Gentleman ^e subject to Failings, he ought
to be guilty of nothing Dishonorable; With several Encomiums on this Prior's
Valor in his Command at the Siege of Toledo: As likewise a Promise to
recommend his Prowess to Posterity. LET. XXIII. To Don Ignigo de Velasco,
Constable of Castile; showing, that Anger and Passion ought never to be
permitted to reign in the Heart of a Man of Honor; condemning communicating
Letters; Instructing how and when to Advise; And lastly, Writing some Iocose
News from Court. p. 167. LET. XXIV. To the same; wherein is hinted, that a wise
Man ought never to trust a Woman with a Secret; occasioned by Communicating a
Letter of the Authors. p. 172. LET. XXV. To the same, containing many Pleasant
and Profitable Remarks on Nobility of Birth, Stature of Body, Long Prayers, and
Tedious Sermons; as likewise hinting the Brevity used by the Ancients in
Writing. p. 175.
FINIS.

