THE GUIDE OF A Christian, Directing him to Such Things, as are BY HIM, To be
Believed, Practiced, Feared, and Hoped for.


There are added at the End PRAYERS to be used upon Several Occasions.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

London, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgatestreet, 1697,

TO THE READER.
THis little Book was written especially for the use of such as have meaner
Capacities and weaker Memories, less time and less money than others. The
designed smallness of the Volume would not admit of the printing at large all
the places of Scripture which are quoted in it. But it is to be hoped that the
Reader will some time or other look them out. That will employ him well, and
fix those places upon his mind. Let him not be Inquisitive about the Author,
who would not be known, but consider rather what is written than by whom. May
our good God give such success to it, as may redound to his Glory, and the
Benefit of those who shall read it with attention of mind, and Honesty of
Heart. Amen.

THE Guide of a Christian.
CHAP. I. Of the Faith of a Christian, and the things to be believed by him.
SECT. I.
A Christian, when he gives, either to himself, or others, an Account of his
Faith, resolves these two Questions.

1. How he comes to have that Faith, or Belief of the Doctrine of the Gospel?

2. What are the particular points of Doctrine, which he thinks most necessary
to be believed?

In Answer to these Questions,

1. He shows that he comes to be a Believer in some degree, by thinking on this
manner. Every one does naturally desire the continuance of his Being, and the
greatest happiness of it that may be, whilst it continues. But he cannot have
the End without the means. The means to Happiness is Religion, which consists
in the true knowledge and service of God. For if there be a Creator, a
Reasonable Creature, depending wholly upon him, cannot be happy without doing
his Will, so far as he can know it. The means to know it are, Reason and
Revelation. The Light of Natural Reason is but an imperfect Guide, and could
never of it self have discovered the Mysteries of God's Love in Christ, for the
Redemption of Mankind. (1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. Colos. 1.26, 27.) However, It shows
us, That there is a God, from the consideration of his works, (Romans 1.20.) It
concludes with the Apostle, ( Heb. 3.4.) That as every House is built by some
Man, so he who made all things is God, or the first Cause, who is Infinite in
Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Justice: And that such a Builder cannot but take
care of so Glorious a Structure. ( Neh. 9.6.) Right Reason does also, in some
measure, teach Men what Worship and Service is agreeable to such a God. He
engraved a Law upon their Hearts, (Romans 2.14, 15.) before he wrote his Will
upon Tables of Stone, and in Holy Books. But the Posterity of Fallen Adam,
forsook the Paths showed to them by the true Light of Nature, and reasoned not
aright, and were led away by the corrupt Imaginations of their hearts, ( Genesis
6.5, 12.) Insomuch that they would have wandered for ever in darkness, if God
had not in great mercy revealed his Will to them, in the Holy Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, which are to be our Rule of Faith and Manners to the end
of the World, ( Gal. 1.8, 9. Jude 3.)

The Old Testament was all the Scripture of the Jewish Church, written by Moses
and the Prophets, who therein foretold of the coming of Christ.

And Christ did recommend it as a Book of Divine Authority, ( Joh. 5.39. Luke
24.27.) He proved his Doctrine by his miraculous Works, ( Joh. 5.36. and 10.25,
38.) Him God owned as his only Son, by raising him from the dead, and showing
him to many (1 Cor. 15.3. to v. 9.) Witnesses, diverse of which sealed that
Truth with their Blood; and their Testimony is handed down to us by the joint
Consent of the Christian Church, in the several Ages of it.

Much of the New Testament was written by the Apostles of Christ, ( viz. S.
Matthew, S. John, S. James, S. Peter, S. Jude,) who were Eye and Ear-witnesses
of what he did and said, (1 John 1.1, 2, 3.) and knew that he arose from the
dead; and they wrought Miracles in his Name, and foretold many things which
have been plainly accomplished. Also, they well knew that if Christ was not
risen, and that if they had hopes only in this Life, they of all men were most
miserable, (1 Cor. 15.19.) Yet they ran the hazard of all things dear to flesh
and blood, in testifying the Truth of what they had heard and seen, for which
also many of them laid down their lives.

As for St. Mark, he has written in short, what St. Matthew delivered more at
large; and the Ancients say that he was the Disciple of St. Peter. S. Luke
wrote such things as were delivered (Luke 1.2.) to him, by those who from the
beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word; and he was conversant in
a particular manner with St. Paul, with whom he traveled, ( Act. 28.16. 2 Timothy
4.11.) To St. Paul, being a Jew, and a Persecutor, Christ appeared in his way
to Damascus, and converted him by Miracles, ( Acts 9.3, etc. 1 Cor. 15.8.) and
enabled him to do Miracles, (2 Cor. 12.12.) and to speak and write with
wonderful power. And indeed the Scriptures are to be distinguished from all
other Books by an extraordinary Spirit discernible in them, by Pious and
Attentive Readers and Hearers. ( Romans 10.17.) And the more a Man studies the
Scriptures, and considers what is in them, and how worthy of a Governor and
Savior of the World all the Doctrines, Commands and Promises are, which they
contain, and prays to God to enlighten his Understanding, and to help his weak
Belief, and has a will to do God's will, (John 7.17.) and uses the means which
God has put in his power; the greater will be his Knowledge, and the firmer
his Faith.

After some such manner as this, a Man comes to believe that the Scriptures are
of divine Authority.

But though a man is never so firm in this Faith, and steadfastly believes every
thing that is said in the Bible to be true, and to come from God; yet he thinks
some things more necessary to be believed than others, in order to God's Glory
and his own Obedience and Salvation, and the Good of Mankind. He therefore
either frames to himself out of the Scriptures a Form of sound Words, (2 Timothy
1.13.) or takes that Sum of Faith for his use which has long been, and is
still confessed by those who call themselves Christians. Such a Form is that
which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, containing the Apostles Doctrine,
and composed, for the main, in or nigh their Days, and continued in Christ's
Church to this time; and this he explains, or gets explained out of the
Scriptures.

This brings on the Second Question; namely,

2. What are the particular Points of Doctrine, which he thinks most necessary
to be believed? And it is Resolved in the following Section.

CHAP. I.
Section 2. The Sum of Things necessary to be believed by a Christian.
Artic. I. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

I do believe, that there is a God, an Infinite, (1 King. 8.27.) Eternal, ( Ps.
90.2.) Spirit, ( Joh. 4.24.) absolutely perfect; ( Ps. 147.5. Romans 1.20.) and
that this God is the Father, of whom are all things, (1 Cor. 8.6.) and who is
in a more eminent manner the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, ( Mat. 17.5. Joh.
1.14. Romans 8.32.) And I do believe, that Power belongs unto him, ( Psalm.
62.11.) so that he is able to do whatsoever he pleases, ( Eccles. 8.3.) who
did at first create the World, and all things contained therein, ( Genesis 1.1.)
and has preserved them ever since by His Divine Providence. ( Neb. 9.6.)

Art. II. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

I do believe, that that Man who was born of the Virgin Mary ( Luke 2.7.) in
the days of Herod, ( Mat. 2.1.) and who before his birth was by an Angel from
Heaven named Jesus, ( Mat. 1.21.) was the True Messiah, the Anointed of the
Lord, ( Joh. 1.41. and 11.27.) whom God had so long, and so often promised to
send into the world, to be the Savior of Mankind, ( Genesis 3.15. and 21.12. and
49.10. Deuteronomy. 18.15.) And I do also believe, that this Holy Person was neither
Angel, nor Archangel, nor any other Creature whatsoever, but the Son of God,
by an unspeakable Generation, begotten of God from all Eternity, ( Colos. 1.15,
17. Heb. 1.5, 6, 10, 13.) God of God, and together with the Father and Holy
Ghost one God, ( John 5.18.) blessed for ever, ( Romans 9.5.) and that he is
rightly called our Lord, in respect of that Right that belongs to him, as
having first Created us, ( Colos. 1.16.) and then redeemed us, (1 Pet. 1.18,
19.) and being made Lord of all things, ( Acts 2.36.)

Art. III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

I do believe, that Jesus Christ was not conceived after the ordinary way, but
by the wonderful Operation of the Holy Ghost overshadowing his Virgin Mother, (
Luke 1.35.) that he might assume our Nature without the Depravation of it. (
Luke 1.35.) And I do moreover believe, that though being conceived in that
wonderful manner, he had no Man to his Father; yet deriving his bodily
substance from his Mother, he is rightly said to be the Seed of the Woman, (
Genesis 3.15.) of the House and Family of David. ( Ps. 132.11. Mat. 15.22. Acts
2.30.) And so being descended from Adam, ( Luke 3.) he is truly called the Son
of Man, ( Mat. 8.20. Mar. 9.12. Luke 9.22. John 5.27.)

Art. IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried; he
descended into Hell.

I do believe, that the only begotten Son of God, did, in our Nature, which he
had assumed, not only really and truly suffer both in his body by tormenting
pains, ( Mat. 27.26, 29, 35.) and in his Soul by unspeakable sorrows, ( Mat.
26.38. Luke 22.44.) for the Redemption of Mankind; (Gal. 3.13. 1 Pet. 2.24.)
but even in the most shameful and ignominious manner also, having his Hands and
Feet nailed to a Cross, as Thieves and the vilest Malefactors were used; ( Luke
23.33.) there he hung some Hours, ( Luke 23.44.) till he was Really dead, (
Luke 23.46.) and then, for the greater certainty of it, like other dead Men,
was embalmed, and laid in the Grave, ( Luke 23.53.) his Soul being departed
into those unknown Regions, where Souls separated from their Bodies are, ( Ps.
16.10. Acts 2.31.) And I am verily persuaded, that all this was done when
Pontius Pilate was Governor of Judea, under Tiberius the Roman Emperor, (
Luke 3.1.)

Art. V. The Third Day he rose again from the Dead.

I do believe, that Jesus Christ, the Third Day after he died, according to his
own Promise, ( Joh 2.19.) and as the Scripture had foretold, ( Ps. 16.10.) had
his Soul, by the Power of the Godhead, reunited to his Body, (Acts 2.31, 32.)
so that he was really and truly alive again, ( Luke 24.39. Acts 1.3.) and is
never to return to Death any more, ( Romans 6.9.)

Art. VI. He Ascended into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God.

I believe, that after he was risen from the Dead, and had conversed with his
Disciples Forty Days, ( Acts 1.3.) while he was Talking with them, he was taken
up in a Cloud, and went into Heaven, Angels attending and ministering unto him,
( Acts 1.9, 10.) where being exalted far above all Principalities and Powers, (
Ephesians. 1.20, 21.) and placed in full Possession of the highest Power, Dignity and
Dominion, he always appears in the Presence of God, making Intercession for us,
by virtue of that Sacrifice, which he had before offered upon the Cross, ( Col.
2.16. to 22. Heb. 7.25. and 9.24.)

Art. VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe, that Christ in his Humane Nature shall continue in Heaven till the
end of the World, ( Acts 3.21.) and that then he shall come from thence in the
Clouds, attended with millions of Angels, and with the Voice of the Archangel,
and with the Trump of God, and shall call all Mankind before him, (Mat. 24.30,
31.) as well those that shall be then alive at his coming, (1 Thessalonians. 4.17.) as
those that shall have been dead from the beginning of the World, ( Joh. 5.28)
and there shall Judge them all according to their Deeds, whether they have been
good, or whether they have been evil, (2 Cor. 5.10.)

Art. VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

I believe, that there is a Third Person, (1 John 5.7.) proceeding from the
Father and the Son, ( Joh. 15.26. Gal. 4.6.) who also is God; ( Acts 5.4.)
called in sacred Scripture the Holy Spirit, or Holy Ghost; not only upon the
account of his own most perfect Holiness; and in Opposition to that Unclean
Spirit the Devil; but also as he is the cause of all Holiness in us, by his
Graces sancrifying our Sculs and Bodies, to the obedience of God, (1 Pet. 1.2.)
and so making us acceptable to him in Jesus Christ, (1 Cor. 6.11.)

Art. IX. The holy Catholic Church.

I believe, that Christ, by the Preaching of the Gospel, has called (not only
out of Judea, but) out of all Nations a Society of Men, ( Mat. 28.19. Acts
2.41, 42. and 4.32. and 5.14.) into which every one is admitted by Baptism, (1
Cor. 12.13.) and all are united to and under him as their Head, (Col. 1.18.)

And that this Catholic or Universal Church, or whole Society of Christians
dispersed over the world, contains in it, as its parts, many particular
Churches; such as were those of Jerusalem (the first Church planted by the
Apostles) (Luke 24.47.) Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. And that there is no
One Governor on Earth, whom Christ has appointed Head of the whole Church, or
all particular Churches, nor any who is sufficient for such a Charge.

I further believe, that this Church is set apart for Holy Services, and that
the Calling and Profession of the Members of it is Holy, (1 Thessalonians. 4.7. 2 Timothy
1.9. and 2.19.)

And I make no doubt, but that, according to his most gracious promise, against
this Church, built upon the Rock of that Faith which St. Peter confessed, (in
owning Jesus to be the Christ) the Gates of Hell (or the Power and Malice of
the Devil, and all his Agents) shall not finally prevail, ( Mat. 16.18.) but
that in it there will be, in some part or other of the World, a constant
succession of Pastors to the end of the World, ( Mat. 28.20.)

The Communion of Saints.
I do further believe, that all Christians truly sanctified, have Fellowship
not only with God the Father, the Son, (1 John 1.3.) and the Holy Ghost, (2
Cor. 13.14.) as dwelling in them, ( Joh. 14.23.) but are united with the Saints
(Romans 1.7. Ephesians. 4.16. 1 John 1.7.) on Earth, the Living Members of Christ, in
Faith and Charity, in Worship and Sacraments, (Acts 2.42. and 4.32. 1 Cor.
12.26. Ephesians. 4.5, 13.) in Christian Assemblies, (Heb. 10.25.) from which
Assemblies, those who wilfully withdraw, whilst no sinful Conditions of
Communion are really put upon them, (though through Pride and Prejudice, and the
Clamor of the Enemies of an Establishment, it may be so suggested) do make
such a Schism, Breach or Rent in the Body of the Church, as becomes not the
Members of it, but is extremely hurtful to Order, Peace and Charity, (Romans
16.17. 1 Cor. 1.10. and 12.25, 26.) dishonorable to Religion, and displeasing
to Almighty God, (Gal. 5.20, 21.)

Art. X. The Forgiveness of Sins.

I do believe, that not only all the Sins whatsoever any Person was guilty of
before he was Baptized, are forgiven unto him at his Baptism, if he was duly
qualified for the receiving of that Holy Ordinance, ( Acts 2.38. and 22.16.)
but also, that all the Sins that any Person shall commit after Baptism, shall
likewise, upon his true Repentance, be forgiven him by God, (Mar. 3.28. Luke
24.47.) for the sake of Christ's meritorious sacrifice, once offered on the
Cross, ( Heb. 9.26.) by which he made Atonement for the sins of the World, (
Romans 5.11. Col. 1.20. and 2.13, 14. 1 John 4.10.)

Art. XI. The Resurrection of the Body.

I do believe, that as it is appointed for all Men once to die, ( Heb. 9.27.)
so is it also determined, That at the end of the World there shall be a general
Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and unjust, ( Act. 24.15.) their
Bodies (however their Parts may, before that, be scartered or dissolved) being
by the Almighty Power of God raised again, and reunited to their Souls, ( Job
19. 26, 27.) never to be separated any more, (1 Cor. 15.42, 53.) And that as
all the just shall be raised to a Resurrection of Life; so shall all the unjust
to a Resurrection of Damnation, (Joh. 5.29.)

Art. XII. And the Life Everlasting.

I do believe, that at the general Resurrection of the Last Day, all Men shall
be rewarded according to their Deeds, which they have done in their Bodies, (2
Cor. 5.10.) they that have done good shall go into Everlasting Life, (Mat.
25.46.) a state of perfect Joy and Happiness for ever; and they that have done
evil, into everlasting punishment, ( Mat. 25.46.) a state of unspeakable Woe
and Misery, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth to all Eternity,
(Mat. 25.30.)

These are the Articles of the Faith of a Christian Man.

But if this Faith, though never so firmly believed, does not work by Love, (1
Cor. 7.19. Gal. 5.6. and 6.15.) it is vain, it is dead, it is such a Faith as
the Devils have, who believe and tremble, but do not obey. Therefore we go on
to show those Christian Works or Duties, which are the Fruits of True Faith,
and which, together with the belief of Revealed Doctrine, are called Faith, or
an Embracing the Gospel, ( Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.18, 19.) And this Faith God
accounts, through Christ, as the Performance of the Condition on our part, of
the Covenant of Baptism, (Heb. 5.9. 1 Pet. 3.21.)

CHAP. II. Of the Things to be Practiced by a Christian.
THE Duties belonging to a Christian Respect, God, our selves, and our
Neighbors, (Tit. 2.11, 12.) The Gospel offering Salvation to all Men upon the
Terms of a Godly, Sober, and Righteous Life, through the Merits of Christ Jesus.

Section I.
Of Duties toward God, to be practiced by every one that believes in him.

Such Duties to God are, to Love and Fear him; to Repent and turn to him; to
Honor and Glorify him; and to Trust in and Rely upon him, with Contentment,
Resignation, and Thankfulness to God.

1. To Love God.
God is the Chief Good, and therefore he is to be loved both by the Approbation
of the Mind, and the Affection of the Heart; and we are to Love him with all
our Hearts, and with all our Souls; and to show we do so, by Keeping his
Commandments, ( John 14.15.) by choosing to suffer for his sake, rather than to
sin, ( Heb. 11.25.) by our delighting to converse with him in Prayer and
Praises, in Reading and Hearing his Word, and Receiving the Sacrament;
esteeming, with David, One Day in his Courts better than a Thousand elsewhere,
( Psalm. 84.10.) And by our coming to those Spiritual Exercises, with the same
Earnestness as the panting Heart does to the Waterbrooks, and with the same
cheerfulness of Mind, though not always the same Sense of it, as we go to visit
our dearest Friends. And, Lastly, by our longing Desire to Enjoy him in Glory,
not thinking the Labor and Service of our whole Lives too much toward the
attaining that blessed State; nor setting up our Rest on this side Heaven, (
Heb. 11.16.) but pressing and hastening toward it with Devout Affections, and
Holy Diligence; being willing, when God calls, to go out of the World, and
patient to stay till he calls.

2. To Fear God.
Fear is a very affecting and powerful Passion; and is a most forcible means to
hold us to our Duty, and to restrain us from sin: For how can he presume to
offend by any wilful neglect of his Duty, or by the commission of any known
sin, that considers either the Knowledge and Power of God, or His Purity, and
hatred of Sin? That He understands all our Thoughts, hears all our Words,
discerns all our Actions, as well secret as open; ( Psalm. 139.1, to 17.) and
will as certainly punish all sin unrepented of, as He hates and condemns it?
For as He is able to cast both body and soul into Hell, (Luke 12.5.) so he has
declared, That he will do it. ( Mat. 25.41. 2 These. 1.8. Rev. 21.8.)

And therefore the Scripture requires that we should serve the Lord with Fear,
( Ps. 2.11. Heb. 12.28.)

But then this Fear is not servile or slavish; that no longer restrains us from
sin than the Rod is before us, or held over us; but Filial, the Fear of a
Child, that is afraid of displeasing his Father, because he is his Father, and
to whom he always pays, as well as owes, the greatest Reverence and Obedience.

3. To Repent and Turn to God.
That which the Apostle styles Repentance toward God, (Acts 20.21.) is a
turning from sin unto God. It Is that which begins in the Knowledge of our
selves, and ends in the actual forsaking of all sin, that we come thus to the
Knowledge of. And therefore as the Scripture has made this necessary by way of
Command; and without which we are told we shall All certainly perish, ( Luke
13.3, 5.) so whoever undertakes it, must strictly enquire into the state of his
own Soul, carefully Re-view his past Life, and compare his Actions with the Law
of God (the only Rule and Measure of Obedience.) And such as he finds his Sins
are, such must his Repentance be. There must be Recollection,
Self-Condemnation, Confession, Deprecation, Resolution, Prayer for Grace to
perform it, and, in a word, a new Nature. Here also, the better to understand
his Condition, he must consider the heinousness of his Sins, in respect of the
great and manifold Aggravations of them: Against what Convictions, with what
Deliberation, against what Vows and Resolutions, how often, how long he has
offended.

And because, at the last, we can never come to a perfect Knowledge of our
selves, so as to remember whatever of that kind is past; or to observe the
Daily Infirmities we are incident unto, we must say with David, Who can
understand his Errors? And with him pray, Cleanse thou me, O Lord, from secret
(or unknown) Faults, (Ps. 19.12.)

To our Convictions must be aded a present and steadfast Resolution of forsaking
all those Sins that we are thus convinced of. Unless it be present, and both
taken up and followed without delay, we shall soon forget those Resolutions.
And unless it be steadfast, our Convictions will soon lose their Force, and we
shall return to the same State again. Having Once Resolved, we must lose no
Time, lest by Delays our Case grows to be dangerous, and we finally perish in
the midst of such ineffectual Resolutions. When we walk abroad, we are not sure
to come back alive. When we lie down to sleep, we know not whether e're we
shall awake, till we hear the sound of the last Trump. Or when we come upon our
Death Bed, who can tell but that the violence of bodily Pains and Distempers
may distract us, and render us altogether unfit for such a great Work as that
of Repentance, which requires the utmost Force of all the Powers and Faculties
of our Souls to accomplish it? And then, having all our Lifetime thus put off
our Repentance, and Rejected the Offers of Divine Grace, God may justly reject
us, ( Prove. 1.27, etc.) So necessary is it for us to remember our Creator
before the evil days come, (Eccles. 12.1.) and to redeem the time, and to awake
out of sleep, (this drowsy and stupid condition) and arise from the dead, if
we expect Christ should give us Light, (Ephesians. 5.14, 16.)

To this Duty of Repentance is that of Fasting to be joined.

A Duty I call it; for how little soever it be regarded, we find it enjoined by
Almighty God, ( Joel 2.12.) Reinforced by our Savior, ( Mat. 6.16, 17. and
9.15.) and practiced by the holy People of God in all Ages. As by Esther
(4.16.) by Anna, (Luke 2.37.) by the Apostles, (Acts 13.2, 3. 2 Cor. 6.5.) And
because of the Excellent Use and Advantage it is of, as well as because of the
Divine Institution, it is frequently in holy Writings joined to Prayer, (Mat.
17.21. Luke 2.37. Acts 14.23. 1 Cor. 7.5.)

And of singular use it is, as being a fit means to keep under the Body, and
bring it into subjection, and to render it the more helpful to the Soul in
Humiliation and Devotion. But how far it can be used by the Aged and Infirm,
must, in great measure, be left to their Prudence. And here we are to observe,
That the afflicting of the Soul for Sin, and the Abstaining from Sin, is the
principal thing which God Regards in our Fasts. He requires us to Rent our
Hearts rather than our Garments, (Joel 2.13.) to bewail our Personal and
National Sins, to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the Oppressed go free; to deal our Bread to the Hungry, and bring
the Poor that are cast out to our Houses, and to give a covering to the naked,
(Isa. 58.6, 7.) And this we must do without Ostentation, and desire of
Vainglory, ( Mat. 6.16.) And then we may call, and the Lord will answer, (Isa.
58.9.) and forgive all our Personal and National Iniquities and Backslidings,
and give us what we stand in need of.

4. To Honor and Glorify God.
The Glory of God is the highest End of Man, (Romans 11.33, 36. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Phil. 1.11. 1 Pet. 4.11.) The glorifying of him consists in a most Reverend
Esteem of him, as a God Infinite in Power, Wisdom and Goodness; and in
expressing and setting forth that Esteem by all the fit ways we are capable of.
This is done,

1. By Divine Meditation. And this is undoubtedly a Duty very becoming a
Christian, when he is in his House or Closet, or in a Journey, or walking alone
in the Fields, or in his Garden, or working at his Calling, or waking on his
Bed; as Occasions shall be presented to him, to contemplate his own
Unworthiness, and God's Greatness and Goodness, and the admirable Effects of
them. The World abounds with Objects which afford him Matter enough for the
employing his busy and active Soul in Contemplation. This was the Exercise of
Isaac, and David, and other Devout Souls, ( Genesis 24.63. Psalm. 63.6.) We need
look no farther for Precedents than the Book of Psalms, a great part of which
seems to be the Product of the Pious and Heavenly Meditations of David, and of
Others, in their Solitudes and Private Retirements. Sometimes the Psalmist
contemplates the Works of the Creation, saying; Lord, how wonderful are thy
Works! In Wisdom have thou made them all, (Psalm. 104.24.) Sometimes he
meditates on the Works of God's Providence, saying, O Lord, thou preservest Man
and Beast, (Ps. 36.6.) Sometimes he meditates upon God's Laws; crying out, O!
how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day, (Ps. 119.97.) But the
Noblest of all the Subjects of Meditation, is God's inestimable Love in the
Redemption of the World, by the Everblessed Jesus, ( John 3.16. 1 John 4.9.)

Of Pious and Heavenly Meditation there are these following Benefits.
First, By Meditation our Good Thoughts are better digested, and we increase in
Knowledge and Grace.

Secondly, By Contemplating the Works of the Creation, and Providence, and
finding how small a part we are of it, it moves us to humble our selves, and to
cry out with the Psalmist, Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of him! etc.
( Ps. 8.4.)

Thirdly, By Meditating upon Heaven and Hell, Death and Judgment, our Fears are
raised in order to the preventing of Evil, and our Hopes in order to the doing
of Good.

Fourthly, The Devil, who watches all Opportunities, is by this means prevented
from casting into our Souls evil Thoughts, and sinful Imaginations. In all
these respects, blessed is the Man who does meditate good things, (Ecclus.
14.20.)

2. God is glorified, by our directing even our common Actions to this great
end, and particularly those (1 Cor. 10.31.) of eating and drinking, not
beginning a Meal without Prayer, nor ending it without Thanksgiving; in some
such Forms as are set down at the end of this Book.

3. God is glorified by our speaking piously and honorably of Him in
Conversation, upon all fit Occasions, in order to the stirring up others to
give Him Glory, ( Mal. 3.16. Col. 3.16. and 4.6.)

Contrary to this Duty is the dishonouring of God,

1. By Blasphemies, or speaking ill of God; or by our wicked Conversation
bringing an evil report upon Him; for thus was the Name of God blasphemed,
among the Gentiles, (Romans 2.23, 24.) by those wicked Jews who boasted of the
Law, but did not keep it. And let all profane Wretches consider, what they do
in their Hours of Revelling, or at any other time when they scoff at Religion,
and make a jest of the Holy Scriptures; for God will also take his time to
laugh at their Calamities, and to mock when their Fear comes, (Prove. 1.26.)

2. By Oaths and Curses. This is one of the Crying Sins of the Age, when many
can hardly pronounce ten Words without Swearing and Imprecation. Too often they
wish, that which of all things in the World they should dread, even their own
Damnation, in course of Talk, and without being tempted or provoked.

3. To these Sins may be added False Oaths, or wilful Perjuries; for the
avoiding of which, let such as are tempted hereto, consider what is said in (
Malachy 3.5.) I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift
Witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false
Swearers, -- and fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts. See also ( Zach. 5.4.)

4. There is yet another sort of Perjury, which is a rash Oath, when any one
Swears at a venture, not knowing whether the thing be so or not.

Now, by all these, God is highly dishonored, and provoked; and therefore when
thou have made a Vow to God, or Promise to Man, perform it, if it be in thy
power. ( Eccles. 5.4.) When thou art called before a Lawful Magistrate, beware
of a false, or rash Oath; and in common Discourse take our Saviors Advice, or
rather obey his Command, and Swear not at all: (Mat. 5.34.) For God will not
hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, (Exodus 20.7.)

4. God is honored and glorified, by a frequent repairing to those Places
which are set apart for his Service, and by a decent Behavior in them; not
coming to Church out of mere Formality, nor employing our Time there otherwise
than becomes such as consider the Holy Ends for which Christians Assemble;
that is, to glorify God in his Perfections, to bless Him for his Mercies, to
ask Blessings of Him, to hear his holy Word, and to celebrate his Sacraments.

5. In giving God those things that are Gods, (Mat. 22.21.) and not robbing Him
of his Tithes and Offerings, nor alienating Lands, Houses, or Goods, given by
the Owners for truly pious Uses, (Mal. 3.8. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.) All which will
come under the Sin of Sacrilege, and will bring a Curse upon us, both in our
Persons and Estates, (Mal. 3.9.)

6. In keeping Holy the Times appointed for Divine Worship. Thus the Jews kept
the Seventh Day in Memory of the Creation of the World, (Genesis 2.2, 3.) and we
keep the Lord's Day in Memory of the Resurrection of Christ. (Mat. 28.1. Rev.
1.10.) That and other Days set apart for Gods Worship, are not Seasons for
worldly Business, Accounts, Journeys, or even Physic or Sleep, as some,
without necessity, make them; but for Piety and Devotion, both at Home and in
Public; and for Charity also, (Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.) And seeing that God
has given us all the Time we enjoy, we should not grudge Him such small
Portions of it, as He requires.

7. By Worshipping God, which contains in it, 1. Adoration. 2. Prayer.


1. Adoration, which is an Act of the deepest Reverence of Soul and Body, when
we set God before us, as the Object of our Devotion. ( Psalm. 95.6.) Thus we
admire and celebrate the glorious Nature, Attributes and Works of God, and with
Holy Raptures make acknowledgment of his Infinite Love to Mankind, revealed in
the Dispensation of the Gospel. Adoration is a Duty we owe to God alone, and
therefore we are expressly forbid, to make to our selves any graven Image, or to
Bow down to and Worship the likeness of any thing in Heaven, the Earth, or the
Water. (Exodus 20.4, 5.) And, in Baptism, we do, in effect, promise not to
Worship the Devil, or to make any Compact or Contract with him, by Witchcraft,
or any other way whatever, or to consult with those that do, or may be thought
so to do, for recovery of Goods, Health, etc. And as we are forbid the outward
Idolatry to Creatures, so we are forbid the inward Idolatry of the Heart, in
placing our Affections upon any thing here below, more than upon the Lord our
God, whom only we are to Worship and Serve, (Mat. 4.10. Phil. 3.19. Col. 3.5.)

2. Prayer.
Prayer has six Branches, viz. Confession, Profession, Petition, Deprecation,
Intercession and Thanksgiving. In all which, Purity of Heart, Reverence,
Humility, Faith, Zeal, and Freedom from wandering of Mind and disturbance of
Passion, become Holy Men and Women.

1. Confession.
That is, acknowledging, either in gross, that we are sinful; or in particular,
enumerating the several Sorts, Acts and Aggravations of our Sins, and heartily
bewailing the same; but that of enumerating the Sorts and Acts is only fit for
our private Closets and Retirements, after we have taken a serious Review of
our Lives; and especially of the Thoughts, Words and Deeds of the Day past.

2. Profession.
This is an humble Declaration of our hearty sorrow for the Sins we have
Confessed, and our hatred of them, and our Resolution, by the Grace of God, to
bring forth the Fruits of Repentance, and amendment of Life.

3. Petition.
That is begging of God pardon for our Sins, the Assistance of his Grace to
forsake them, and to lead new Lives; a supply of such necessaries of this Life,
as He in his Infinite Wisdom sees convenient for us, more than we for our
selves, and comfortable Hopes of the things of a better Life, whenever we put
off these Earthly Tabernacles.

4. Deprecation.
Which is Praying to God to turn away from us,

1. The evil of Sin; and especially to keep us from the Commission of such
wickednesses as we are more addicted to, either by Nature, or worldly
Consideration, or evil Custom.

2. The evil of Punishment, either Temporal, with Submission to his Will; or
Eternal, in the World to come. Such is that Form of Deprecation in the Litany,
from all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Crafts and Assaults of the
Devil, from thy Wrath, and from everlasting Damnation, good Lord deliver us.

5. Intercession.
That must be for all Mankind; for the whole Catholic Church, and that
Particular Church whereof we are Members; for the Nation wherein we live; for
our King, for all the Royal Family; for all the Ministers of State and Justice;
for the Universities and Schools; for our private Relations, our Friends and
Benefactors; for all in Trouble and Affliction; for our Enemies, and those who
dispightfully use us. (Mat. 5.44.)

6. Thanksgiving.
This is Praising God for all his Mercies to us and to Mankind, in the Name of
Christ, (Ephesians. 5.20.) Christians are to praise him for sending his Son and Holy
Spirit; for the Preservation of his Church; for all the Examples and Patterns
of Piety gone before us; for the means of Grace, his Word, Worship and
Sacraments; for the particular blessings of Food, Raiment etc. or the
Preservation of our Selves, or Relations, and the like. When we consider such
Mercies it would well become us to say with Reverence and Devotion, Glory be to
our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, for ever and ever, Amen.

This Duty of Praise is sometimes to be performed by singing of Psalms (as
particularly Ps. 4, 15, 23, 67, 100, 117, 128, 134.) and Hymns and Spiritual
Songs, which render the Service very Solemn, and are a means to raise Devotion
in a Private Family or Public Assembly, ( Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. James 5.13.)
As for stated Public Prayers in Churches, and Private in Families, he who
wilfully Absents himself from either without just Cause, or necessary
Impediment, looses the Blessing of God's presence, promised where two or three
are met together in his Name, (Mat. 18.20.)

As for Secret Devotion, our Savior himself directs it in these words, Thou,
when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
shall reward thee openly, (Mat. 6.6.)

This must be done at least every Morning and Evening; it being not safe to let
pass the sins, or to adventure the Perils of a Day or Night, without begging
pardon for the one, and the Divine Protection to prevent the other.

In this private Address we must (as far as our Memories will serve us,)
unbosom our selves, by making a full and free Confession of all our sins, and
laying open all our wants, and asking suitable supplies; lifting up holy hands
without wrath or doubting, (1 Timothy 2.8.) And then (as the Son of Syrach says)
The Prayer of the humble pierces the Clouds, and will not turn away till the
Highest regard it, (Ecclus. 35.17.)

8. God is Glorified by the worthy Receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper.

This is an holy Rite of the New Covenant, agreeable to the Passover under the
Old. In this Rite, by the outward and visible signs of Bread broken, and Wine
poured forth, (Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22, 23, 24. Luke 22.19, 20.) is
represented the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in the Offering of which,
his Flesh was rent, and his Blood shed forth. ( John 19.34.) And by eating of
that Bread, and drinking of that Cup, Administered by Christ's Ministers in his
Church, according to Christ's own Institution, is made a Festival Memorial of
the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, which is thus to be showed forth till He
comes to Judge the World. (1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26.) To as many Baptized
Persons, as do this in such manner as God is pleased to account meet or worthy,
those outward Signs and Actions are both means whereby we receive the Benefits
of Christ's Sacrifice, and also Pledges and Tokens from God, to assure us, that
we verily and indeed partake of them.

To this Sacrament we are to come, because Christ expressly commands all to do
it, (Mat. 26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.23, to 26.) and to partake of the Holy Cup, as
well as the Bread. And we cannot do less out of Love and Thankfulness to our
Redeemer, than to make such a Memorial of his Death. Here we renew our holy
Vows, which we have need to do as often as we can. Hereby also the Church is
edified, the Bread which we break (1 Cor. 10.16.) being the Communion of the
Body of Christ, and the Cup which we drink being the Communion of the Blood of
Christ, or a public Act of Christian Fellowship, (1 Cor. 10.20, 21.) made by
the Members of Christ's Church, in or for a Remembrance of his Passion, to
which God never denies his Blessing, to those who duly receive it, it being his
own Ordinance.

Before a Man comes to this Supper, he must retire, and with Reverence and
Godly Fear, carefully examine himself, (1 Cor. 11.28.) and condemn himself for
that which he finds amiss, resolving by God's Grace to do so no more. He is to
judge himself, that he may not be judged, (1 Cor. 11.31.) And if he finds any
thing good in himself, he is to Bless God for his Grace, and to desire that he
may grow in it, and persevere in Holiness to his Lives end. [See Repentance in
Table of Contents.] He is also to prepare himself with a lively Faith in God's
Mercy through Christ, and with a thankful Heart for the Benefit of Christ's
Death, and with fervent Charity to all, (not excepting Enemies) (Mat. 5.23,
24.) and especially to his Fellow-Communicants.

When he comes there, he must with all Devout Affection exercise himself in the
aforesaid Acts of Reverence, Repentance, and Faith, and Thankfuln^ss, and
Charity, and holy Resolution.

After the Sacrament, he is again to do the same, and to humble himself for any
Failures in that Duty, of which he may have observed himself to have been
guilty; and to bless God, who has vouchsafed to make him a partaker of that
Ordinance; and to resolve by God's help, having solemnly renewed his Baptismal
Vow not to break it again.

In Sum, God is honored by a Christian Life, Herein (says Christ to his
Disciples) ( John 15.8.) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.

See, at the end of this Book, Prayers before, and at, and after the Sacrament.

5. To trust and rely on God.
It is the Duty of all good Christians, to depend and rest on God for all the
good things which concern their Souls and Bodies. either here or hereafter,
with Contentment and Resignation of Mind.

1. Their Souls.
We may be said to rely on God for the things which concern our Souls, by
Faith, Hope, and Patience in well-doing; that is, by believing that all which
God has said is true, and that all which he has promised, will be fulfilled;
by depending upon Him without murmuring, and with a firm expectation, that all
things shall work together for good to us, whilst we love (Romans 8.28.) and
obey Him, and cast our care on Him, (1 Pet. 5.7.) But without this Love and
Obedience, Faith, and Hope, and Patience are vain, and we shall never become
Heirs of those precious Promises, which, without the performance of the
Conditions required on our part, do not at all belong to us, ( Heb. 5.9.)

2. Their Bodies.
We are likewise to rely upon God for such a measure of these outward things,
as He in his great Wisdom sees fit for us; and so to learn the true Art of
Contentedness.

Would thou be greater then thou art? And does not thy Rank and Quality
please thee?

1. Why should Dust and Ashes be proud? Or why should not God do what He will
with that which is his own? Friend, he does thee no wrong, (Mat. 20.13, 15.)
The Clay may with more Justice quarrel with the Potter, for being formed into a
Vessel of dishonor, (Romans 9.21.) Or the small Rafter with the Master
Carpenter, for not being made a main Post, or a Beam. Why should not the great
Architect of the Universe, have Skill enough to dispose of so small a Material
as Man is? Or He who stretched forth the Heavens, not know how to place a little
lump of Earth?

2. Consider that Men in great Offices stand in high and slippery Places,
whilst those below them take aim, and shoot at them; and though they may miss
their Honors and Preferments, they are sure to hit their Failings and
Infirmities. Think also, that the Cares and Temptations of worldly Greatness
are more than the Felicities of it. The very Thoughts of them made Saul the Son
of Kish, hide himself among the stuff, (1 Samuel 10.22.) He had rather have been
feeding his Father's Asses, than be made King of the Israelites.

Do thou covet Riches? Or, art thou troubled that others have a greater share
than thou of this Worlds Goods? Consider,

1. That the World, and all that is therein, is wholly and solely at God's
dispose; The Fowls of the Air, the Fish of the Sea, the Beasts of the Field,
and the Cattle upon a Thousand Hills, the Corn and the Wine, the Gold and the
Silver, the Wool and the Flax, (Psalm. 50.10, 11. Hos. 2.8, 9.) And a Beggar
may as well contend with him who gives him a small piece of Silver, to enlarge
his Bounty, and make it a Talent of Gold, or a yearly Stipend, as a Creature
dispute about any thing with his Creator.

2. Thou set thy Heart upon great uncertainties, which the moth and rust
does corrupt, and Thieves break in and steal, (Mat. 6.19.) A Tempestuous Sea
may sink an able Merchant; an ill Season eat up a skilful Husbandman; a
neglected Brand or Candles-end, soon reduce to Ashes Kings Palaces, and the
stately Buildings of proud Cities, with all their Magazines, Trophies, and Rich
Furnitures. Thus do Riches make themselves wings, and fly away as Eagles,
(Prove. 23.5.)

3. They are not able to help thee in the Day of thy Distress. How can any
Treasure ease the torturing Pains of the Body, or Grief arising from Shame or
Disgrace? And much less the Wounds of a Guilty Conscience. The whole World
cannot Comfort thee, when thy Soul is lost, or purchase a drop of water to cool
thy Tongue, when thou shall be tormented in the Infernal Flames, (Luke 16.24.)

4. Plenty of Riches leads Men into a Thousand Snares, and the love of Money
pierces them through with many sorrows, (1 Timothy 6.9, 10.) And the strict
Accounts they must one Day give of their Stewardships, will make, (to those
that trust in them) their passage into Heaven more difficult, than that of a
Camel through the Eye of a Needle, (Mat. 19.24.)

Why art thou cast down, O weak Christian? And why is thy Soul so disquieted
within thee, because the World Smiles not upon thee? Trust still in God, (Ps.
42.5, 11.) If thou art of low degree, and of mean Parentage, be content with
thy station, and diligent in it. Remember we are all the Sons of Adam, and that
Virtuous Actions alone gave the first Rise to Honorable Families, and that the
Most High God has regard to the mean and humble, (Luke 1.51, 52.)

If thou art poor and needy, He who clothes the Lilies, and feeds the Ravens,
will provide for thee to day, and let to morrow take care for it self,
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, (Mat. 6.34.) Although the Fig Tree
should not blossom, nor Fruit be in the Vine, the labor of the Olive fail, the
Fields yield no Meat, the Flocks be cut off from the fold, and no Herd in the
Stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, (Hab. 3.17, 18.)

If thou labourest under Troubles, Crosses, and Afflictions, or painful
Diseases or Distempers; Comider,

1. That this Life is a state of Trial, and not of Recompense. Man is born to
trouble, as the sparks fly upwards, (Job 5.7.) And a heavy yoke is upon the
Sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of the Womb, till the day that they
return to the Mother of all things, (Ecclus. 40.1.)

2. Are not thy Troubles and Afflictions, or bodily Pains suited by God to thy
Sins, to reclaim thee from some evil Course? Or, are they not sent thee, as a
trial and exercise of thy Faith and Patience? Or, to wean thee from the World,
and from setting up thy rest here below?

3. Are they not Ten Thousand times less than thou have deserved? For when we
consider what we have merited, every mouth must be stopped, and the whole World
must become guilty before God, (Romans 3.19.)

4. Make up thy Accounts with God, and see if thy Receipts be not greater than
thy Disbursements; and the Mercies thou enjoyest, more in number than the
things thou want. But do not affright thy self with Images of past
Calamities, or dress up new ones in Imagination and wandering Thoughts.

5. God la^s upon none of his Children more than they are able to bear, neither
does He willingly afflict the Children of Men, (Lam. 3.33.) But Fools for their
transgressions are afflicted, (Ps. 107.17.) and when he sees his time, and them
fit for Mercies, he will put an end to all their Troubles.

Art thou Oppressed or Persecuted?

If it be for doing ill, thou have no reason to complain; if for doing well,
happy art thou, (1 Pet. 3.14.)

In short, instead of murmuring and complaining, thank God, (Job. 1.21.) who
Corrects his Children out of Love. (Heb. 12.6.) So shall these light
Afflictions which are but for a moment, work for thee a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, (2 Cor. 4.17.) Neither are the sufferings of this
Life, worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed, (Romans 8.18.)

Upon this whole Matter, argue with thy self in the Words of Jeremiah, (Lam.
3.39, 40.) Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the punishment of
his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

CHAP. II.
SECT. II.
Duties to our selves.
THese Duties are Consideration, Resolution, Humility, Diligence in our
Callings, Chastity, and Moderateness.

1. Consideration,
Or a serious and careful weighing in our Minds what we are, to what end we
were born, what we think, speak, or act. No Opinion is to be taken up, no Word
to be spoken, no Action to be done at all adventure, and without being
considered. If any inconsiderate thing proves well, it is by chance, and no
thanks are due to us. All our Thoughtfulness and Discretion is little enough to
guide us. How strangely then shall we err without Direction? ( Psalm. 119.59.
Eccles. 5.1. Isa. 1.3. Hag. 1.5, 7.) How shall Men, who consider not the worth
of their Souls, take care to save them? How shall those who think not what
their ways are, turn their Feet out of them, when they are evil? ( Ezekiel. 18.14,
27, 28.)

2. Resolution.
When we have considered well, it will be of use to us to resolve to act
accordingly. Resolution gives strength to the Mind; and there is great need of
it, in order to the passing safe through the changes and temptations of this
present Life; and it is what good Men have still been bent upon: As for me and
my House, we will serve the Lord, said Joshua, (Josh. 24.15.) I have sworn, and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments, said Holy David,
(Ps. 119.106.) The Primitive Christians of Antioch, were exhorted, that with
purpose of Heart, they would cleave unto the Lord, (Acts 11.23.) And if evil
Men go through many difficulties by obstinacy, why may not good Men do so by
holy Resolution? Such a Resolution is agreeable to the solemn Vow made in
Baptism, to promote the Glory of God against the World, the Flesh and the Devil.

3. Humility.
We must have a low Opinion of our selves, and be content if others have the
same; for our best faculties and services are imperfect; and if we are proud of
our sins, we glory in our shame, (Phil. 3.19.) If a proud man loves himself, he
loves what God hates, for He is an abomination to God, ( Prove. 16.5.) and a
baughty spirit goes before a fall, (Prove. 16.18.) Besides, it is a vanity in
great Persons, to think they acquire respect or reverence by being proud or
haughty. If we are proud of the gifts of Nature, we are outdone in most of
them, by some or other of the lower Creatures. If of our Birth and Parentage,
we should consider that the Honors of our Ancestors can hardly be called ours,
unless they be seconded by our virtuous and noble Actions. If of Riches, alas,
they are not good to us, unless by a good use of them, we make them such. If
lastly, we are proud of the Gifts of Grace, they are none of our own, and of
them St. Paul himself thought it not expedient to glory, (2 Cor. 12.1.)
Wherefore let us learn of our great Lord and Master, to be meek and lowly,
(Mat, 11.29.) and quench the first risings of pride and vainglory in our
hearts, with as much diligence, as we would a Fire that is already begun in our
Houses; and as our Savior has promised, we shaell find rest to our Souls.

4. Diligence in our Callings.
There is no quality or condition from that of a King who sits upon the Throne,
to him who grinds at the Mill, that exempts Men from some kind of Calling,
wherein they are bound to employ the Talents God has given them; especially
those who live upon their Labors; for they are not to eat, if they do not
work, (2 These. 3.10.) And Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant, to learn to
provide his Meat in the Summer, and his Food in the Harvest, (Prove. 6.6, 8.)
assuring him that otherwise, Poverty will come upon him as a Woman's travail,
and want as an armed Man, (Prove. 6.11.)

5. Chastity.
As on the one hand Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled, (Heb. 13.4.)
and a Man may lawfully rejoice in the Wife of his Youth, (Prove. 5.18.) So on
the other we are to abstain, not only from the grosser acts of Adultery and
Fornication, and all other such filthiness, but also from the lower degrees of
Lust, as coveting our Neighbors Wife, (Exodus 20.17.) Or looking on a Woman to
lust after her, (Mat. 5.28.) As likewise chambering and wantonness, (Romans
13.13.) and corrupt communication, (Ephesians. 4.29.) and entertaining in our
Fancies, foul and filthy thoughts and desires; all which are odious to God, who
sees the Heart, and loves none but the pure and spotless.

Besides, these sins of the Flesh ruin Men's Estates, and bring Diseases both
loathsome and painful, and so make the Committers of them the Devils Martyrs.
Wherefore beware of a Whorish Woman, lust not after her beauty, nor let her
take thee with her Eyelids, (Prove. 6.24, 25.) For she is a deep ditch, and a
narrow pit, (Prove. 28.27.) And the young man void of understanding goes after
her, as an Ox to the slaughter, till a dart strikes through his Liver, (Prove.
7.22, 23.)

But, which is worst of all, if these Sins be not attended with Judgments here,
as that of Sodom was with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, (Genesis 19.24.) or as
the Incest of Amnon, (2 Samuel 13.28, 29.) Or the Sin of Zimri and Cozbi, (Number.
25.8.) Yet they are sure to be rewarded with Hellfire at last; For
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, (Heb. 13.4.) And whoever defiles
his Body, which is the Temple of God, him will God destroy, (1 Cor. 3.17.) No
such Transgressors, without an extraordinary Repentance, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, (1 Cor. 6.9.) Christ has told us, that for every lascivious and
filthy Word and Thought unrepented of, we shall give an account at the day of
Judgment, (Mat. 12.36.)

Wherefore let us stifle the very first motions to any of these Sins; for to
parley with them, or entertain thoughts of them, is to cherish small sparks of
the fire of Lust in our Bosoms, which will at the last break out into a Flame
and devour us.

6. Moderateness. Of this there are 5 Branches, viz. In Meats, Drinks, Sleep,
Recreations and Apparel. The Two First go commonly under the Name of Temperance.
1. Of Temperance in Meats.
Man is of such a frame, that eating is necessary to preserve life; but then it
must be with moderation of which he himself is the best Judge: For the same
proportion of Meat, may give one Man a Surfeit, which will not satisfy
another's Hunger; and the eating of that Food which may be necessary for a sick
or weak Person, would be reputed wantonness and luxury in one of a stronger
Constitution. It is true in some sense, as the Wise Man tells us, That it is
good for a Man to eat, and to make his soul enjoy the Fruits of his labor,
that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his life, which God gives him, for
it is his Portion. (Eccles. 5.18.) But withal, he gives us this Caution, not to
eat more than is sufficient, lest we be filled therewith, and vomit it up
again, (Prove. 25.16.) And our Savior commands us, to take heed of having our
Hearts overcharged with surfeiting, (Luke 21.34.) And St. Paul, not to make
Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, (Romans 13.14.) Whoever does
so, abuses the bounty of God, starves Charity, that Luxury may abound, and
exposes his Body to manifold Dangers, and Distempers here, and to the pains of
Hell hereafter.

2. Of Temperance in Drinks.
As in Meats, so in Drinks, whatsoever exceeds a moderate Refreshment, though
perhaps it makes no visible change in a Man of a stronger Brain, is a degree of
Intemperance, and therefore those who are mighty to drink Wine, and rise early
in the Morning, to follow strong drink, and continue till Night, till Wine
inflame them, (Isa. 5.11.) have a dreadful Curse denounced against them.
Besides the waste and abuse of God's good Creatures, (which would have relieved
many thirsty Souls,) Such Men are the Devil's Factors, and make it matter of
sport and Recreation, to draw on others to the like excess, and then triumph
when they see them fall. But woe unto him that puts his Bottle to his
Neighbor's Mouth, and makes him drunken also, (Hab. 2.15.)

Some there are that plead a necessity, and others who think they make
plausible excuses for this sin of Drunkenness, namely, good Fellowship,
maintaining of Friendship, chearing of their Spirits, and putting away of
cares; but hereby they do but deceive themselves. Who has woe? who has
sorrow? who has contentions? who has bablings? who has wounds without cause?
they that tarry long at the Wine, (Prove. 23.29, 30.) And again, strong drink is
raging, (Pro. 20.1.) And how often have we seen Men of the mildest
Dispositions, go into those drunken meetings, with the most Friendly Embraces,
and anon, come out like chafed Lions and Tigers, and sheath their Swords in
each others Bowels, making their Wives Widows, and their Children Fatherless?
It were endless to reckon up the manifold mischiefs, and dreadful consequencies
of those Extravagancies. But the Sinners themselves will come to see their own
folly, when those that preyed upon them, shall be the first that forsake them;
when the Extortioners take possession of their Patrimony; and Palsies, Megrims,
Gouts, Dropsies, and other as dangerous, but more loathsome Diseases torment
their Bodies. And as for the putting away of cares, they may indeed for the
present be drowned in Wine and strong Drink: but after a short time, they will
be sure to rise again and float like so many Dead Carcasses, in more ugly and
deformed shapes.

Others tell us Drinking is an expedient to make Bargains, and to do business,
which is, in plain English, to overreach their Neighbors, by dealing with
them, when Drink has driven out Reason: such defrauding is contrary to St.
Paul's Commands, who requires us rather to take wrong, and suffer our selves to
be defrauded, (1 Cor. 6, 7,) than to do wrong, or to defraud.

There is a third sort of Winebibbers, who fear to be reproached for being
stricter than their Neighbors, if they lead a sober Life; but are not afraid
of being disowned by Christ in the Kingdom of his Father, for their
Intemperance, and the many sins that attend it.

There are some that know not how otherwise to pass away their time (their
precious time) of which the Damned Souls in Hell would give the wealth of the
whole World, were it in their power, to recall a few Days or Hours. Wherefore
look not not on the Wine when it is red, and sparkles in the Cup, for at last
it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, (Prove. 23.31, 32.) And
there is yet some thing more dreadful than any temporal Judgment; Drunkards
shall never inherit the Kingdom of God, (1 Cor. 6.10.) And the end of these
things is Death. (Rom, 6, 23.) and eternal Damnation, (Gal 5.21.)

3. Of Moderatness in Sleep.
This was ordained by God for refreshing and supporting our frail Bodies, so as
to enable us for such Labors, as the duties of our Religion, and the works of
our Calling require of us; and what is beyond this is a sort of Intemperance,
which wastes our precious time, and often consumes our Estates; for
drowsiness shall cloth a Man with Rags, (Prove. 23.21,) It also fills our
bodies with Diseases, making them as so many sinks of ill Humors, and renders
us useless both to God, our selves, and the World, and in effect dead whilst we
live.

4. Of Moderateness in Recreations.
Of these we are to take care, that they neither dishonor God, nor injure our
Neighbor, nor take up too great a part of our time; as likewise that we do not
set our Hearts upon them. And here let all those who can spend whole days and
nights in Cards, and Dice, and other idle Pastimes, consider whether they can
satisfy themselves, that God gave them so much time to so little purpose, and
brought them into his Vineyard to stand idle in it, ( Mat. 20.6.)

5. Of Moderateness, in Apparel.
The first occasion of Clothing was the covering the Nakedness of Adam and
Eve, after sin had brought in shame, and therefore we have very little reason
to be proud of such Ornaments. Another end was to fence our Bodies from cold,
and preserve our Health; and a third to distinguish Sexes, which has been
observed by all Nations; and God himself expressly provided for it among the
Jews. The Woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a Man, neither shall
a Man put on a Woman's Garment, for all that do so are abomination unto the
Lord, ( Deuteronomy. 22.5.) Now, for as much as all Kingdoms and Countries, for the
most part, have distinct Habits, and those commonly alter every Age, and
amongst us almost every Year; it is impossible to give particular Rules about
them. Only sure we are, that immodest Apparel, the Attire of Harlots, a
Fantastical Dress, Superfluity of Ornament, Clothing above our Estates,
Degree, or Calling, and unagreeable to our Age and Sex, is that which becomes
not Christian Men and Women.

CHAP. II.
SECT. III. Duties toward our Neighbors.
WE are commanded to love our Neighbors as our selves: (Mat. 22.39. Jam. 2.8.)
and we are to esteem every Man our Neighbor, ( Luke 10.29, 36, 37.)

Duties to our Neighbors, are,

1. To speak truth every Man to and of his Neighbor; ( Ephesians. 4.25.) Lying is of
the Devil, ( John 8.44.) and it leads to him. And though a Lie may be hid from
Man, God knows the Heart, and Liars must expect their part in the burning
Lake, ( Rev. 21.8.) Especially such as bear false Witness against others,
hurting thereby their Body, Goods and Name. Every Member of a Society has a
right to Truth, and by the mutual Trust and Confidence of the Members It is
preserved: But when Truth and Faith cease, it is dissolved. Therefore he that
will take a Serpent, let him take a Liar into his Bosom.

2. To be Just in all our Dealings: Doing by others, as we would they should do
by us, (Mat. 7.12.) This Rule, well observed, would maintain Property and Peace
in the World, without which, Families, Cities, Kingdoms are destroyed, and Men
live in a state of Fear and Violence, and provoke the Righteous God, who
governs by methods of Justice and Judgment, ( Genesis 18.19. 2 Samuel 23.3.) and
pours blessings upon the head of the Just, (Prove. 10.6.) He that will be such
a just Man, must root Covetousness out of his Heart. He that keeps the Command,
Thou shall not Covet, will not break that, Thou shall not Steal.

3. To be Courteous in our Behavior, and in Honor to prefer one another, (
Romans 12.10.) and to be easy to be entreated, ( Jam. 3.17.) He that thinks not
too highly of himself will be affable to others.

4. To be Patient, and Gentle, and Peaceable, (Romans 12.18.) toward all Men,
and to let all Rigor and Bitterness, Wrath and Clamor be put away from us, (
Ephesians. 4.31.) Such a churlish Temper, and such boisterous Passions, as governed
in Nabal, will render us very uneasy, both to our selves, and all who Converse
with us. If you are angry, though not without cause, (Mat. 5.22.) Sin not; let
not the Sun go down upon your wrath, (Ephesians. 4.26.)

5. To set a just value and esteem upon the Gifts and Parts of others, neither
envying nor detracting from them, nor seeking by any ways whatever to eclipse
them; but in lowliness of Mind, esteeming others better than themselves, (Phil.
2.3.)

6. To promote, to our power, and in our stations, the salsation of others,
(Jam. 5.19, 20.) This is the greatest of Charities, and it is done several
ways. As, by recommending them to God by fervent Prayer, by setting them a
pattern of a holy Life; by endeavoring their Instruction, by our selves or
others, in the things that belong to their Eternal Peace; by lending or giving
them Books of Piety; by reading to them, as we have opportunity, the
Scriptures, or other Pious Books, if they either cannot read at all, or do it
very imperfectly, or are disabled by Infirmity; by putting them in mind of the
Duties they omit, particularly of their neglecting the Lord's day, and the holy
Communion; by encouraging them when they do well; by speaking well of them, and
comfortably to them; by showing them the true kindness of Discreet Admonition,
and Brotherly Reproof, (Levit. 19.17. Psalm. 141.5. Mat. 18.15, 16.) by
assisting them in healing the Wounds of their Conscience. He can be no Friend
to his own Soul, who is none to his Neighbors.

7. To Assist those whom we see or know to be in any worldly Distress, either
by our Advice, Interest, or Purses, as we are able, and as is proper for our
circumstances, and that with a cheerful Countenance and comfortable Words. For
whosoever has this Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up
his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? (1 John
3.17.) A sad thing it is to observe how prodigal some Men and Women are in Rich
Clothes and Sumptuous Tables, and yet provide not one Garment for the Widow and
Fatherless, nor a few Crumbs for a poor Lazarus.

8. To pay thankful Acknowledgments to all our Benefactors, of what kind
soever; and, as we have Opportunities, to make suitable Returns: And not, as
the manner of some is, to repay Favors and Kindnesses with Ingratitude and
Injuries.

9. Those who have the Supreme Authority are to look upon themselves as God's
Vicegerents. They are not, on the one side, to be a terror to good Works, nor,
on the other, to bear the Sword in vain, but as the Ministers of God, to
execute wrath upon them that do evil, (Romans 13.4.) And to these must every Soul
within their Dominions be subject, in all things lawful, ( Mat. 22.21. Acts
4.19. Romans 13.1.) and whoever is not, resists the Ordinance of God, (Romans
13.2.) We must likewise pay them Tribute, (Romans 13.7.) and pray for them, and
all who are deputed by them, that so we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty, (1 Timothy 2.2.)

10. Those who are Spiritual Fathers in Christ, are to take Care of all the
Souls committed to their Charge. To preach the Word, to be instant in season
and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all long suffering, (2 Timothy 4.2.) And to this end, a Bishop must be blameless, vigilant, sober, of
good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no
striker, nor greedy of filthy lucre, and one who rules well his own house, (1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.) And this Character every other Christian Minister is to
endeavor to make good, with respect to the Circumstances in which he is.

Those that are under them, must esteem them very highly in love for their work
sake, (1 These. 5.12, 13.) and look upon them as those who watch for their
Souls, and must give an account of them, ( Heb. 13.17.) And, lastly, they must
pray for them, that utterance may be given them, and that they may open their
Mouths boldly to make known the Mysteries of the Gospel, (Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3.)

11. Those who are natural Parents, are early to bring their Children to
Baptism, and afterward, as they grow up, to Confirmation, and the holy
Communion. To such good ends, it is their Duty, to instill into their Minds
betimes the Principles of Christian Religion, and to keep them to their Duty,
sometimes by Rewards and Encouragements, sometimes by moderate Correction and
Punishment, but always by their own good Examples; and never by reviling
Language, or other unlawful Severities. Those of Noble Families, and plentiful
Fortunes, are to spare no sort of Education, that may qualify their Children,
to serve either Church or State, in places proper for them; for as much as
their Examples, Interest, Reputation, and Revenues, will have very great
influence upon their dependants and inferiors. And those of a lower rank are to
take care of putting their Children in some way of getting an honest
livelihood, and when they are fit for a wedded life, to Marry them in the Lord,
(1 Cor. 7.39.) and give them all the reasonable supplies they can, and to arm
them with all necessary cautions and instructions, but never to force them to
marry such as they abhor and loath; lest the Soul of a Child thus grieved and
put into a state of Temptation, be one day required at their hands, (Ezekiel.
3.18.)

Children are likewise commanded by God to love, honor, and obey, their
Parents; as likewise to pray for them; to administer to their wants when they
are able, and to cover all their Infirmities; for the Eye that mocks his
Father, or despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valleys shall pick
it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, (Prove. 30.17.) And no unkindness of
Parents can ever exempt or discharge Children from their Duties. And lastly,
they are to be kind and loving one to another, as Joseph to his Brethren, (
Genesis 50.21.)

12. Those who are Husbands and Wives, may do well to peruse ( Ephesians. 5.
Coloss. 3. 1 Timothy 3. and 1 Pet. 3.) and frequently to read over their
Matrimonial Vows, and consider how they have plighted their troth each to
other, and solemnly taken one another for better for worse, for richer for
poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, (the Woman adds, to
Obey) till death them do part; and forsaking all others, to keep only to one
another so long as they both shall live. These are not Words of course, but
Engagements in the special presence of God, and before a Christian
Congregation, and oblige in Law and Conscience; and where such Vows are set at
naught, the blessing of God rests not upon that Household.

13. As to the Duty of Friends, we must in the first place, be very careful in
choosing them, and having found one of a Thousand, we must be true to their
Souls, their Secrets and Trusts, their Reputations and their Interests, all the
days of our Lives; and not change them for the Gold of Ophir, (Ecclus. 7.18.)
Who can read and not abhor the Character of a False Friend given (in Ecclus.
6.10, 11, 12.) There is a Friend that is a Companion at thy Table, but will not
continue in the day of thy Affliction; in thy prosperity he will be as thy
self; when thou art brought low, he will hide himself. And here above all
others, Men in eminent Places, to whom Inferiors speak rather that which they
think will please them, than what they know to be true and fit, ought to make
this a part of their Litanies, from Flatterers, and false Friends, good Lord
deliver us.

14. Those who are Debtors and Creditors: The first must use their best
endeavors to pay what they really and truly owe; and the last must have a care
of taking their Fellow Servants by the Throat, for fear lest what measure they
mete out to others, the same may be meted to them again, by their great Lord
and Master, ( Mat. 18.35.)

15. Those that are Masters, must rule their own Spirits first, that they may
the better govern their Servants, (Prove. 16.32. Ecclus. 4.30) they must not
provoke them to curse, (Eccles. 7.21.) but with gentleness admonish and reprove
them, unless the heinousness of the fault requires that they rebuke them
sharply, (Tit. 1.12, 13.) They are likewise to give them a good Example, as
likewise to provide for their Sustenance in Sickness, and in Health, and justly
pay them their Wages, always remembering that their Master is in Heaven. (Ephesians.
6.9.) Which if they do, they will also take care of their Souls, and so order
the Affairs of their Household, that they may have some time to pray and read in
private, and to come to the House and Table of God.

On the other hand, Servants must obey their Masters in all their just
Commands, not with Eye-Service, but in singleness of heart, as unto Christ,
(Ephesians. 6.5, 6.) They must not use any Deceit, or embezzel their Goods, or betray
their Trusts, or carry Tales abroad, or be slothful in their business, or
occasion Quarrels in the Family, or take Gifts where they should not, (2 Kings
5.20.) Or excuse a Fault with a Lie, (Psalm. 101.7.) which makes the fault much
the greater.

These are things which are commanded us in reference to our Neighbors; there
are other things which we are forbid: As,

1. Not to hurt their Souls, by afflicting them, or breaking their Spirits,
(Prove. 15.13.) no not so much as to laugh at, and scorn a poor Man in the
bitterness of his Soul, (Ecclu. 4.6.) nor by giving him evil counsel, as Job's
Wife did to her Husband, ( Job 2.9.) to curse God and die; or as Achitophel to
Absalom, to go up to his Father's Concubines, (2 Samuel 16.21.) nor by enticing
him to any evil courses, or encouraging and helping him in them, ( Prove. 1.10.)
as Jonadab did Amnon in his abominable Incest, (2 Samuel 13.5.)

2. Not to hurt their Bodies, either by open Murder, as Cain killed Abel,
(Genesis 4.8.) or secret, as David killed Vriah, to get his Wife, (2 Samuel 11.17.)
or as Jezebel killed Naboth, (1 Kin. 21.13.) to possess his Vineyard; or as a
Strumpet murders her Child, to cover her Shame; which Murder seldom goes
unpunished, even here in this World. God will judge them for such bloody and
uncharitable Wickednesses, ( Genesis 9.5, 6.) He that sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man
shall his Blood be shed; namely, by the Magistrate, who is the Avenger in God's
stead.

There are other sorts relating to this, as maiming a poor Man, whose Bread is
his Life. (Ecclus. 34.21.) for which he ought to have ample Restitution and
Satisfaction. As likewise murdering our Neighbors in their Reputation and good
Name, which to most is dearer than their Lives. Therefore Whisperers and
Backbiters are joined with Murderers, (Romans 1.29, 30.) as worthy of Death, v.
32.

3. We are not to hurt our Neighbor, as to his Wife, or his Estate. Not his
Wife, his nearest Friend, by corrupting or enticing her to a strange Bed, and
so robbing her of her Innocence, and him of her love. This stirs up in the
Husband raging Jealousy, (Prove. 6.34.) and oft-times ends in most desperate
Quarrels, and becomes fatal to whole Families. Again, we are not to hurt him in
his Estate; (though he be an Enemy, if his Ox go astray, we must bring it back;
or if his Ass lay under his burden, we must help him;) (Exodus 23.4, 5.) much
less to steal from him his Cattle, Money or Goods, or to rob his Houses or
Lands; by Griping, Usury, or Oppression; especially, not to enter into the
Fields of the Fatherless, (Prove. 23.10.) nor to devour Widows Houses. (Mat.
23.14.) and here let Men take heed and beware, as they will answer it to the
Judge of the World; Princes and great Men of abusing their Power; Learned and
Wise Men their Knowledge and Skill; Judges and Officers of Justice their Trust,
for the perverting of Judgment, (See Wisd. 6.1, to 7.)

Lastly, we must not cheat, or overreach our Neighbor in matters of trust,
traffic, and bargaining. And here let all Guardians, Stewards, and other
Servants, to whom any business of trust is committed; all Traders and Dealers,
and even Gamesters, strictly examine their own Consciences; and where any have
wronged others, let them follow the Example of Zacchaeus, (Luke 9.8.) and make
quick and ample restitution, to the best of their abilities and powers. The sin
is not remitted, where that which was unjustly gotten, is not, to our power,
restored.

4. Not to revenge Injuries; a Man being no proper Judge and Executioner in his
own cause. Vengeance belongs to God, (Romans 12.19.) and his Vicegerents, (Romans
13.4.) Christ has taught us to forgive, as we hope to be forgiven; for if we
forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will our Heavenly Father forgive us
our trespasses, (Mat. 6.14, 15.)

If a Man knows these things, happy is he, if he does them, (Joh. 13.17.)
without Hypocrisy, (Phil. 1.10.) Lukewarmness and Partiality, (Psalm 119.6.
Luke 1.6.) and perseveres in well doing to the end of his Life: Then his hope
will not be in vain, ( Romans 2.7. Rev. 2.10.) For ( Tit. 2.11, 12, 13.) the
Gospel which teaches all Men to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts and to
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, directs them also
to look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. III. Of things to be feared and hoped for by a Christian.
HE that comes unto God must believe, not only that he is, (Heb. 11.6.) but
also, that he is both a punisher of evil doers, (Romans 2.9.) and a rewarder of
those that diligently seek him. (Heb. 11.6.)

God has threatened the Disobedient with fearful Judgments of all kinds,
outweighing all the short and brutal Pleasures of Sin, ( Deuteronomy. 28.15. to v. 68.
Psalm. 11.6. Romans 2.9.) and will at last say to the impenitent, Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, (Mat.
25.41.)

He has also encouraged all his Servants, with Promises of very great Rewards,
(Mark 10.30. Romans 2.7, 10.) to which they may have an Eye, (Heb. 11.26.) as
being assured to them through the Merits of his Son. ( Romans 8.17. 1 John 5.11.)

And as he was gracious in making his Promises so he will be just in the
performing of them: To the Righteous he will deny no good thing, (Ps. 84.11.)
Godliness has the promise both of this Life, and that which is to come, (1 Timothy 4.8. 1 John 2.25.)

In this life, God has promised to true Christians, Mercies both temporal and
spiritual; as for temporal Mercies he gives them to his Children, so far as
they are convenient for them, that they may be Blessings to them, and not
Snares; and he has assured those who love him, that all things shall work
together for good to them, (Romans 8.28.) He also blesses them (Ephesians. 1.3.) with
Spiritual Blessings in Christ. By his holy Spirit going along with the means of
the Gospel, and the sincere endeavors of Men, he enlightens the Mind, and
heals the Will, and moderates the Affections, and sanctifies the whole Man. He
prevents evil, he brings good out of it; he gives grace to repent; he
vouchsafes pardon; he works in us to will and to do whilst we work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling (Phil. 2.12, 13.) He supports in trouble; He
sanctifies affliction; He makes us able to resist temptation; He sends
deliverance in his time and way; He gives that Peace which the World can
neither give nor take away. He makes a Man happy both in Life and Death.

After Death, he delivers him from the insupportable Miseries of Hell; and
rewards his mean and temporary Services, with Life everlasting, (1 John 2.25)
He gives not only Grace but Glory, even the eternal Glory of Heaven, (Ephesians.
4.7. 1 These. 2.12.) He receives the Souls of the Faithful into Joy and
Felicity, after they are delivered from the burden of the Flesh, (2 Cor. 5.8.
Phil. 1.23.) And, at the great day of Judgment, he raises this Mortal Body,
and makes it like to Christ's Glorious Body, (Phil. 3.21.) and uniteth it to
the Soul, and causes the whole Person to be entirely happy for ever and ever.
Eye has not seen (1 Cor. 2.9.) neither has Ear heard, nor has it entered
into the heart of Man [fully] to conceive the things which God has prepared
for those that love him; and all this for performing but a reasonable Service
(Romans 12.1.) in which God also assists him.

Seeing now that the goodness of the End, does naturally quicken Man in the
way, and that God has encouraged the Obedience of a Christian with such
exceeding great and precious promises, (2 Pet. 1.4.) it behooves him to abstain
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of
God, (2 Cor. 7.1.) And then, after he has had his Fruit unto holiness, his End
will be everlasting Life, (Romans 6.22.) through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Certain Forms of Devotion, to be used either in a Family, or in the
Closet of a Christian.
A Prayer to be used at any time of the day, especially in the Morning and
Evening.
[When this Prayer, or any of the rest, is used in a Family, there needs only
the change of the Person, as We must be put instead of I, Us instead of Me, Our
instead of My, Are instead of Am, etc.]

O Most Holy and Blessed Lord God, the Great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
the most merciful and gracious Father of Mankind in thy Son Christ Jesus: It is
of thy great Condescension that the Sons of Men may approach thy Presence, who
art Infinite in Majesty and Power, and can do what thou please every where.
I that am miserable Dust and Ashes, do humbly acknowledge the Duty which I owe
thee, both as I am thy Creature, and as I am made a Member of the Body of thy
Son. I am ashamed when I call to mind my forgetfulness of thee, and my
Ingratitude to thee, who have so often and so grievously sinned against thee,
in Thought, Word and Deed, by Ignorance, Error and Presumption; for which thou
might justly cast me off for ever. But Lord I repent; be pleased to accept
of my Repentance. Lord, I believe; help my weak Belief. Pardon all my sins that
are past, for the Merits of my dear Savior; and preserve me by thy Grace from
offending thee for the time to come. And when thou have dealt thus graciously
with my Soul, be pleased to extend thy mercy to my Body also, and give me such
a supply of all things necessary for the support of it, as thou in thy Wisdom
shall see most convenient. And grant that I may use the Comforts of this Life
with such Moderation and Sobriety, that I may never forfeit the hopes of a
better, when this my Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved. Remove far from me
all Evil, especially that great Evil of Sin. And wheresoever thou see me apt
to fall, through the weakness of my Corrupt Nature, there let thy Strength be
most graciously seen in my Preservation. O Lord, I beseech thee, let not thine
Anger Rise against me to punish me in this World; Or if my sins have so far
provoked thee, that thou will not spare me altogether, thy Will be done; only
this I humbly beg, by all the meritorious sufferings of thy dear Son, that thou will deliver me from thy Wrath, and from Everlasting Damnation, and of thy
great Goodness bring me to Life Eternal, through the same Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Extend thy Goodness not only to me a miserable sinner, but to all mankind. Let
thy VVays be known upon Earth, thy saving health among all Nations. Be gracious
to Christ's Universal Church; more especially bless these Kingdoms, and that
part of thy Church which is planted in them. And herein be particularly
gracious to our Sovereign Lord the King: Prolong his Days, and prosper his
Government over us: Bless the Princess, and all the Royal Family. Give thy
Grace to all the Nobility and Gentry, and to all that are in Authority, that
Justice, Mercy and Truth may flourish amongst us, and there may be no
Complaining in our Streets. Bless all our Pastors and Teachers, and prosper
their Endeavors for the good of Souls. Look down in Mercy upon all that are in
Affliction; give them an entire Resignation to thy holy Will, and in thy due
time send a happy End to all their Troubles. Let it be good for them that they
have been under thy Discipline. Strengthen the Good and Virtuous with a greater
Portion of Grace, and bring all Sinners to Repentance. Preserve all that travel
by Land or by Water, and give thy blessing to those that labor in their
several Callings, O prosper thou their handy work. O good God, be gracious to
all my Relations and Friends; convert and pardon my Enemies. Deal to all
degrees and conditions of Men, what is most useful and profitable for them.
Finally, I bless and praise thy holy Name, for all the Mercies vouchsafed to
me, and to all Mankind, for the sake of thy dear Son Christ Jesus. I glorify
thee for his miraculous Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and for
his Intercession at thy right Hand for us; and for the sending of the Holy
Ghost; for the wonderful Preservation of thy Church in all Ages; for the good
Examples of all Holy Men and Women that have gone before us; for the means of
Grace, and for the hope of Glory. I likewise magnify Thee for my Health,
Strength, Food and Raiment; for the Preservation of my Self, my Friends and
Relations, and for all the Comforts of this Life, humbly beseeching Thee to
give us all Grace to live so godly, soberly and righteously in this present
World, that at the end of our Days, we may come to those everlasting Joys,
which thou have prepared for those that love thee; through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

When this Prayer is used in the Morning, add that which follows.
O God, who by thy good Providence have watched over me the Night that is
passed, be Thou pleased also to preserve me this Day; defend me by thy mighty
power from all things hurtful, and grant me all things needful both for my Soul
and Body; and prosper what I shall go about; through Jesus Christ, Amen.

When in the Evening, add this.
BE thou pleased this Night to protect and defend me, and all that Thou in thy
good Providence have given me, from all dangers; and grant me such a
comfortable and refreshing Sleep, as may enable me to serve Thee better the Day
following; through Christ, Amen.

End these Prayers as follows.
Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen. (Mat. 6.9. Luke
11.2.)

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the Followship of the
Holy Ghost, be with me now, and evermore, Amen. (2 Cor. 13, 14.)

A Brief Paraphrase on the Lord's Prayer, to be used at any time as a Prayer.
[Preface.] O Lord, the Creator and Preserver of all Men, Heaven is thy Throne,
and the Earth thy Footstool. [ Petition 1.] We entirely desire that thy Name
may be glorified by us and by all the World, who have had so many Experiences
how great, how wise, and how merciful thou art. 2. Rule thou in the hearts of
all Mankind by thy Grace, and so prepare them for thy Kingdom of Glory. 3. And
since thy Will is holy, and just, and wise, may we on Earth yield as ready and
cheerful an obedience to it in all things, as the blessed Angels themselves do,
who stand in thy Presence, and do whatever thou command them. 4. Unless Thou
preservest us, we all perish. We therefore humbly beseech Thee, that Thou
would give us all things needful both for our Souls and Bodies, and bless us
in the due use of them. We are indeed unworthy of such Mercies, by reason of
our manifold Transgressions; But 5. We humbly hope, Thou will in tender
compassion to us, pardon all our Offenses against Thee, as we do sincerely
forgive all those who have offended against us; and we beseech Thee to increase
this Charity in us. 6. And together with thy Pardon for all that is past, we
implore thy Grace to preserve us continually from offending Thee for the time
to come. And to that end, do Thou by thy Providence, either prevent us from
falling into Temptations, or by thy Grace so assist us, that we may overcome
them. Deliver us from the Snares and Malice of the evil one, and from all sin
and wickedness, and from the Miseries of this Life, so far as thou see fit
for us; and above all from everlasting Death.

[Conclusion.] Hear us, and graciously answer our Petitions, for thou art the
great King, whose power is infinite; and to thee shall all the glory of the
goodness and mercy be returned, for ever and ever. Amen. So be it.

On the Lord's Day, before Church, add this to the general Prayer.
IN an humble and thankful sense of thy infinite goodness, O Lord, who art
pleased to admit us thy unworthy Creatures, to tread thy Courts; I am going to
thine House, there to present my Soul and Body to thee in the Assembly of thy
Saints O do thou draw nigh to me, who am drawing nigh to thee in a holy
Fellowship with those who profess the Christian Faith. Let thy Holy Spirit
compose my Mind to a serious and devout attention in all the parts of thy
Divine Service. Let me praise thy Name with Cheerfulness, pray unto thee with
Earnestness, and hear thy word with Reverence: And vouchsafe more fully to
inform me of my Duty, to correct and amend what is amiss in me, to encourage
and strengthen my good Resolutions, and to assist me in all well-doing for the
time to come: That so growing every Day better and better by my Communion with
Thee, I may become such as thou can love and delight in now, and wilt reward
at the great Day of the Lord Jesus, Amen.

When you come from Church, pray thus,
I adore thee again, O Lord of Life and Glory, and do most humbly beseech thee
to accept of that dedication I have made of my Soul and Body to thee, with
Prayers and Praises in the public Congregation Pardon all the wandering and
evil Thoughts, and all the unfit Actions I may have been guilty of in my
attendance upon thee. Be merciful to me in pardoning all my sins, and endue me
with the grace of thy Holy Spirit. Preserve in me always a Religious sense of
thee, wherever I am, or whatsoever I do. O Blessed Jesus, I beseech thee that
thy holy Laws may be more deeply engraven on my heart: O that every truth I
have learnt this day, may be so faithfully remembered by me, as may make me more
diligent in my Calling, more useful in my Conversation, more dutiful in all my
Relations, and more contented in all Conditions; that so running the way of thy
Commandments, I may at length attain thy gracious Promises, and be made
Partaker of thy everlasting Kingdom; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer before Confirmation.
O Almighty God and Merciful Father, through whose gracious Providence over me
I have been admitted into thy Church by Baptism, pardon I beseech thee all my
former Breaches of that holy Covenant which I was then entered into. And now
that I am going to renew my Baptismal Vows in my own Person, so strengthen me
with all the graces of thy Holy Spirit that I may make open Profession of thy
Holy Religion at all times hereafter, and speak, and think and live as becomes
a true Member of Christ. Give me Grace to mortify all my evil and corrupt
Affections, and daily to proceed in all virtue and godliness of living, till I
at last attain the end of my hopes, even the Salvation of my Soul, through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

A Prayer before the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
O Holy, Just and Gracious God, it is of thy Mercy alone that I am not
consumed; and because thy Compassions fail not. I have by my manifold
Provocations deserved the utmost of thy wrath and indignation against me; yet
behold thou have not only spared me, but have now also invited me to the
renewing of that Holy Covenant which I have so often and so shamefully broken.
I am not worthy of that daily bread which sustains my bodily Life, how then
shall I dare to approach thy Holy Table, to partake of that Bread of Life which
thou have prepared for the food of Pious and Holy souls? O Lord, it is true, my
guiltiness makes me tremble to come, and yet it makes me not dare to stay away.
For where can my polluted Soul be washed, but in the Fountain of thy Sons
Blood? That alone which was shed for the remission of sins, can take away all
its stains. Hither therefore I come, according to thy gracious Invitation, and
hope that my Person and Service may be accepted in thy beloved Son. To that
end, do thou prepare my heart to draw nigh to thee. Let thy Divine Spirit
breath into my Soul such holy Thoughts, and devout Affections, as may become
one who commemorates the death of the Son of God, who was wounded for our
Iniquities, and bruised for our Transgressions. O let my heart be deeply
affected with such a sense of sin, as may make me hate the very thoughts of
every evil way for the future, and choose to endure any thing, rather than to
despise the riches of his love. And while I remember the love of my Blessed
Savior in dying for me a Sinner, may I never forget to exercise Charity
toward all Men, even Enemies as well as Friends. Let every Grace be so
confirmed and strengthened in me, that I may serve thee sincerely and
acceptably all the days of my Life, perfecting Holiness in thy fear. Fulfill, O
Gracious Lord, all my Petitions, and grant that I may be made Partaker of the
benefits of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood here, and of his glory
hereafter; through the merits of the same, our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer at the Sacrament, immediately before Receiving.
O Blessed Lord Jesus, I remember with all humility and love, and gratitude,
how thy Sacred Body was broken and thy Precious Blood poured out for sinners.
And I am now come to receive this Bread, and this Wine, which thou have
appointed as the Sacramental Representations of them. O let that Sacrifice of
thine which thou did once make, when thou did offer up thy Sacred Body upon
the Cross, be effectual for the Salvation of my Soul and Body. Here is that
which my Soul longs and thirsts after; O let me not be sent empty away.
Give me thy self, and with thy self, thy Holy Spirit to take possession of me;
and let me feel that it always dwells in me by those Heavenly Graces moving in
my Soul, which are the blessed fruits and effects of it. Awaken m^ Repentance,
increase my Faith, inflame my Charity, Thankfulness and Devotion. Make me a
meet Partaker of thy Holy Supper here, and of the Jo^s of thy Kingdom
hereafter; through Christ Jesus, Amen.

A Prayer after the Sacrament.
I Return unto thee, O most gracious and glorious God, all praise and thanks
for thine infinite and inconceivable Mercies to us the Children of Men; and
especial, I desire to bless and magnify thy Hol^ Name, for that wonderful love
of thine, in sending thy dear Son to die for Sinners: and for that great Grace
which thou have now vouchsafed thy humble Servant, in giving me a fresh
assurance of an Interest in that precious Death, by admitting me to partake of
thy holy Sacrament, ordained in remembrance of it. O may I never forget what
thou have done for my Soul! but carry the thoughts of it along with me to all
the ^ctions of my life, that it may be in me a Spring of entire obedience unto
thee all the rest of my da^s. This is indeed my unfeigned desire, that! may
never break those Vows and Promises of a Holy Life which I have made to thee
this day: But I am afraid of my own treache ous Heart, and the Assaults which
will be made upon me by my spiritual Enemies, least they should betray me into
the breach of thy Holy Commandments. O therefore let the assistance of thy holy
Spirit be ever with me, and the grace always prevent and follow me, and then I
trust I shall approve my self thy faithful Servant in all things, and finish my
course with joy. With my own, I desire the happiness of all Mankind, that they
who are still in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, may see the salvation of
God, and taste how Gracious thou art to Christians; and that all those who are
called by the Name of Christ, may depart from Iniquity and adorn the Doctrine
of Christ their Savior in all things. May we all glorify thy Name in this
World, and live for ever to praise thee in the World to come; through Christ
our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer to be used by, or with, or for a Sick Person.
[ Note, that in this Prayer, when used for another, I must be changed to He,
She, or We, and Me, to Him or Her, and My to His or Her.]

O Most Righteous and Merciful Lord, the God of Health and of Sickness, of Life
and of Death, I most humbly acknowledge the justice of thy present Visiation
upon thy Servant, whose Sins had long ago deserved it from thee. Yet since
thou designest not the ruin, but the amendment of those whom thou scourgest, I
beseech thee by thy Grace to sanctify this Correction to me that this sickness
to my Body may be a means of health to my Soul. Deliver Me from all frowardness
and impatience under it, and give me an entire resignation to thy Divine will.
If in thy good Providence thou have appointed that I shall live longer upon
Earth, Lord bless all means that are u^ed for my recovery, and give me grace to
amend the rest of my Life and with good works to glorify thy holy Name. But if
thou have otherwise determined, and this Sickness must be unto Death, O fit and
prepare me for it. Wean my Heart from the World and all the fading Vanities of
it. Give me unfeigned Repentance for all the Errors of my Life past, and seal
my Pardon in Heaven, before I go hence and be no more seen. O lift up thy
Countenance upon me, and in all the pains of my Body, in all the Agonies of my
Spirit, let thy Comforts refresh my Soul And when the time of my departure is
come, receive me into those Heavenly Habitations, where the Souls of them that
sleep in the Lord Jesus, enjoy perpetual rest and felicity. Grant this O Lord,
for the Merits of the same Jesus Christ, thy only Son, and our only Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer to be said by one whose Friend is dead.
O Righteous Lord, I acknowledge thy wisdom and goodness in all thy
Dispensations toward the Children of Men, and do therefore submit my self, and
all I have, to thy Disp^sal, who know best what is fit for us. It was of the
Mercy that I so long enjoyed the comfort of my Friend, whom thou have now taken
from me. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord. From Thee all good things do come, and thou can repair this loss to
me, by adding to the number of my Friends. But however thou shall deal with me
in that particular, yet this one thing I most humbly beg, be thou my God and my
Friend, and it is enough. In thee shall be m^ trust as long as I live; and when
thou shall call me hence, receive me into Heaven, where I hope my Friend is,
that we may there join with all thy Holy Angels and Saints, to sing thy Praises
for ever and ever; Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

A Prayer to be said for one who has lost a Friend.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts, who in a more especial manner
have always showed thy self a helper of the Friendless, and a Father of the
Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow; look down with an Eye of Pity and
Compassion upon thy Servant; now in great grief and bitterness of heart, for
the loss of his dear Friend; and give him grace to consider that it was thy
doing, who do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. And let
this teach him to moderate all his Passions, and to bear his Affliction with an
humble, meek and patient Spirit. Free him from all discontented and distrustiul
Thoughts, and help him to cast all his care upon Thee, who carest for him, and
can do infinitely more for him, than the most tender and faithful Friend on
Earth. Lift up his Thoughts toward that blessed Place, where thou his God and
Savior art; and so assist him with thy grace to follow the blessed Son in
purity of living, during his Pilgrimage upon Earth, that he may hereafter enter
into his joy, and with all those who are departed in thy fear, be made Partaker
of everlasting Glory; through the same Lord Jesus, Amen.

A Grace before Meat.
LOrd pardon all our Sins; give us grace to make a temperate and discreet use
of thy Creatures which thou have now provided for us; that whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, we may do all to thy Glory; through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

After Meat.
WE praise the Holy Name, O Lord, for all thy Mercies, and especially for this
refreshment which thou have now given us. Enable us thereby to do thee further
Service. Bless thy Holy Church, preserve our King, the Royal Family, and these
Realms; grant us Peace and Truth here, and make us Partakers of thy Glory
hereafter; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Table of the Contents.
A.
OF Adoration Page 41 Of Moderateness in Apparel Page 71
B.
Of Baptism Page 24, 50, 61 Of Blasphemies Page 38 Not to hurt the Bodies of
our Neighbors Page 85
C.
Of Charity Page 76, 77 Of Diligence in our Callings Page 62 Of Chastity Page
63 Duty of Children 81 Of Consideration Page 59 Arguments for Contentment Page
51 to 58 Duty of Creditors Page 83 The Creed Explained Page 13
D.
Of Death Page 32 Duty of Debtors Page 83 Of Secret Devotion Page 46 Certain
Forms of Devotion, either in a Family of Closet Page 93 Ways of Dishonouring
God Page 38 Of Temperance in Drinks Page 66
F.
Of the Faith of a Christian Page 5 How he comes to have that Faith Page 6 Of
Fasting Page 33 Of the Fear of God Page 29 Things to be Feared Page 89 Duty of
Friends Page 82
G.
Of Duties toward God Page 27 Not to hurt our Neighbor as to his Goods Page
86 Grace before Meat Page 115 Grace after Meat Page 116
H.
Of Honoring God Page 34 Of things to be Hoped for page 89 Of Humility Page 61
Duty of Husbands Page 81
J.
Of Justice in dealings Page 74
L.
Of the Love of God Page 27 Lords- day Page 40, 41
M.
Duty of Magistrates and Ministers Page 78 Duty of Masters Page 83 Of the
Matrimonial Vow Page 81 Of Temporance in Meats Page 65 Of Divine Meditation
Page 35 The Benefits of It Page 36 Of Moderateness Page 65 Of Murder Page 85
N.
Duties toward our Neighbors Page 73
O.
Of Oaths Page 38
P.
Duty of Parents Page 79 Of Perjury Page 39 Of things to be Practiced by a
Christian Page 27 Of Prayer, and its Parts Page 42 Morning and Evening Prayer
for a Family or single Person Page 93 Paraphrase on the Lords Prayer Page 100
Prayer before Church Page 102 Prayer after Church Page 103 Prayer before
Confirmation Page 105 Prayer before the Sacrament Page 106 Prayer at the
Sacrament Page 108 Prayer after the Sacrament Page 109 Prayer by, with, or for
a sick Person Page 111 Prayer When a Friend is dead Page 113 Prayer For one who
has lost a Friend Page 114 Of singing of Psaims Page 45
R.
Of Moderateness in Recreations Page 70 Of Repentance and turning to God Page
30 The Danger of delaying It Page 32 Of Reproof Pae 76 Of Resolution page 60
Against Revenge Page 88
S.
Authority of Scriptures Page 8 Duties toward our Selves Page 59 Duty of
Servants Page 84 Of Moderateness in Sleep Page 70 Of the Duty of Subjects Page
78 Of the Lord's Supper Page 47 Against hurting the Soul of our Neighbor 84
T.
Of Temperance Page 65, 66 Of Thanksgiving Page 45 Particularly after Meals
Page 37 Of Trusting in God Page 50 Of speaking Truth page 73
W.
Duty of Wives Page 81 Against hurting our Neighbor as to his Wife Page 86 Of
Worshipping God. Page 41
FINIS.

