THE MOURNER COMFORTED. AN Epistle Consolatory; WRITTEN BY HVGO GROTIVS TO
Monsieur DU MAURIER the French Ambassador at the HAGUE. Translated on a sad
occasion, by C.B.

Melius se fert sparsus Dolor. LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Edward Lee at the
Turks Head in Fleetstreet. 1652.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THis had not seen the light, but that it may be useful to some of the
Relatives of that excellent Lady, that could not go to her grave unobserved,
nor without great attendance. Her departure may be compared to the disappearing
of some star of the first magnitude. Or rather, a new star is thereby added to
the heavens. And there let her shine for ever. The use of this Epistolical
Discourse may also extend farther then my first design. They that faint under
any such loss may take it for a cordial: and they that fear any, may receive
it for a preparative. This (upon some experience in himself) is the hope of the
Translator in the publication of it; and it is Dedicated to those Honorable
persons, whom he will not presume to name, until by some more ample testimony
he may publicly show himself their faithful and humble servant,

C.B.

HUGO GROTIUS His Consolatory Epistle to the French Ambassador DV MAVRIER, upon
the Death of his Lady.
Most, Illustrious Lord,
I Am thus far indebted to my prison, that the evils of other men come later to
my knowledge; even your wound, which otherwise I should have known among the
first, by reason of that friendship wherewith you have honored me, I now
understand last of all, like unto those things that come to pass in the
remotest parts of Europe. This will excuse the slownesse of my duty, which yet
beside necessity has reason enough to defend it. For those consolations are
wont to be more acceptable, which are then applied, when the first storm of
sorrow is past, and that pleasure (if I may so speak) of grieving is abated;
when the mind now wearied with its disease begins to be willing to admit of
remedies, and to suffer the touch of some helping hand. I know how you were
affected with my calamity, and thence you may understand, I am not unsensible
of your sorrow. Let us, if it please you, mingle together the causes of our
grief, that we may together seek for comforts, and when we have found them make
use of them together. Neither am I ignorant, how little I, that am so destitute
of all aids both to my mind and body, am able to bring unto this purpose,
which is not already better and more effectually alleged and expressed by the
professors of wisdom or eloquence or piety, who have heretofore set up their
standard against immoderate mourning. But I am taught by my own experience,
That can never be too much repeated which is never enough remembered. We must
scour and call back into use the Arms, which by length of time are grown rusty.
Besides, the advices which are given in general words, as spoken unto all, are
wont to pass by with less observation: but when they are applied to our
particular case, having no other mark to hit, they pierce and have a more
strong effect. At our first entrance upon this work, we must seriously
consider, whether the grief of the heart be in the number of those things, over
which our labor and industry has any power. For if necessarily and naturally
we do all grieve so much as the greatness of the occasion, and the immutable
frame of every ones mind requires, it is easily understood all pains to the
contrary is taken in vain. Nor doubt I but rude minds surprised with some such
persuasion do sometimes give up themselves to the possession of grief, as of a
disease incurable. They feel sad thoughts come into the mind unsent for,
whence follows that pressure of the heart contracting it self, which we call
maeror, and so without more ado they throw down their arms in despair of
victory. But we, who besides our inward experience (which alone rightly
observed might suffice) have the helps of excellent arts, and the use of all
learned and wise men's labors before us, cannot be ignorant of the truth in
this point, if we please but to rouse our selves up, and draw forth what we
have hid within us. The truth is this, Those first appearances, and the sudden
motions arising thence, which the wise compare to the twinklings of the eyes,
are without our power; but to admit of those appearances and let them without
judgment and discretion into the closet of the heart; or else to pass a strict
examination upon them, and weigh them in the scale of reason: also, to loose
the reigns to the affections, or to restrain them; this for the most part is
within our power. That sorrow may be overcome, nature it self teaches us; for,
if by no other means, it is at last consumed by time. Art imitates Nature. The
Physician observing any disease mitigated by natural sweat, endeavors to ease
his patient sick of the like disease by medicines that procure sweating. The
new Philosophers, the Chemists, worthy of more praise and favor, if they did
not corrupt the glory of their excellent inventions by vainglorious promises,
teach that the nature of metalls is ambulatory, and by long continuance of time
one is changed into another: and herein consists their industry, to promote the
endeavors of nature, and hasten that effect which will at length be produced.
Such is the office of right reason in overcoming sorrow. Sorrow has this good
in it, above other evils, it bears not age. Other diseases of the mind are
nourished, this is wasted by time. You may suppose it is a weak enemy, that
cannot maintain it self, and without any force opposed, falls of it self. What
nature promises at a longer day, reason represents and pays down in hand. Let
us therefore, as it is the property of Art, follow the steps of nature. When by
little and little the grief of mind departs, there is for the most part no
change in the thing it self, yea the incommodity that was, often becomes
greater, as when he that has lost a friend or wife declines to old age,
wherein he has most need of helps. Whence then arises that calm in a mind so
much troubled before? Truly hence, the appearance of the thing that causes
sorrow is more seldom in the eye of the mind; it slides by, not sticks, it
touches, does not press or pierce the mind, and at last it does not so much as
touch it. Consider now whether every one be not able speedily to cure himself,
and hasten his own enjoyment of so great a good. Most of us not only suffer,
but create our sorrow, whilst we yield our selves to sudden cogitations; in
mourning especially, where the vexation flatters us under a show of piety.
Those sad thoughts we cherish carefully, and to our own hurt patronize, doing
like them that seek for looking-glasses which represent bodies greater then
they are. Surely, the will of man, that has such force to hurt himself, might
do somewhat, if it pleased, for his own ease. That sorrow is an enemy to us, we
cannot deny. The leanness of an exhausted body, paleness of countenance,
dejection of mind (causes of grief for the most part more just then that for
which we grieve) show it to be an enemy. In the dealing with an enemy, what are
we wont to do? If he be strong and at the first onset violent, whilst your
forces are not yet come together; the first caution is, to decline the battle:
afterward, when you are assured and confident in your strength, you shall march
into the field and display your colors. Even so the appearance of your loss
being fresh, and your mind tender, it is best to bend your thoughts another
way. None may do it more easily, excellent Sir, then you, who need not seek for
employment, you have in your charge affairs of so great weight and labor, that
they may very take up all your thoughts. The King whom you serve, the greatest
and most Christian, the difficult times, the many and various businesses of
your Office, what else do they all say unto you, but; Attend your work, you are
not at leisure to be a Mourner. Most true is that old saying, The mind is
prevalent, where you put it forth and use it. Certainly it is there to be used,
where our labor may be to good purpose; that is, not in mourning, but in the
service of your King and Country. It is no more then ordinary common sense
which the Greek Poet has adorned with elegant expressions to this effect; If
ills were cured by our weeping eyes,
And tears could wash away our miseries;
Thy tears were worth gold: which I now must blame,
For weep, or weep not, evils are the same.
I know that, said Solon, and I weep the more, because I can do no good by
weeping. This very foolish saying of so wise a man may be an example to us, how
much sorrow darkneth the judgment, that made Solon himself to speak unwisely.
For in those things wherein care and industry is of any force (among which
things sorrow is one, as we have said) we must observe, not whence the passion
comes, but whither it goes. It Is the office of reason to look forward, not
backward. Wherefore he that does any thing ought often to put the question to
himself, Why do I do this? What do I hope? What do I desire? This if one ask
himself who cherishes his grief and endeavors not to correct it, he shall
see how nothing can be answered.

But you may object, It is hard and inhumane to expel out of your heart the
thought of her you loved so dearly and so deservedly, not less for her virtues,
then because she was your wife. Remember, it is required but for a time, and, as
in a labyrinth, this way leads you to a place contrary unto it. So does a short
abstinence conduce to the better concoction and digestion of the food you shall
eat. I would have her live in your thoughts perpetually, but so that the memory
of her may delight, not torment you. It Is an injury to her, when she is called
into your mind to create her husband sorrow. Let her come then, when she may
come, in the quality she was wont to come, fair, kind and cheerful. This
image of her, which now occurrs to your mind, sorrowful, and leaving a
troublesome remembrance of her, is false and resembles her not. I do now
foresee the time, when that sweetness of manners, that love and reverence of
you, that unwearied care in the good education of her children, that sincere
piety toward God, and whatsoever in many of that sex is wanting, in some few is
most praiseworthy, will offer it self to your mind, not only without danger,
but with much sense of joy: when it will delight you to remember her, and to
set before your childrens eyes all her actions as the best Samplar for their
life. Only for a little while put by the thought of her, which you shall
afterward resume with advantage. To this end, as I was saying, will avail these
many weighty affairs, which being enough to oppress another, sit lightly upon
you. Now is the time, if ever, to be immersed in public cares, and suffer no
room at all in the mind to be unpossest. Nor are the conferences of friends
unprofitable, provided they be men of courage and wisdom, not such as commend
themselves by the imitation of your sadness. Confer with the dead also, and
turn over Books with greater diligence now then ever, and let that which was
but your recreation before, now become a part of your labor. Books will not
only give you a safe retreat from the enemies fury, but arms also against the
enemy. For whether you contemplate with your most capacious soul the nature of
things, you will see how nothing is without the empire of death, no not the
elements themselves: It is the most universal law, which condemns every thing
that is born, to dye; and it were great ignorance to think one person can be
exempted from the common ruin: Or, whether you turn to the Morals, among that
fair company of virtues you shall behold Fortitude, of a firm body, a head
lifted up, a cheerful countenance, but among the vices Sorrow, macilent, pale,
of a cloudy brow, and down-cast looks: Or, whether you search the Animals, you
shall find examples of men, who have born the deaths of Parents, Children,
Wives, with a mind less moved then ours is at the reading of the story. Now,
having by these Arts escaped the dangers of the first time, and withal gotten
strength, let the soul at length come forth into the field, as it were, and
prepare to fight.

But here also I think it fit to imitate wise Commanders, who, as much as they
can, sever the enemies forces, that fighting with the several parties, they
may more easily conquer all. Mourning is a confused thing, it objects unto the
mind many things at once and in a heap, which being joined terrific, but
vanish being divided. All the assaults it makes against you are either in
respect of Her whom you lament, or of your self the Mourner, or of your
children, with whom and for whom you mourn. Weigh these particulars severally,
you will find partly that there is no cause of grief, partly that the
incommodity is much overbalanced by greater good. I will begin with Her. It is
in all men's mouths, which we read every where in Christian Writers, but in
Antiphanes too (which you may more admire) a heathen Poet speaking in words of
this sense: Lament your friends with sorrow moderate:
They are not lost, but gone before, where Fate
Disposes all: And we, in order, must
One after one be turned to the same dust;
And meet at the same Inn by several ways,
And in another world shall see new days.


We must dwell the longer upon this place, because it alone without the rest,
if it be rightly considered, is sufficient for consolation. I would not have
any credit given me without a most competent witness, the Doctor of the
Gentiles, the Founder of Churches, called to be an Apostle by a voice from
heaven; who being endued also with humane learning, all other arguments
omitted, checks the immodesty of sorrow with this alone: I would not have you
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as
others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them that are asleep will God bring with him. It is the manner of
Epistles to deliver in short that which familiar discourse does express more
liberally. But if Paul, as it is believed, after he wrote this, visited his
Disciples of Macedon again, he might happily prosecute this most wholesome point
more at large after this sort: Friends, whom nature has made of the same kind
with us, and the Word of God has new made and raised to the same Grace; ye
know it is our duty thoroughly to purge out whatsoever old corruption remains
in you; your countenance, your habit and gesture speak you to be much and long
grieved in mind, it any of your dearest Relatives be taken out of your sight.
Nor is it any marvel, for thus did your fathers, and thus do the people with
whom you live intermixed: Great is the power of a vice commended by the
authority of parents, and the diseases which have seized, not upon single
persons, but whole Nations, are very contagious: but you must remember to what
Institution you have given your name: in your baptism, when the washing of your
body figured the cleanness of mind, I received your vow to forsake the world.
Peace with God is not bought at any cheaper rate. We have doctrines, we have
also rites which separate us from the world, and make us a people different
from all the rest of mankind: Even our words are not the same, whom they call
dead, we say are fallen asleep: So are we taught to speak by him that is not
only the Master of life but speech. What is the meaning of that new word? That
sleep is the image of death, even the Poets of the Grecians and their
Philosophers have delivered; but with them the similitude holds not, which with
us is most exact. By motion and action we understand life: there is a defect of
these, when the body is tied up with the bonds of sleep, and lies as it were
buried: when the morning Sun has driven away the night, that vigor that was
not lost but intermitted returns again: mean while, the soul which has a power
not depending on the body, performing the offices of both times, perpetuates
her action; So when the term of mortal life is come, the body lies torpid and
unactive, whether it retain as yet the shape it had immediately before, or else
has rendered its parts to the original dust. But wait until the great day
shine forth, there it will appear, the body rested for a time which seemed
lost. In the mean, that part which is invisible keeps possession of life in
behalf of the whole man. Compare with this our faith, what others running into
so many by-waies do conceive: when in very many and the greatest things their
opinions differ, in this almost alone they agree, that they are without hope of
life ever to return unto the body, and therefore deprive man of his
immortality. For man is a body animate, not a soul without a body, nor a body
without a soul. The soul it self departed from the body, many of them either
think to be annihilated, or at least not to retain the state of its own
substance. So the whole man, to them, is destroyed without hope of restitution,
as appears by those very consolations which they apply to mourners. For they
say, Dead men indeed have no good; but neither have they any ill. Now, although
the opinion of these men is hard, yet theirs is much harder who make the soul
outlive the body. For that lower place which they will have to be the common
seat of souls gone out of the body, they describe as a wild place, horrid and
dark, and of such a condition, that one would die another death to get out of
it. Moreover, which is worst of all, They to whom other punishments are
remitted are (according to this opinion) everlastingly under this torment, a
vain and never satisfied desire of returning back again to their former life.
If some few among those men have any better conjectures, they doubt and
fluctuate more like to those that wish then affirm. But ye have learned among
the elements of our doctrine, that life remains in the soul, and shall be
restored to the body. That which is the consummation of our desires, concludes
the formula in our holy initiation. For being asked whether ye believed the
Resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, ye answered every one
before God and his Chuach, that ye did believe. Upon this formula the
confession that you made I now treat with you: but it is not sufficient to give
a light assent, that persuasion must be firmly rooted in your minds, so shall
it bring forth mature and fair and lasting fruits. Much will avail to this
purpose, the attent meditation of those Arguments by which you were induced to
subscribe to this Faith. We caught you not by the affected ornaments of humane
eloquence, nor did we by a long chain of consequences entangle the minds of
the more ignorant; but we brought the business to that which is common to men
and women, learned and unlearned, young and old, and which is accounted the
greatest assurance of all, even to the judgment of sense. The most famous
enquirer into nature among the Grecians, gives this reason why we have not the
knowledge of many things; because we can neither see them with our eyes, nor
touch them with our hands: by which way things are wont to come unto the
understanding. God has excluded us from this excuse and pretense for our
ignorance. He has presented to our hands and eyes a specimen and pledge of
what we hope for. That Jesus Christ the Author of our faith was nailed to the
cross, and died on the Cross, all Jerusalem saw, the Senate saw, the Roman
band saw it with their eyes, and also that multitude of strangers wherewith
that great City was then filled: That he was buried and lay in the Sepulcher
two whole nights, and the day interposed, is manifest, both by the declaration
of the Seal, and by the testimony of the watch. So far we and our adversaries
are agreed. This same Jesus after that time women saw living again, his
followers also saw him, both severally and all the eleven together, at diverse
times: There were some also that handled his hands and side. That nothing might
be wanting to make faith complete, He showed himself to be seen and heard by
five hundred witnesses at once: who in good part are living and do testify the
same. To come unto my self, I have seen Him shining with divine Majesty, and by
his immediate authority was converted, and vowed to be his servant whom before
I had persecuted. And can any one yet be doubtful? Certainly, never did any
equal Judge reject so many witnesses, men of integrity, and such as had no
temptation to make a lie. This testimony is so far from being gainful to us,
that we must pay for it with the loss of all things, for the saving whereof
lies are wont to be invented. Therefore do we incur the hatred even of our
nearest Relatives; we are dispossessed of our Estates, we are banished from our
Country, we are in hazard of our life every day. No man at so dear a price
does buy the pleasure of deceiving another. Now if our testimony be received by
amost evident example it is manifest that God can restore life to a dead body,
And by the same Argument it is evinced, that this shall be done for all the
Disciples of Christ's institution, if that be certain, which was certainly heard
by many thousands, that Christ has promised it. For the Resurrection of our
bodies is assured by Christ's testimony, the veracity of Christ is witnessed by
his Resurrection. Neither could it stand with the equity of God to give that
honor to one that spoke not the truth, especially when himself before the
event had set it for a sign: Wherefore believe us, that Christ is risen; and
believe Christ, that all shall rise to immortal blessedness and blessed
immortality who die his Disciples. He shall present us to the Father, who has
once obtained such grace with the Father, that no request of his can ever be in
vain: He shall make us partakers of his glory, and bring us into those places,
where dwells an undisturbed peace; where neither diseases shall approach the
body, nor vices have access unto the mind; where shall be life without fear
of death, and joys without mixture of sorrow. Some taste of this supper have
the souls already, that are departed hence in the faith of Christ, in most
sweet tranquillity waiting for the consummation of their felicity, together
with the bodies. He that heartily believes these things, must needs be so far
from lamenting, that he will congratulate their happy condition, whom he has
sent away before him to the enjoyment of our common hopes. For in a true
judgment they are not dead, but freed now at last from their mortality. This
place of Paul has carried me farther then I intended, whilst I endeavor to
examine every one of his words, and the force of them. For I am assured, there
can be no better remedy applied to sorrow, then that which the great Physician
of souls among the infinite treasures of saving wisdom has brought down from
Heaven. And yet, how many things have I omitted, which might be drawn from the
fame fountain? But those considerations that we have deduced thence, if they be
taken to heart, and received thoroughly, will be sufficient. Believe it,
excellent Sir, as if you saw it, the soul of your wife for many reasons most
beloved, begins already to enjoy the sweet fruits of her virtues, and tastes
the rewards promised to sincere piety. The end and consummation of so many
ages, when she shall be wholly restored to her self; that immense accumulation
of all good things, to which all that can be imagined is far inferior, is not
expected afar off, as by us; but looked upon by her at the nearest distance.
What she has in possession is so great, that she wants nothing; and yet that
is more which she sees she shall possess. Nor have you any reason to say, She
might have stayed longer before she went thither. Time is some advantage, and
it is a great felicity to be quickly happy. How many evils, partly certain,
partly uncertain, does he escape who is called hence betimes? How many are the
examples of men that have paid dear for the lengthening of their life? I might
here relate the torments of diseases, and the affronts of fortune never more to
be feared then when she flattereth, and the incommodities of old age which
every man that lives long shall be sure of. This one thing seems to me a
sufficient benefit of an early death, to be put out of danger of sinning any
more. It remains that you say, I am not sorry for her sake, but my own: And to
this I was now coming, for that is wont to be said; but how unjustly, any one
may easily understand whose ejulations have not made him deaf to the voice of
reason. He that flies to this refuge manifestly shows himself an offender
against the laws of friendship. For they that fetched the original of
friendship from indigence, were entertained with the hisses of almost all
Philosophers; nor among the common people, whose manner is to measure most
things by profit, could they make good their cause. In friendship, the
Affection goes abroad, and without self-respect, seeks the good of another.
Applauses fill the Theater, as often as any Pilades derives upon himself the
dangers of Orestes: so prone is the consent of men to esteem it the office of a
friend, in an equal matter to prefer his friends safety before his own. How
much more ought the sense of our own incommodity and loss be swallowed up by
the felicity of one we profess to love; when we consider here is much more of
good then there of evil. Zopyrus is commended in the story, because he cut and
dismembered his own body, to the end his King might obtain a great, yet but one
City. In this case there was some comparison: but in yours, if in the one scale
you put your wife advanced to the very gates of Eternity, enjoying the society
of Christ and the blessed souls, free from every thing that may occasion either
grief or fear; in the other scale place your self, destitute of those
commodities which a happy matrimony prolonged for some more years might add
unto you, there will be found no weight in your part of the balance, the beam
will not stand at all, but speedily turn with the great weight on the other
side, as if on yours were nothing. What if I acquit you from this comparison,
and convince you that your incommodities weighed by themselves are nothing
really, but only in opinion? For wherein, is he more unhappy who has lost a
wife, then he who never had one? In opinion there is some difference, for the
memory of the thing once possessed represents the image, the image excites the
desire: but this is the judgment of the lower bench, we may appeal. Let your
Reason aided by so much experience, and instructed by so much reading, sit in
the Judgment Seat and pronounce the sentence. That which is past, is not; and
therefore can have no efficiency: nothing is ours but whilst we have it;
afterward it pertains no more unto us, then that which is farthest from us.
Really then, He that never had, and he that now has not, are in the like case;
but that he seems the more ungrateful, who from the benefit he once enjoyed
takes an occasion to complain. Would you therefore see, how not miserable you
are? Look upon so many thousands of men, who to their last years have willingly
and by their own choice lived a single life: in which number are many learned
men, pious, prudent, and such as were not ignorant either of the good or evil
wherewith married men are attended. Wives are helps and comforts to their
husbands: but they must be likewise helped and comforted. And if the burden be
equally divided, there is no more in one whole burden, then in half of that
which is double to it. Such is the nature of the contract, that it lays the
harder bond upon the men, to whose protection the infirmer sex commends it
self. One in the Greek Comedy, if God should offer him a double body, says he
would refuse the favor; his reason is, because with multiplicity of the parts
his care would be multiplied. It is indeed a pleasant thing in prosperity to
have one to whom you may do good: but the more favorably fortune fills your
sails, the more you must contract them, and take heed lest even in the greatest
innocence your behavior give color and occasion unto Calumny, which does
closely pursue men of higher fortunes. If any adversity befall you, it is true
the wife partakes of the sorrow, but it returns and lies heavier upon the
husband: as the rays of the Sun reflected from the ground do the more inflame
the air. The Grief derived from a dear person whom you behold grieving for you,
is more grievous then the primitive. I allege not these things as if I had
undertaken the Encomium of a single life: it is enough for me to show, that
seeing either life has its commodities tempered and mixed with the
incommodities, it becomes every one, with an equal and indifferent mind, to
conform himself to that lot and condition that has befallen him. The last
pretense of grief is the most specious, in respect of children whose education,
when the care is divided between the two parents, proceeds the better. This is
somewhat, but herein has God abundantly provided for you. You are a man of
unwearied vigor; and if you please to use your whole strength, able to supply
the place of both sexes: Cut off from your businesses and studies so much as
that charge requires, yea, think that charge to be the best study and
business. Matters of most consequence execute your self, the lesser commit to
others: and as often as you can, visit your sweet children with your paternall
eye, now also serving for the maternall. And look upon the great supporters of
your House, your most gracious King, by whom your diligence and trust are well
tried, and therefore well esteemed; Your honorable employment, your estate
virtuously acquired, your kindred, alliance, friends, flourishing and
prosperous. You see if any accession shall be made unto your labor, how great
comforts are given you aforehand. Moreover, that very labor will decrease
under your hand, whenas every one of your children shall ripen in years, so he
will succeed into the care both of himself and the rest. But how little of
justice there is in your complaint of this burden, you may even hereby
understand. Had your Wife left you a house empty of children, I believe as the
custom is, you would say, O had thou left some might me father call,
O for one child to play about my Hall!
But had some Prophet, foretold before your marriage day, You shall, for many
years have a happy and peaceable enjoyment of your wife, only you know one of
you must needs outlive the other: this indulgence shall be yielded to the more
tender sex, that she may not mourn for you. Choose whether you please, by her
and after her to be called Father, or no. You would have answered, I doubt not,
Let me have, when I can have her no longer, O let me have some living images of
her, and successors of our common fortunes.

Riches then unhappy are,
When they do not find an heir.
Well then, what is it that compels you, or I may say, permits you to grieve?
Your wife? But she is blessed. A widowers state which is imposed on you? The
single life has adventured at all times to compare it self with wedlock, in
point of felicity. Children? You would not be without them; if you were
childlesse, you would be more sorrowful. And do you now grieve because you are
not childlesse? It is great morosity, to accuse and complain of every fortune.
But if this discourse may seem too rigid and severe, I will be a little more
remiss, and grant that some adversity is befallen you; yet will I thereby
evince, that you have reason to rejoice. That the power and the wisdom of God
are unlimited, we do all acknowledge. Hence it follows, nothing can happen
without his knowledge who is omniscient, without his permission who is
omnipotent. Whatsoever he either does or permits, he has good reason for
it. God has care of all things, but not equally, because they are not equal.
According to the several degrees of things, there be degrees of Providence. He
governs with a more careful hand the affairs of men, then of inferior
creatures. And among all mankind, he has a nearer inspection over Kings, and
other Rulers of the Nations, who are, as it were, earthly stars, from whose
influence either the tempests of war, or the calms of peace descend upon the
people. But above all, most dear unto that supreme Goodness are faithful
Christians. The divine pleasure is, that Kingdoms themselves should be
serviceable to them: and in all constitutions through the whole world, they are
favored with a singular respect. Therefore, even those things are for them,
which seem against them: according to that immutable decree, All things fall
out for the best to those that purely worship God. Nor may we wonder, if God
keeps them not delicately but under discipline. This is a fathers part. Either
they must be purged by some sharp and nimble medicine, if they have contracted
any contagion from the multitude with whom they converse; or, before the
disease take hold upon them, the souls health must be preserved by some
wholesome, though bitter, potion; or else, the soldier of God is to be proved
by encountering with an enemy, that himself may perceive, and others may not be
ignorant what a proficient he is. Matters of difficulty are provided for the
exercise and illustration of every virtue. God has always set godly men to
such a task: but he justly exacteth more from Christian men, who by the very
ensign of the Cross are given to understand, upon what terms they are admitted
into service. The chief Captain himself having made his way to heaven by
patience, and struggled through many sufferings, has consecrated the same way
for us. The soldier that is not called forth into any danger, may fear, his
Commander holds him in small esteem. And who would not courageously descend
into that combat, wherein there is a certain reward for him that conquers, and
certain conquest for him that fights? For he that is the Rewarder, is also a
Helper, he shows the crown, he supplieth arms. Nor need we excuse our selves by
pretense of weakness. The most equal Arbiter and Judge of the field, does so
fitly match every combatant, that he calls forth none to fight, but whom he
knows able or will make so. He can no more deny his heavenly aid to the man
that prays aright, then a loving and wealthy father can deny bread to his son,
that asks it when he is hungry. How many of the old Philosophers, how many
also of a lower rank, having but ordinary encouragements and supports, have
subdued Sorrow? and shall we, who are neither destitute of the use of reason,
nor of the succors of good learning, and besides are assured of that excellent
and peculiar aid from heaven, turn our back and yield to any calamity how great
soever? That can become no man, and you least of all, most honored Sir, you
are advanced to an eminent place, where you shine both by your own light, and
by that which you borrow from the Majesty of your King. Whatsoever you do is
conspicuous, and goes into example. Let it be hereafter said; Bear your wifes
death as Maurier did. Nor may you fear being suspected for to have loved your
wife less, if you mourn less. Keep her virtues in your memory, deliver them
to your children, and as you can by ingenuous and glorious monuments propagate
them to posterity. These are truer Tokens of your love, then to do what she
would not have you. Among all nations the Wills of the deceased are sacred and
inviolate, and not only such as are declared in word, or committed to writing,
but also if by probable arguments we can conjecture what their wills were. You
are not ignorant what her will was, and what she desires now, if in that place
of rest there be any care of our affairs; to wit, that you may pass the
remainder of your life with greatest felicity, and never think on her but with
a quiet, and (if it may be) a joyful mind. The same you must suppose to be
the Kings pleasure, whom it concerns, that both in body and mind you may be
strong and healthy. To add any more might seem to proceed from a diffidence of
your wisdom and courage. What I have said, how much better could you say to
your self? and so, I hope, you nave done. It would be a joy to me to have
performed my duty, and that you needed it not. Nor will it be unpleasant to
you, to be assured of your friends fidelity by the succors offered, although
your victory achieved, sooner then was hoped, has made them of no use.

Lupisten, 11 Calend. Mar. An. 1621.
THE END.

