ARTICLES MINISTERED By His MAJESTY'S Commissioners. For Causes Ecclesiastical.
Presented to the High Court of Parliament against John Gwin, Vicar of Cople in
the County of Bedford. Wherein is discovered his lascivious wenching,
Drunkenness, and wanton life, and most vild, and unbecomming courses, most
unfit for his Function.

Hush, Hush,

Cuckoo.

Gwin, guin,



London Printed for V. V. 1641.

ARTICLES Ministered by his Majesty's Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical:
presented to the High Court of Parliament, against John Gwin, Vicar of Cople,
in the County of Bedford.
1. THat the said John Gwin has bin, and is a common frequenter of Alehouses,
Taverns, and other tippling houses, and a man given to immoderate, and excessive
drinking, and has been diverse times so distempered, and overcome therewith,
that he has been scarce able to stand or go, but like a drunkard, has
reeled up and down, and having necklected his stody in Divinity; has spent
his time in carousing and drinking Ale, Beer and Tobacco the most part of the
wecke in tippling houses, and upon the Lords day has there sat until 10.11.12.
or a clock at night.

2 That the said John Gwin is much given to quarrelling, and brawling,
especially at the alehouse, and in such quarrelling has hurt his own brother,
Henry Gwin; with his weapon.

3. That he has committed the hanous crime of Adultery with the wife of Robert
Purser, and had the carnal use of her body.

And he has diverse times gloryed and boasted of such his wickedness, and
incontinency with the said Pursers wife, and has reported it to diverse
persons, that he has had the carnal use of her body in the said Pursers Hall,
where her husband himself sat by the fire side in the Kitchen, or to that
effect.

4 Upon the Lords Day in the morning, the said John Gwin went from his own
house, to the Parish of Wootten, to one Fowcks his house: where he continued
in company with the said Foowcks his wifes sister, the most part of the said
day, and did not go to Church at all that day:

And he then, and there, and at other times also, had the carnal use of her
body, and did commit Adultery with her.

And he has in a glorying manner boasted diverse times, that he has layne with
her, and that he had given her all the money that he sold his Corn for, which
grew in Brooks field, or to that effect.

5. Upon the Fair day held at Bedford, he the said John Gwin, being at one
Peries house, and there espying Mary, and Dorathy the daughters of John Davy
standing in the street, did send for them, to come to him, and he did drink
with them 4. s. or 5. s. in wine, and having so done, he took occasion to send
away the said Mary and all other company, save only the said Dorothy and then,
and there, not having the fear of God before his eyes, he did commit the
heinous crime of Adultery incontinently with her, the said Dorothy Davis, in
the said Petties house, and immediately after the said Mary came back again
into the room to him, and then he took occasion to send away the said
Dorothie, and all other, save only the said Mary, and then, and there he did
attempt the chastity of the said mary, and pulled up her clothes, and offered
to commit the heinous Crime of Adultery, incontinently with her, and forced her
to cry out for help.

And he has diverse times boasted in a glorying manner, that he has lain with
the said Dorathy the time aforesaid, and that he attempted to have lain with
the said Mary, and to be naught with her, but that he could not enter her body.

And that the said Mary cried out and said, ah master, what will you do, will
you undo me: or to that effect.

6. One of good quality came to his house in a morning; (his wife and he being
then in bed together) and the said Gentleman being come into his chamber,
desiring him to arise, and go with him a little way, then the said John Gwin
made answer that he must stay a little for him, for I must have a bout with my
wife quoth he, meaning he would first have the use of her body. Then and there
in the presence of that person the said John Gwin did in a shameless and in an
impudent manner get up upon his wife, and had the carnal use of her body in the
presence of the said person, who was a gentleman of good quality, and ashamed
thereat; and he has diverse times since (in a glorying manner) boastingly
reported, that he then lay with, and had the carnal use of his wives body.

7 He has so heynously committed the heinous crime of adultery with diverse
women, that he got the loathsome Disease of the French Pox, or at least, the
running of the reyns, which he has diverse times confessed that he got with
lying by a whore at Bedford: but he said, that he would tell his wife, he got
it some other way.

8 He has endeavored to be a Bawd to his own wife, and has given way, that a
gentleman of his acquaintance should lie with his wife, and have the carnal
use of her body. And upon a morning he put on a red coat, and a culler'd hat
belonging to a gentleman, and went with the same upon him a good distance from
his own house; and at one John Braces in Cople aforesaid, cocked his hat, and
asked the said Brace how he liked him in that habit: and he said to him that
he had left the gentleman (whose clothes he had then on) at home in bed with
his wife, and that his wife was giving him a posset (meaning thereby that she
was committing the act of Adultery with him.)

9 That the said John Gwin, together with one John Patman being the house of
one Brace in Cople aforesaid sitting by the fire side, and hoving their drink
about them, did sing lascivious prhfaine, and drunken catches; and after in a
profaine manner did sing the Lateny or part thereof with a loud voice:
beginning, O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.
etc.

And so went on his companion Patman, answering every versicle, as the Clarke
uses to do in the church: after that, he sung other profane, and idle caths,
to the scandal of the profession of his calling, and the evil example of
others.

10 That the said John Gwin did write foolish scorrilous lines against
authority, and went forth of the church, whilst the people was in singing of a
Psalm, to the whipping post, and there fixed the said verses to the said
whipping post.

11. He has diverse, and sundry times, both publicly, and privately, and in
his Sermons, and elsewhere, without any just cause, inveyed, and rayled against
diverse of his Parishioners.

12 He has changed and altered, both the Form and sense of the Psalms, at
diverse times, when he has read them to the people to sing, turning them to
his own purpose, at his own pleasure.

13 That all, and singular, the premises mentioned in the precedent Articles,
were, and are true, public, and notorious: and thereupon, rhere has bin, and
is, a public voice, fame, and Report, both in the Parish of Cople aforesaid,
and other Parishes and places, thereunto near adjoining, and that by reason of
the premises; and especially, of his wicked, deboyst, lascivious, and
incontinent course of life* he has bin, and is a shame, and scandal to the
Ministry, and to his profession and calling. And so generally accounted,
reputed, and taken to be,

FINIS.

