TWO SPEECHES OF Mr. JAMES GUTHRY BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT.

One after the reading of his INDICTMENT, Feb. 21. 1661.

The other immediately after the reading of the PROCESS, April 10. 1661.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

Mr. James Guthry his Speech before the Parliament, after the reading of his
Indictment, Febr. 21. 1661.
My Lord Chancellor,
BEing Indicted at the instance of Sir John Flescher, his Majesty's Advocate,
for his Majesty's Interest, upon things alleged to be Seditious and
Treasonable, I do humbly desire, and from your equity expect, that my Lord
Commissioner his Grace, and this Honorable Court of Parliament, will
patiently, and without interruption, allow me hearing, as to a few things which
I have to say for my self, in answer to that Indictment, and that I may proceed
distinctly therein, following the order of the Indictment it self, I shall
speak a word first to the Laws that are mentioned and cited therein, by which I
am to be judged, then to the things themselves whereof I am accused: Concerning
these Laws, I am glad that the Law of God is named in the first place, it being
indeed the Sovereign and Supreme Law, not only of Religion, but also of
righteousness, to which all other Laws ought to be squared and subordinate; and
there being an Act of the 1. Parl* of K. Ja. 6. whereby all Laws, or clauses of
Laws, or Acts of Parliament, repugnant unto the Word of God, are repealed, an
Act most worthy of a Christian King and Kingdom; and I hope that your
Lordship, in all your proceedings, will mostly have respect unto this, that I
may be judged by the Law of God especially, and by other Laws in subordination
thereunto. As to these Laws and Acts of Parliament which are mentioned in the
Indictment, concerning his Majesty's Royal Prerogative, and declining his
Majesty's Judgment and Authority, and keeping of Conventions: I hope it will
not be denied, that they are to be understood and explained according to that
sense and meaning that is gre^^ thereof by posterior Acts of Parliament, it
being a maxim in the Law, no less common, then true and equitable, that where
there is any seeming or real contradiction and opposition betwixt Laws,
Posteriora derogant prioribus, otherwise Laws, instead of preservatives to
States and Commonwealths, might prove nets and snares, to entangle the lives,
reputations, and estates of the Subjects. And it must also be granted, that
these Laws and Acts of Parliament, are to be understood and expounded by our
solemn public Vows and Covenants contracted with God, both by his Majesty and
Subjects, which are not only declared by the Laws of the Land to have the
strength of Acts of Parliament, but both by the Law of God, and Common Law, and
light of all the Nations in the world, are more binding and indispensible, then
any municipal Law or Statute whatsoever. Thirdly, as to these Acts of
Parliament, which are cited ag^^^^^ slanderous and untrue speeches, to the
disdain, contempt and reproach of his Majesty's Authority, I think I need not
say that none, much less his Majesty's Commissioner, and this Honorable Court
of Parliament, do understand them of truths uttered in sobriety, by those who
have any lawful call thereunto; and that these Acts, which speak against
meddling in the affairs of his Majesty and States, are not to be understood of
such meddling, as men are bound unto by virtue of their calling, and wherein
they do not transgress the bounds thereof. The next thing I shall speak to, is
the particulars wherewith I am charged, concerning which, I shall give your
Lordship a true and ingenuous account, as to my accession thereto, knowing that
I speak in the sight of him who sits in the Assembly of the Gods: Next, I shall
be bold to offer to your Lordship some humble defense of my doing for
vindica^ing of my carriage from the breach of his Majesty's Laws, and exempting
me from the punishment appointed thereby: As to matter of fact, I am in the
Indictment first charged with a general, of being culpable of sundry seditious
and treasonable Remonstrances, Declarations, Petitions, Instructions, Letters,
Speeches, Preachings, Declamations, etc. To which I say, that generalia non
pungunt, they can have no strength in the inferring of any crime of guilt,
except in so far as they are instanced and verified in particulars, but are
like unto that universal, that having no foundation in re, is a mere Chimera,
or second notion, only one thing there is in that general charge that I cannot,
yea ought not to pass by, to wit, that I have seditiously and traitorously
purposed the eradicating and subverting the Fundamental Government of this his
Majesty's ancient Kingdom, at least the enervating, or violating, or impairing
of his Authority; concerning which, I am bold to say it is an unjust Charge,
there was never any such design or purpose in my heart; and since I am thus
charged, I may without vanity, or the breach of the law of sobriety affirm,
that as I had never any complyances with the counsel, designs, or actings of
the late usurping Powers against his Majesty's Royal Father, or himself, or
against this Kingdom, or the ancient Government thereof, or of the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, so was there no part of their ungodly and unjust
actings, but I did in my station and calling bear open and public testimony
against the same, both by word and writ, which is a thing better known, and
more manifest, then that can be liable to suspicion therein, many of these
testimonies being given before many, and many of them being yet extant in the
world, and such as will be extant to posterity. My Lord, albeit it does become
me to adore God in the holiness and wilsdome of his dispensations, yet I can
hardly refrain from expressing some grief of spirit, that my house and family
should not only have been possessed for many months together by a number of
English soldiers, and my se^f kept from the Pulpit for speaking and preaching
against the tender and incorporating of this Nation in one Commonwealth with
England, and that I should thereafter, in the time of Oliver Cromwell, as
usurping the Government to himself, under the name of Protector, been delated
by some, and challenged by sundry of his Council in this Nation, because of a
paper published by me, wherein he was declared to be an Usurper, and his
Government to be Usurpation, that I should have been threatened to be sent to
the Tower for writing a paper against Oliver Cromwell, his Usurping of the
Crown of these Kingdoms; that I should have been threatened with banishment,
for concurring in offering a large testimony against the evils of the time to
Richard Cromwell his Council, immediately after his usurping of the Government;
I say, my Lord, it grieves me, that notwithstanding of these things, I should
now stand indicted before your Lordship, as intending the eradicating and
subverting of the ancient Civil Government of this Nation, and beign
subservient to that Usurper in his designs, the God of heaven knows, that I am
free of this Charge; and I do defy all the world, allowing me Justice and fair
proceeding, which I hope your Lordship will, to make out the same against me.
The first particular wherewith I am charged in the Indictment is, that I did
contrive, and comply, and draw up ane paper, commonly called The Remonstrance,
and presented it, or caused it to be presented to his Majesty, and the
Committee of Estates, upon the 22 day of October, 1650. To which I answer, by
denying that part of the Indictment, I did neither compile, nor contrive that
Remonstrance, nor did I present, nor caused it to be presented to the Committee
of Estates, at that time, or at any other time; I did indeed, being a Member of
the Commission of the Genesis Assembly, when they gave their judgment upon it,
dissent from the sentence which they past upon it, which cannot be reckoned any
culpable accession thereto, every man being free, without hazard of punishment,
and bound in conscience, as before God, to give his judgment freely in the
Judicatory whereof he is a Member: If it be alleged, that I did afterward
abate the same in the book of the Causes of the Lords wrath, in the sixth head
of the nin^h Article thereof, by asserting the rejecting of the discovery of
guiltiness contained therein, to have been a sin, etc. is answered first, that
that was no more but the asserting of my former dissent: Secondly, that it was
no more, upon the matter, then was acknowledged and asserted by the whole
Commission of the Genesis Assembly, when they past sentence upon it, in which
sentence it is acknowledged, that it did contain many sad truths, which yet
were not received, nor any effectual remedy endeavored for helping of evils
represented thereby. Thirdly, it cannot be accounted culpable in a Minister of
the Gospel, who is thereunto bound by virtue of his calling, to assert the
rejecting of the discovery of sin, and guiltiness to be a sin. The next
particular which I am charged with, is the book of the Cause of Gods
Controversy, especially the fifth and sixth Articles thereof, which are
particulars that I believe, upon the looking thereof, will not be found to
contain any just matter of accusation, much less matter of sedition and
Treason, there being nothing mentioned therein, but the discovery of the sin of
covetousness, and the abuse of the public Faith of the Land in borrowing of
money; but because I do apprehend that it was the fifth and sixth step of the
ninth Article that was intended by my Lord Advocate, I do humbly profess unto
your Lordship, and to this Honorable Court of Parliament, that I am very
unwillingly drawn forth to speak of these things, and shall only say first,
That the God of heaven is witness, that my accession thereunto, it did not flow
from any disrespect or disaffection to his Majesty's person or Government, much
less from any malicious purpose to render him odious to the world, or to his
Subjects, or to give advantage to his enemies, and the enemies of these
Kingdoms, or from any purpose in any thing to be subservient to the designs or
actings of the late usurping powers, but merely and singly from a constraining
power of conscience to be found faithful as a Minister of the Cospel in the
discovery of sin and guiltiness, that it being taken with, and repented of,
wrath might be taken away from the house of the King, and from these Kingdoms:
Your Lordship knows what strict charge is laid upon Ministers of the Gospel to
give faithful warning to all sorts of persons, and how they expose their own
souls to the hazard of eternal damnation, and the guilt of the blood of those
with whom they have to do, if they do not; and you do also know, that the
Prophets and Apostles, and the Lord Jesus Christ himself, did faithfully warn
all men, though it was their lot, because of the same, to be reckoned Traitors,
and seditious persons, and to suffer as evil doers upon the account thereof.
Next, my Lord, I wish it may be seriously pondered, that nothing is asserted in
these causes as to the matter of sin and duty, but what has been the common
received doctrine of the Kirk of Scotland, as may appear from the Records of
the work of Reformation from Popery, and from the National Covenant, and Solemn
League and Covenant, and the public Declarations and Acts of this Kirk and
Kingdom, concerning the necessary security of Religion; the truth of which
doctrine is confirmed from the Word of God, and divine reason, in these public
papers themselves; and as to matters of fact, they are no other then is
mentioned in the solemn public causes of humiliation, condescended and kept
either by the whole Kirk of Scotland jointly, and by his Majesty and his
family, with the Commission of the General-Assembly, and the Committee of
Estates, a little before his Coronation at Perth. As to the sixth step, there
is nothing therein mentioned but what is truth, all the particulars therein
specified, as of the Remonstrance it self, containing some discovery of known
and undeniable sins and guiltiness, the rejecting whereof behoved to be a sin,
and therefore cannot the asserting of it be Treason and Sedition. The third
particular wherewith I am charged, is the supplication at Os^, August 24. To
which I acknowledge my accession, but do deny it to be treasonable and
seditious, because besides the vindication of my former carriage and actings
from complyances with the late usurping powers, and an humble profession of
that subjection, and loyalty, and obedience, which I owe to his Majesty and of
my resolution to render the same unto him, as unto the Supreme and rightful
Magistrate over these Kingdoms, and some serious prayers and supplications for
his Majesty, etc. does contain nothing but an humble Petition concerning these
things, to which his Majesty and all the Subjects of this Kingdom are engaged
by the solemn and indispensable Oath of the Covenant, with a sober and serious
representation of the dangers that threaten Religion, and of things that are
destructive unto the duties contained in these Articles of the Covenant; and
therefore the Covenant being established by Law, and constrained by the public
Oath of God, which is more then Law, a humble Petition and Representation
concerning these things, cannot be accounted Sedition and Treason. The
Indictment is pleased to say, that I charged his Majesty with dissimulation and
perjury, but there is no such thing in the supplication, which does only put
him in remembrance of holding fast the oath of the Covenant: As to what is
alleged against the unlawfulness of our meeting, etc. was Presbyterially
resolved, that I should keep that meeting, and suppose it had not been so, yet
cannot that meeting fall within the compass of these Acts of Parliament, which
strikes against unlawful Conventions, because every meeting for business in it
self, lawful or agreeable to the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land, and
kept without multitude or tumult, such as that was, needs no particular
Warrant from Authority, as may be instanced in sundry other meetings up and
down the Land, day by day, for several sorts of business: Be there not many
meetings kept by persons of all sorts in all the parts of the Country, in
reference to applications to Judicatories, and to the Supreme Magistrate, for
the civil interests and rights? and if so, how much more may Ministers meet for
supplicating his Majesty, for the interests and right of Jesus Christ, keeping
themselves for the matter of their supplication within the bounds of the
Covenant, and of these things that are established by Law.

Thirdly, such meetings are clearly exempted from the breach of these Acts of
Parliament, by a posterior Act of Parliament, to wit, by the 29th Act of the 2
Parl. of King Charles the first.

As to the last particular in the Indictment, to wit, my declining of his
Majesty's Authority at Perth, I do acknowledge, that I did decline the Civil
Magistrate, as competent Judge of Ministers Doctrine in the first instant; his
Majesty's Authority, in all things civil, I do with all my heart acknowledge,
and that according to the Confession of the Faith of this Church, the
conservation and purgation of Religion belongs to him as civil Magistrate, and
that Ecclesiastic persons are not exempted from obedience to Civil Authority,
and the just commands thereof, not from punishment in case of their
transgression; but that declinators of the Civil Magistrate, his being Judge of
Ministers Doctrine in the first instant, are no treason nor sedition, but
lawful and warrantable: I do humbly offer first, that such declinators are
agreeable to the rule of Gods Word, and to the Confessions of Faith and
Doctrine of this Church, which are confirmed and ratified in Parliament by many
several Acts, and therefore have the strength both of divine and humane Law;
that they are agreeable to the rule of Gods Word, is evidents from this that
the Scriptures do clearly hold forth, that Jesus Christ has a visible
Kingdom, which he exercises in or over his visible Church, by the spiritual
office bearers thereof, which is wholly distinct from the civil powers and
government of the world, and not depending upon, nor subordinate unto these
governments, and the Acts thereof, John 18.36, 37. Mat. 16.19. John 28.23.

That they are agreeable to the Confessions of Faith and Doctrine of this
Church is evident, because these do acknowledge no Head over the visible Church
of Christ, but Jesus Christ himself, nor any Judgment, nor Power, in nor over
his house, but that which he has committed unto the spiritual office-bearers
thereof under himself; and therefore it has been the ordinary practice of this
Church in such cases, to use such declinators, since the time of Reformation
from Popery, as may appear from many clear, and undeniable, and proven
instances, extant in the Acts of the Genesis Assemblies, and Records of this
Church, particularly these of Mr. David Black, in the year 1596. which was
owned and subscribed by three or four hundred Ministers, besides sundry others
which are well known; and I do believe, my Lord, that not only is this the
doctrine of the Church of Scotland, but also of many sound Protestant Divines,
who give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that
are Gods. Secondly, such declinators are agreeable unto, and founded upon the
National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, by which the Kings
Majesty himself, and all the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound to maintain
the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government of this Church, which with
solemn vows, and public Oaths of God, have always in all Kingdoms, States,
and Republics, been accounted more sacred and binding, then any municipal Law
or Statute whatsoever, and being posterior to the Act of Parliament 1584. do
necessarily include a repealing thereof: Upon these grounds it is, that I gave
in, and do assert that declinator, for vindicating the Crown dignity, and Royal
Prerogative of Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, but with
all due reverence and respect to his Majesty, and his just greatness and
Authority.

Fourthly; as to that Act of Parliament 1584. was made in a time wherein the
settled Government of this Church by Presbyters and Synods, was wholly
over-turned, and their meetings utterly discharged, and the deposition of
Ministers and things properly spiritual and Ecclesiastic, put into the hands
of the Civil Magistrate, so we do assert, that that Act, in so far as concerns
such declinators, has since the making thereof been often repealed and
rescinded, and was standing repealed and rescinded at the down sitting of the
Parliament: First, it was ranversed and annulled by a posterior Act, in the
year 1592. to wit, the first Act of the 12. Parl. of King Ja. the 6. which in
the last Section thereof, does expressly declare, that that Act in the year
1584. shall no ways be prejudicial, nor derogate any thing to the privilege
that God has given to the spiritual office-bearers in the Kirk, concerning
heads of Religion, matters of Heresy, collation or deprivation of Ministers,
or any sick-like essential censure, specially grounded and having Warrant from
the Word of God; but so it is, that the freedom and independency of the
spiritual office-bearers of the Kirk of God in things Ecclesiastical, that
concern their calling, is a special privilege of the Kirk, and a special head
of Religion, and that the free discovering of the sins of all persons by
Ministers in their Doctrine from the word of God, is an essential censure
grounded upon, and having warrant in the Word of God; and according hereto King
James the 6. in the year 1585. considering the great offense given and taken by
that Act in the year 84. did for removing thereof, send a Declaration penned
and signed with his own hand to the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland at
Linlithgow, December. 7. which he says shall be as good and valid, as any Act of
Parliament whatsoever. In which Declaration he has these words, I for my part
shall never, neither my Posterity ought ever cite, summon, or apprehend any
Pastor or Preacher, for matters of Doctrine, Religion, Salvation, Heresies, or
ton interpretation of the Scriptures, but according to my first Act, which
confirms the liberty of preaching of the Word, Ministration of the
Sacraments, etc. I avouch the same to be a matter mere Ecclesiastical, and
altogether impertinent to my calling, therefore never shall I, nor never ought
they, I mean my posterity, acclaim any power or Jurisdiction in the foresaids.
It is also to be considered, that that Act 1584. is also repealed by the 4th
Act of the 2d Parl. of King Charles the 1. which reckons it amongst the evils
that had sore troubled the peace of the Church and Kingdom; that the power of
the Keys and Kirk-censures was given to persons merely civil, and therefore
does provide, that for preservation of Religion, and preventing all such evils
in time coming, Genesis Assemblies rightly constitute, as the proper and competent
Judges of all matters Ecclesiastical hereafter, be kept yearly, and oftener,
pro re naia, as occasion and necessity shall require. The same Act in the year
1584: is also repealed by the 6th Act of the 2d Parl. of King Charles the
First, called the Act rescissory, which expressly provides and declares, that
the sole, and only power, and jurisdiction within this Kirk, stands in the Kirk
of God, as it is now reformed, and in the General, Provincial, Presbyterial
Assemblies, with Kirk Sessions, established by Act of Parliament in Jan. 1592.
which Act is expressly revived, and renewed in the whole heads, points, and
Articles in the foresaid Act rescissory, and is appointed to stand in full
strength, as a perpetual Law in a^l time coming, notwithstanding of whatsoever
Acts or Statutes made in the contrary thereof, in whole or in part, which the
Estates by that Act rescissory casses and annulls in all time coming, and
rescinds and annulls all and whatsoever Acts of Parliament, Laws and
Constitutions, in so far as they derogate, and are prejudicial to the spiritual
nature, jurisdiction, discipline, and privileges of this Kirk, by which it is
evident, that not only that that Act in the year 1584. but also the first Act
of the 18 Parl. of King James the 6th, and 3d Act of the first Parl. of King
Charles the First, whcih ratifies and establishes the Royal Prerogative over
all estates, persons, and causes within this Kingdom, is declared to be of no
force, in so far as the same may be extended to make the Supreme Magistrate the
proper and competent Judge of matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastic. Sixthly, it
is to be observed, that it has been lawful, and in continual practice, that
his Majesty and secret Council, in sundry causes, have been declined, and the
cause drawn to the ordinary competent Judge; as matters Civil to the Lords of
the Session, matters criminal to the Chief Justice, matters of divorcement to
the Commissaries, yea the meanest regality in the Country, has power to
decline the Supreme Iudicatories. As to what is alleged in the close of the
Indictment, of protesting for remedy of Law against his Majesty for a seasment,
etc. of that protestation, was but an Appendix and Consequent of the other,
made only in reference thereto, and a protestation against any particular Act
for remedy according to his Majesty's Laws, cannot be treason against his
Majesty, there being no Act of Parliament declaring it to be so, and it being
not Authority it self that is protested against, but only a particular Act of
the Authority, against which protestations in many cases are ordinary. Lastly,
it is to be observed, that this declinatur was buried in silence by his
Majesty, and the Committee of Estates after the in-giving thereof, and M.
Guthry sent home without their challenging of him for the same, and permitted
the exercise of his Ministry at Sterling. These few things, my Lord, I thought
fit at present to say in vindication, and defense of my own innocence,
notwithstanding of any thing contained in the Indictment now read against me;
the sum of what I have said is shortly in these two: first, that I did never
purpose nor intend to speak, or write, or act any thing disloyal, or seditious,
or treasonable, against his Majesty's person or Authority, or Government, God
is my witness, and that what I have spoken, or written, or acted in any of
these things wherewith I am charged, has been merely and singly from a
principle of conscience, that according to the weak measure of light given me
of God, I might do my duty in my station and calling, as a Minister of the
Gospel: Next, because conscience barely taken, is not a sufficient plea, though
it may extenuate, yet it cannot wholly excuse, I do assert, that I have founded
my speeches, and writings, and actings in these matters upon the Word of God,
and the Doctrine and Confessions of Faith, and Laws of this Church and
Kingdom, and upon the National Covenant of Scotland, and the Solemn League and
Covenant betwixt the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland; if
these foundations shall fail, I must fall with them, but if these sustain and
stand in judgment, as I hope they will, I cannot acknowledge my self, neither,
I hope, will his Majesty's Lord Commissioner, and the Honorable Court of
Parliament, judge me guilty of sedition and treason, notwithstanding of any
thing contained in the Indictment.

After this Speech before the Parliament, Mr. James Guthry was appointed to
give in writing his legal defenses, or what he had to say in Law for his own
defense against the things contained in his Indictment, which legal defenses he
gave in to the Lord Advocate, the fourth of March. These defenses contain five
sheets of paper, to which having received a Reply from the Lord Advocate, about
fifteen days thereafter, he did return a Duply thereunto the fifth of April,
consisting of seven sheets of paper; and being called before the Parliament the
tenth of April, his whole Process consisting of the Indictment, and his
Defenses, and the Lord Advocates Reply was read; after which, having liberty to
speak again for himself, he did by word of mouth deliver what is contained in
the following Speech.

Mr. James Guthry his Speech before the Parliament, immediately after the
reading of the Process, April 10. 1661.
My Lord Chancellor,
I Did at my first appearance before his Majesty's Commissioner, and this
Honorable Court of Parliament, give an account of my accession to the
particulars contained in the Indictment, and of the grounds and reasons
thereof, and have now done it more fully in my Defenses, and in my Duplies to
the Replies given by my Lord Advocate thereunto, in all which I have dealt
ingeniously, and without shifting, holding it the duty of a Christian,
especially of a Minister of the Gospel, in the matters of his duty and calling
so to do; I have only now to add these few words.

1. That I hope I have made it sufficiently to appear, that what I have spoke,
or written, or acted in these matters, was from no malicious or sinistrous
intention against his Majesty's person, or his Government, but from a principle
of true piety toward God, and true loyalty toward his Majesty, as I have
demonstrated this from the tenor of my carriage and actings under the Usurpers,
so I have herein confidence toward God, and in the persuasion of the integrity
of my Soul in this particular, may with a good conscience, not only make this
Declaration before your Lordship, but also hazard to step into Eternity.

2. Next, my Lord, I hope I have made it to appear, that besides the conformity
that my accession to these things have with the Word of God, so they have a
foundation in the National Covenant, and in the Solemn League and Covenant, the
obligation whereof I dare not but profess to own, as binding and standing upon
these Kingdoms, and that they are agreeable unto the actings of public
Authority, before the Englishes invading of this Nation, to the Canons of the
Church, and the Laws of the Kingdom, and the public declared judgment both of
Church and State before that time: And my Lord, if this may not plead an
Indemnity and Oblivion for me, but that notwithstanding thereof I shall be
judged a seditious person and a Traitor, not only shall the whole Church and
Kingdom of Scotland be involved in the guilt of Sedition and Treason, and few
or none have any security for their lives, and honors, and estates, further
then the Kings mercy does give them; but also a very dangerous foundation shall
be laid for the time to come, for men of differing judgments, upon every
emergent revolution, to prosecute the worsted party unto death, notwithstanding
that they have the public Authority, and the Laws then standing, to plead in
the defense of their actings. I know my Lord, that it lies upon the spirits of
some, as a prejudice against me, that I am supposed to have been a chief
instrument, or a Ringleader, in these Declarations, and Canons, and Laws, and
public actings of the Church and Kingdom, which I do now plead in my own
defense: I shall not say, that this has any rise from any, who to lighten
their own burdens, would increase mine, holding that to be unworthy of any man
of an ingenious spirit, and most unworthy of a Christian: As I charge no man in
particular with accession to any of these things, so as to my self, I do for
the truths sake ingenuously acknowledge, that throughout the whole course of my
life I have studied to be serious, and to deal not with a slack hand in what I
did look upon as my duty; and yet my Lord, lest I should attribute unto my self
what is not due unto me, I must, for shunning of pride and vainglory also say,
that I was not honored to be of these who laid the first foundation of the
work of Reformation in this Church and Kingdom: I am not ashamed to give glory
to God in acknowledging, that until the beginning of the year 1638. I was
treading other steps, and though God did then graciously recover me out of the
snare of Prelacy, and the Ceremonies and Service Book, and a little thereafter
put me into the Ministry, yet did I never judge my self worthy to be accounted
a Ringleader in any of the superstructures of that blessed work, there being a
good many elder for years, and more eminent for piety, and prudence, and parts,
and faithfulness, and zeal, whom I did reverence, and gave the precedence unto
in these things.

3. It may also happily my Lord be, and a little I have been informed of it,
that besides any thing contained in the Indictment, there be some other things
that bear weight upon the spirits of some of the Members of this House, from
reports that have passed of my carriage toward his Majesty's Royal Father, and
toward himself, and some others. As to these things, my Lord, if there be any
thing of that kind, I do most humbly and seriously beg, and think that I may
justly expect, both in order to Justice, and to the peace of their own
consciences, that seeing they have no proof of it, but at best have taken it
upon information, that they would either altogether lay it aside, and lay no
weight upon it, or else before they give Judgment of me, they would let me know
of it, and allow me a fair hearing upon it, and if I cannot vindicate my self,
let me bear the burdning of it.

4. In the next place, my Lord, knowing that it is wondered and offended at, not
by a few of the Members of this Parliament, that I should stand to my own
justification in the things whereof I am challenged, and that this I looked
upon as a piece of peremptory and wilful humor, which if I pleased, I might
easily lay aside. My Lord, I humbly beg so much charity of all who now hear me,
as to think, that I have not so far lost the exercise of all conscience toward
God, and of all reason toward my self, and my dearest relations in the world,
as upon deliberation to hazard, if not cast away, both my life and soul at
once, God knows it is not humor, but conscience that sticks with me, and could
I lay it aside and not sin against God, not dissemble with men, by confessing
or professing what I think not, I should not stand to the defense of any of
these things for the minute of an hour: but my Lord, having with prayer and
supplication unto the God of truth, searched the Word of God, and consulted the
judgment and practice of the Reformed Churches, especially of our own Church,
since the time of Reformation from Popery, and writings of many sound and
Orthodox Divines, and having frequently conversed and conferred with the godly
Ministry and praying people of this Nation, and try the pulse of their spirits
anent the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, the
particulars contained in them, and superstructures that have been built upon
them, anent sin and duty, and the power of the Civil Magistrate in matters
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, I find my practice and profession anent these
things agreeable unto all these, and therefore cannot reckon my light for
humor and delusion, but must hold it fast, until better guides be shown me to
follow.

5. My Lord, I shall in the last place humbly beg, that having brought so
pregnant and clear defenses from the Word of God, so much divine reason and
humane Law, and so much of the common practice of Kirk and King done in my own
defense, and being already cast out of my Ministry, thrust out from my dwelling
and maintenance, my self and my family put to live upon the charity of others,
and having now suffered eight months imprisonment, your Lordship would not put
more burdnings upon me I shall conclude, my Lord, with the words of the Prophet
Jeremy in a like case, Behold, says he, I am in your hands, do with me what
seems good unto you; but know ye for certain, that the Lord has commanded me
to speak all these things, and that if you put me to death, you shall bring
innocent blood upon your selves, and upon the inhabitants of this City. My
Lord, my conscience I cannot submit, but this old crazy body, and mortal flesh,
I do submit, to do with it whatsoever you will, whether by death or
imprisonment, or banishment, or any thing else, only I beseech you to ponder
well what profit is in my blood; it is not the extinguishing of me, or of many
others, that will extinguish the Covenant and work of Reformation since the
year 1638. My blood* bondage, or banishment, will contribute more for
propagation of these things, then my life or liberty could do, though I should
live for many years. I wish to my Lord Commissioners Grace, and to all your
Lordships, a spirit of judgment, and wisdom, and understanding, and of the
fear of the Lord, that you may judge righteous judgment, in which he may have
glory, and the King honor and happin^ss, and your selves peace in the day of
your accounts.

FINIS.

