The late Lord Chief Justice NORTH'S ARGUMENT. In the CASE Between Sir WILLIAM
SOAMES, SHERIFF of SVFFOLK, And Sir SAM. BARNADISTON, Bar. Adjudged in the
COURT of Exchequer Chamber. UPON A WRIT of ERROR, CONTAINING The REASONS of
that JUDGMENT.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Randal Tailor. 1689.

The late Lord Chief Justice North's Argument, etc.
SIR Samuel Barnardiston brings an Action upon the Case in B. R. against Sir
William Soame, late Sheriff of Suffolk, setting forth that a Writ issued for
the choosing of a Knight for that County to serve in this Parliament instead of
Sir Henry North deceased, that at the next County Court the Freeholders
proceeded to Election; and although the Plaintiff was duly chosen per majorem
numerum gentium tunc resident. infra dict. Comitat. quorum tunc quilibet
expendere potuit 40 s. libri ten'ti and ultra per annum infra Comitat. illud,
ac licet praedictus Willielmus, praemissa satis sciens, postea brevem praed. in
Cur. Cancellar. returnavit, simul cum quadam Indentura inter ipsum Vicecomitem
and praedict. Electores ipsius Samuelis de praedicta Electione ipsius Samuelis
fact. secund. Exigentiam brevis praedict. praedictus tamen Willielmus ad tunc
Vicecomes Officii sui debitum minime ponderans, sed machinans and maliriose
intendens ipsum Samuelem in hac part minus rite praegravare, ac eundem
Samuelem de fiducia, and officio unius Mil. Comitat. praedict. in dict.
Parliamento exercend. omnino frustrare, and deprivare, Et praedict. Samuelem ad
diversas magnas and grandes pecuniarum summas expend. causare, contra debitum
officii sui praed. falso, malitiose, scienter and deceptive, ad tunc in ead.
Cancellar. apud Westmonast. praedict. retornavit una cum Indentura praedict.
quandam aliam Indenturam eidem brevi similiter annex. specificant' illam fore
fact. inter prefat. Willielmum, etc. ex una part, and diversas alias personas
dict. Comitat. in Indentura illa specificat. and continent, quod dictae al.
personae, ut major pars totius Comitat. praedict. in praedicto pleno Comitat.
elegerunt quend. Lionellum Talmash Bar. alias dict. Lionell Dom. Huntingtowr in
Regno Scotiae in loco praedicti Henrici North un. Mil. Com. Suffolk praedict
pro Parliamento praedicto adveniend. eidem Parliamento pro Com. il. Vbi revera
praedictus Lionellus non fuit electus per majorem partem, prout per ult.
Indent. falso supponitur, Ratione cujus quidem falsi retorn. de praedicta al.
Indent. etc. idem Samuel, in Domum inferiorem pro Comitat. hujus. Regni
Angliae, etc. assemblat. admitti non potuit, quousque idem Samuel. per
petitionem suam Comitat. dicti Parliamenti pro remedio congruo exhibit, and
post diversas ingentes denar, summas in and circa manifestationem and
verificationem dictae Electionis coram dict. Comitat. expendit and diversos
labores in ea part sustent. postea scil. etc. per Comitat. in Domum Comitat.
praedict. admissus fuit and electio ipsius Samuelis per Comitat. declarat* fuit
fore bond, unde deteriat. est, and damnum habet ad Valenc' 3000 l.

There is a Verdict given for the Plaintiff, and Damages found to the value of
800 l. and Judgment thereupon, and a Writ of Error is brought to reverse that
Judgment.

I have but little time left me to say what I have to offer, it being very
late, and yet I must desire leave to produce these Reasons I have in
maintenance of my Opinion, I will be careful to detain you no longer then will
be necessary.

And therefore I will not trouble you to State the Case again, nor will I speak
of any Exceptions that have been made to the Declaration, for I love not the
Niceties of the Law, in Cases where they do prevail; and in this Case I have
only considered the foundations of the Action, which if I had found well
established upon Reason, or the Grounds of Law, I would have Examined what has
been Objected to the Forms of the Declaration, which must have brought great
weight to have overturned those Proceedings. But as to the point of the Action,
upon the most serious Consideration I could have of it, and weighing what has
been before now, and also at this time said in Support of it, I am of Opinion
that the Judgment ought to be reversed, for that no such Action (as this at
Bar) does lie by the Common Law.

Because this is a Cause of considerable value, great Damages being recovered,
because it is a Judgment of great Authority, being upon a Cause tried at the
King's Bench Bar, and given upon deliberation there, because it is a Case of
extraordinary nature, and of great import, each Party pretending benefit to the
Parliament by it; because it is an Action primae impressionis, that never was
before adjudged, the report of which will be listened after. I have taken pains
to collect and set down the Reasons that I must go upon in determining this
Case, That as the Judgment had the Countenance of some deliberation in the
Court where it was given; so the Reversal being with greater deliberation, may
appear grounded upon Reasons that ought to prevail.

I can say with my Brother Wyndham, that I love rather to affirm Judgments than
to reverse them; but I can attribute nothing of Authority to the Judgment,
though it were given in a Superior Court, and upon deliberation; I must judge
upon it as if the Case came to be Originally judged by me. The Argument to
support a Judgment from the Authority of its self is Exceptio ejusdem rei cujus
petitur dissolutio, which must not be admitted in Case of Writs of Error. We
are instructed to Examine, and Correct the Errors of that Court, and for that
purpose we are made Superior to it. We must proceed according to our own
Knowledge and Discretion, else we do not perform the Trust reposed in us.

I must needs say this is a Cause that imports it more than any Cause I have
known come before us, for it is a Cause primae impressionis, and the Question
is, whether by this Judgment, a change of the Common Law be introduced?

It is the principal use of Writs of Error and Appeals to hinder the change of
the Law, and therefore Writs of Error in our Law, and Appeals in the Civil Law
do carry Judgments and Decrees to be Examined by Superior Courts, until they
come to the highest who are entrusted, that they will not change the Law.

Therefore do Writs of Error lie from Ireland which is a Subordinate Kingdom to
England, by whose Laws it is Governed, that they might not be able to change
the Law by their Judgments, and not so much for the particular right of the
Party. For otherwise it would be very easy for Judges by Construction and
Interpretation to change even a Written Law; and it would be most easy for the
Judges of the Common Laws of England, which are not Written, but Deputed upon
Usage, to make a change in them, especially if they may justify themselves by
such a Rule as my Brother lays down to support this Case, sc. That the Common
Law complies with the Genius of a Nation; but when that Genius changes, the
Parliament is only entrusted to judge of it, and by changing the Law, to make
it suitable to it. But if Judges will say it is Common Law, because it suits
with the Genius of the Nation, they may take upon them to change the whole, as
well as any part of it; the Consequence whereof may easily be seen, I wish we
had not found it by sad Experience.

If the Case at Bar be a change of the Law, it is happy that it comes to be
Questioned in the first Instance, for if this Cause had been any way Agreed or
Quitted, and a second Case of this nature had been Questioned, there would have
been President urged, which cannot be spoke of it; for this Case has no
fellow, there never having been the like Judgment before.

The Method I shall take in what I have to say shall be,

1. To remove some Prejudice the Case is under. 2. Give my Reasons against the
Action. 3. Weigh what has been said to maintain the Action.
The Case is under this Prejudice that an Action of the Case lies for false
Retorns of Sheriffs, and why should it not lie in this Case, as well as any
other.

To remove this Prejudice, I shall show some material difference betwixt the
nature of Ordinary Retorns, and this Retorn.

In Ordinary Retorns the Party is concluded, and absolutely without remedy, for
the Court must take the Retorn as the Sheriff makes it.

In Ordinary Cases the Sheriff may and frequently does take Security of the
Plaintiff, or the Sheriff has means by Law to be secure; as if he doubts the
property of the Goods, he may return a Fieri facias, Nullus benit ad
monstrandum bona. In some Cases he may for his Safety Impannel a Jury, as upon
an Elegit; or he may resort the Court, and pray a reasonable time to prepare
his Retorn, if the matter be difficult; and has other shelters, that if he be
away he may save himself from Danger.

But in this Case the Party is not concluded, for upon a Petition to the
Parliament, if they see it just, they will cause the Retorn to be altered by
the Clerk of the Crown, if the Sheriff be not in the way; In this Case the
Sheriff may not take Security, it were Criminal in him to make such a Retorn by
Compact: Nor can the Sheriff make a fruitless Retorn, or obtain delay to
consult his Safety.

These differences are of that nature, that they change the Case in the reason
of it, as I shall hereafter make appear; and no Man can infer, because an
Action lies for false Retorns in Ordinary Cases, therefore it lies in a Case of
a Retorn to Parliament, where the Sheriff is clearly upon other terms.

My Reasons against this Action are all applicable to this Case, and make it
different from all the Cases that have been put by my Brothers, that Argued for
the Action. I observe, that they Argued only upon Generals, without any other
application to this Case, and then by a Topic of concluding a Minori ad majus,
because Actions lie in Cases of inferior nature, therefore it will lie in this;
which Rule holds not in diverse Cases, where there are particular Reasons to the
contrary, as I shall by and by show to be in this.

My First Reason is this, because the Sheriff, as to the declaring the
Majority, is a Judge; and no Action will lie against a Judge for what he does
Judicially, though it should be laid falso, malitiose and scienter, as appears
1 Co. Rep. fol. 24. They that are entrusted to judge ought to be free from
Vexation, that they may determine without Fear; the Law requires Courage in a
Judge, and therefore provides Security for the support of that Courage.

But First, Is the Sheriff a Judge in this Case? Secondly, Is there the same
Reason he should be free from all Action?

As to the First, it is of necessity, that as to the declaring of the Majority
he should be the Judge upon the Place. In other Cases, in the County Courts,
the Freeholders are the Judges, and he is the Minister: When we say the
Freeholders are Judges, we mean the Major part of them is to judge; but when
the Question is, which is the Major part, they cannot determine that Question,
but of necessity the Sheriff must determine that; the nature of the thing
speaks it.

Therefore it was held rightly in Letchmere's Case, Hugh's Abr*
13, 14 Car. 2. That as to the Election of Knights to Parliament, the Court is
properly the Sheriffs Court, and the Writ is in the nature of a Special Common
( Elegi facias.)

I know a Judge may have many Ministerial Actions incumbent upon him, as the
Chief Justice have to certify Records upon Writs of Error; therefore it is
necessary for me to observe, that the Suit is here for what he does as a Judge,
and not for any thing Ministerial, which appears by the Averment, that the
Sheriff annexed an other Indenture, specifying to be made by the Major part of
the Freeholders, and containing that the Lord Huntingtowr was chosen, Vbi
revera, the Lord Huntingtowr was not chosen by the Major part of the
Freeholders. If it had been said Vbi revera, the Freeholders supposed to Seal
the same, never did Seal the same, there had been a falsity in the Ministerial
part of sending in the Indenture: But his sending Two Indentures which were
really Sealed by the Freeholders as they import, wherein the Freeholders of
each Indenture (and not the Sheriff) say they are the major part, is no falsity
in his Ministerial part, but only deferring to judge between them, which is the
Major part, or more properly judging that they are both equal in number.

They Object, that the matter in Question is not matter of Judgment, it is but
counting the Poll, which requires Arithmetique, but not Judgment. But
certainly, if it be righty considered, it will be thought that this Question of
Majority is not barely a Question of Fact, but a Question of Judgment, a
Question of difficult Judgment, there are so many Qualifications of Electors.
First, They must have 40 s. per Annum, there the Value must be judged.
Secondly, It must be Freehold, there the Title. Thirdly, It must be their Own,
there colorable and fraudulent Gifts, made many times on purpose to get
Voices, must be judged. Fourthly, The Electors must be Resident there, the
Settlement of the Party must be determined. Fifthly, There are many things that
incapacitate Voices, as Bribery, Force, etc. And many other Questions arise
that are of such difficulty, that in debate of them much time is spent in
Parliament, and sometimes a Committee determines one way, and the House
another; Is not this a Question that refers to Judgment?

They Object again, that the Sheriff may give an Oath concerning all the
Qualifications, and he is to look no further.

I Answer, the Statute has given the Sheriff power to give an Oath in
assistance of him, but the Statute does not say, that whosoever takes that Oath
shall have a Voice: Neither does the Stat. 23 Hen. 6. say, that the Sheriff
shall not be charged with a false Retorn that pursues that way. So that
although he may use those means for his Direction, yet he must consider his own
Safety, not to make a false Retorn. If a Man upon taking such Oath give a
special Answer, or it should be known to the Sheriff that he swears false, the
Sheriff must determine according to his own Judgment, and not by what is sworn.

It may be hence concluded, that the Sheriff, as to the declaring the Majority,
is a Judge; And if so, my next Assertion is, That there is the same Reason he
should be free from Action as any Judge in Westminster Hall, or any other
Judge. Does it not import the Public that the Sheriff should deal Uprightly
and Impartially? Ought he not to have Courage, and for that end should not the
Laws provide him Security?

Consider his Disadvantages; What a Noise and Crowd accompany such Elections?
What Importunity? Nay, what Violence there is upon him from the contesting
Parties.

We may say, no other Judge has more need of Courage and Resolution to manage
himself, and determine uprightly, than he: No other Judge determines in a Case
of greater Consequence to the Public, or Difficulty than he: Expose him to
such Actions, and in most Elections he must have trouble; for commonly each
Party is confident of his Strength, and his Conduct, and his Friends, that let
the Sheriff return never so uprightly, the Party that is rejected will revenge
it by a Suit, especially if he may Sue at Common Law to have boundless Damages,
without running any hazard himself, but of the loss of his Costs.

If we Judges, that find our selves secure from Actions, should not be tender
of others that are in the same Circumstances, it may be well said, Woe unto you;
for you impose heavy Burdens upon others, that will not bear the least of them
your selves.

My second Reason is because it is alieni fori, either to examine the right of
Election or behavior of the Sheriff, both which are incident, and indeed the
only Considerations that can guide in the Trial of such Causes, if they be
allowed.

It is admitted that the Parliament is the only proper Judicature to determine
the right of Election, and to censure the behavior of the Sheriff; How can the
Common Law try a Cause that cannot determine of those things, without which the
Cause cannot be tried?

No Action upon the Case will lie for breach of a Trust, because the
determination of the Principal thing (the Trust) does not belong to the Common
Law, but to the Court of Chancery; certainly the Reason of the Case at Bar is
stronger, as the Parliament ought to have more Reverence than the Court of
Chancery.

They Object, that it may be tried after the Parliament has decided the
Election, for then that which the Common Law could not try is determined, and
the Parliament cannot give the Party the Costs he is put unto:

Then I perceive they would have the determination of the Parliament binding to
the Sheriff in the Action, which it cannot be, for that it is between other
Parties to which the Sheriff is not called: It is against the course of Law,
that any Judgment, Decree, or Proceeding betwixt other Parties, should bind the
Interest of, or any way conclude a Third Person; No more ought it to do here.
It may be easy for Parties combining to represent a Case so to the Parliament
that the Right of Election may appear either way as the Parties please; Is is
fit that the Sheriff who is not admitted to controvert such Determination
should be concluded by it in an Action, brought against him to make him pay the
Reckoning?

Did the Parliament believe when they determined this Election, that they
passed Sentence against the Sheriff upon which he must pay 800 l. Sure if they
had imagined so, they would, nay in Justice they ought to have heard his
Defense before they determine it.

And yet that was the measure of this Case, the Sheriff was not heard in
Parliament, indeed he was not blamed there, and yet upon the Trial, which
concerned him so deeply, he was not allowed to defend himself, by showing any
Majority or Equality of Voices, the Parliament having determined the Election.

I do not by these Reflections tax the Law of injustice, or the Course of
Parliament of inconveniency; I am an Admirer of the Methods of both, it is from
the Excellency of them, I conclude this proceeding in this newfangled Action,
being absurd, unjust, and unreasonable, cannot be Legal.

To answer the other Branch of this Objection, I say, it does not follow, that
because the Parliament cannot give Costs, therefore this new devised Action
must lie to help the Party to them.

For then such an Action might lie in all Cases, where there is a Wrong to be
remedied by course of Law, and no Costs are given for it.

At the Common Law no Costs were given in any Case, and many Cases remain at
this day, where the Statutes have given no Costs, as in a Prohibition, Scire
facias, and Quare impedit, and diverse other Cases, and yet no Action will lie
to recover those Costs. And why should it lie in the Case at Bar?

In this Case the Parliament have already had it under their Consideration in
the Statute 23 Hen. 6. and have appointed what shall be paid by the Sheriff
that offends, sc. 100 l. to the King and Imprisonment. The Parliament have
Stated what shall be paid for Compensation, and what for Punishment, and would
have provided for Costs it they had thought fit.

My third Reason is, because a double Retorn is a lawful Means for the Sheriff
to perform his Duty in doubtful Cases.

If this be so, then all Aggravations of falso, malitiose, and scienter, will
not make the thing Actionable; for whatever a Man may do for his Safety, cannot
be the Ground of an Action.

There is sometimes Dam' absque injuria, though the thing be done on purpose to
bring a loss upon another, without any design of benefit to himself: As if a
New house be erected contiguous to my Ground, I may build any thing on purpose
to blind the Lights of the New house, and no Action will accrue though the
Malice were never so great, much less will an Action lie, where a Man acts for
his own Safety.

If a Jury will find a Special Verdict, If a Judge will advise and take time to
consider, If a Bishop will delay a Patron, and impannel a Jury to Enquire of
the Right of Patronage, you cannot bring an Action for these Delays, though you
suppose it to be done maliciously, and on purpose to put you to Charges, though
you suppose it to be done Scienter, knowing the Law to be clear; for they take
but the Liberty the Law has provided for their Safety, and there can be no
demonstration that they have not real Doubts, for those are within their own
Breasts. It would be very Mischievous that a Man should not have leave to Doubt
without so great a Peril.

The course of Parliament makes out the ground of this Reason to be true in
Fact. scil. That a double Retorn is Lawful when the Sheriff doubts; for if the
Parliament did not allow a double Retorn in doubtful Cases they ought never to
accept a double Retorn, if it were in it self a void and unlawful Retorn, they
ought not to endure it a moment, but send for the Sheriff and compel him
forthwith to make a single Retorn; But we see that where there is ground of
Doubt, the Parliament sends not for the Sheriff before they have examined the
Case, and give particular Directions.

And it must of necessity be the Course, for suppose the Voices are equal,
suppose the Election is void for force, suppose the Sheriff doubts upon the
validity of some Voices, shall he transmit his doubts specially to the
Parliament? Was there ever any such thing done? Was there ever any other way
but to make a double Retorn, and leave it fairly to the decision of the
Parliament?

It was said by my Brother, that if the Sheriff had returned in the nature of a
Special Verdict the Special Matter, and had concluded in this manner, viz, If
the Parliament shall adjudge Sir Samuel Barnardiston to be chosen, then he
retorns him; and if the Parliament shall adjudge the Lord Huntingtowr to be
chosen, then he retorns him, that such a retorn as this had been safe, and
could not have born an Action.

This is a pretty Invention found out for Arguments sake, but methinks it
furnishes no force at all to the part for which it is brought, but rather shows
the right to be the other way; for let any Man of Reason say, whether a double
Retorn be not the same thing in Consequence, Is not a double Retorn as if the
Sheriff should say to the Parliament (the right of Election is between these
two, I am in doubt which of them I shall reject, and expect your Directions.)
This is the import of a double Retorn, and is the same in effect, as if it had
concluded like a Special Verdict, and so by my Brother's instance the Case
should not be Actionable, though he concluded otherwise.

That other newfangled way could not be received; for, First, The Freeholders
would never join in such a Retorn. Secondly, Such a Retorn is not capable of
being mended by the Sheriff, But the Judgment of the Parliament must be entered
upon Record to make it any Retorn, it concluding nothing of it self, as a
Verdict concludes nothing till the Judgment of the Court be entered upon the
Roll with it. Thirdly, The Parliament will not, as I believe, admit of new
Devises in the Course of their Proceedings, whatsoever we do at Law.

But the double Retorn is practicable in the Country; for the Freeholders of
each part will tender their Indentures. Secondly, It is easily amended in
Parliament, by rejecting the Indenture of those Freeholdres that were not the
Major part. Thirdly, The way has been practiced in doubtful Cases for many
years. So that I apprehend the Case at Bar to be more regular and favorable
than the Case my Brother put, as a Case that would not bear an Action.

Again, suppose the Sheriff had informed the Parliament of his Doubts, and that
he could not readily determine where the Majority was, but it was betwixt two
Persons, A. and B. and thereupon desired their favor either to grant him time
to determine it, if they pleased to command him so to do, or else that they
would decide it themselves, and he would obey what Directions they should make
in it, and thereupon the Parliament had taken upon themselves to determine it.

This most clearly had not been Actionable, for it was not Actionable to delay
a Retorn to any Court of Justice, where the Sheriff has leave from the Court
so to do.

A double Retorn, in my Understanding, speaks the same thing to the Parliament,
and upon it they may either direct the Sheriff to make a single Retorn, which
is to cause him to decide it, or they may do it themselves.

And here I must needs reflect upon the second Reason I gave against the
Action, that the Matter of it is alieni fori; for I find my self, and my
Brothers that argued for the Action, engaged in a Discourse of the nature of a
double Retorn, and the Course of Parliament upon it, which as a Judge I cannot
so well speak to. I had the Honor to be of this House of Commons, and whilst I
was there, I considered, as well as I could, the Course of Proceedings of the
House, and am therefore able to speak something of them, and I am brought into
this Discourse necessarily by this Action; but I must say it is an improper
Discourse for Judges, for they know not what is the Course of Parliament, nor
the Privilege of Parliament: When the Lords in Parliament, whom they are bound
to assist with their Advice, ask the Judges any thing concerning the Course or
Privilege of Parliament, they have answered that they know them not, nor can
advise concerning them.

If in Parliament we do not know nor can advise concerning these things, how
can we judge upon them out of Parliament? We ought to know before we judge, and
therefore we cannot judge of things we cannot know.

Our being engaged in a Discourse improper for Judges shows the Action to be
improper, as much as any other Argument that can be made, and this Argument
arises from my Brothers that argued for the Action; But now I am in this
Discourse, I must go on a little further.

My Observation of the Course of Parliament has been, that they will not permit
the Sheriff to delay his Retorn to deliberate, and he cannot take Security of
either Party; and if a single Retorn be not justified by the Committee of
Elections, he is in danger of the Stat. 23 H. 6.

It follows, that there is no way for an innocent Sheriff to be safe, where he
conceives doubt, but in making a double Retorn; and if that should be
Actionable too, the Service of the Parliament were the most ungrateful Service
in the World.

It seems rediculous to me, that it should be Objected, that this Course of Law
is necessary to prevent the great Mischief arising from double Retorns, when as
it be a Mischief, or disliked by the Parliament, either in general or any
particular Case, they may reject them when they please, and command the Sheriff
to make a single Retorn: So that they may remedy it by their practice, without
help of their Legislative Power.

Their practice has been hitherto to receive double Retorns, which therefore
in some Cases must be Lawful; and in this very Case the double Retorn was
accepted, and the Sheriff no way punished for it, which he ought to have been
if he had been blameable.

If double Retorns are accepted by the Parliament they are allowed, and we must
say they are Lawful, which is the ground of my third Reason, for which I hold
this Action not maintainable.

My Fourth Reason is, that there is no legal Damage occasioned by the Sheriff.
The Damages laid in the Declaration are, First, Being kept from Sitting in the
House. Secondly, The Pains and Charges he was put unto to get into the House.

First, That of his being kept from Sitting in the House is as much every Man's
Damage in the whole County, nay, in the whole Kingdom; and any Man else might
as well have an Action for it as the Member chosen.

To sit in Parliament is a Service in the Member, for the benefit of the King
and Kingdom, and not for the particular profit of the Member.

It is a Rule in Law, that no particular Man may bring an Action for a Nuisance
to the King's Highway; because all Men in England might as well have Actions,
which would be infinite, and therefore such an Offense is punishable only by
Indictment, except there be a special Loss occasioned by that Nuisance. For the
same Reason the exclusion of a Member from the House being as much Damage to
all Men in England as to himself, he, nor any Man else in England, can have an
Action for it, but is punishable upon the public Score, and no otherwise. For
this Reason was the Stat. 23 H. 6. wisely considered; By that Statute the
Action is not given to the Party for his particular Damage, but the Action
given is a popular Action, only the Party grieved has a preference for Six
months, but if he do not Sue for that time, every Man else is at Liberty to
recover the same Sum.

The other point of Damage is the Pains and Charges he was put unto, and that
is not occasioned by the Sheriff, but by the deliberation of the House; Why
should the Sheriff pay for that? It may be if the Parliament had sent for the
Sheriff the first day, and blamed the double Retorn, he would have ventured to
determine the matter speedily, and there should have been no cause of Complaint
for delay: But the Parliament saw so much Cause of doubt, that they think it
not fit to put the Sheriff to determine, but resolve to examine the matter, and
give him directions that may guide him in amending his Retorn, thereupon they
give day to the Parties on both sides, and finding the matter of long
Examination and Difficult, they deliberate upon it.

It seems very unreasonable the Sheriff should be made pay for this which he
did not occasion, but was a course taken by the Parliament for their own
Satisfaction, who found no fault in the Sheriff for putting them to all that
trouble.

Suppose Sir Samuel Barnardiston had been returned alone, and the Lord
Huntingtowr had petitioned against that Retorn, there had been the same Charge
to have defended the Retorn: So it was the contest of the opposite Party that
occasioned the Charge, the deliberation of the Parliament that occasioned the
Delay, but neither of them can be imputed to the Sheriff.

I cannot difference this Case from the Case of bringing an Action against a
Jury for maliciously and knowingly, and on purpose to put the Party to Charges,
finding a matter Specially, whereby great Delay and great Expenses were before
the Party could obtain Judgment, and yet I think no Man will affirm that an
Action will lie in that Case.

In this Case the Damages are found entire, So that if both parts, sc. the not
Sitting in the House, and the Pains and Charges, are not Actionable causes of
Damage, it will be intended the Jury gave for both, and so the Judgment is for
that Cause erroneous.

I suppose the Wages of Parliament will not be mentioned for Damage, for in
most places they are only Imaginary, being not demanded; but if there were to
be any Consideration of them, it will not alter this Case, for upon this Retorn
they are due as from the first day, and so no Damage can be pretended upon that
score.

My Fifth Reason is drawn from the Stat. 23 H. 6. which has been so often
mentioned, that Statute is a great Evidence to me, that no Action lay by the
Common Law against a Sheriff for a false Retorn of a Writ of Election to the
Parliament, and this Evidence is much strengthened by the Observation that has
been made, that never any Action was brought otherwise than upon that Statute.

I must admit that if an Action lay by the Common Law, this Statute does not
take it away, for there are no negative Words in the Statute; but it is not
likely that the Parliament would have made that Law, if there had been any
Remedy for the Party before. The Statute observes that some Laws had been made
before, for preventing false Retorns, but there was not convenient Remedy
provided for the Party grieved, and therefore gives him an Action for 100 l. If
the Courts of Justice had by the Common Laws Jurisdiction to examine
Misdemeanors concerning the Retorns of Sheriffs to the Parliament, what needed
the Parliament to be so elaborate to provide Law after Law to give them Power
therein, and at last to give the Party grieved an Action, can any Man imagaine
but that the Parliament took the Law to be that the Party was without Remedy; I
know preambles of Acts of Parliament are not always Gospel, but it becomes us,
I am sure, to have respect to them, and not to impute any falsity or failing to
them, especially where constant usage speaks for them.

It has been Objected that in these times it was reckoned a Damage to be
Returned to serve in Parliament, which is the reason that no Man then did bring
his Action against the Sheriff for Retorning another in his stead. This cannot
be true, for the Statute calls him the Party grieved, and is careful to
provide convenient Remedy for him, and we see by the many Statutes about those
Times, that it was a mischief very frequent, and there wanted not occasion for
those Actions which does extremely strengthen the Argument of the Non user of
this pretended Common Law.

An Action upon the Case where it may be brought, is a Plaster that fits it
self for all Times, and for all Sores, and if such an Action might then have
been brought, there was no need for the Parliament to provide a convenient
Remedy.

By Littletons Rule often mentioned by my Brothers, we may conclude this Action
will not lie, for if such an Action had lain it would have been brought before
this Time.

In the Case of Buckley against Rice Thomas, in Plowdens Commentaries 118.
which appears to have been elaborately Argued at Bar and Bench; if this Common
Law had been thought upon, they might have prevented the Question, Whether the
Sheriffs of Wales were bound by the Statute of 23 H. 6.

It seems plain to me that the Makers of the 23 H. 6. were ignorant of this
Common Law, and yet as my Brother Thurland Observes, the Judges in those Times
usually assisted in the Pening of the Laws.

The Judges and Council in the time of Buckleyes Case were ignorant of this
Common Law, else it would have been mentioned in the Argument of that Case.

This Common Law was never revealed that I find, until a Time that there were
diverse other new lights, I mean those Times when Nevill brought an Action for a
false Retorn against Stroud during the late troubles, but in these Times it
could never obtain Judgment. I have heard that the Court of Common Pleas sent
the Record to the Parliament, as a Case too difficult for the Courts of Common
Law to determine.

This Statute of 23 H. 6. is not only Evidence that no such Action lay at the
Common Law, but in my Opinion is not consistent with any Remedy at the Common
Law, unless it be allowed that the Party shall be doubly punished.

If the Party grieved has brought his Action upon the Statute and recovered, it
was admitted by the Council that no Action can be brought at the Common Law,
nor, e contra, can he recover by the Statute, after he has recovered by the
Common Law, because Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.

So far it stands well, but suppose the Party grieved has let slip his Time for
Three Months, and then a third Person brings a popular Action and recovers 100
l. upon the Statute, there is nothing can bar the Party grieved from his Action
at the Common Law, for his sitting still will not conclude him. No Statute of
Limittations extending to this Case, and if it be so, then the Party must
besides his Fine and Imprisonment be doubly punished by this Statute, which was
made as the Letter of it imports, because there wanted convenient Remedy.

And now I am Discoursing of this Statute, I must observe the great Wisdom of
the course of Parliament in these Cases, which has in great measure prevented
the bringing of Actions against the Sheriffs, even upon this Statute.

Where the Sheriff mistakes the Person in his Retorn, he incurs the Penalty of
23 H. 6. though it be without any Malice, and it may happen that where there
are 21 Electors of one side and 20 of the other, and the Sheriff Retorns him
that has 21, and the Parliament by adjudging an incapacity in two of the 21
may determine that he that had the 20 voices was duly chosen. In such Case the
Sheriff, has made a false Retorn within the Penalty of the Statute 23 H. 6. and
no Evidence shall be given against the Determination of the Parliament.

This were a very hard Case for the Sheriff, and if he were liable to such
Mischief, many a past Sheriff might be awakened, that takes himself to be
Secure.

But the Course of Parliament prevents this, as it is Reason; for immediately
upon their Determination, they send for the Sheriff and cause him to amend his
Retorn, and thence forward the amended Retorn is the Sheriffs Retorn, and there
is no Record that can warrant any Action to be brought for a false Retorn. As
when the Marshal of the King's Bench, or Warden of the Fleet have made an
improvident Retorn, omitting some Causes wherewith the Prisoner stood charged
in their Custody, whereby they become liable to Action, they frequently move
the Court to amend the Retorn, and when the Retorn is amended all is set Right,
for there is no avering against a Record. In like manner when the Sheriff has
amended his Retorn he is secure from any Action upon that occasion.

By this means there has of late years been no Recovery upon the Statute,
because all Persons chose rather to compel the Sheriff to amend his Retorn,
that they might be admitted to sit in the House, then to take their Remedy upon
the Statute, and no Man can recover upon the Statute first and afterward have
the Retorn amended, for I have been told that by the course of Parliament,
unless the Petition be lodged some few Days after the Retorn, it cannot be
received afterward, so that a Man cannot upon that Statute have Remedy at Law,
and also in Parliament which seems to be wisely provided to prevent any
contrariety of Determinations.

This Statute of 23 H. 6. furnished those that argued for this occasion with
one Argument which does now vanish, they said that all the inconveniences that
could be Objected to this Action were the same upon the Statute, 23 H. 6. sc.
that upon that Statute the right of Election must be examined upon a Trial
where there might be contrariety of Determinations, for it appears by what I
have said that there can be no contrariety of Determinations.

And there are other Inconveniences in this Remedy by the Common Law, which are
not in the Remedy given by the Statute; for by the Statute the Sum to be
recovered is limited, the Informer has a time prefixed, So that there are
bounds set which cannot be exceeded: But the Remedy by the Common Law is
without limittation of time, which is considerable; for all Sheriffs that ever
made any Retorn otherwise then the Parliament determined, will be liable during
their whole lives to them that will call them to Account for it; I say, this
Case is without limittation of Time, without measure of Damages, or any Rules
contained in a written Law, it depends upon a general Notion of Remedy, which
may be enlarged by constructions, as it is now introduced without President.

To finish my Observations upon this Statute, I say, it is great Wisdom in the
Parliament, to call the Sheriff to amend the Return, and so prevent any Remedy
against him upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. For I do not see that the Rules of Law
concerning Elections, are so manifestly clear and known, that it is sit that
the Sheriff should, upon all Returns that are corrected by the Parliament, pay
the reckoning of the contest.

I have a Sixth Reason against this Action, which is, because the Sheriff is
not admitted to take security to save him harmless in such Cases; I take this
reason to be instar omnium, and there needs no other in the Case.

It were the most unreasonable and grievous thing in the World, that the
Sheriff should be bound to act without any deliberation, and not be allowed to
take any security, and yet be liable to an Action; which way soever he take
there is no course can avoid it, but this of a double Return, as I have before
shown.

It has not been said by any that argued the other way, that the Sheriff may
take security, and I suppose will not be said, for that will be a dangerous
course for Parliaments; for then the most litigious man must be returned, and
not he which is truly chosen.

If the Sheriff may not take security, the Law must be his security. It was an
Argument used by my Brother --, that because the Law imposes an Officer, viz.
the Sheriff, therefore the Law must give the party an Action against that
Officer, if he misdemean himself: the Argument does not hold universally, for
the Law imposes a Judge, and yet no Action lies against him: but the reason of
that Argument, if turned the other way, is irrefragable; as thus, the Law will
not suffer the Sheriff to take security, therefore the Law must be his
security, else it were a most unreasonable Law. This reason of it self is
sufficient to bear the whole Case; for no Case can be put in our Law, nay, no
Case can be in any reasonable Law, where a man is compellable to judge without
deliberation, and cannot take security, and yet shall be liable to an Action.

I have two reasons to add, upon which I lay great weight, though they depend
not upon any particular circumstances of this Case, but the general
consideration of it; they are these, 1. This is a New Invention. 2. That it
relates to the Parliament.


As it is a new Invention, it ought to be examined very strictly, and have no
allowance of favor, and then it will have the same fortune that many other
Novelties heretofore attempted in our Law have had.

Actions upon the Case have sometimes been received in new Cases, where it
stands with the Rules of Law, and no inconveniency appears, but they have been
more often rejected. I shall instance some Cases that have been rejected,
because it will be manifest by them, that all the Arguments and Positions laid
down by my Brothers, that would support the Action, are as well applicable to
several Cases, that have been already rejected, as to the Case at Bar.

An Action upon the Case was brought against a Grand Jury-man, for falsely and
maliciously conspiring to Indict another, and adjudged it would not lie. An
Action was brought against a Witness, for testifying falsely and maliciously,
but adjudged that no Action would lie in those Cases.

These three Instances are applicable to every Argument urged for this Action,
the Arguments my Brothers made in depressing Falsity and Malice, those which
they made from the comparison of other Actions upon the Case, a minore ad
majus, the Argument, that because the Law imposes the Officer, it will punish
Malice; these Arguments have the same force in the case of a Judge, Juror, or
Witness, and yet my Brothers admit in those Cases an Action will not lie, which
shows the invalidity of those Arguments.

Now I shall give other Instances, where Actions upon the Case have been
rejected for Novelty and Reasons of Inconveniency.

An Action of the Case was brought against the Lord of a Manor, for not
admitting a Copyholder, and it was adjudged it would not lie, Cro. Jac. 368.

There was Verdict given, and Damages found, by the Jury in that Case, the Lord
is compellable in Chancery to admit a Copyholder; and what harm would it have
been, if there might have been remedy given by the Common Law, there being a
Custom broken, by which the Lord was bound? The Reasons of the Book are,
because it was a Novelty, and it would be vexatious, if every Copyholder should
have an Action against the Lord, when he refused to admit him upon his own
terms.

It has been adjudged, that an Action upon the Case will not lie for the
breach of a Trust, because the Common Law cannot try what a Trust is; but if
such Actions were allowed, the Law might declare that to be a Trust which the
Court of Chancery, that properly judges of Trusts, might say is none; and where
the Common Law cannot examine the principal Matter, the Damages that are but
dependant upon it shall not be regarded.

Anthony Maddison brought an Action against Skipwith, for maliciously killing
Sir Thomas Wortley. The Case was thus: The Plaintiff was a young Lawyer, that
had expended all his Gains in the Purchase of a Rent, that was determinable
upon the death of Sir Thomas Wortley; Skipwith quarrelled with Sir Thomas in
the Streets, about a Mistress, and killed him, whereby Maddison lost his Rent.
It was held the Action would not lie, though it were laid to be done
maliciously, and on purpose to determine the Paintiff's Rent.

I observed in that Case, that although Mr. Maddison knew very well there was a
Mistress in the case, and that his Rent was not aimed at, yet he would fain try
his fortune in the Suit, thinking that perhaps a Jury, out of compassion to
him, or to discourage the like Facts, might make the Manslayer pay him for his
loss. But the Judges would not suffer it to go on, it being a mere device and
newfangled Action.

It has been held, that an Action will not lie against a person for suing for
Tithes in kind, knowing that there was a Modus, because it might then be
perilous for any person to insist upon his right.

It was held by the Court of Common Pleas, that no Action will lie for suing an
Attorney knowingly in another Court against his Privilege, for his means to
enjoy his Privilege, is by Writ of Privilege, and he is not bound to claim
his Privilege, nor can his adversary know he will claim it.

An Action was lately brought in the King's Bench, (as I heard) for delaying a
Post-Letter maliciously, whereby the Plaintiff wanted Intelligence, that might
have been of great advantage to him. The Court discountenanced the Action, so
that it proceeded no further. It was then said (as I heard) to this effect:
That if such Precedents were admitted, there could hardly be any dealing or
correspondence, but might be matter for Actions at Law; and although the Case
depended upon proof of particular malice, and the Defendant will be acquitted,
if his case be not odious, yet we must consider, that there is both charge and
vexation of mind that attends the defense of a just Cause, and we must not
subject men for all their actions to such trouble and hazard.

These Instances show, that although an Action upon the Case be esteemed a
Catholicon, yet when Actions have been applied to new Cases, they have been
always strictly examined, and upon considerations of Justice or convenience
they have been many times rejected.

For though the Law advances Remedies, as my Brothers observed, yet it is with
consideration, that Vexation be not more advanced than Remedy.

It is my opinion, that no new Device ever was or can be introduced into the
Law, but absurdities and difficulties arise upon it, which were not foreseen,
which makes me very jealous of admitting Novelties.

But in matters relating to the Parliament, which is my second ground, there is
no need of introducing Novelties, for the Parliament can provide new Laws, to
answer any Mischiefs that arise, and it ought to be left to them to do it.

Especially in a Case of this nature, concerning Elections, which the
Parliament have already taken care of, and prescribed Remedies by the several
Statutes that have been made concerning them, I say, in such a Case there is
little need to strain the Law.

The Judges in all times have been very tender of meddling with matters relating
to the Parliament. I do not find, that ever they tried Elections, but where
Statutes give them express power, or that they ever examined the behavior of a
Sheriff, or any Officer of the Parliament, in relation to any service performed
to the Parliament, but upon the Statutes, and in Brouncker's Case, Dyer 168.
The Statute was their Rule in the Star Chamber, and they inflicted the same
Punishment that is appointed by the Statute.

If we shall allow general Remedies (as an Action upon the Case is) to be
applied to Cases relating to the Parliament, we shall at last invade Privilege
of Parliament, and that great Privilege of Judging of their own Privileges.

Suppose an Action should be brought in time of Prorogation, against a Member
of Parliament, for that he falsely and maliciously did exhibit a Complaint of
Breach of Privilege to the Parliament, whereby the party was sent for in
custody, and lost his liberty, and was put to great charges to acquit himself,
and was acquitted by Parliament.

If upon such a Case the Jury should find the Defendant guilty, why should not
that Action be maintained as well as this at Bar? It may be said for that
Action, that the Judgment of the Parliament is followed, and the Privilege is
not tried at Law, but determined first in the House. 2. It may be said, that
the party has no other way to recover his Charges.

It would be dangerous to admit such an Action, for then there would be peril
in claiming Privilege, if the party complained of, had the fortune to be
acquitted by the House; the Member that made the complaint, will be at the
mercy of the Jury, as to the point of Malice, and quantity of Damages. Such a
Precedent, I suppose, would not please the Parliament, and yet it may with more
justice be the second Case, than this Case at Bar the first.

Actions may be brought for giving Parliament-Protections wrongfully. Actions
may be brought against the Clark of the Parliament, Sergeant at Arms, and
Speaker, for ought I know, for executing their Offices amiss, with Averments of
Malice and Damage, and then must Judges and Juries determine what they ought to
do by their Offices, and in effect give Rules to them.

It cannot be seen whither we shall be drawn, if we meddle with Matters of
Parliament in Actions at Law, therefore, in my judgment, the only safety is in
those bounds that are warranted by Acts of Parliament or constant Practice.

Suppose this Action had been brought before the Election decided in the House,
and the Jury had found one way, and the Parliament had determined contrary, how
inconsistent has this been?

But it was said in the King's Bench, that the Court would not try it before the
Parliament had determined the Election, and then that cannot be contested, but
the Judgment of the Parliament must be followed; and my Brother -- but now
said, Sure no Man will be so indiscreet, as to bring such an Action before the
Parliament have determined it, and the Court will not try it, before such time
as the Election be decided in a proper way.

In my opinion this was not rightly considered, for how can the Court stay any
Suit, to expect the Determination of the Parliament? And what reason or justice
is there, that the Sheriff, who is no party called to answer in the Parliament,
should be concluded in any thing, by a Judgment between other parties, to
defend himself from a demand of Damages, in a Course of Law, where Witnesses
are examined upon Oath, which they cannot be in the Commons House? There is no
reason the Suit at Law should stay till the House have determined, if the
determination of the House be not conclusive in that Suit.

And for the discretion of the persons that are like to bring such Actions, I
cannot depend upon it, for I see in this Age, some Men will insist upon their
Private Rights, to the hindrance of Public Affairs, of higher consequence than
any that can come before the Courts in Westminster Hall.

It may be there will not want men that will press us to judge in such cases,
not only before the Parliament have determined, but against what the Parliament
have determined, and will tell us, that the Sheriff was no party, that
Witnesses were not there examined upon Oath, and produce Arguments from
Antiquity, which we shall be very loath to judge of.

I can see no other way to avoid consequences derogatory to the Honor of
Parliament, but to reject the Action, and all others that shall relate either
to the Proceedings or Privilege of Parliament, as our Predecessors have done.

For if we shall admit general Remedies, in Matters relating to the Parliament,
we must set bounds how far they shall go, which is a dangerous province; for if
we err, Privilege of Parliament will be invaded, which we ought not any way to
endamage. This I speak for general Remedies: Now I will consider this
particular Case, which, in my opinion, would bring danger and dishonor to the
Parliament.

It is dishonorable to the Parliament, that there should be no protection in
their Service; I have shown, that the Sheriff can be safe in no case, if he
shall be sued in such a case as this; and can there be a greater reproach, than
that there is no safety in their Service? no body can serve them cheerfully or
willingly, at that rate.

It has been objected, that the Sheriff is not their Officer, but is the
Officer of the Court of Chancery, which sends forth the Writs, and receives the
Returns. The Argument is plausible, but will not pass in the Parliament, for
there they say the Court of Chancery is the Repository of their Writs, and will
not allow them to issue without Warrant from the House, they will not suffer
the Court of Chancery to meddle with the Returns, or the Sheriff; the
Parliament sends immediate Orders to the Sheriff, if the Return be too slow;
they direct the Sheriff to amend his Return; they punish the Sheriff, where
they find him faulty: so that it appear they exercise an immediate Jurisdiction
over the Sheriff, and I suppose they would judge it very false Doctrine to say,
that the Court of Chancery can any way meddle with the Returns, or the Officer.

Admitting the Sheriff to act in Returns, as the Officer of the Parliament, it
concerns them, that he should be liable to no other punishment, but what they
inflict; otherwise they cannot expect to be obeyed.

To have others Judge when their Servants do well, will be to have others give
Rules to their Servants and Service, which they will think inconvenient.

Let it be considered, how hard a Task Sheriffs have in Elections of Knights to
the Parliament; the Appearance is commonly very numerous; the Parties
contesting very violent; the Proceedings tumultuous; the Polling is sometimes
in several Places at once: so that the Sheriff can hardly be a Witness of the
action; and if a dispute be in the House of Commons, he is no party to it. If
after all this, the Sheriff, who cannot indempnifie himself by security, shall
be liable to an Action, the Service of the Parliament may be reckoned a
miserable slavery, which is not for their honor.

As this is dishonorable, so it is dangerous to Parliaments. It concerns the
Kingdom, that Returns to Parliament should be upright and impartial; that they
may be so, the Sheriffs should be secure from all fears.

Judges are not liable to Actions, that they may proceed uprightly and
impartially; if they were subject to Suits for their judgments, there is that
earnestness and confidence on both sides, that one side would be dissatisfied
and trouble them, and they could not discharge their duty without apprehensions
of disquiet.

If the Sheriffs be exposed to Actions thus, let us consider what and whom he
is to fear; he may fear the Suit of the Party, and he may fear the Suit of the
King, and it follows necessarily, that if an Action lies, an Information for
the King will also lie, for the misdemeanour in his Office. If it be not a Case
privileged by the Complexion of it as Parliamentary, from being examined in
Westminster Hall, but that he may be punished at the Suit of the Party, he may
certainly be as well punished at the King's Suit; if so, where is the Sheriff's
security? will his own innocence secure him? that must be tried by a Jury of
the Country where the Parliament sits, who are (it may be) strangers to him as
well as to the matter, or by a Jury of the Country where the Election was,
where (it may be) they will be of an opposite party, the Plaintiff may wait his
opportunity, and question him twenty Years after; if he be condemned, his
punishment is unlimited; a Fine may be set to any height for the King; the
Damages may be given to any value for the party: where is his security upon
such proceedings, will he not be (more afraid of such punishment out of
Parliament, than of any punishment in Parliament? will not, or may not his
terror make them desire to please them that can punish them out of Parliament,
rather than do right? will not that be dangerous to the Constitution of
Parliaments.

As the punishment out of the Parliament may be a terror to those which mean
well, so colorable punishments may be as mischievous on the other side, for
they may prevent any punishment in Parliament; for, Nemo bis punitur pro eodem
delicto, they may serve for protection of men that do ill: when it is seriously
weighed of what Consequence this may be, the Case at Bar will not be thought a
Case fit to be received by the Judges, without the countenance of a new Law.

They object, here is Malice found by the Verdict, and there can be no danger
or inconveniency that Malice should be punished.

This Objection fortifies my Opinion, for Malice, upon which they would have
the Scales turned, in this Case is not a thing demonstrative, but
interpretative, and lies in opinion; so that it may give a handle to any man to
punish another by.

The instance of this very Case shows, that a good man may reasonably be afraid
of the event of his defense in such a Case.

For although the matter was of great examination in Parliament, and at last
decided but by few Voices, and no observation of the Sheriffs miscarriage
there, though it appeared upon the Trial, (which I may say, being present) that
the Sheriff was guided by the advice of his Friends of Council and of
Parliament Men, that told him, the only safe course was, to make a double
Return, yet the Jury condemned him to pay 800 l. against the expectation of the
Court, for the Judges, that were present at the Trial, did all declare
publicly, that they would not have given that Verdict.

The Judges heard all the Evidence the jury could go upon, for being of a
remote County to the place of Election, the Jury could know nothing of their
own knowledge, and yet the Judges concurred not with the Jury in opinion.

I know we are not to examine the truth of the Verdict, we must take it for
Gospel, neither does any partiality in this particular lead me in judgment, but
I show it as an instance, that Malice is not demonstrative; men's minds may be
mistaken: and innocent men have therefore reason to be afraid, especially in
ill times, and may use such means for their safety, as may not be convenient
for Parliaments.

But there can be no danger or inconveniency in the Censure of the Parliament,
that represents the whole Kingdom, who hitherto have alone exercised this
Power, and who may at any time reform the Law, if the present practice be any
way inconvenient.

Upon the Reasons which I have produced, I ground my Opinion. Now it will be
necessary to weigh what has been said in opposition to it.

The Arguments urged on the other part, related either to the Ingredients or
Circumstances of the Action, or to the Foundation and Substance of it.

I call the Ingredients and Circumstances of the Action, that it is laid with
the words, falso malitiose deceptive and scienter, and that here is a Verdict
in this Case, and Damages are found.

The words, falso malitiose and deceptive, will sometimes make a thing
actionable, which is not so in it self, without Malice proved, though there be
the same damage to the party.

As where a man causes another to be falsely indicted, yet if it be not
maliciously, no Action lies, though there be the same trouble, charge and
damage, in one Case, as in the other.

But it is only where a man is a voluntary Agent, for if a man be compellable
to act, you cannot molest him upon any Averment of Malice, as if a Grand
Jury-man causes another to be indicted; though you aver Malice, you cannot
have an Action against him: so for a Witness that does testify, or a Judge
that judges.

In the Case at Bar, the Sheriff is compellable to act, and not barely, as a
Minister, to send the Indenture, but, as a Judge, to say which is the major
part of the due Electors, and if he mistakes, there is no reason it should
subject him to an Action upon an artificial Averment of Malice.

I remember, in Shepherd and Wakeman's Case, in the King's Bench, Mr. Justice
Wyndham said well, that the words, falso and malitiose, were grown words of
course, and put into every Action, and that, to his knowledge, Juries had many
times not regarded them, that he looked upon them as words of form.

If we should make the words, falso and malitiose, support an Action, without a
fit Subject Matter, all the actions of Mankind would be liable to Suit and
Vexation; they that have the Cooking (as we call it) of Declarations in Actions
of the Case, if they be skilful in their Art, will be sure to put in the words,
falso and malitiose, let the Case be what it will, they are like Pepper and
Vinegar in a Cook's hand, that help to make Sauce for any Meat, but will not
make a Dish of themselves.

Falso and malitiose will not enable an Action against a Judge, nor against a
Indictor, or Witness, nor where words are not actionable, though the Plaintiff
have a Verdict and Damages found, nor for a breach of a Trust, which is alieni
fori.

The reason of every one of these Cases holds in the Case at Bar, and therefore
it ought to have the same Resolution.

As to the word scienter, it has weight sometimes, as if an Action be brought
for keeping a Dog that worried another's Sheep, Sciens Canem ad mordendum oves
esse consuetum; or for detaining the Servant or Wife of another, scienter. In
these Cases, if the Defendant have been told, that the Dog did worry Sheep, or
that it was the Servant or Wife of another, though it may be he did not believe
it, yet it was scienter, for the word implies no more, than having notice. And
in those Actions he must inform himself at his peril, and may, if he doubts,
avoid danger, by putting away those things which give offense.

But in this Case he could receive Information by none, and is not to believe
or disbelieve any body, but is bound to judge of the thing himself, and to act
according to his judgment. So that no proof could be made of the scienter, for
one side tells him the Election is one way, the other side tells him it is the
other way, but he being present to the whole Action, must follow the dictates
of his own judgment. Hence it appears, scienter in this Case is an empty word,
not referring to Notice of a Fact, but to Matter of Judgment, which cannot any
way be proved.

It has been often urged, that this Case is stronger being after a Verdict, and
Damages found by the Jury, and it has been said that perhaps upon Demurrer, it
might have been more doubtful.

The Case is the same to me upon a Verdict, that it would have been upon a
general Demurrer, and no stronger, for a Demurrer is the Confession of the
Party, of all that can be proved, or can possibly be found upon that
Declaration.

It is my Lord Cooke's advice, in Cromwell's Case, 4 Part 14. a. never to Demur
to a Declaration, if there be any hopes of the Matter of Fact, for the Matter
in Law will as well serve after Verdict, as upon Demurrer.

It had been a very odious Case, if the Sheriff should have admitted all this
Fact to be true by a Demurrer.

The finding the Plaintiffs Damages adds no strength to the Case, for we see
every day upon Actions for Words, though the Jury find the Defendant guilty of
speaking words falso and malitiose, and find it to be to the Plaintiffs great
damages, yet if the words are not such as will bear an Action, the Court stays
Judgment, and if Judgment happen to be given, it is reversable for Error, which
shows, that the finding of Damages by the Jury, cannot make an Action better,
than if it were to be adjudged upon Demurrer.

I shall now consider what has been said to maintain this Action upon the main
substance and foundation of it. They say, this is a Case within the general
reason of the Common Law, for here is Malice, Falsity, and Damage, and where
they concur, there ought to be remedy, and although this be a new Case, yet it
ought not to be rejected, for other kind of Actions have been newly introduced,
and this is as sit to be entertained as any.

My Brothers, that argued even now for the Action, showed great Learning and
great Pains, and certainly have said all that can be invented in support of
this Case, but as far as I could perceive, they have spoken only upon general
Notions to that purpose I just now mentioned, but nothing that I could observe
applicable to the reasons and differences I go upon.

As for the Rule they go upon, that where Malice, Falsity and Damage do concur,
there must be remedy; I confess it is true generally, but not universally; for
it holds not in the Case of a Judge, nor an Indicator, nor a Witness, nor of
words that import not legal slanders, through they are found to bring damage,
as I have shown before; and the reasons that exempt these Cases from the
general Rule, have the same force in the Case at Bar.

I must confess, the Judges have sometimes entertained new kinds of Actions,
but it was upon great deliberation and with discretion, where a general
inconvenience required it.

If Slade's Case were new, (for my Brother The land observes truly; it was said
in that Case, that there were infinite number Precedents) that Case imported
the common course of Justice; Actions for words, that are said to be new,
though they have been used some hundreds of Years, are a necessary means to
preserve the Peace of the Kingdom. The Case of Smith and Crasshaw, Cro. Car.
15. was a Case of general concern, being, that Prosecutions for Treason may be
against any man, and at any time.

But in the case at Bar, neither the Peace of the Kingdom, nor the Course of
Justice is concerned in general, but only the Administration of Officers of the
Parliament in the Execution of Parliamentary Writs, and can never happen but in
time of Parliament, and must of necessity fall under notice of the Parliament:
so that if the Law were deficient, it is presumed the Parliament would take
care to supply it; discretion requires us rather to attend that, than to
introduce new Precedents upon such general Notions that cannot govern the
course of Parliaments.

My Brother -- said the Common Law complied with the Genius of the Nation. I do
not understand the Argument; Does the Common Law -- Are we to judge of the
changes of the Genius of the Nation? whether may general Notions carry us at
that rate? for my part, I think, though the Common Law be not written, yet it
is certain, and not arbitrary; we are sworn to observe the Laws as they are,
and I see not how we change them by our Judgments, and as for the Genius of the
Nation, it will be best considered by the Parliament who have Power of the Laws.

In the Case at Bar, I look upon the Sheriff as a particular Officer of the
Parliaments, for the managing Elections, and if he were not Sheriff, I look
upon the Writ as if it were an Order of Parliament, and had not the Name of a
Writ: I look upon the Course of Parliament, which we pretend not to know, to be
incident to the Consideration of it; so that it stands not upon the general
Notion of Remedy in the common course of Justice.

The Arguments of the Falling of the Value of Money, whereby the Penalty of 100
l. provided by the 23 H. 6. is become inconsiderable, and the increase of the
estimation of being a Member of Parliament, if they were true, are Arguments to
the Parliament to change the Law by increasing the Penalty, but we cannot do it.

My Brother --, in his Argument at the Bar, would embolden us, telling us we
are not to think the Case too hard for us, because of the Name or Course of
Parliament, for Judges have punished Absentees; they may determine what is a
Parliament; what is an Act of Parliament; how long an Ordinance of Parliament
shall continue, and may punish Trespasses done in the very Parliament.

I will not dispute the truth of what has been said in this, but if his
Arguments were artificial, he might have spared them, for they have no manner
of effect, to draw me beyond my sphere.

I will not be afraid to determine any thing that I think proper for me to
judge, but seeing I cannot find the Courts of Justice have at any time meddled
with Cases of this nature, but upon power expressly given them by Acts of
Parliament, I cannot consent to this Precedent, I am confident when there is
need the Parliament will discern it, and make Laws to enlarge our Power, so far
as they shall think convenient.

I see no harm, that Sheriffs in the mean time should be safe from this new
devised Action, which they call the Common Law, if they misdemean themselves
they are answerable to the Parliament, whose Officers they be, or may be
punished by the Statutes made for the regulating Elections.

It is time for me to conclude, which I shall do by repeating the Opinion I at
first delivered, viz. That this Judgment is not warranted by the Rules of Law,
that it introduces Novelty of dangerous consequence, and therefore ought to be
reversed.

Saepe Viatorem nova non vetus orbita fallit. FINIS.

