A SERMON PREACHED UPON Breach of Covenant, By that Reverend and Worthy Servant
of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. John Guthrie sometime Minister of the Gospel at Tarboltoun
1663.

2 CHRONICLES: 15.12. And they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul. Verse. 15. And all Judah
rejoiced at the Oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him
with their whole desire, and he was found of them: and the Lord gave them rest
round about. DEUTERONOMY: 29.14, 15. Neither with you only do I make this Covenant and
this Oath; but with him that stands here with us this day before the Lord our
God, and also with him that is not here with us this day. NEH: 9.38. And
because of all this, we make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our Princes,
Levites, and Priests seal unto it. DEUTERONOMY: 29. 24, 25. All nations shall say,
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? what means the heat of this
great anger? Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord God of their fathers which he made with them. TO THE READER.
THE Design of Publishing this Treatise, especially at this time, is to evince
to the World, what have been the Principles of the Church of Scotland, and Her
Faithful and Constant Wrestlings against abjured Prelacy, that bitter Root of
Human Invention, obtruded upon this Church, contrary to Her Received
Reformation, and diametrically opposite to the Word of GOD, and our Covenants,
both National and Solemn League. The Scope and Design of this Treatise,
consists in these Two; First, In asserting and proving from Scripture, the
irrevocable Tie and Obligation, this Land lies under to prosecute the Ends, and
Designs of these solemn Sworn Covenants. Secondly, In answering some Objections
adduced for debilitating their Obligations. This Treatise, by the Blessing of
GOD upon the Conscientious Perusal, may be a Mean to discover our Ancient and
Received Principles, and Practices in adhering to these Covenants, even to the
Effusion of much Blood; and also, how far we are degenerated from our First
Love and Wonted Zeal to, and Apostasy from our Covenant-Engagements, so as the
Sense of our Covenant-Obligations, is not only slipped out of the Memories of
some, but also out of the Judgments of not a few. If the Reader find any thing
not so well connected, let it not be imputed to the Author, but to the Pen of
him who gathered it from the Author's Mouth.

EZEKIEL, 17 Chap. 19 Ver. Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely
mine Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it
will I recompense upon his own head.
I Conceive in the Verse that I have read, there is more solid Truth delivered
by the Spirit of God, which cannot lie, than I am able to declare, when I have
fallen to the Explication and Enlargement of if; yet the very first words in
the 11 and 12 Verses, speak as much to the Truth contained in the rest of the
Sermons of Ezekiel, as that it is not laid before the People, neither left unto
them in any confused way, which is not plain: But the Prophet gets a Commission
to show them plainly, what the mind of the Lord was to them. This will more
clearly appear, if you take notice of the former part of the Chapter, wherein
these things are delivered plainly to the People by a Similitude, the Prophet
having showed to his Hearers the same things that he comes to speak plainly of
unto them, so that any Man might have thought this with himself, What needs so
plain Preaching, and Application? Will not any Man that hears the Words take
them up without any Application? You find the Lord in his Commission to
Ezekiel, after he Points out the Similitude of two Eagles taking away the
Branches, he tells (now says he) Go to the City of Jerusalem and say, Do ye
understand these things, that God will avenge his broken Covenant against the
King of Jerusalem? And if they understand not these things, go and make them
plain to them, and apply it to them; spare neither King nor Prince, but tell
them this is my Message; Thou have broken my Covenant, therefore by this
Message which I send to you, the Plague and the Vengeance of God shall come
upon you, As I live, says the Lord.

And lest any of you who sometime have heard us press the Oath of the Covenant
in these Lands, should now adays think it alterable, and look upon it as a
thing that may be dispensed with; therefore, we are through God's strength from
Scripture, to make out the indissolvable Tie of the Covenant; and that we bear
not upon the Air in speaking to that purpose, according to the Faithfulness of
the Prophet's Commission by the Lord, We intend to follow this Rule, as we
shall be answerable to our Lord and Master; and to be free of your Blood, whose
Souls are committed to our Charge, to lay it before you; and if you sin against
the Lord, then your Blood will be upon your own head; this we intend not to
speak in general but in particular; and if any Man will justle himself against
the Lord, then he will break himself for ever.

And for making the words more clear, consider, that the King of Babylon as you
read 2 Kings 24.17. did change Mattaniah's Name to Zedekiah, and made him King
of Jerusalem, and afterward Zedekiah entered into Covenant with the King of
Babylon, that he should abide Tributary to him; and for the Confirmation of it,
he puts the King Zedekiah to Swear by the Lord. But after he had sent him home
to Jerusalem, Zedekiah upon some supposed Advantage which he saw not at that
time, did break his Covenant with the King of Babylon; therefore the Lord sends
the Prophet to him, and says, Since thou have broken Covenant with the King of
Babylon and has not kept it, as I live says the Lord, thou shall not
prosper. Yea the Lord noticeth and owns it so much, that he makes the Covenant
sworn to the King of Babylon, his Covenant; and therefore says in that Verse,
As I live, my Oath which he has despised, and my Covenant, etc. This is the
History, and we have it clearly set down in the Prophet's Commission, which he
must not dare to sit, but faithfully does deliver the same, as it is in the 33.
Chap. of this Prophecy, Ver. 7, 8. wherein the Prophet tells the Duty of the
Watchmen of Israel, Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of
Israel: Therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.
When I say unto the wicked, O wicked Man, thou shall surely die; if thou do
not speak to warn the Wicked from his way, that wicked Man shall dye in his
iniquity; but his Blood will I require at thy hand; that is, whenever a Land or
Kingdom is found guilty of such and such things for which the Lord's Wrath uses
to come upon a People; if that be made known to the Prophets, they are bound to
Preach and declare it, or else resolve that the Blood of all those, that are
taken away with the Stroke, shall be charged on them as unfaithful Men in the
House of God. And it were to be desired, that there were many to give warning;
I fear there shall not the blood of a few in Scotland be required at the hands
of Ministers for not giving faithful and timeous Warning; for as every Man that
shall be taken away in his iniquity, and for his Defection shall be made to
smart for it: so it shall be no Excuse to you the People, that the Ministers
did not tell you; O but dreadful shall be the Account that Ministers must give
for not telling the People!

In the words there is 1 st. a threatening for Breach of Covenant, and 2 dly.
There is the Thing for which he does threaten, and that is for despising the
Oath, and breaking the Covenant of God. 3 dly. The Confirmation that is fixed to
the Threatening; would it not have been thought that this was enough, Thus says
the Lord, I will punish thee for breaking my Covenant? Now this is
extraordinary, that it must have this put to it twice, As I live says the
Lord, shall he break my Covenant and escape? All this put together, speaks the
certainty of the Threatening, ver. 16 and 19. and also the greatness of the
Matter, and the weightiness of it, and how the Lord looks upon breach of Oaths
and Covenants.

The Doctrine from the Words, is, That the Oath is indissolvable, the Breach
whereof God recompenseth upon the heads of those that break it. It Is
inviolable, it is in the words not framed by my Mouth; the Holy Ghost framed
them in the mouth of Ezekiel the Prophet long ago, As I live says the Lord
God, surely mine Oath, etc. As applicable to our Case, consider, the Doctrine
supposes something that is not plainly spoken, and that is, That every Oath
and Covenant of God is a thing that is inviolable, that is, may not nor can not
be broken; For the better understanding whereof, there is something that is
needful to an Oath and Covenant of the Lord. I am not to speak here in relation
to the Covenant of Works between God and Man in his Integrity; neither am I to
speak to the Covenant of Grace, either in the way of it is Dispensation on Mount
Sinai, or as to the fullness of it under the New Testament, though all these are
more properly called Covenants, because they are of his own devising: But we
take the Covenant here in this place, to be of Men's Duties in the Land; and for
keeping them the better, we take an Oath upon us in things that are neither
Morally evil or good, but indifferent; but a Man once engaged by Oath cannot
retract, though they be not commanded Duties, yet once entered into they must
stand; for when we open our mouths to the Lord, we cannot go back. But I say,
for clearing this,

Consider what makes an Oath and Covenant of God: 1 st. It must be a thing in
it self lawful; there is no Man that warrantably according to the word of God,
may swear the thing which in it self is unlawful, 2 dly. It must be a thing in
it self possible, within the Man's power; no Man is warranted to swear that
which he cannot perform. 3 dly. When we take the Vows and Oath of God upon us,
we interpone the Name of the Lord to it; we swear by the Lord; this is the
thing here, that makes this Covenant the Covenant of the Lord; the King of
Babylon made Zedekiah King of Jerusalem swear by the Lord. And it is more the
Covenant of the Lord, when the King is Religious, and the thing commanded of
the Lord which we are bound to obey, though we had never sworn it: Therefore it
must stand, once entered into, lest we make enquiry after Vows, and so destroy
that which is holy.

Now for further clearing ot the words consider, 1 st. That in Deuteronomy. 23.21. you
may see, how much the Lord counts an Oath binding, When thou shall vow a Vow
unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; for it will be sin to
thee not to perform it; but if thou shall forbear to Vow, it shall be no sin in
thee. Numb. 30. The Lord gives out Laws to Moses for Vows, and will have them
declared, v. 2. If a Man vow a Vow to the Lord, or swear an Oath, to bind his
Soul, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds
out of his mouth. The Scripture is very full, so that a Man once engaged in
Duty, if he break, the Vengeance of God shall be upon him.

2 dly. The Inviolableness of the Oath of God, is founded upon the Law of
Nature and Nations. Wherefore is it that there is such an Order in Ordinances
to swear by the Name of the Lord? Is it not for this, think you, to make the
Thing stand sure? For the very Law of Nature teaches, That if a Man swear, he
must swear by his God, and must keep it; and in like manner the Law of Nations
for the Matter of Offensive and Defensive Arms, and as to the Matter of
Cessation and Peace. Is not all this to hold out, that they design to secure
themselves by interponing the Name of God to it? Now once allow this, that Men
may retract and break Covenant with God, then we break the Law of Nature and
Nations too: and so there is not a Nation under the Sun secure, because the way
of continuing Peace (which is by the Name of the Lord being interpon'd) is
broken, so that neither the Law of Nature or Nations (if it be broken) can
stand; if that be granted, then it may be retracted.

The 3d Confirmation for the Truth of this Doctrine; The Lord himself in his
Word has declared a Man's tender keeping of the Covenant, Vow or Oath, that it
is exceedingly well pleasing to him; and that he has declared such a Man
blessed, Ps. 15.1. compared with the last words of the 4th Verse, Who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? Would not any Man think they are foolish that would not
dwell in Heaven? Then look through, He shall dwell that swears to his own
hurt and changes not. A Body that swears any thing, must keep it though it be
to his hurt.

The 4th Thing for Confirmation of the Doctrine, as to the inviolableness of
the Oath of God, it appears and is established, as the Lord has commanded the
thing in his Word, and as it is founded upon the Law of Nature and Nations, and
has the Promises; so the Lord has appeared an eminent Revenger upon the
Breakers of this Oath and Covenant; that is to say, when Folk has taken a
Lawful Covenant upon them and has broken it, God will appear eminently in
sending Plagues upon them. And for proving this, we are not here to speak of
the Covenant given upon Mount Sinai, of which see the Ten Commands, how he
threatens eminently to punish the Breakers thereof; or for not receiving Christ
offered in the Gospel Covenant, without Question he punishes his People for
the Breach thereof; but we mean these Oaths and Covenants we enter into,
whether they be commanded or not; yet once being entered into we must keep them,
or else he will punish us, as is clear from these three following Instances.

The first Instance you have Jos: 9. compared with 2 Samuel: 21. where it will be
found clearly, that the Covenant being broken by Saul, many Generations after
it was made, he and his House and the People must be eminently punished for the
Breach of it, by three years Famine: For the Princes and all the People of
Israel are said to have sworn to the Gibeonites, (wherein many a black Face was
seen among them) now this Covenant was merely Civil, and the Oath could not be
very well warranted, but yet when it was made, it was binding.

2 d Instance to prove the Judgments on them, etc. Consider Jer. 34.8, etc.
where you read, after the People had broken the covenant they had made with the
Servants, whom they had liberated, and yet brought them into Bondage
afterward; that the Lord says, Since you have done so, I proclaim a liberty
for you, etc. that is, I shall pay you home in your own Coin, I will proclaim a
Liberty to you for the Sword, Pestilence and Famine.

3 d Instance is in that place of the Text, Shall he break and shall he escape,
says the Lord? Though the Oath was given to an Usurper, and Zedekiah being his
Prisoner at the time, yet it was required at his hand. I shall say no more to
it, but consider how Covenant-breaches are reckoned among the Deeds of the
flesh, Romans 1.31. 2 Timothy 3.3. without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers. And, also I read of the great War betwixt the Turks and Christians,
the Christians entering into Covenant with the Turks, the Pope gives the
Christians a Dispensation to break it before the day come: Upon this Vladislaus
the King of Hungary came forth against Amurath, and when he came to the Field,
he did first beat the Turks; then Amurath having the Covenant in his bosom,
took it out, and lift up his eyes and said, If thou, crucified Christ, be a God
as the Christians profess thee to be, then take vengeance on them for this
broken Covenant, and for the wrongs they have done to me. And presently the
Turks fell upon the Christians, and gave them a fatal Stroke, and gained the
day, notwithstanding the Christians had scattered them before. A most
remarkable Instance; this, I think, except People be more than curious, will
satisfy them.

From all which you may see, that the inviolableness of Oaths and Covenants is
founded upon the Law of Nature and Nations; and Scripture and History is clear
for it, that Covenants cannot be broken, except Folk resolve to meet with the
Deluge of God's Wrath.

For Use of this, 1. If it be so, that the Oath and Covenant of God once
engaged into, cannot be broken, then let no Man despise the Oath and Covenant
of God; let Folk be endeavoring to secure themselves in this Truth, according
to the Word of God.

2. If it be so, then know this, that all who venture on the Breach of it, do
sin against the Lord, against Precept, Promises, Law of Nature and Nations, and
against Threatenings.

3. Since it is so, that every one does sin that makes void the Covenant of God,
then let all that are under that Sin expect, that the Wrath and Vengeance of
God will be upon them, which is the second thing in the Text; because of my
Oath and Covenant which he has despised, I will recompense it upon his own
head. Understand now what I have been saying, and what I am driving at, lest it
be to you as the Similitude in the preceding Verses was to this People: For I
declare plainly to you, That these three Kingdoms have despised the Oath and
Covenant of God; and therefore according to the Word of God these 3 Kingdoms
are to expect his dreadful Wrath and Vengeance, if he in Mercy prevent it not;
let no Man or Woman be ignorant of these things afterward; remember I have told
you that it shall be so.

But now I shall speak to some things which Folk may have for excusing
themselves about the Solemn League and Covenant: and for understanding of them,
consider, the Parliament of Scotland, England and Ireland entered into a
Covenant for maintaining the Word of God and the Purity thereof, and putting
away Prophanity; and engaged themselves against Schism, Heresy, Error, Popery
and Prelacy; and there was an Oath of God taken for this End upon us; and our
King took it at his Coronation; this Oath again is broken by our King and
Parliament, and is despised: For which, according to the Word of God, Wrath
will be upon the heads of these that have broken it, if God do not mercifully
prevent it.

Now there are many that have many Excuses and many Objections about this
Solemn League and Covenant; I shall therefore speak to some of them, and I take
you to record this day, I intend not to preach Rebellion against King or
Parliament, but according to the Word of God: and if it be Rebellion, we must
take our hazard of it.

Objection 1. We are not bound to a Covenant and Oath which is not Lawful, etc.
but this is such. Ergo. Prob. Minor. Because it wanted the Consent of the King
the Supreme Magistrate. Ergo. I dare say, many of you have this Objection,
which is no Ground for it; but to strengthen your Argument, look Numbers 30,
compare 3d and 5th Verses; the Argument runs thus: The Subjects of a Land
taking upon them to covenant with God, they can do no more in it than a Woman
in her Father's House, etc. but so is it with these Lands: For seeing the King
who is Supreme, did disallow it, therefore it is not binding.

Answer I. The Place alleged does not speak directly to the thing; for though
the King be a Civil Parent, he is not a Natural Parent.

II. This Place cannot be alleged to prove the thing; for the Matter is only
spoken of a Woman in her Father's House, or subject to her Husband, etc. It is
true that a Parent or Husband may disannul her Vows, being made without his
Consent anent these things, wherein she is subject to her Parent or to her
Husband; but that Place does speak nothing of annulling the Man's Vow or the
Widows, as verse. 2. for their Vows must stand.

III. God makes no Exception here but this first; and therefore it must stand.
Will any of you who has this Argument say, that the King's taking or not taking
the Covenant made the Covenant Lawful or Unlawful? Yet, though the King was not
consenting to it, (which I will not grant, for there was at that time a Power
for it; I will not take upon me to dispute the Power that Parliaments have
without a King, it is far above my hand, yet I say) the Parliament has Power to
put Folk to Duty, nill they, will they.

IV. For making the Covenant valid and lawful, something may be added to it
afterward, though not at the present time, (yet seeing it is afterward added,
it is enough) but so was it with our Covenant, there was a frequent Consent
given to it by our King; and also it was subscribed by him, which is sufficient
to make our Vows stand. Numb. 30. we see, if a Husband or Parent hold their
Peace when they heard a Woman vow, the Vow did stand; much more if the Husband
or Parent take the Vow upon themselves. I know no shadow imaginable of Excuse
for them, the Word of God, which stands sure, makes against them: and since it
is so, our King and Parliament cannot retract what they have done.

Objection 2 d. Some will say, there is no Man but knows that the King has
taken the Covenant, for it was not done in a Corner* but he may break, because
he was forced to it, and he was not absolut^ly free.

Answ: I. We did not hear tell of this before now; if any Man would have said
at that time, that he was constrained to take it, he would be counted a very
uncharitable Constructer.

II. Suppose that he was not free, which I will never grant, and ^^ppose he was
forced to the Oath, yet Scripture makes it out, that a Man's Swearing, though
he was not free, must stand to it; Though it was ^^t a spontaneous Act, yet at
was a most voluntary Act. Again, Consider this in Zedekiah, he was a Captive,
to whom? To a Heathen: (now no Man will say a Captive is a free Man, and a
liberate Man) yet he swearing to the King of Babylon a Heathen, and breaking
his Oath afterward, God's Vengeance came upon him, for there is no dallying
with God in these Matters; for all Casuists say, If a Man swear to a Robber to
give him so much to spare his Life, he must keep his Oath, if it be in his
power, though it be to his hurt. I shall say no more on this, but I am hopeful,
if you will receive the Word in Love, ye shall have wherewith to answer your
Adversaries in the Gate.

Objection 3 d. The solemn League and Covenant must be broken, because we are
not bound to keep with them that brake to us first: but it is so betwixt Us and
England. Ergo. Ans: Is there not many make this Objection, which, I dare say,
never read the Covenant: Thou poor blind Creature, how dare thou speak of it?
These that will say so, it seems they never understood the League and Covenant,
because it is not a Bargain betwixt two Parties on Earth, the one whereof
breaking, the other is free; but these 3 Lands is one Party, and the God of
Heaven is the other Party; therefore, though England should break, should
Scotland break also the Covenant? It is not after this Tenor; We will endeavor
Reformation in these Lands, but if you break, we will break also: No, it is each
Man swearing for himself, that he shall in his Place and Station endeavor
Reformation; so that if it were left all to one Man, he must endeavor
Reformation. For, consider the last words of the Article, each of them for
themselves did lift up their hands to the Most High; and so these 3 Lands are
one Party, and the other Party is the God of Heaven. Consider seriously upon
it; for it is the thing you must either suffer for or sin, ere it be long
without Remedy. Whatever England and Ireland have done in breaking the
Covenant, we say, they justly must smart for it, according to the Word of God,
if God in mercy prevent it not: nevertheless as long as there is in these Lands
any who keep the Covenant, we are bound to keep it; and suppose there are many
who had rather suffer for it than sin, as Witness the many scattered Flocks and
Shepherds in these Lands; and supposing this were not, though both England and
Ireland should ^uite it, yet Scotland is bound to it.

Objection 4 th. We swear in the League and Covenant to that which is
impossible and therefore it cannot be kept.

Answ^^. If all these 3 Kingdoms, who have taken the Oath upon them, would
^incerely stand to it, I hope there should be no need to stand out agai^^t it.
The Objection is in this, We have sworn to reform England; no^ for Answer, We
are not sworn to reform England, neither is England ^worn to reform Scotland;
but that which is sworn is this, Each of them are to endeavor in their Places
and Callings the Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government in these Lands, and to reform England, according to the Word of God
and the best Reformed Churches: For though we had never sworn an Oath, we are
bound to promote the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. So that the Objection is
rather out of Malice against the Word of God, than any conscionable Principle;
he is not worth the Name of a Christian, that condemns this, for it is contrary
to the Petition, Thy Kingdom come: So that we should study all Kingdoms
Reformation, that they may become the Kingdoms of our Lord. If the King and
Parliament were studying to reform as much as they are studying to deface and
deform, there should be no need of this Objection.

Objection 5 th. The Covenant which these Kingdoms entered into, as to their own
Reformation, and as to the Reformation of all the rest, it was too rashly and
inconsiderately gone about.

Answer I. I question if any of you who moves the Objection, knows what
Consideration is; was there not Deliberation when there was Protestants and
Remonstrators for the poor Lands? and at last they came to this with it, to
enter into Covenant: wherefore it seems it was not indeliberate.

II. There was more Deliberation in it than many other Oaths in Scripture, and
yet they did stand, as Judges 11.35. the Vow of Jeph^hah when he met his
Daughter, who will deny but that was a rash Oath, to vow whatsoever came out of
his door first, he should offer it up to the God of heaven? And yet it did bind
him, while he says, Alace, my daughter, thou have brought me very low! And
might not his Daughter have said, Father, it is but a rash Vow, break it? Nay,
says he, I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back.

III. To confirm it more, What would you think of a Covenant made between the
People of the Lord and Heathens, and no Counsel sought from the Lord? Jos. 9.
The Covenant is made there with the People of Israel and the Gibeonites; there
you will see a Vow very rashly taken, yea not so much as to seek Counsel from
the Lord; and Israel made Peace with them, The Princes of the Congregation
swore unto them. Now I hope none of you will deny, but God's Counsel was sought
to our Covenants, which was not sought in that Covenant, and yet for the Breach
of it, all the Land did smart, as you may see 2 Samuel 21. Therefore, I conclude,
Though a Covenant be entered into rashly, and want many things for making it
complete, yet opening the Mouth to the Lord, we cannot go back, or else we must
expect the Wrath and Vengeance of God.

Objection 6 th. The Covenant cannot be binding, because the Parties dealt
craftily with us.

Answer I. England is not our Party that we covenanted with, but all the 3
Lands together, as one Party, and God the other Party with whom they covenanted.

II. Consider Josh: 9. and you will find how little weight this Objection has
in Matter of Covenanting: It Is said in the 4 th Verse, They did work wilily,
and went as if they had been Ambassadors, yet Joshua and the Princes entered
into Covenant with them, and when it was broken, the Land of Israel did smart
for it.

Objection 7 th. The Covenant binds us to things that are not particularly set
down, but are so general as keep us in doubt; the Ground whereof is this,
because we swear in general to endeavor the Reformation of England, according
to the best Reformed Churches; but these Churches were not particularly set
down and pitched upon: therefore it cannot stand.

Answer I. If there be any Man that would have a more particular Rule than the
Word of God for Reformation, he must be sent to another Land to seek another
Gospel from Jews or Turks; and if it be so, then there is not a Rule among us.

II. Comparing one part of the Covenant with another, its most particularly set
down and determined; As (1 st.) the Covenant is clear, the Reformation must not
be Popery. (2 dly.) The Bishops, Prelates, Archbishops, Deans, Chapters,
Curates, etc. I say, the Covenant is clear in chief, if it lays aside all these
things; what, I pray you, remains in Debate then? I know nothing, except you
make it either a Presbyterian or Independent Covenant, and at that time
Independency was to be brought to Presbytery; now since they pass by all these
things, I hope the Matter is not left in the dark, as some think it is.

Objection 8 th. Supposing the Covenant binds the Land, yet it binds none but
these that took it.

Answ: Now I perceive there are many of you young and ranting Blades that think
your selves happy Youths, because ye never took the Covenant; But I have a word
to speak to such from the Scriptures, and therefore take it with you: Where
ever a King and the Princes of a Land take a Covenant, the rest of the Land are
bound to it, as you may see in that Covenant with the Gibeonites: The People
there did not swear, yea they murmured against the Oath; but though the People
did not swear, yet the Princes say, We have sworn to the Lord, we cannot touch
them. Therefore do not beguile your selves, ye stand as surely engaged to it as
I or he, who did subscribe it with our hands: Therefore the Breach of it shall
be required at your hands, be you young or old, Men or Women; and therefore
remember the 9. of Joshua, The Children of Israel did not smite them, because
the Princes had sworn the Oath. Might not the People have said, Let them keep
it, who did swear it? But it is not so, for they say, We have all sworn it,
therefore we must not touch them.

Object. 9. Suppose it binds this Generation yet it cannot bind our Posterity.
Answer, This same Generation that did swear it, has broken it, and I fear the
same Generation shall be punished for it. 2 dly. The Covenant does directly
bind all following Generations, That our Children after us be found walking in
Faith and Love, that the Lord may dwell among us; these are the very words of
the Covenant. For what end was these words put in? Was it nor to bind our
Posterity, and to keep Conformity and Unity, and to bind them to the Word of
God? But you will say, There is no mention of the Posterity. Ans. There was no
Mention made of the Posterity of Israel, when the People of Israel made that
Covenant with the Gibeonites, neither was there mention made of the Gibeonites
Posterity, yet you may see the Covenant binding to their Posterity, as is clear
Josh. 9. compared with 2 Samuel 21. so then you must understand, that the
Covenant is absolute; therefore I conclude, that as sure as Sun and Moon
endures in the Firmament, if there be any Generation in these Three Lands, God
will require the Breach of His Covenant at their hands, and his Vengeance shall
be upon them, if they repent not.

Object. 10. The King and Estates of the Land found hurt in keeping it. Ans. Ay
but read Psalm 15.1, 4. He that swears to his hurt and changes not.

Object. 11. There will be eminent Advantages by the breaking of it, Ergo.
Answer. For my self I do not understand any Advantage to these Three Lands
comparable to the Solemn League; this is my Judgment: But will you consider the
Covenant betwixt Joshua and the Gibeonites, it was a Covenant contrary to God's
Command, yet His Name being taken in it, could not he retracted, they dealt
wilily with him, and they sought no Counsel from the Lord, and they were
suspecting it in the mean time, and they knew it within 3 days afterward; yet
because of the Breach of it, though it was broken out of Zeal to the Children
of Israel, yet the People did smart for it by 3 Years Famine, and when it was
broken, it was not the same Generation that broke it; I believe, and set all
the Three Kingdoms Wit together, they will not get as many Excuses for the
Breaches of the Covenant of our Kingdom as Zedekiah had for his Covenant: For
first, his was contrary to God and his People; for he had promised to the
People within 70 Years to be delivered; now the Covenant was, to keep them in
Captivity, and to keep the Kingdom in Subjection. 2 dly. He was a Captive, and
so forced to it. 3 dly. The Covenant was made with a Heathenish King, it was
the direct Intent of the Covenant to make the Kingdom base as it is in the 14
verse, that it might not lift up it self. Now what could have been a greater
Excuse to have broken the Covenant, than for him to have said, I cannot keep
this Covenant because I will prove false to my People, for I was a Captive when
he made me swear, etc? Therefore might he say, I will break it: But says God,
It is my Covenant, therefore I will recompense it upon his own head. And
therefore I conclude, That whoever enters into Covenant, be what he will,
especially when he is commanded, he must keep it: For he that breaks it, God's
Vengeance shall be upon him. Now seeing it is so, we are to expect, he will
avenge his Broken Covenant upon these Lands, according to His Word.

Now the next thing in the Text is, That the Breakers of Covenant with God, God
will recompense it upon their own heads; this is the words of the Text, My Oath
that he has despised, etc. Now to clear it to you, who they are that are
Despisers of the Covenant; consider, First. That it is a Covenanter in Opinion
and not in Practice, that is to say, There is not a Man that reforms not in his
heart according to the Covenant, but he is a Breaker of the same; for this is
the Articles of the Covenant. Therefore know assuredly, O ye Drunkards,
Adulterers, Despisers of Ordinances, and the People of God, Sabbath Breakers,
Covetous Persons and Civilians, who care for no more than an outward
Profession; if ye be not endeavoring Reformation, and to keep the Covenant,
God's Vengeance shall be upon you. Indeed we will hear many Folk who pretend to
keep the Covenant: But they will let an Oath flee when they like, thou by so
doing art a good Keeper of the Covenant indeed, thou art guilty before God, for
thou never Covenanted in Heart and Affection.

2 dly. All those despise the Covenant that care not for it; for there is no
Indifferency here: Therefore all the Three Kingdoms may expect Wrath from the
Lord, except they repent.

3 dly. These are Despisers of the Covenant, who are Fathers of Lies and
Seditions, and find out Shifts to shun it; but whoever they be that are seeking
Wiles to be freed of the Covenant, whether King or Parliament, God will send
Vengeance on them. We are not here to Preach Rebellion or Treason, but what we
shall warrant from the Lord's Word. Zedekiah was a King, and yet you find
Vengeance came upon him; and so did it upon Readiness House and Posterity for his
Breach of Covenant; therefore let all take head to it.

But what would you have us to do, say ye? 1 st. Consider what Case these Lands
stand in? And what it is they ly under? Is it not the Breach of Covenant? and
the Judgment of God will come upon them, if he in mercy prevent it not: Because
we have sworn the Covenant, and broken it; therefore God has sworn, That we
shall not prosper. O! Is there none among the Tribes of Israel, to lament these
things this day, this sad Condition of these Three Lands, that they are guilty
of breach of Covenant, and are under the threatening of most severe Judgments!
Will you then bewail it, if you have any tenderness of heart, each Man for
himself and for his Family. I know some Folk will say, Let it even be so, for
we will never lift it up again; but of this afterward, now I would entreat you
to beware of partaking of other Men's Sins, lest ye partake of their Plagues and
Judgments. Will thou Vote with the King in Parliament to sin? then thou must
Vote for Judgments. And I shall only say this, Endeavor to cover your selves
now, with that which you would cover your selves with at the Day of Judgment.
There will never a Man come in and say, The King must answer for me; no, no,
the King must answer for himself. If you be not studying to keep these things,
the Covering will be too narrow for you that Day. Again I would advise you to
lay your thoughts aside from getting much of the World, but see if ye can get
this that is in Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few Names, even in Sardis which have not
defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white; for they are
worthy. It was a time then of great Defection, and these of them that continued
steadfast, were as Signs and Wonders. O then walk now as you would desire to
walk afterward! for surely these that ly down with sin unpardoned in the Grave,
must resolve to ly in an eternal Bed of sorrow; and these that keep themselves
clean, shall walk with the Lamb in white.

Now a word to that which I mentioned before, What shall we do, since these
Lands have broken Covenant with God? I tell you that Scotland is bound to keep
it, although England and Ireland have broken it; and although Scotland broke, yet
Ireland and England are bound to stand to it. Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel
play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend; that is to say. As for you at this
present time, though England and Ireland have broken, yet let not Scotland do
so too. Suppose, there were but one Family in these Lands that would stand to
it, and if all that Family should turn their back upon it except one Person;
truly that Person is bound to stand to it, Josh. 24.15. Choose you whom you
will serve; but as for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. Here is but a
Family; so that if all the Kingdom should forswear the Covenant, yet so long as
I am Master of a Family, I must serve the Lord, I must not serve other gods,
that is to say, We should not serve Popes nor Prelates, etc.

But what if it come to this, That there be no Man to bide by it at all but one
Man? That Man is bound to keep it according to Scripture, read 1 Kings 19.14. I
have been very jealous, etc. from which I conclude according to the Scriptures,
though England has forsaken, yet Scotland is bound; and though Scotland should
forsake, yet England is bound; and though both should forsake, yet one Family is
bound to stand to it. Therefore study to know your Duty, lest the Wrath of God
come upon you and your Posterity; believe these things, for our King and
Princes, Nobles and Ministers, and all the People, and our Posterity, is bound
to it: So I leave it to you with this word, Happy is that Man that shall be
steadfast in the Covenant, though all the rest should forsake it. But as to the
Persons who they are that shall continue steadfast, God has reserved that to
himself as a piece of his Sovereignty. Again, we hear not tell of a Public
Covenant ever sworn and broken, but God visibly plagued the Breakers thereof.
There is no sin God would have Folk laying more to heart than the Breach of
Covenant: As I live says the Lord, surely mine Oath that he has despised, and
my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.
God uses not to trust Folk long, that break Covenant, without some visible
Stroke, as it was in Readiness Days and Zedekiah's. If you would have a Mark upon
your Foreheads, and be kept free from these things, be sighing for the
Abominations of these Lands, Ezekiel. 9. Woe to the Man that is rejoicing at this
day. Is there no Family found sighing for these thing? if not, all the World
shall hear tell of their Punishment. This we recommend to you, and do not say,
that we did not give you warning: For we have told you this from the Word of
the Lord, therefore receive it in love.

As for my self, I know not what I may do, yet though I should shrink from the
Faith by my weakness, which God forbid, I ofttimes remember the words of
Nehemiah and Jeremiah when they did testify against the People's sins; and I do
Protest against the Breach of Covenant, that I may not be made accessory to
other Folks sins, and lest I be found guilty before the Lord, and be made
Partaker of other Men's Judgments. This is the way, that the Prophets did use;
this is no Rebellion or Treson: For if they think it Rebellion or Treason, and
think it Censurable, I commit them to the Prophets who are gone to their Place,
who did these things; and first punish them and then me. I commit all their
things to you, Lord engrave them on your Hearts, Amen.

FINIS.

