July. 3. 1696. Mr Biship. 6d.

Mr. GARDINER's Thanksgiving-SERMON Preached at St. Michaels-Crooked-Lane,
April 16th 1696.

A Thanksgiving-SERMON Preached at St. Michaels Crooked-Lane, April 16th. 1696.

Upon Occasion of His MAJESTY'S Deliverance From the Late Intended
Assassination of His SACRED PERSON, In Order to a FRENCH INVASION.

By JAMES GARDENER, Rector of the said Parish.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, MDCXCVI.

A Thanksgiving-SERMON.
2 TIMOTHY 3 Chap. ver. 1. and beginning of the 4th. 1 This know also, that in the
last Days, perilous times shall come; for men shall be

4 Traitors, etc. --


A Time ( Solomon says there is) to be Silent, and a Time to Speak; such an One
is this that now offers it self upon the Happy Discovery of the late Barbarous
Plot designed against His Majesty's Sacred Life, in Order to a French Invasion.
(Of the Truth and Reality of which, the flying of some from Justice; the very
extenuating and mincing of Matters by others at their Trials; and their
Voluntary Confessions in their Papers delivered with their own Hands
immediately before they were turned off, and went to their Place are full
Evidence, and irrefragable Arguments; and must satisfy all the World, except
such Miscreants that want Demonstration from the accursed Deed; from which Good
Lord deliver us.) Which has so much of Horror, and Villainy in it, that should
we now be Dumb, and not open our Mouths in an utter detestation of it, the
Stone out of the Wall would cry out against such an Irreligious Silence, and
the Beam out of the Timber would answer it.

It Is a Sign that the World is a dangerous place to live in, and almost at an
End, not far from the Gates of Death, when we see so many Gray Hairs (the
Messengers of an approaching Dissolution) upon her. My meaning is, when Men
shall be Traitors. This know also that in the last days, perilous Times shall
come; for men shall be -- Traitors.

You Will pardon me if I be not over-methodical to Day, or do not speak so closely
to the Text as I ought to have done at another Time; my design being only this
at present, viz. to draw you out a short Figure of those Miseries which would
infallibly have attended this Cursed Conspiracy had it taken effect; and to
hint in two or three Particulars what we are all obliged to (for the day is too
little for the day to acquaint you with the whole of your Duty) upon the
Receipt of such Favors, of such a Deliverance as this; that can be compared to
nothing but it self, and may have many Deliverances in it which we know not of.

When Sixtus Quintus began his Encomiastical Oration of the Jacobine that
killed the French King, it was with the Words of the Prophet Habakkuk; Chap.
1.5.
Behold a work wrought in your days, you will not believe it when it shall be
told you; a poor Friar has slain the great King of France. Such another piece
of Work should have been done in Our Days, and I make no Question but we should
have had such kind of Speeches made too in Defense of it, and the Divine
Providence Magnified in it also. But thanks be to GOD (who is wonderful in
Counsel and excellent in working) he has done another work, in which with open
Face we may behold his Glory: Behold! what Prevention of Desolation he has
wrought in the Land! for nothing Less could have been expected from such
Conspirators: Men that neither fear GOD nor Reverence Man; Men of such
debauched Principles; (to whom it is as Natural to hate and Kill Princes as to
Eat their GOD) Men of such Desperate Fortunes, or, which is worse of the two,
Plentiful Ones.

What Flesh does not tremble to think what would have followed upon the Kings
Death, or a French Invasion! Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of Smoke! The
Confused Noise of the Warrior; and Garments rolled in Blood. The Mother dashed
in pieces upon the Children: No Reverence to the Person of the Aged, nor pity
to the sucking Babe. The whole Body of the Clergy (to be sure of it) either
Banished or Sacrificed: the Church destroyed, and her Lands Escheated to pay
all the Charges of the Plot, etc. All Laws overlaid, and stifled: The Nobility,
and Gentry rooted out, and all their Possessions given to his Own Soldiers;
(nothing remaining to their Heirs after them but Poverty; which is a sure
Inheritance, and can neither be plundered, nor forfeited;) forcing them
notwithstanding to hold it under them as their Salves and Vassals. Hear his
Language. -- Thy Silver and Gold is mine, thy Women and Fair Children. And if
any thing be denied, -- The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the Dust of
thy Land be sufficient for my People, every man to take an handful. Not a
Remnant to be saved; not a Berry here and there in the utmost Boughs.

In short; the Consequence would have been, a French Government, and French
Popery; the Yoke of which is neither easy, nor the Burden light; which if not
complied with would have forced us to the Galleys, or to be Martyrs or
Refugees. These would have been the Favors and the Graces that our Three
Kingdoms had been crowned and blessed withal had the designs of our Foreign
Enemies, and our False Brethren within our Selves, (Good God! that ever there
should be in a certain Island of the World such Devils in Humane shape!) had
their designs I say succeeded.

But to the Lord our GOD belong the Issues from Death. Come, and behold his
Works of Mercy, and Deliverance: See them, touch them, handle them; they are
not Spirits, Fancies, Speculations; they are true Bodies, and have the flesh
and bones of real Works. Just when the Arrow was upon the String, and the
down-lookt Rebels, men skilful to destroy, had prepared the Instruments of
Death, and marked out the very Place where to Fire His Majesty out of his Life;
when the Decree was Signed by a Kings Letters, and they said, the days of
Mourning are come, come let us Kill the Spark, (for we will not have this Man
to Rule over us;) and subvert his Kingdom, that his Name may be had no more in
Remembrance; then it was that He scattered the Proud in the Imagination of
their Hearts; and so disappointed their Devices that their Hands could not
perform their Enterprise: The Wicked is snared in the work of his own hands,
Higgaion, Selah; Mark, and Meditate. This is the Lord's Doing, and it is
mavelous in our Eyes. Da Veniam Imperator; Pardon me, (Great Sir) It was not
Flesh and Blood that Revealed this Mystery of Iniquity unto you, but Your
Father, and Savior which is in Heaven.

Happy art thou, O England, who is like unto Thee saved by the Lord? Thine
Enemies are found Liars unto thee. The Snare is broken, and we are delivered;
their Machinations are unravelled into Folly, and Shame and Dishonor are their
last promotion. They are hurled out of the Land of the Living as out of the
midst of a Sling; and are perished in their own Corruption, and have consulted
Shame to their Houses. The Mischief is returned upon their own Heads, and the
wicked are silent in Darkness, and we are sure that the Judgment of GOD is
according to Truth against those which commit such Things.

Oh the Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! How
unsearchable are his Mercies as well as his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out! Of a Truth the Lord has not forsaken the Earth. Hear O Atheist;
perceive, and understand and be Converted: The Lord GOD of Gods he knows; his
Eyes behold, and his Eyelids consider: He narrowly observed all their
Thoughts, and watched their Motions when they wafted over into France, and
conferred at Versailles and St. Germains: He marked the hissing of the Be of
Assure to the Fly of Egypt; all the Intelligence, I mean, that passed betwixt a
discontented Party amongst us and an Unworthy Monarch, (whose Character will be
infamous to the End of the World, as he is now the Scandal of his Age for this
last Unnatural Conspiracy, notwithstanding his Manifesto's, and Fulsome
Gazettes, and the Industry of all his Ministers abroad to persuade the World,
which no body will believe, of His and some Bodies else pretended Innocence,
and that They knew nothing of the Matter,) and the Mischiefs which they
designed for others, like overcharged Pieces has recoyl'd upon themselves;
their own Counsel has cast them down. So true is the Observation of the
Historian, Livy.
Consilia callida prima specie laeta, tractatu dura, eventu tristia;
Treacherous Counsels are kindled with many sparkling Hopes, with great
difficulty preserved and kept in, and go out in as much Stench and Danger. Thus
has GOD made the Wrath of Man (as well as do their Virtues and Graces) to
praise him; and the remainder of Wrath he will restrain. The LXX in their
Translation have wittily expressed the last words; the Remainder of Wrath, (...),
shall keep Holy Day unto thee; i. e. shall rest from its Labor, shall be so
curbed and bound up as never more to break out, but give his People opportunity
to Land and Magnisy his Glorious Name. Which naturally leads me to the
Consideration of some few things which this Grand Deliverance of ours does more
especially oblige us all unto; which I shall do with that freedom and plainness
that becomes the Place I now stand in. And

First, Let not the Horror of the intended Mischiefs chill the just Triumph of
the Day; but let us be affected with, and raise an Altar of Praise, and
Thanksgiving to the Known GOD for this so seasonable but unexpected Mercy.
What, think we, can be the design of it, but that we should talk of his
Loving Kindness in the Morning, and of his Faithfulness every Night; and make
known to the Sons of Men his Mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of his
Kingdom? Awake, awake Deborah, and arise Barac the Son of Ahinoam. Glory and
Honor and Thanks to him that sits on the Throne; Hallelujah! For the Lord
Omnipotent Reigns. Nature it self (if there was no Bible) reads us a Lecture
and prompts us to this Duty. Hear one of her High Priests. Senec. de Benef.
lib. 3. cap. 1.
Ingratus est, qui Beneficium accepisse se negat, quod accepit; ingratus est
qui dissimulat; ingratus qui non reddit; ingratissimus Omnium qui oblitus est.
That Man is ungrateful that denies a Benefit received, and so is He that
dissembles it, nor is he any better that does not requite it, but he is most of
all that has forgot it. GOD by no means will admit that his Mercies should be
writ in Sand to be washed away by the next coming in of the Tide; but expects
they should be thankfully had in remembrance. Let us not therefore look upon
Public Mercies as we do upon Public Duties, That which is Every man's work is
no man's; but let us rejoice in the Good of GOD's Chosen, and glory with his
Inheritance: And since this bitter Cup is past from us, let us take the Cup of
Salvation, and praise the Name of the Lord. This is a Day wherein Praises
should wait for him; Tibi silet Laus, Pagnine renders it; Praise is silent to
Thee O GOD in Sion; such a Throng of Praises and so great that they were
unutterable; and therefore silent praise. (as we say of Cares, Leres Loquuntur,
ingentes stupent.) Yet supposing they should be more than we can express, we
ought however to endeavor to express them to GOD as well as we can; And we do
it in the best manner when we walk answerably to such Loving Kindness. The
Riches of Gods Goodness should lead us to Repentance, and a Pious Improvement
of them: this is the way to hallow his Name, and not only to preserve his
Mercies, but to Praise him into greater. But Fatal it would prove, if we should
count that we are delivered to commit Abominations: This will cause GOD to be
weary of us, and as he has done great Things for us, so to do great Things
against us; to let loose our Enemies upon us again, and to suffer them to
strike us home, to execute their Malice, and quench the Light of our Israel.

When Joshua aggravates the Sin of Achan he seems to play the Herald; Jos. 7.1.
for we are told that Achan was the Son of Carmi, the Son of Zabdi, the Son of
Zerah, of the Tribe of Judah. Had Achan been a poor ignorant Heathen, his Sin,
even in these lower Circumstances, would have incensed the Wrath of the
Almighty, and have pulled down Judgment upon him: But Achan that was a Jew, and
that no mean Jew, but of the Royal Tribe of Judah, and descended from such
Noble Progenitors as Carmi, Zabdi, and Zerah; for him to commit a Trespass of
this Nature, his Privileges and Advantages exceedingly aggravated his Sin, and
rendered him obnoxious to a double punishment which were both inflicted, as you
may read at your Leisure. To apply this to our selves; If we who call our
selves Members of the best Church in the World, and comparing our selves with
other Nations and Churches Experience the Portion of our Mercies to be like
that of the Firstborn, double to what they have at any time enjoyed; if
therefore We, who have received much, instead of loving much, provoke him by
our Iniquities, what can we expect but that he will pour out upon us the
abundance of his Fury? You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth
(certainly that People must be blessed indeed that could thus call him their
Lord and their GOD; no, very far from it;) therefore will I visit upon you all
your Iniquities.

Strange Punishment, says Job, Chap. 31.3. is to the Workers of Iniquity; i. e.
extraordinary, and unusual. That We have and continue to be such, is too
notorious to be denied: Yet instead of Strange Punishment inflicted, We have
had Strange Mercy conferred upon us: But let us not mistake our selves, the
Word of GOD threatened still remains true, and shall do so for ever; and
therefore, though he has shown his Prerogative at this time in the dispensation
of his Mercy toward us, and suffered himself to except us from the General
Rule by Proclaiming his Name, the Lord, the Lord Gracious, and Merciful,
abundant in Goodness; Yet if we abuse this his Mercy, this so great Salvation
it will be bitterness in the Latter End; Judgment without Mercy.

Secondly, May we all, by this happy Deliverance, be provoked to Unity and
Peace. We are delivered from being devoured by our Enemies, and shall we be our
own destroyers? It was Barbarous in the Priests of Baal to cut and slash
themselves, but much worse it is in us to cut, and Slash one another. Let us
learn this Wisdom I beg of you, of our Adversaries, since there is One Soul,
and Spirit possesses them to ruin us; to Love and Unite (that is the best
Association) for mutual Safety. GOD has in Mercy, it is true, diverted the Blow
at present; but it is as true that only the Power of our Enemies is abated, not
their Malice and Bloody Minds, not their Pride, or their Expectations. We need
not a Prophet to tell us what is spoken in the King of Syria's Bedchamber. They
stick not yet to say, They shall have a day for it; and if it should not happen
in their Time, they have provided that their Malice may survive themselves,
(thus one Depth will call for another;) and their Children after them are to
imbibe their Sour, poisonous Principles, and revenge their Quarrel. Like the
plodding Spaniard at his game of Chess, who having not Success, or Time to give
Check etc. leaves it to be played out by his Successor. But what need they to
be so very earnest and hot? Let us but alone, and we shall destroy our selves
by our Differences and Divisions; and it is a wounding reflection to consider
that Men should not see it plainly, but cause Schisms and Factions, and pursue
them too on purpose to make our Ruin unavoidable.

If therefore we are sensible how Industrious, Politic, and numerous our
Enemies are, in whose Heart still it is to destroy and cut off Nations not a
few; If we have any Sense of the Dangers that our Divisions, and Animosities
may bring upon us; (which next to Apostasy from GOD have always proved fatal to
a Church, or Nation;) If we have any Honor, or Respect for our Country, our
Religion, or Posterity; (and GOD forgive them that have not) let these be
perswasives to Unity and Peace. Let all petty Interests and Bones of Contention
be sacrificed to the Public Benefit; and though it is an Unhappiness at
present that we cannot syncretize in the Minutes of Religion and Worship; yet
ought not this to prevent our being Publick-spirited, or that we should not
labor after the things that make for Peace: And was this but heartily once put
in Practice, I doubt not in the least but, through the Blessing of GOD, and the
Prudence and Goodness of our Governors, but the effect would be the Security
of the King, Church and State, maugre all the Attempts and Designs of Our
Adversaries.

Thirdly, Let this Discovery be a Warning how we engage in Factions and
Conspiracies. Our Business (my Brethren) is to be Quiet and Governable; and not
to fill our Noddles with Politic Whimsies, or interest our selves with men of
Roving Heads, and unsettled Minds: who cannot tell themselves nor any body else
for them what they would have but are restless and uneasy in all Reigns. Such
Conversation is infectious; it makes men Peevish, and Proud, etc. (with the
froward men will learn frowardness;) and unawares draws them into Plots and
Rebellion; and what the Consequence of that is let the Tree speak. For what
Suetonius reports of such as stabbed Julius Caesar is generally true of all
Traitors, Ne quisquam sua morte defunctus est, not one of them died a Natural
Death, or went down to his Grave in Peace. And the reason why a Sevenfold
Vengeance was threatened more upon him that should kill Cain, than was upon Cain
himself though a bloody Fratricide, by some is thought to be this, because Cain
was a Prince, and being eldest Son to Adam was Heir apparent to the Crown of
the whole World.

The Sum of all is thus much: All Treacherous Plots are founded in a deep
Malice, and Ambition; upheld for a time by Large Expense and vain Confidence,
and end in an unexpected discovery, a just Punishment, and perpetual Infamy. My
Son therefore, fear thou the Lord and the King and meddle not with those that
are given to Change: And let us all put up the Church Prayer, which is not to
be found in any of the Roman Missals, that from all Sedition, Privy Conspiracy
and Rebellion GOD would deliver us.

Fourthly, Let this Deliverance oblige us to put our future Trust in GOD; and
to place our Confidence in Him that raises the Dead, from whence in a Figure
we have been raised. This is our meet, right and our bounden Duty; nay whither
would our Reason direct us but unto that GOD whom we have found a very present
Help in Trouble, and from whom comes every good and perfect Gift: Who can no
more suffer a change in his Mercy then in Himself, but is yesterday, to day and
the same for ever. Fear not then Thou Worm Jacob, fear not then little Flock;
if the Wolves assault thee, rely upon thy experienced Keeper that neither
slumbers nor sleeps; if the clashing of Armor, or the Threats of the Proud
affright thee, trust thy self and Cause to the Lord of Hosts who does great
things and unsearchable, mavelous things without Number; and has promised to
be a Sun and a Shield to them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. A Shield to
defend, and a Sun to extinguish the fire of the Adversaries Fury by shining
upon it. In short they that know his Name (and Nature) will put their Trust in
him; for the Lord never forsakes them that seek him.

Lastly, Let us pray to GOD for His Majesty King William (in whose Life all our
dearest Interests are bound up, and of whom we trust he has Sworn by his
Holiness that he will never fail him) that as he has now wonderfully preserved
Him that was appointed to die, so He would still keep him as the Apple of an
Eye, and hide him under his Feathers, and suffer no Weapon formed against him
to prosper: That he would Crown his Arms with Victory and Success; that at last
he may have rest from all his Enemies on every side, and leisure to pass his
Old Age in comfort and safety, serving that GOD without Distraction whose
Mercies all along have been so eminent toward him; and then be received up
into Glory. Which GOD of his Infinite Mercy Grant, etc.

FINIS.
Sermons New Published, and Sold by B. Aylmer in Cornhil.
THE Bishop of Gloucester's Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Lords, at
Westminster-Abby, April, 16th. 1696. Mr. Stephens of Sutton in Surrey his
Thanksgiving Sermon, Preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Bow-Church;
April the 16th. Mr. Showers his Thanksgiving Sermon, also upon the 16th. of
April. Mr. Strypes of Low-Layton his Thanksgiving Sermon, the same day.

