IMPRIMATUR, Robert Grove.

THE CHRISTIANS Labor and Reward; OR, A SERMON, Part of which was Preached at
the Funeral of the Right Honorable the Lady Mary Vere, Relict of Sir Horace
Vere, Baron of Tilbury, on the 10th of January, 1671. At Castle Heviningham in
Essex.

The memory of the Just is Blessed, Prove. 10.7. By humility and the fear of the
Lord, are Riches, Honor, and Life, Prove. 22. ver. 14. By William Gurnall, M.
A. of Emman. Coll. now Pastor of Lavenham, Suffolk.

Nobilis genere, sed multo nobilior Sanctitate, Hieron. Epitaph Paulae Matris,
Ep. 27. LONDON, printed by J. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the Piazzo
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1672.

TO THE Right Honorable Lady ELIZABETH, Countess Dowager of Clare.
MADAM,
IT was a very merciful Providence, which brought your Honor to your dear
Mothers assistance, in her dying sickness; by which, as you had the pleasure of
recreating her Spirit with your presence, and of giving an high Demonstration
of your Piety to her, in her low and weak state of body (a virtue of great
price with God, and remarkably rewarded by him, even in this life) So also the
happiness of being an eye witness to her Christian Deportment, in her sharpest
Pains and Agonies; how her Faith and Patience triumphed over them all; which,
no doubt, did much sweeten the sorrow, that her outward distress, inflicted
upon your tender Heart. And, indeed, it is no wonder so holy a Life, should
have so Happy an end. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end
of that man is Peace. This Precious Saint had made her Bed, before she was to
lie down on it. Long had she been gathering these Spices (Graces I mean) for
her dying Nest; in the sweet Odours of which, she at last so Holily, and
Peaceably, breathed forth her Gracious Soul, into the Arms of her beloved
Savior. And, now Madam, seeing God has determined your Will, by declaring
his, it will highly become your Honor to bear her Decease, Non Maeremus quod
talem amisimus, sed gratias agimus, quod habuimus, imo habemus Deo enim vivunt
omnia, and quicquid revertitur ad Dominum, in familiae numero computatur.
Epist. 27. Epitaph Paulae Matris.
as Saint Hierom did the death of the Noble Paula, whom he so much honored for
her Piety. Not by Mourning you have lost, but by Praising God you had so
Precious a Saint to be your Mother; and that you had her so long, even to live
to see, and give her Blessing to your Childrens Children, before her departure;
yea, that you have her still. Is there no way to have our Friends, unless we
have them in our sight? She is not lost, that still lives. Her death was the
end of her Mortality, but there is no end of her Life. In her Spirit, she lives
in Heaven with God, to whom she lived on Earth. In her good Name, she lives
with all that knew her, or heard of her admirable Piety. This like an after
beam of the Sun-sett, followed her, to her bed of the Grave, and still shines
to her Honor. The memory of the just is blessed, though the name of the wicked
rots, even while it is remembered; as the name of Pilate does in the Creed, to
his reproach and curse. And as to her Virtues, she lives in your self, and in
as many other of her Noble Descendants, as imitate her Piety. It joyed this
Blessed Saint while alive, that she should leave her surviving Children, and so
many of her Grandchildren, walking in the Truth. And if an Heathen took such
high content, that the Honor which he arrived to, befell him, while his Parents
were yet living; whereby they had a pleasure in seeing his happiness; How much
more may it comfort the Pious Relations of this Saint, that this their Precious
Parent, had the joy of seeing them ennobled with Divine Grace, and so in their
way to Heaven, before her self went thither. I am sure, it has been an
Heart-breaking-sorrow to some Children, that they converted not to God, before
their Godly Parents bodies, were converted into Dust; and thereby cause them to
go sighing with sorrow to their Graves; who, might they but first have seen
them reclaimed, would have gone down to them singing for joy. It is a blessed
sight, to behold Children, especially of Noble Persons, imitating their Godly
Parents Graces. God is no respecter of Persons, Minime quidem Deus est acceptor
personarum: Nescio tamenquo pacto, virtus in Nobili plus placet; An forte quia
plus claret? Epist. CXIII. ad Sophiam virginem.
yet says Saint Bernard, I know not how it comes to pass, that Virtue in a
Noble Person, does more please; Is it not happily, because it is more
conspicuous? and so more attractive. This Consideration made me more readily
obey your Honors commands, in publishing these mean Papers; hoping that this
great Example of Piety, in so Noble a Lady, together, with the Honor that
attended her to the Grave for it, may cause some of high Birth, a little more,
to consider their great mistake, in thinking to overtake Honor in the dirty
paths of Profaneness and Irreligion; and so be moved, at last, to change their
way, and turn into this clean road of Piety; wherein this good Lady walking,
lived with so much esteem, and dyed so wonderfully lamented. The character,
that I have here given of her, is True, but not full; nay, far short of her
worth. Her Graces were of so high a strain, that I may truly say, Quid in illa
virtutum, quid ingenii, quid sanctitatis, quid puritatis invenerim; vereor
dicere, ne fidem credulitatis excedam. Hieron. Ep. 16. ad Princip. Virg.
what Saint Jerome did, concerning his commending Marcella, a Noble Roman Lady.
I was afraid to speak all I knew of her Wisdom, Sanctity, Charity, and other
Excellencies, lest I should seem to exceed the belief of some; those, I mean,
who knew her not; for as any were more, and longer acquainted with her, so
their estimate of her advanced higher. And must not that Piece be admirably
well drawn, which is most commended by those (if able to judge) that stand
nearest, and look longest on it? And none, I think, will deny, that famous
light of his Age, Bishop Usher, to have been as able to judge in this case, as
any other; and what an high esteem he had of this Lady, and her Noble Lord and
Husband also, appears, from a Letter written by him, to her, Forty years ago,
in which there is this passage. This Letter was writ, An. Dom. 1628.
The thing that I have most admired in your Noble Lord, is, that such lowliness
of mind, and such an high pitch of a brave Spirit, should be yoaked together,
and lodged in one Breast. And on the other side, when I reflect upon you;
methinks, I understand that saying of the Apostle better, than I did. That as
the man is the Image and Glory of God, so the woman is the Glory of the Man.
And to your comfort, let me add this, That if I have any insight in things of
this Nature, or have any judgment to discern of Spirits; I have clearly beheld
engraven in your Soul, the Image and Superscription of my God. Thus wrote this
Excellent Person, whose admirable judgment, may keep any sober Person from
thinking him in this high character, guilty of rashness and light credulity;
and his known integrity is enough to free him from all suspicion of abusing his
Pen to any servile flattery. And they, who knew the lowly Spirit of this good
Lady, and how ready she was to be dejected from an over deep sense of her
unworthiness, will find reason to believe, that this Man of God, gave this
Testimony of her, to her, as a Cordial to revive her Humble Spirit; and
therefore brings it in with, And this to your comfort I add. But I am too
troublesome, I fear, to your Honor; my hearty Prayers are, that as you have
begun, so you may go on in living your Mothers Holy Life; and that then yon
may, in a good Old Age, dye her happy death, with much Peace and Honor. And
that so long, as you shall have a Posterity live on Earth, your good Mother may
never be Dead; but may from Generation, to Generation, have those descending
from her, that will keep her Name, and Precious Example alive, by a due
Veneration of the one, and Pious imitation of the other.

Madam, I am your Honors most Humble Servant, W. GVRNALL.
Evenham, March 13. 1671.
ERRATA.
PAge 51. Line 25. read Bewrayed. page 87 l. 2O. r. on. p. 97. l. 22. r.
sloughs. p. 110 l. 11. r. Sin.

1 Cor. 15.58. For as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord.
WHAT Luther said of Justification by Faith, that may we concerning the
Resurrection of the dead, Articulus est Ecclesiae stantis, aut cadentis; it is
an Article with which the Church stands or falls; Yet so foul an error had
taken the head of some Members in the Church of Corinth, as to deny this grand
Truth, which St Paul calls in another place, Heb. 6.2.
one of the principles of the Doctrine of Christ: how say some among you, there
is no Resurrection of the dead? v. 12. And, is it not strange, that such who
professed to believe the Resurrection of Christ should deny their own! but much
more, that any in the Church of Corinth (especially in those early days) should
have such a darkness found upon their minds, who stood so near the rising Sun?
and that while St Paul himself was yet alive, who had planted this Church; by
this we see, though Truth is errors elder, yet error is not much Truths
younger. Though the Gospel Church was purest in the Primitive times, yet it
soon began to corrupt in its Members. Not unapt therefore was his saying, who
compared (in this respect) the gathering of Churches to the gathering of
Apples, which when first gathered, may appear all fair and sound, but then
within a while, some amongst them begin to speak, and others to discover their
rottinness. No doubt this Church of Corinth, and so others gathered by the rest
of the Apostles, appeared in their Members very sound in the faith, and fair in
their lives at their first embraceing of the Gospel; yet some we see did thus
soon discover corruption in both. Now to recover the tainted, and especially to
preserve the sound from this dangerous infection, the Apostle sets himself to
defend this Article of our Faith, well knowing, that this was a blow made at
the root of Christianity; which must needs fall to the ground, if this cannot
be maintained; and he does it with such invincible arguments, that if any
Heretic shall now deny it, the reason cannot be deficiency in the proof here
given, but rather a criminous conscience in himself, which makes him on his own
defense, deny a Resurrection, for fear of the Judgment which attends it.

Now the Apostle having done this, and withal shown the glorious array, in
which the Saints shall arise out of their beds of dust: he then v. 55. sings
his (...), or triumphant song over Death, and out-braves this King of Terrors
to his face, that is wont to keep the hearts of poor Mortals in the miserable
bondage of a slavish fear. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
victory? As if he had said, Death do now thy worst, we fear thee not: thou
may indeed get us into thy hands, but thou can not long keep us in thy
power, fall we shall into the Grave, but we fall to rise again, and when we
arise out of our Graves, then shall thou Death fall into thy Grave, never to
arise again. Then v. 57. he sings with an holy ravishment of joy the praises of
God, and Christ our Redeemer, by whose achievement this glorious victory over
death is won: The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law;
but thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. This indeed is our David, who cut off the head of this Goliath with his
own sword, killed Death by falling dead upon it; he unstung this Serpent by
receiving its sting into his own blesed body. He overcame this great
Conqueror, by submitting himself for a time to be conquered by it; when Christ
lost his life, then his whole Army of Saints won the day. Death now to them is
no death, that which was their punishment as Sinners, is now their privilege
as Saints. That which stood amongst the threatenings of the Law, and was the
most formidable of them all, has now changed its place, and is got amongst the
promises of the Gospel. All things are yours, or Life or Death. 1 Cor. 3.21. So
precious an oil does our Apostle extract from this slain Scorpion; so sweet an
honey comb does he find in this dead Lions breast, and gives it into the hand
of the Saints, to go eating of it, to their unspeakable joy and comfort: but,
is this victory over Death only matter of joy and comfort unto Believers? Oh
no; Blessed art thou O Land, when thy Princes eat for strength, and not for
drunkenness; and, blessed art thou O Emanuels Land, when thy Saints feed on the
privileges and promises of the Gospel, not to make them drunk with Pride, nor
to lay them asleepin Sloth; but to refresh them to run the Race set before
them, and the Joy of the Lord becomes their strength; the Apostle therefore
goes on to improve and close up his discourse on this subject with an
Exhortation to Duty; Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, that is, be steadfast in the faith of the
Gospel, and especially in the belief of this particular Article of our
Christian faith, the Resurrection of the dead, and then live up unto this
belief; walk and work as for God while you live, as believing you shall, when
dead, rise again. Now my Text has the nature of a powerful Argument to enforce
this Exhortation upon them, for as much as ye know, that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

In which words these two things are observable. First, the Nature and Quality
of the service or work of God, it is a Labor; the Apostle changes the the
word (...), i. e. Work, which he had used in the Exhortation immediately
preceding into this of Labor, and that not (...), which signifies any ordinary
labor but (...), which imports the hardest of labor; Negotium, quod nos
caedit and quasi vires frangit, says an Etymoligist, and this we may conceive
to pre-occupate an Objection of such that could be willing to do some work, but
afraid of meeting with too much labor.

Secondly, Here is the reward that sweetens this labor, and may make the
Christian more easily submit unto it. For as much as ye know your labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord. In which, first, here is the certainty of the
reward, (...), knowing, or ye know, your labor is not in vain. It is not an
uncertain surmise, taken up by a self-flattering hope from some easy ground of
a weak fortassis, or may be; but ye know it upon infallible grounds; ye doubt
no more of the being of another World, where God will reward his faithful
laborers, then ye do of the being of this which you see with your bodily eyes,
and live at present in. Here you know it, though here you do not receive it.
Secondly, the transcendency of this reward, it is a great reward as well as
sure. For there is a (...) in this Phrase, an elegant figure in Rhetoric,
wherein more is meant than is spoken: the words sound low, but the sense is
high. You shall not lose your labor, that is, you shall be infinite gainers by
it, you shall receive a reward greater than now you can conceive. Thus in our
own Language we are wont to speak, when we would make one willing to do a work
we set them about, we'll say to him, you shall not repent doing of it, you
shall not be a loser, or work for nothing; in which we intend more than we
express, that it shall redound to his great advantage. Thus here under this
expression, your labor is not in vain, is intended no less than Heaven, that
exceeding great and eternal weight of glory, which no tongue of men or Angels
can express how great it is.

First of the first, the nature or quality of the Christians work; his work is
a labor, and so will every one find it, that means to be faithful in doing of
it. Man is born to labor, and the Christian is not born again to be idle; God
sends not his servants into the World as a Playhouse, but Workhouse; and such
a work it is which he appoints them, as is not an idle man's business, that may
be done sitting at his ease on the chair of sloth, but requires his greatest
pains and diligence; therefore Christianity is in Scripture compared to the
most toylsom employments: is it a labor to run a race, which strains all parts
of a man's body; what is it then to run this spiritual race, which is every step
of the way up-hill, and straineth not legs and lungs as the other does, but
faith and patience which is a harder exercise? Is the Husbandmans work
laborious to plow up his stiff ground, and with many a weary step to go sowing
his heavy land, especially in a wet season? what then is the Christians labor,
who is to plow on the Rock, to break up an heart by nature, harder than stone,
and whose whole life is a wet seed-time, he living in a Valley of tears. Is the
Soldiers work laborious and hazardous, who must be content to lie hard, and
fair hard, and which is more, prepare for hard blows, and knocks, yea wounds,
and death it self? then the Christians cannot be easy, who must deny himself,
and take up his Cross and follow Christ, and that cheerfully, amidst all his
losses and crosses. For this Captain non amat gementem Militem? loves not a
Soldier that follows him groaning and grumbling. But for the further
clearing and amplifying this point, it will not be amiss to descend to some
particulars, to discover what it is that makes the Christians work so laborious
and difficult; and in the next place, why God has charged Religion with so
much labor, and so many difficulties.

First of the first, The vast circumference of his duty; the more strings an
Instrument has, the more art is required to handle it well; the larger the
Field is, the more labor it will cost him that is to Till it; in a word, the
greater the Servants charge is, and the more business which lies upon his
hands, the more care is needful to tend it; and where the care must be great,
the labor cannot be little, because care is it self one of the greatest
labors: O how great then is the Christians labor? whose care and duty has no
less compass than the commandment of God, which is of such vast comprehension,
that the Psalmist, who saw an end of all perfections, could see no end of it.
Psalm 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfections, but thy commandment is
exceeding broad. The Commandment here includes both Law and Gospel, and the
Christians duty extends to, yea, diffuseth it self over both. First, the Law
Moral, this is bound upon the Christian in point of duty to make it his rule,
as strictly as it was upon innocent Adam himself, though not upon such strait
conditions, and dismal consequences. The Christian is bound to it upon peril of
contracting sin, though not of incurring death and damnation; the Christian
has no more liberty to transgress the Law than Adam had, though he has a
promise of pardon upon repentance, when he has sinned, which Adam had not; how
indeed can we imagine that Christ, who was made a curse for sin, would come to
be a cloak to sin? now is it an easy work, for the Christian to keep his heart
in a sincere compliance with, and respect to, this Law in his daily walking? a
Law which is so large, as reaches from Heaven to Earth, commanding us to keep
a conscience void of offense to God and Man; a Law so pure and precise, that
forbids all sin, omissions of good, as well as commissions of evil; that
indites him for a Murderer that does not feed his Brother (yea his Enemy) as
well as he that stabs him to the heart; him that does not pray to God, as well
as him that does curse him; the barren Heath without good fruit, as well as the
Dunghil-life of the profane sinner filled with the stinking weeds of gross
crimes, that condemns sudden passions, as well as deliberate sins; that
binds the soul to its good behavior, as well as the hands. Is it an easy
thing to hate every false way? to be ready to every good work? to have respect
to every Command, which yet he must have that will not be put to shame, Psalm.
119.6. willing in all things to live honestly. Yet this he must do, that will
keep a good conscience, Heb. 13.18. is not here enough to fill the Christians
head with care, and his heart continually with an holy fear and trembling? But
this is not all his work; for secondly, the Evangelical Law is also bound upon
the Christian; the sum of which the Apostle gives us in these two comprehensive
duties, Acts.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and are these
to be got, or exercised when got, without labor? When the poor Christian has
done his utmost to keep the Law, how far short does he fall of that exact Rule?
Now these deficiencies and obliquities call for repentance, and is it easy for
him to comply with this duty? is it easy to rifle his conscience, and search
his own heart, so impartially, as if he forgot it was his own house he was
searching, and his own shame he was to discover; yet this is a necessary
antecedent to the act of repentance: how can he correct the Errata's or faults
of a book, that never read nor examined it? and to do it surely will cost some
pains. I confess this review the Christian is to make, is more easily done,
when he does it daily, and examines his life (if I may so say) sheet by sheet,
as it is printed off in every particular days conversation: but even this is a
labor too heavy for a slothful heart to endure, is it easy when the poor
creature has found out his many sins and failings, upon this review, to get
his heart into a melting frame and sorrowful sense of his ingratitude and
disingenuity to God in them, so as to throw up those sweet morsels with more
bitterness of spirit, than they were swallowed down with pleasure. In a word,
Is it easy for the poor Christian to get these Inmates out of doors, which he
has so unadvisedly let in, to clear his affections of that poison, with which
these his sins have infected them? Is it easy to recover the strength of his
resolutions, which his sins must needs have much loosned and weakened? The
second great duty of the Gospel is Faith, and this is as hard as the other; for
indeed the difficulty of believing makes that of repenting so hard. Is it easy
to assent to the truth of these Mysteries of the Gospel, which are contrary to
the apprehensions of corrupt reason, and beyond the comprehension of the
Christians most elevated understanding? Is it easy for one of a wounded
spirit, sunk and dejected as low as Hell, under the heavy sense of his guilt,
to lift up an eye of faith to the promise, and to conceive a hope, that such a
Wretch as he has been, may ever find grace and favor in the eyes of a just
and holy God? Verily, it is a wonder little less, than that of the Prophets, in
making Iron to swim; it is easy for a stupid sinner (indeed) to dream of a
pardon, while Conscience is asleep; but when this is once thoroughly awake, only
he that can still the waves and winds in a storm at Sea, can pacify this, can
give either power to believe, or peace in believing. Is it easy to repent, and
bring forth the meet fruits of it, good works, and not to make them the Idol of
our trust? not to rely on the first to procure our pardon here, nor on the
other to purchase our reward hereafafter; but to rejoice only in Christ Jesus,
as the sole entire object of our trust for both.

Secondly, The curious Sculpture with which every Duty in Religion must be
engraved, to render it acceptable to God, a miscarriage in any of which is
(like an hair on the writers pen) enough to mar and blot his fairest copy, for
bonum ex integris. First, every duty in Religion, to render it acceptable to
God must spring from a supernatural principle. It is not labor in the Lord,
except the labourer himself be in the Lord. Actio sequitur vitam, a carnal man
can do no other than a carnal action, though the matter of it be spiritual. A
dead state can have no other but dead works, a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Mat. 7.12. Secondly, the Christians work must be performed with an
holy fervor, Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. Psalm.
119.4. (...) valde, vehementer. The word is emphatical, importing an exerting
the utmost force of our Souls. Zeal is the religious part of our affections,
the firstborn and strength of a man's spirit, and therefore God sets it apart
for himself, as his peculiar portion, fervent in spirit serving the Lord;
without this, he accounts himself slighted, not served, and accordingly deals
with such cold servitours, giving them as cold welcome as they do him service;
cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently; If we would repent, we
must be zealous and repent, Rev. 2. v. 2. if hear the word, we must be swift to
hear; if pray, it must be an effectual fervent prayer, or else it is but
thuribulum sine prunis, a censure without fire. If we would give an alms, we
must draw out our soul, as well as our purse to the hungry. Now those
employments are counted most laborious, to which most strength and force must
be put, and those which intend the powers of the soul, more than such as strain
the limbs of the body; the Scholars labor in his study, is more spending, than
the Plow-mans in the field. What then is the Christians labor, which exerts
the zeal and heat of his spirit? O how hard is it to kindle, or kindled, to
keep this heavenly fire alive, on a hearth so damp and cold as our heart is?
Thirdly, the Christians work must be done from a right motive to a right end;
First, a right motive from obedience to the will of God, and that such as
springs from the love of God; he does not Gods work that does not obey him, and
he does not obey him, that does not love him, that only being true obedience,
which is hearty obedience. Ye have obeyed him from the heart; Romans 6.8.
and that only hearty obedience, which is loving; for love has the regency of
the heart, and it goes only whither love carries it. O how hard is this, where
there is so much of the slave, even in those that are children? where Hagar so
often overtops Sarah's servile fear, our filial affection; Secondly, it must be
to a right end; it is in vain to wind up the watch, if it be not set to the
right figure, or to draw the Arrow (though to the head) if the Archers eye
direct it not to the right mark; Zeal winds up and draws forth the powers of
the soul, it makes the Christian act vigorously, and forcibly: but if sincerity
(which is the singleness of the souls eye) be not present to direct it
ultimately to the glory of God, the labor is in vain; the faster a man goes,
(when out of his way) the worse; for the faster he goes, the further he has to
come back: he that is slothful in the Lords work does displease him, but he
that makes a great bustle in Religion, and by this his activity calls others
eyes to behold his zeal, yet secretly intends his own, not Gods praise,
provokes him more, because more hypocritical in what he does: hypocrisy being
to sin, what putrefaction is to diseases; the more of this in a disease, the
more dangerous it makes it; the more of that in a sin, the more abominable it
makes it: nay further, though the aim be not false, yet if that which God
allows to be our inferior end, be made our ultimate, it depraves the action;
if I aim at the comfort and relief of a poor man's necessity in my alms (which I
may and ought) yet if this be the highest I look, and my eye passes not
through this, to the glorifying of God, it becomes unacceptable; a man may lose
the prize by shooting short, as well as wide of the mark; now how hard to keep
our eye fixed on this ultimate end? truly even as hard as to keep our eye fixed
on a single object, through an Optic Glass, held by a trembling hand.
Fourthly, Every Duty must be timed aright; the Christians life is full of
duties, and those very various; now he is called to exercise himself in one,
then in another; now to pray, anon to meditate; now to be in his Closet, then
to be in his Shop about his worldly calling; now to private, then to public;
now to reprove, then to encourage or comfort his Brother. As one that has a
Shop full of diverse Tools, all necessary for his Calling, but this for that
purpose, and that for this in it; now if he should cut with his Axe, when he
should smooth with his Plain, he would soon spoil his work; that which is at
one time a Duty, would, if done, at another be a Sin. Diligence in our worldly
Calling on the week day is the work of the Lord; but the same on the Lords day
would be Satan's; no doubt as many a fair Child has been lost by an untimely
Birth, so many a good Work spoiled by an unseasonable performance; and to
discern time and judgment for our actions, requires both wisdom and care, and
these labor and pains.

Thirdly, The difficulty the Christian finds to order his Conversation, so that
his care for one part of his work may not hinder him in another. Now the reason
of this difficulty, is the seeming contrariety of some duties to others:
Seeming, I say, not real, indeed it is in Satan's service only (not in Gods)
that there is a real contrariety of work: Errors have their opposites; he that
maintains one, cannot, if he understands himself, hold some others; so in
Practical Lusts, some are at such a feud, that when one is in the Throne, the
other is kept under, but all Truths agree lovingly together, being all but one
Faith; and so do the Graces of a Christian, being all the effect of one and the
same Holy Spirit; they do no more hinder one another in acting, than the
several wheels in a well made Clock do one another motions; or the various
members of the body, one the others Operations and Functions; yet, I say, there
is a seeming contrariety. And as it requires Art and care to touch the several
strings of an Instrument, that have different Sounds, so as from all may result
one harmonious sound, so much more holy skill and care in a Christian to
exercise these many various Graces, and perform so many diverse Duties, in such
a sweet concurrence and fellowship, that from all, there may result an uniform
Holiness in the course of his life. The Christian must be Zealous, but leave
room for Discretion, or else like a Ship that has all Sail and no Ballast,
he will grow top heavy; he must fear to sin, and yet hope in the Mercy of God,
when he has sinned and repents of it; it is his duty to draw near to the Throne
of Grace with an Holy boldness; but it is his duty even then to preserve an
Holy awe and reverence; he must be sensible of the hand of God when afflicted,
or else he is not a Man; but then he must bear it patiently, or else he is not
a Christian; he must be meek and lowly in his carriage to all, even the
meanest, yet must keep an high courage and noble resolution, not to be turned
out of the path of Duty for the frowns of the greatest; he must love his
Brother but hate the sin he commits; how many such riddles are there in
Religion? Now is it an easy work for the Christian to drive his Chariot in so
narrow a path, without justling one duty against another; to hold a fair and
friendly correspondence with all these duties, and not set one at variance with
the other?

Fourthly, The great opposition the Christian meets with in doing the Lords
work, makes his labor still greater. Other men can work in their Shops
quietly, and few or none will molest them, much less throw stones at them; but
the Christian he is hindered from all hands. First, The flesh within controuls
him, lusting against every good motion and holy action which the Spirit of God
stirs him up unto; so that he is forced to dispute his way before he can come
at his work; much ado to answer what the flesh objects against every duty he is
to perform. Would he pray, then the flesh begs time, and will be putting it off
for a more convenient season, some other business it starts first to be done;
would he give an Alms, the flesh asks him, whether he means to be a beggar,
and give that to others which himself may want before he dies? would he reprove
a sinning Brother, then why will he be a busy body in other men's matters, and
lose a Friend in doing a thankless office? would he bear witness to the Name
and Gospel of Christ, then pity thy self is its counsel? no duty but it either
keeps from it, or disturbs in it; so that he needs a Sword as well as a Trowel
to lay every stone in his Spiritual building. Secondly, A body of flesh hangs
heavy upon him; the body was at the first, and shall again be at last in Heaven
a wing; but now, alas, it is a weight to man's Soul, and that an heavy one; it
should indeed be the Souls servant, but now the Soul is fain to tend and wait
upon that, to provide Food to keep, and Physic to restore its Health; yet when
all is done, it proves no over meet help to the Soul; if it be strong and
healthy, then like a pampered Beast, it grows crank and wanton, ready to throw
its rider, which made Saint Paul keep down his body; yet if the Soul discipline
it but a little too severely, then it is feeble and tired. Thirdly, The World,
this makes no small opposition. First, The things of the world; the Christians
worldly calling is ready to filtch the time which should be spent in the
Christians general; Martha is in the Kitching, when she should be in the
Chapel; the enjoyments of the world, how ensnaring are they? sensual delights,
so sweet Wine, that when the cup is at our lips, we cannot drink little, and so
heady and intoxicating that we cannot bear much: when troubles come, how hard
to keep from extremes, making too light of them, or thinking them too heavy; we
are prone either to despise them, or to faint under them. Secondly, The men of
the world, these are often a snare to draw the Christian into sin, sometimes a
whip in the Lords hand to scourge him for his sins, but always a sore vexation
to the Christian by their sins. Lastly, The Prince of the world brings up the
rear; he like a roaring Lion comes fell out of his Den, and runs full month at
him: such a bold and brazen faced Enemy, that he is not afraid or ashamed to
tempt the chastest Soul to the foulest crimes: he that durst tempt Christ
himself to devil-worship and self-murder, what will he not dare to attempt upon
the best Christians? and he is as sly as bold; an Art he has of insinuating
and winding in his head before the Christian can discover his design; he has
more baits than one to his hook and knows how to fit every ones pallat; if he
cannot make the Christian wallow in the mire of fleshly lusts, then he tempts
to Spiritual sins: if he will not be so profane as to live without Religion,
he will try to make him an Hypocrite in Religion; if that succeed not, he will try
to blow him up into a proud conceit of his Sincerity; if that will not do,
he will labor to abuse his Humility into dejection, and make him think worse of
himself than he is. Lastly, He is as importunate and restless an enemy, as he
is bold and sly; like Marcellus the Roman Captain, of whom Hannibal said, he
was the oddest man he ever met with; for whether he did beat; or was beaten, he
would not be quiet: if Satan gets a victory, he pursues it without mercy, never
losing an advantage given him; if he be worsted, he rallies and comes on again
with more rage. Thus he dogs the Christian to the last breath, and never leaves
till the Christian be got into Heaven it self, where he cannot come at him. Now
if any can go through all this work, and withstand all this opposition without
labor, or with but a little, he has learnt an Art, and got a slight, which
the rest of his brethren never knew; and we may bid him, as the Emperor did
Acctius, set up his ladder, and go to Heaven away by himself alone.

Quest. But why has God charged his peoples work with so much labor, travel,
and trouble?

Answ. First, Therefore they have so much labor here, because they shall have
none at all hereafter; they shall in Heaven rest from their labors, therefore
it is fit they should have some on Earth; otherwise, some Graces could never be
exercised, and so their excellency would not be known, and consequently might
seem to be Created in vain; there resulting from them neither benefit to the
Saint, nor Glory to God. To name but one, how should the excellent Grace of
Patience (which shall have no occasion for its exercise in Heaven) be ever
seen, if no part were given it to bring it upon the stage in this world? and
what can discover Patience, but labor and trouble? we had never heard of Job,
probably, but for his Patience; and I am sure we could never have heard of his
Patience, if we had not also heard of his Trials: indeed there is a great
decorum in this dispensation, that the Christian should have his Patience tried
in this world, where God himself has his own Patience so much exercised: that
they should endure some affliction from God, where God bears with so much sin
from them.

Secondly, God does this, that his people may give good proof of their high
esteem of the promised reward; it was an unspeakable* contempt which Adam cast
upon his happiness to sell it for a trifle; how could he more deprize it? God
therefore resolved, that before he restored him, or any of his to their lost
happiness, they shall first restore what he so vilified, to its due place in
their estimation; and because no more convincing Argument can be given of the
high price we value Heaven at, than by the great labor we are willing to take,
and trouble we are ready to endure for the obtaining of it; therefore he has
charged the Christians work with so many labors and difficulties, that by our
digesting these, to obtain that, we may give, indeed, a real proof that we
prize Heaven at a rate Superlative to all that is here below. Thus Caleb showed
his high account of Canaan, when he was not cooled in his desire of it, nor
quailed in his courage with the high Walls, and high Giants upon them, which
rendered the attempt difficult and hazardous; but cries, Numb. 13.30.
Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are able to overcome it. Whereas
the other faint-hearted Israelites are said to despise the good land, Numb.
14.31.
and why, but because they valued their ease and safety at an higher rate than
it?

Thirdly, That he may make his Peoples rest in Heaven sweeter when they come to
it: There are three joys mentioned in Scripture, as the greatest this world
has; the joy of Harvest, the joy of Victory, and the joy of a Woman that has
brought forth a Man-child; now all these joys are ushered in with great labor
and travel; past troubles swell present joys; for besides the pleasure which is
sucked from the present good enjoyed, there is a further accession of joy made,
from the remembrance of past labors and perils happily now conquered; the more
hazardous the Battle was in the Fight, the more pleasure the Conqueror has in
his Victory. It would ease the damned of some of their sorrow, could they
forget the possibility they once had of being happy; and it would deprive the
Saint of much of his accessory joy in Heaven, did he not remember the danger he
once had of falling into that misery, which there he needs not fear.

I shall apply this Point only to two sorts of Persons. First, To those that
have slighty thoughts of Religion, who think it an easy thing to be a
Christian here, and no hard matter to be saved hereafter, Secondly, To those
that are so far from believing it thus easy, that (through the suffusion of
Melancholy and Satan's Art, who thickens this darkness) apprehend it so hard a
labor, as renders it next to impossible; whereby they are dispirited from
making any vigorous endeavors in Religion, fearing they shall never overcome
the difficulties which attend it; and as good they think it is to set still, as
rising to fall deeper at last into condemnation. Thus, the Ship cannot sail if
it has no wind, or too strong and violent a one. My desire is to undeceive
those, and thereby to do a kindness to them both. Those that think it so easy
to be a Christian, no hard matter to obtain Salvation; I would endeavor to
show these what a delusion they are under, and danger they run, by fancying the
Bridge to. Heaven wider than it is: But where, may some say, dwell these Men I
am now directing my speech unto? I wish they did not swarm every where, and
made not the greatest number in most of our Towns and Congregations. I shall
point at a few: First, He that conceits himself a Christian, and nourishes in
him an hope of Salvation, even whilst his life is profane, he, no doubt,
thinks it too easy to be a Christian; when a man shall think Christ will own
him as his, merely for his Christian name, and not reject him for his
Heathenish Practices, thinks that his heart is good, though his life be wicked;
whereas his life could not be wicked, if his heart was not so (for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks) when men shall think they are Gods
Servants, though they be the Devils Laborers; that God is their Friend, when
they declare themselves every day his Enemies. In a word, to think they shall
leap at death, e coeno in coelum, out of Delilahs lap, into Abraham's bosom; is
not this to make it an easy thing to be a Christian, and no hard matter to be
saved? and where is any one (who has not first been convinced from some work
of the Spirit) so bad, that is not yet thus kind to himself? yea, have they not
commonly the strongest Faith, who have the weakest Grounds for it? they build
up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, yet will they lean upon the
Lord, Mic. 3.
and say, is not the Lord amongst us, none evil can come upon us? Who knocks
more boldly at Heaven Gate to be let in, than they whom Christ will reject as
workers of iniquity? O what a delusion is this! Caligula never made himself
more ridiculous, than when he would be honored as a God, while he lived more
like a Devil. Before you would have others take you for Christians, for Gods
sake, prove your selves men, and not beasts, as you do by your brutish lives.
Talk not of your hopes of Salvation, so long as the marks of Damnation are seen
upon your flagitious lives. If the way to Heaven were thus easy, I promise you
the Saints in all Ages have been much over-seen, to take so great pains in
mortifying their lusts, in denying to satisfy their sensual appetite, ad quid
perditio haec, to what purpose did they make so much waste of their sweat in
their zealous serving God? and of their tears, that they could serve him no
better, if they might have gone to Heaven, as these men hope to do? That Friar
was far more sound in his judgment, in this Point, who Preaching at Rome one
Lent, when some Cardinals, and many other great ones were present, began his
Sermon thus abruptly and Ironically. Saint Peter was a Fool, Saint Paul was a
Fool, and all the Primitive Christians were Fools; for they thought the way to
Heaven was by Prayers and Tears, Watchings and Fastings, severities of
Mortification, and denying the pomp and glory of this World. Whereas you here
in Rome, spend your time in Balls and Masks, live in Pomp and Pride, Lust and
Luxury, and yet count your selves good Christians, and hope to be saved: but at
last you will prove the Fools, and they will be found to have been the Wise
men. Did ever any man arrive at London by going from it? every sin is a step
from God, and the more we sin, the further we depart from God. Does not he then
take a wise course to come at last to the full enjoyment of God in Heaven, who
by a lend wicked life runs as far from him, as his legs can carry him?

Secondly, They who think they are good Christians, and fair enough for Heaven,
though they have no more then a Negative Holiness; the best that can be said of
them, is, they are not so bad as the worst; they do not take so much pains for
Hell as others; but none for Heaven; they labor not so much in the Devils
work; but work not at all for God: like those in the Gospel, they stand idle
all the day long, and yet hope for a penny at night, though they never entered
into Christ's Vineyard: they are so far from laboring in the work of the Lord,
that they will not touch his work with one of their fingers. Do not these think
it very easy to be Christians? as if God was bound to save them, but they not
bound to serve them. Is not Heaven called a reward? and what reward can be
expected where no work is done? if some that work shall be denied all reward,
because they did not labor at it; and some seek, that shall not be able to
enter; because they do not strive; then miserable must thy condition be, who
fallest short of those, who themselves fall short of Heaven.

Thirdly, Formalists and slothful Christians; and how many are these? who will
not be Atheists to live without all Religion, but resolve not to be Zealots.
They are more then key-cold, but are afraid to be too hot in their work; they
are not idle, but cannot be persuaded to be diligent; they love such a temper
in Religion for their Souls, as they do a Climate for their Bodies to live in;
it must be a very temperate one; afraid to exceed only in Piety and Holiness,
in which alone there can be no excess. Oh what a delusion is this! he that will
choose another temper for his Religion, than God has commanded, had need
provide another Heaven for himself, than God has prepared; for that is given
to the zealous Labourer, not the lazy Loiterer. The violent are they which
take this Kingdom by force; a man may be sure of Hell with a little pains, but
Heaven will certainly be lost without our labor and diligence: and the reason
is, because every man is born in a state of sin and damnation, and so needs no
more than to fit still in that state, to bring inevitable destruction upon him;
to Hell he will come soon enough, though he gallop not so fast as others in
riot and excess. But, alas, we are born afar off from God and Heaven; much
labor is required to get into the way that leads to life Eternal; and when we
are in it, many a weary step to take, abundance of work to dispatch; sins to
mortify, temptations to resist, afflictions to endure, impaired Graces to
repair, weak to strengthen, and to persevere in all this labor, till death it
self takes us off. This we must do, or else (as Saint Paul said of their
abiding in the Ship) we cannot be saved. It is with the Christians Spiritual
Life, (in this respect) as with his natural; his body has within it self, that
which is sufficient to cause the death of it, but not to maintain its life.
This provision is without; as a man, he will dye, though he make no use of
knife or halter to dispatch himself: not taking food, or not using physic will
do it alone: Thus the Christian has enough within him to procure his Spiritual
death, and consequently his Eternal; but not to maintain his Spiritual life.
The provision for this is out of himself, his sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3.5. and this sufficiency God gives not in an immediate way, but by appointed
means, which he requires their care to make use of (as he did the Israelites
hands, to gather and bake their Manna) and so by blessing his means, and their
care in using of it, their Spiritual life is preserved and nourished unto
Eternal life. Now, when any shall thus extend his care to the use of all
appointed means, and intend the faculties of his Soul industriously (as he
ought) in the use of them, and shall have continued some considerable time in
this exercise; then, and not till then, will he be a competent judge, to tell
us whether it be a slighty business, to be a Christian indeed or not.

Secondly, A few words to those who will acknowledge the labor of Christianity
to be great; but that is it which is their discouragement, and scares them from
entering into that service, which will cost so much pains, and bring so much
trouble. I shall leave some Considerations to be pondered by them, which, I
hope, may ease them of this too deep an apprehension of the Christians labor.

First, Christianity, it is confessed, is a labor, but a necessary labor; it is
not, indeed, the part of a wise man, to labor, or hazard much for that he
little needs; yet for such things is it (God knows) that most men bestow their
greatest toil and travel; to obtain that which they may have ( specie aut
valor) and spare this their pains also; as Cyneas told Pyrrhus, when he said,
after such and such Kingdoms Conquered by him, then we will sit down and live a
merry life. But why, quoth Cyneas, may we not do that already without all this
trouble? I confess (considering the present frame of Carnal men's hearts) they
are under a kind of necessity of what they inordinately desire. The Covetous
man must have his Gold, the Voluptuous man his Pleasures; or else they cannot
enjoy themselves: but this necessity is no other than that of a Dropsy man,
for his unmeasurable drinking; for was this man's disease, and the other man's
lusts purged out, both their necessities would cease alike; but Heaven is
absolutely necessary to all, whether they think so or no. Better we had the
Soul of a Beast, than having the Soul of a Man, not to have at last that
perfection and happiness, for which this Immortal Soul was made. And this thou
can not have, except thou will take the pains to walk in the ways of
Holiness, which lead to it; thy Soul (poor man) is hastening apace to its last
and eternal state, which will be either in Heaven or Hell: the Happiness of the
one invaluable, the misery of the other intolerable, and both interminable. If
thou bestirrest not thy self, and that timely, to take hold of Eternal Life,
Hell is at thy back to take hold of thee. Now is there any room left in this
case for deliberation, when de vita aut morte aeterna agitur? is it now time to
say, shall I labor to be saved, or shall I not? It may in some cases be more
eligible to lose our temporal life, than to be at pains to save it. If Caesar
told the Mariner, in a storm, it was necessary he should sail, not that he
should live; then surely with much more reason may the Christian say; yea, must
he say, it is not necessary I live here, but it is necessary while I live, that
I perform the voyage God has imposed on me; that I launch forth into his
service, whereby I may make sure of Eternal Life, though with the loss of my
Temporal. But no worldly necessity can be such, as should control our care in
the other. Get Eternal Life, and thou will find again that life thou did lose
in getting it; but lose Heaven, and in Hell thou will see all those paltry
gains lost, to keep which a while, thou did lose Heaven.

Secondly, Consider, the greatest labor and trouble the service of God will
put thee to, is incomparably less, than the least pain the sinner shall find
and feel in Hell. What is the trouble a Christian is at in Mortifying a Lust
here, to the torment which the enraged Conscience of a Damued Soul will put him
to there, for not Mortifying of it when time was? what is the sorrow which the
Saint feels here, whilst he mourns for his sins in hope of pardon, to the
horror of a Reprobrate anguish in Hell, imbittered with despair: what is the
Christians loss to part with his Temporals for Christ's sake, to the Sinners
parting with God and Heaven, never to see his blessed face more? in a word,
what are the flouts and reproaches which the Saint has from a wicked world, to
the Sinners portion; when God, with all the Holy Angels and Saints, shall laugh
at their destruction. If the love of Heaven will not move you to submit to the
short labor which attends the service of God, let the fear of Hell do it.

Thirdly, Though the Christians labor be hard, yet there are many things
alleviate the burden of it.

First, The sumbleness of the Christians work to his renewed Nature; the
trouble of a work is much as the man's mind stands to or against it. It would be
a tedious business to an ignorant Rustic, to be locked up in a Scholars Study,
and there be made to spend his time amongst his Books; but the true Scholar
needs not be forced or wagered to this work; his delight in it, takes away the
labor of it; non inveni (said one) in hoc mundo requiem nisi in angulo cum
libello; it were a great calamity, to a slothful dastardly spirit, to be made
to endure the labor and hardship of a Soldier: whereas a generous Soul, would
prefer it before ease and gain at home; mea sit laborum major pars, pecunia
autem, abundet quis volet, was Achilles his speech; give me the labor, let who
will take the money. To a sensual heart, what more unpleasing then Heavenly
Meditations? yet what more delighted David? To a carnal heart, the Commandments
of God are all hard sayings, because, contrary to his unholy nature: but to a
Gracious Soul, none of them are grievous; he loves the Law of God from the same
reason, for which the other hates it, because it is pure; he delights to do the
Will of God, because he has a law within him, which corresponds with the law
without; his Heart answers to it, as the echo to the voice; thou said seek
my face, thy face will I seek: No wonder a Cross lies heavy upon his shoulders,
that has no Faith in God to sustain him under it; but a Paul, he can take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, etc. 2 Cor. 12.10.

Secondly, The Divine assistances which the Christian has in his work,
alleviates the labor of it; consider the Christians work without this help,
it is heavy indeed, yea, too heavy for him to stand under; but Gods helping hand
put to it, makes this heavy work light. The Ship, which when lying on ground,
all the Teams in the Country could not draw off; how easily is it set a float
when the Tide comes in? Thus the Heart which the Christian, by no pains and
industry of his own, can raise out of its dullness and indisposition to Duty?
Oh how soon is it elevated and inspirited, when God flows in with his secret
Aspirations and Exuscitations of his Blessed Spirit and Grace! he who confessed
that he could do nothing of himself, not so much as think a good thought, tells
us also, he is able to do all things through Christ who strengthens him: now
this help from the Lord is promised; but it comes not till the Christians hand
is put to the work; let him be up and doing, and then God will not fail to be
with him. It Is cheap traveling (we say) for a Child in his Fathers company: to
be sure God will pay the charge the Christian is at in his whole journey to
Heaven; it is easy working while God holds our hand, yea, puts strength into
it. Art thou to pray his Spirit will lift with thee, for so that (...),
signifies, art thou tempted? whilst thou art fighting in the Valley below,
Christ's hands are lift up in Heaven above for thy Victory. I have prayed that
thy Faith fail not; yea he does not only pray above for thee, but will be in
the Field with thee, and in thee, by the secret succors of his Spirit. My
Grace is sufficient for thee, which is not meant of Grace Inherent in us; that
indeed is unsufficient of it self; but the auxiliary Grace, which he sends in
to assist and excite that in a time of need.

Thirdly, Though Christianity be a labor, and many troubles and perils attend
it, yet it is not alike to all: every Christian has not Hemans Faith, Jobs
Patience, or Paul's Courage; neither shall all have Hemans Disertions, Jobs
Losses, nor Paul's Persecutions; the stoutest Soldiers are put upon the hottest
service; the heaviest burden upon the strongest back: he knows every Saints
ability, and so he rates them; he will not suffer any to be tempted above that
they are able. When the Israelites came first out of Egypt, he knew they were
raw Soldiers, and therefore led them about, that they might not be put to
fight, before he had hardened, and heartned them more to bear such a work. While
Christ was upon Earth, he interposed his own body between his weak Disciples,
and the fury of the wicked world: but when he went to Heaven, then he ventured
them into the storm, but careful first to reinforce them with power from
above, before he let them take the Field, Acts 1.4. Being assembled together
with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait
for the promise of the Father.

Fourthly, The merciful indulgence which the Lord gives them as to their
failings: hard work, indeed, God calls them to, but the harder the work is, the
more his pity is expressed toward them; in pardoning those invincible
infirmities, which notwithstanding their faithful endeavor, will be found in
their doing it. It was hard for the Apostles to keep their eyes wakeful in the
dead of the night; Christ considers this, and Apologizeth for them, even
while he chides them; the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak. It is hard
when Afflictions are strong, and long, not to fall into some indecencies of
speech and behavior: we have heard of Jobs Impatience, as well as Patience,
yet the Lord was graciously pleased to to take his part against his accusing
Friends; ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job
has, Job 42.7. It is hard to act Faith, when sense and reason are nonplust;
the Lord therefore is pleased to overlook the weaknesses of his Childrens
faith, which in such deep plunges they bewray, so they strive against them, and
be humbled for them; in magnis tentasse aliquid, non parvum, in great and
difficult enterprises, an essay and endeavor is not little: Peter showed great
Faith in venturing to go upon the Sea, but discovered infirmity when he began
to sink; therefore Christ pitieth and succoureth his weakness. David's strait
was in a manner as great at Land, as Peter's was at Sea. When at Gath amongst
his Enemies, whose Champion he had slain; much fear and unbelief he borrowed in
this his strait, yet some secret actings of Faith were mingled with these his
fears, as appeared by the Prayer he then lift up to God; and even this Prayer
attended with so many distrustful fears, found acceptance with God; which made
the good man bring this forth as an encouragement for others; This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles, Psalm
34.6. A poor man, indeed, he was at this time, not only in his outward state,
but his inward; poor and low in the actings of his Faith. O what encouragement
is here to come into the service of God; hard work thou may meet with, but
not an hard Master; do but thou thy best, and God will forgive thy worst.
Beware of wickedness, in not doing what thou can, and God will not reject
thee for thy weakness; Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him, Psalm 103.13.

I come now to the Second Part of the Text, which presents us with the reward
that attends the Christians labor; it is not in vain in the Lord; they shall
not be put off with their labor for their pains: no, there is a reward laid up
in Heaven, which will abundantly compensate all the pain and pains they were
put to on Earth; but we must not understand this, as if the Christian received
no gain or advantage, in this life, from the service of God, while he is
laboring in it: Godliness has the promise of this life, as well as the other.
There are promises of which payment is made here; and though these be inferior
to what the Christian shall receive hereafter; yet be they so precious, as
prove Religion even in this life, no hospes asymbolus. No guest that lodges on
free cost, but such as pays well, and that in present Coin for its
entertainment. It affords Bread to the eater, as well as Seed to the sower;
there is fruit unto Holiness, which the Christian may now feed on to his
comfort, as well as an hope of Eternal life to be received at the end of this.
The very vales which the Christian has given him, while at his work, afford
him enough for his present expense, to maintain him in a port becoming his high
hopes for afterward. First, His conscionable labor in the Lords work, will
gain him more ability, and holy skill to do his work still better; by
exercising of himself daily unto Godliness, he becomes more ready and prepared
for every good work; by daily combating with his corruptions, and resisting
temptations, he learns more easily to overcome his Enemy. And if in worldly
trades this be accounted a sufficient reward to an Apprentice, for serving out
his time, to learn the mystery of his Calling; Oh what a reward is it, by the
daily practice of Godliness, to learn more fully the Mystery of it? This I am
sure holy David set down for great gains, I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in
the night, and have kept thy Law; this I had because I kept thy Precepts, Psalm.
119.55. And again, I understand more than the Ancients, because I kept thy
Precepts, ver. 100. He did not grudge his own pains, nor envy others ease, so
long as he might get more Heavenly Wisdom by it. Secondly, The Christians
conscionable labor, interesseth him in the special Providence of God for him:
while he is at work for God, God will take care of him; and what can he want,
that has God for his Provider? what, or whom need he fear, that has God for
his Protector? For though all the Saints have a right in Promises, yet none
have a pleasant aptitude to apply the comfort of any one Promise, while they
are idle and negligent; no, this is the portion of the laborious Christian,
that walks in the actual exercise of his Grace: No good thing shall he want
that walks uprightly. When God engages to Abraham his Almightiness, it is to
him, as walking before him, not as sitting in the chair of sloth. Thirdly, The
Christians labor is rewarded here with inward peace of Conscience, and
serenity of Mind; Great peace have they that keep thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them, Psalm 119.166. Peace be on them that walk by this rule, as on the
Israel of God, Gal. 6. These are they, in whose bosoms this Bird of Paradise
sings her sweet Notes, and her sweetest in foulest weather; when sickness
comes, and death approaches. Now he that has the testimony of his Conscience,
for having been a faithful Labourer in the Lords work, will be able to make a
comfortable reflection upon his past life: For men's expectations of what is
coming to them at death, depends upon what their past lives have been. Life is
the time of sowing, and death of reaping; as they have sown, so only can they
expect to reap. Life is a time for working, and death for receiving the reward,
suitable to the work. Hence it is, when death is approaching, Conscience (if not
seared, and past all feeling) is then carried back to review what the man has
been doing, for whom he has been laboring; and therefore must needs bring in
heavy tidings to the sinner of his approaching misery; then it rips up all the
stitches of that false peace, which the ungodly wretch had been bolstred up
with, and tells him, that now the Righteous Judge is at hand, to pay him the
dismal wages due to him, for all the wicked works he has done, which makes the
thoughts of death a terror to him. But the Sincere Christian, who has labored
faithfully in the Lords work; he then has a pleasant Prospect to behold, when
he looks back upon his conscionable walking, and can thence make his humble
appeal to God, and desire him to remember how he has walked before him in
Truth, and with a Perfect Heart. Oh what joy is this to his poor heart, that
his Conscience bears him witness, he has endeavored to walk before God, with
godly simplicity, and not in guile? and can cast himself upon the Mercy of God
in Christ, and breathe out his Soul with a joyful expectation, of being
received into the Kingdom of Glory.

This premised, I address my self to speak of the Christians reward in the
other world, this being principally (if not solely) in the Text; where it is
set forth two ways. First, By its certainty, For as much as ye know. Secondly,
By its transcendency, Your labor is not in vain in the Lord. In which words,
you may remember, I told you there is more intended, than expressed.

First, of the first, The certainty of the Saints reward intimated by this
Phrase, ye know: that is, ye know it for a certain indubitable truth; ye make
no doubt of this: thus is the Saints future Happiness spoke of, with the
greatest assurance and certainty; We know that if our earthly house of his
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 1 Cor. 5.1. We know that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him. The Saints know this so well, 1 John 5.3.
that they dare venture the loss of all they are worth here, for the reward
they expect there: Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves, that ye have in Heaven a more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. yea, they
have refused their temporal life, when offered to the prejudice of their
eternal, Heb. 11.35. Not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection. If any should ask, how do they know so assuredly there is this
reward? I would ask such, how they know the Sun to be, when they see it shine?
if they say, by seeing of it; they may know, that the Saint sees an Heaven, as
certainly, by an eye of Faith, as they can do the Sun, by an eye of Sense;
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
Hebr. 11.1.
The very light of nature, whereby the Heathens knew a God, did let with it
into their minds, some knowledge of another world, and of a double state
therein; of happiness to the good, and misery to the wicked; being not able,
otherwise, to reconcile the unevenness of Providence in this world, with the
righteous nature of God: but alas, what was this lesser light which God left in
man to rule him, in the night of Heathenish darkness, to the certainty of the
Saints knowledge, which comes in by the light of Faith? first, the Christians
Faith is grounded on the testimony of God himself, in his word. Humane Faith
is, indeed the weakest, and most uncertain kind of knowledge; because man's
testimony, on which it relys, is so fallible; but Divine Faith the most
certain, because the testimony of God, on which its weight bears, is
infallible: One, who cannot deceive, because he is truth it self; nor be
deceived, because he is wisdom it self: So that, though Faith be not Reason,
yet to believe what God says is true, there is the highest reason. 2 ly, As
the testimony on which the Saints Faith relies, is the infallible Word of God;
so his very Faith which relies on this Word of God, is no other than the work
of God; the same Spirit, who is the Author of that, is the efficient of this;
for the Christian believes not from the power of his own will, but the power of
God, mightily working his heart up to this supernatural act. Hence we are said
to be saved through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8. And this Faith is called a Faith of the operation of God, Colos.
2.12. it is wrought in us, not by us. Not only the light of truth which the
Christian sees is Divine, but the eye of Faith by which he sees, this light is
Divine also; how certain must that knowledge be, which in the light of Gods
Spirit, beholds the light of Gods Truth? now from this Word of God, the
Christian is assured of this reward many ways. First, He is assured of it, by
Jesus Christ, who, himself, came from Heaven, and makes report thereof; In my
Fathers house are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you, John
14.2. As if he had said, you may belief me, for I speak it, that cannot lie;
and who loves you too well to put a cheat upon you. That there are such
Countries as France and Holland, you do not doubt, though you never saw them,
because some that have, assure you it is true: and shall the Saint be blamed
for relying on Christ's own faithful Word? who comes from Heaven, is above all,
and what he has seen and heard, that he testifyeth, John 3.32. Secondly, The
Christian knows it, by the purchase Christ has made of Heaven for Believers.
Man's sin had shut Heaven door against him, and opened Death and Hells door upon
him: now before God would (or indeed could) set open again this door of life to
poor sinners, it was necessary that his Glory should first be secured; which to
do, this admirable expedient, the Divine Wisdom contrived, that Christ should
dye for sinners, by which, both Death, the punishment of man's sin, might be
abolished; and life, and immortality, which man had lost, might be restored,
and brought to light again, 2 Timothy 1.10. Hence it is said, It became him, for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons unto
Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb.
2.10. Mark that, it became him; (...), there was a condecency for God thus to
do. God never does any thing that does not become him; in all his works he acts
like himself; every work declaring his Glory, but not all alike. Now God in the
Redemption of the world, intending to make the greatest manifestation of his
Glory, that ever he did: It became him to pitch on such a means, as was suitable
to such an end; and this of bringing his People to Glory, by the abasement of
his own Son, to an ignominious and cursed death, was the expedient he resolved
upon, as every way condecent to this design; and indeed, never did all the
Divine Attributes appear in all their Glory, so as they do here. According
therefore to this Eternal Council of Gods Will and Love, in the fullness of
time, the Son of God was clothed with our Flesh, laid down his life, took it
up again; and further, to show he had got a full triumph over death, and had
opened Heaven gates for Believers. He opened the Graves of many of the dead
Saints, and raised them to life, as a pledge, that he would do the same, in due
time, for the rest. So that now to doubt, whether there be an Eternal life for
the Saints after death, is to make the whole Gospel a fiction. Thirdly, They
know it by the actual possession which Christ has already taken of Heaven for
them. A Child thinks himself sure of an Estate, when his Father not only
purchases it, but also takes it up for him. Thus did Christ ascend to Heaven,
not only to sit down on his own Throne, but to take and keep possession of
Heaven, for the behoof and benefit of Believers. Hence they are said, to sit
together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; Ephesians. 2.
that is, in him as their head, which is a certain pledge to them; they shall
one day sit with him there, in their own persons: Because I live (says Christ)
ye shall live also. Indeed he lives there to make Intercession for them, and
will never leave praying, till he has prayed them up unto himself. I may say
to Believers, as once Naomi to Ruth, sit still for the man will not cease, till
he has finished the thing: Christ will not cease his Mediatory work, till he
has finished his peoples happiness, and got his betrothed Spouse home to him,
in his Fathers house. 4 ly, He knows the certainty of this happy estate, by the
many express Promises made to Believers of it. I cannot number them they are so
many, neither need I name them; there being no Child of God so little (I hope)
acquainted, with his Saviors Will and Testament, as not to be able to turn on
a sudden to many places, where this Inheritance is settled on them. The greatest
Heir that lives, is the Saint. He is heir to both Worlds, having Promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come: But the grand promise of all
is, that which gives him title to his Heavenly Inheritance. Heb. 6.17.

Heb. 1.14.


In one place they are called Heirs of Promise, in another, Heirs of Salvation;
because this is the Crowning Promise. Heaven it is called their Hope, till this
comes; he has not his Portion; all he has here, is the least of what is
promised. But when Heaven comes, then all is paid; the Bond then is delivered
in, Faith and Hopes work is done. The Christian, who on Earth, believes and
expects Promises, shall in Heaven inherit Promises; there Faith shall be turned
into Vision, and Hope swallowed up in Fruition. Now though nothing can make
Heaven more sure to the Believer, than Gods Promise, no not the Oath of God it
self, because it is as impossible for God to lie without an Oath, as with it;
for being he can swear by no greater, he swears only by himself; and so the
strength even of his Oath, lies in his Veracity, which is engaged in his
Promise, as well as Oath: yet he is graciously pleased, ex abundanti,
consulting therein with our frailty, to superadd all those things to his
Promise; by which men in contracts, amongst themselves, do conceive a further
confirmation and security to to be given, for performance of their Promises one
to another; as witnesses, Seal, Oath, and Earnest; that having these
Securities, which are wont to satisfy us in Humane Promises, the sin of
distrusting Gods performance of his, might appear the more unreasonable in us,
and injurious to him: as, indeed, it is beyond all expression, when those
Securities will not assure our hearts, concerning the performance of Gods
Promises, than which we cannot exact more from those men that are most
unresponsable or deceitful.

Secondly, The Saints reward is described by its Transcendency; your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. In the explication of which Phrase, I showed, that
there is more employed, than is expressed. That the Christians labor shall be
highly, unspeakably rewarded, the place where the reward is laid up, proves the
transcendency of it, and that is Heaven, Heb. 10.34. Ye have in Heaven a
better, and an enduring substance; and Heaven is a place so excellent, as
renders it incapable of an hyperbole; not so far above our heads, as it is
above our thoughts: It has not entered into the heart of man, the things which
God has prepared for them that love him. One may as easily draw in all the Air
of the world at a breath, as express, or conceive, how great and glorious the
Saints reward in Heaven is. As it is, praemium reconditum pro nobis; so it is,
absconditum a nobis, as it is laid up for Believers, so it is hid from them. We
are now the Sons of God, but we know not what we shall be. The Apostle compares
our apprehensions of Heaven here, to the low apprehensions, which little
children have of men's affairs, 1 Cor. 13.11. which you know is very low. That
Saint which knew least of Heaven, while on Earth, did the first moment he
entered into that Glorious place, understand more of it, than all the Doctors of
the Church ever did, or could, whilst on Earth: The Scripture therefore
presents it to us, as an object of our admiration, not comprehension. O how
great things has God laid up for them that fear him? Psalm 31. When Saint Paul
had set forth the Saints Happiness, in that Golden chain of Salvation, whom he
predestined, them he called, whom he called, them he also justified; and whom
he justified, them he also glorified; breaks forth like a man in an Ecstasy,
What shall we say to these things? expressing thereby his inability, to express
the greatness and glory of them. Yet so much the Saints know of this blessed
state that waits for them, as will not suffer them to admire any thing they see
here below, any more, than he would the light of a Glowworm, who has seen the
Sun. I shall content my self at this time, in setting forth the Transcendency
of that Happiness the Saints shall receive as their reward in Heaven, after
their labor is finished on Earth. To consider, First, The Properties of that
Blessed state, to which they shall be advanced in Heaven. Secondly, To compare
the Saints work and labor on Earth, with this their reward in Heaven. First of
the first, The Properties of that Blessed state with which their labor shall
be rewarded in Heaven.

First, It is a state purely Spiritual. The Saints state on earth, is partly
Spiritual, and partly Animal. He cease not to be a Mortal Creature, when he
becomes a new Creature: his life is Spiritual as a Saint, but Animal as a
mortal Man: and so his comforts and refreshings, are Animal, as well as
Spiritual. He eats, he drinks, he sleeps; and all these acts of Nature have a
pleasure, and sweetness proper to their kind, which is too low for that
glorified state, to which they shall there be exalted; they shall need neither
meat, nor drink, where there is no hunger, nor thirst; no time there lost in
sleep, where the Body shall never be weary, nor drowsy, but be as wakeful as
the Soul: no need of clothes, where there shall be no shame, where the body it
self, shall outshine the Sun in its noonday glory. And is it not more
desirable to be without these, than to need them and have them? to have sound
legs, then to be lame, and have crutches? who had not rather have been with
Moses, beholding the face of God in the Mount (though all that time without
food) than Feasting with the Israelites at the bottom of the Hill? surely
Spiritual Pleasures are more noble and sweet, than bodily; or else we might
say, that Sensual men have more joy and pleasure in their life, than God has
in his.

Secondly, It is an accumulative state, wherein there is an aggregation, and
concentration, of all those things, which are requisite to make their happiness
complete; it is not Esaus (...) but Jacobs (...) not having much, but having
all will make man happy. Are here all thy Children? said Samuel unto Jesse, and
would not sit down to the Feast, 1 Samuel 16.11.
till David, the only one wanting was come. Thus man's Soul cannot sit down to
its Feast, and be satisfied, till it has all that goes to its Perfection; the
absence of any one Ingredient, keeps it in motion, looking and longing for it;
and that is inconsistent with complete happiness, which consists in rest
arising from satisfaction. Now in Heaven, there is a confluence of all, that
the Saint, even then, when his faculties will be stretched out and enlarged to
their utmost capacity, can possibly desire; He that overcomes shall inherit
all things, Rev. 21.7.
and I will be his God. The glorified Saint has above him, the beatifying
Vision of God himself, and Jesus Christ, the purchaser of all his Felicity,
whom he so loved on Earth, and longed to see. Within him he shall behold his
own Soul, made perfect in all its noble Powers, satisfied with the Image of
God, Psalm. 17.15.
as full of Holiness as it can hold. Upon him he shall see that body, which was
once so vile and corruptible, made Immortal, Spiritual, and Glorious, even like
the Glorious body of Christ, the exemplar cause, after which it is fashioned:
about him he shall see an innumerable company of Holy Angels, and glorified
Saints, his Brethren; not one of them envying his happiness, but all
congratulating him for it, and rejoicing in it. Beneath him, he shall see the
Infernal Pit of Hell; wherein so many millions of lost souls are to spend a
miserable Eternity in unspeakable torment; which must needs fill him with
ineffable joy to think, how near once, he himself was falling into it; but was
happily prevented by the arms of free Grace, seasonably interposing and
^atching him. In a word, he shall have joy without sorrow, health without
languour, rest without labor, and life without end.

Thirdly, It is an entire state. There is not only all Ingredients of Happiness
in Heaven, but the Saint enjoys all together: here on Earth, the Christian
has many precious Promises, sweet Refreshings and Comforts; but he takes in
the sweetness of them successively, not all in one draught. Indeed, the largest
Heart, of the Holiest Saint on Earth, is an house of too little receipt and
roomth, to entertain so many Guests together. No, now the Christian entertains
himself, first in the company of one, then of another Promise. God comes in a
little at this, and more at the next Sermon he hears. He is as a leaky vessel
under a running cock, filling, but never full: But in Heaven, the Saint is
filled, and that all at once; as a vessel thrown into the Sea, full as soon as
it is in. This the Apostles expression seems to import, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4. in a word, the Christian here is like some
great man, that has a vast estate, but he neither sees all his Land, nor
receives all his Rents together; but in Heaven, his whole felicity is present;
not one imaginary point of time, wherein he can be more, or shall be less happy
to all Eternity.

Fourthly, It is a consistent and fixed state, free from all changes and
vicissitudes, which in this life he is subject to: here, alas, the Christian is
sometimes well, and sometimes sick; now in Prosperity, then in Adversity; Rich
and Poor in the same day: In momento vertitur mare and ubi luserunt navigia
sorbentur. In a moment, a storm arising, where the Ship even now danced, it is
wrackt. He is like one that Travels in an April day, whose Cloak is wet with
the Rain, and dried again by the Sun, and then wet again: neither do these
changes only befall the Saints outward state, but his inward also, both in point
of Grace and Comfort. Now his Heart is up and lively in the performance of a
duty; anon so dead and down, as if he were not the same man. Now the Christians
Coat is on, ready to attend and follow his Master; anon it is off, and he on
his bed of sloth. So in point of Comfort; one while the Spouse has her Beloved
in her arms, and is ravished with his company; another while, she is setting up
her, Si quis, and enquiring if any can tell her tidings of him; hora longa,
brevis mora: The Christian waits long for the Comforter, and when he comes, he
does but look in, and then withdraws again: so that the joy which he has at
present, is much interrupted from the fear of losing it; for, nemo fruitur
solicito bono; how much there is of fear, so little is then of enjoyment in
what we have. Indeed, what ever the Saints refreshings are here, it is but like
a Travelers entertainment in an Inn; the thoughts that he must to Horse again
in the morning, does lessen the pleasure he takes in it. But in Heaven, the
journey is at an end, the Saint is at home; his labor is gone, and his rest is
come; he is in a Kingdom that cannot be moved.

Fifthly, It is an Eternal state, this is more than the former; the property
that crowns all the rest. There are some in this life (and those none of the
best) who meet with no changes, and that for a long time; Psalm. 55.19.
who enjoy a continued Summers day; their Sun of Prosperity goes not in and
out, but shines with a constant beam; no black cloud of any great Affliction,
interposing, to hide their joy from them: but at last, death chops in upon
them, and spoils all their mirth; in a moment they go down to the pit, and with
them all their thoughts perish. What joy remains to him that is in misery, to
remember the years of pleasure he has had? A past felicity, is a present
misery; and to remember the pleasure we had, doubles the sorrow we have. This
made Saint Bernard interpret that place of the Psalmist, with long life will I
satisfy him of Heaven; because he thought nothing was long that had an end.
This, indeed, is the Emphasis of Heavens joy; those Blessed Souls shall never
sin, never weep more; they shall not only be with the Lord, but ever with the
Lord. This is the accent which is set on the Elogies, given to Heaven, in
Scripture. It Is an Inheritance, and that an incorruptible one, that fades not
away: It is a Crown of Glory, and that a weighty one; yea, an exceeding great
and eternal weight of Glory. When once it is on the Saints head, it can never
fall, or be snatched off; it is a Feast, but such an one, that has a sitting
down to it, but no rising up from it.

The second way I propounded for seting forth the Saints reward, was, to
compare the Saints work and labor with the reward. For though the reward be
great, yet if the labor bear any considerable proportion to it, so much of its
greatness is taken away. But the Christians labor here bears no proportion at
all, with his reward hereafter; and therefore the Apostle says, It is not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed. His labor is
finite, but his reward infinite; and there is no proportion between finite, and
infinite. There is but little proportion, you will say, betwixt a drop of
water, and the Sea; yet there is some, because though vastly greater, yet not
infinitely greater: but betwixt these finite, and infinite, there is none at
all. The Christians reward is infinite; First, Intensive, God himself is his
reward, as well as his rewarder, who is infinite in all his Divine Perfections.
And what proportion between a poor nothing Creature, and his nothing Service,
to the having this infinitely Glorious God his portion? So far are these from
bearing any proportion to God, that compared with him, they are denied to be, I
am, and there is none besides me, says God, or to have any excellency; he is
the Holy one, the only wise God. Man's wisdom, is no wisdom; his holiness, no
holiness compared to God. Secondly, It is infinite extensive, or in duration.
Their reward is an everlasting life; but their work and labor for the Lord,
how short? how soon is it dispatched? If there be no proportion between Time,
and Eternity; then none between the Christians labor, which is performed in so
little a point of time, and the reward which endures for ever and ever. The
Christian is a few hours in the Field at his work, and then called into an
everlasting rest in his Fathers house. He carries a light cross, a little way
on his back, which death at the furthest takes off; and then an Eternal Crown
of Glory is set on his Head. It aggravated King Lysimachus his sorrow, that he
had lost so great a Kingdom, for so little a matter as a draught of water. How
will it ravish the Saints Heart, to receive so great a reward, at the end of so
short a labor? Jonathan wondered that a little Honey, should cost him so dear
as death. I did (says he) but taste a little Honey, with the end of the Rod,
that was in mine hand, and lo I must dye. How much more admiringly may the
Saint say; it is but a little, and that sorry service that I have done for my
God on Earth; and lo I must live, yea, live with God; yea, with God
everlastingly in Glory. Well may the Apostle say, That Christ shall come to be
admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 2.10. How can it but make them
admire, to see so infinite a Glory the reward of so poor a labor?

Object. But why should not the Christians Holy labor and Faithful service,
bear the same proportion to his reward in Heaven, as the wicked man's sin does
to his punishment in Hell? this deserves that, why not that this? though the
wicked man's sin be as little a time in committing, as the Saints Holy service
is in performing; yet there is an infinite evil in his sin (that is, objective)
because committed against an infinite God. And why should there not be the same
reason for the Christians labor.

Answ. There is a vast difference betwixt these, the nature of Sin, and the
nature of Good and Holy Actions. The evil of sin, bears proportion to the
object, or person offended by it; as the object is higher, and more excellent,
so the offense is greater. The same offense done to a King, is far greater,
than that which is done to a mean Subject. Every sin therefore being committed
against an infinite God, comes to be an infinite evil; and so deserves an
infinite punishment. But the valor and worth of a good and holy action,
arises not from the excellency of the object, but of the subject, whose act it
is. This made Christ his obedience meritorious, and satisfactory with God for
us; because his person, who performed it, was so excellent, of infinite worth
and dignity. And for the same reason, the Christians obedience can deserve
nothing, his person being so mean and low, and performed to God, who is so
infinitely great and glorious. Secondly, The Christians labor can deserve no
reward at Gods hands, as sin does punishment; because the service he does is
due debt; he owes it to his God, and even men do not use to reward those who
pay them a debt; nay, not thank them: So says our Savior, Does the Master
thank his Servant, because he did that he commanded him? I trow not, Luke 17.9.
Thirdly, The Christians work and labor falls short of what is due; it is
blended with sin; his Silver is mixed with dross, and his Wine with water; yea,
there is but parvum in magno, a little silver with an abundance of dross. Our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Psalm. 64.6. Surely that work deserves not a
good reward, which deserves a punishment. Lastly, That little which is found
truly and spiritually good, is not the Christians own; but his, by whose power
it was done. The Christian may say of his best performed duty, what he of his
axe, Oh master it is borrowed: The act, indeed, is the Christians own, in
Believing, Repenting, and the rest; he uses his own faculties, but the power
by which he is enabled to do so, is Christ's. And therefore he is so far from
deserving a reward, that he is indebted to God for his assistance; and the
greater the assistance is, the greater is the debt he contracts. Instead
therefore of expecting thanks from God, for what he has done, he owes thanks,
and praise to God, who helped him to do it. Thus David, 1 Chronicles. 29.13. Now
therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name; but who am I?
and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this
sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own me have given thee: Yet
this is the work which God so wonderfully rewards of his Free Grace; pugna and
ego adjuvabo, vince and ego coronabo. Fight and I will help, overcome and I
will Crown thee. God works all in us, and then rewards the work, as if all had
been done by our selves; Oh Free Grace, never enough admired Mercy!

Quest. But if the reward be so glorious, what reason can then be given, why so
few are found that will labor for it.

Answ. If you expect a good reason, there is none can be given: but if a true
reason will serve, it is soon at hand. First, Because Heaven is a reward that
is unseen to the Eye of Sense, and Carnal men (who make the most in the world)
have not such an eye, as the eye of Faith, to make it evident to them: they
have, indeed, an eye of Sense in their Head, but that like the Sun, does
revelare inferiora, sed obsignare superiora. It shows the good of sensual
objects here below, but leaves the Glory of Heaven unseen. Secondly, Heaven is
a glorious reward, but it is to come, we must wait for it; and carnal men's
desires are impetuous, that will not let them stay so long for their
consolation. Now the world that offers present pleasure, present profit,
present ease; and most men are like beggarly traders, who cannot sell for time,
but must have ready money, though they put off their Goods with loss; thus do
carnal men. Give me my Portion (said the Prodigal) Never thinks what he shall
do, when that is spent. Demas loved this present World, 2 Timothy 14.10. Heaven is
a great way off, they will put that to the adventure; occidit modo imperat. Let
him kill me, (said Agrippina of her Son) only let him reign. This is the
language of many men's hearts, fall back, fall edge, damned, or not damned
hereafter, so I may have my present lust satisfied Thirdly, Sinners do not like
the nature and quality of Heaven. Some expressions, indeed, there are, with
which it is set forth in Scripture, that please them very well, were they true
in the Letter; as when it is set out by a Marriage Feast, by Rivers of
Pleasures, by a Crown and Kingdom. A Feast the Glutton likes, were the cheer
such in Heaven, as is on his own Table here on Earth; if the Wine of that
Kingdom were such as is drawn at the Tavern, the Drunkard would be for it. But
a Feast without Sensual fare, joy without jollity, Music without Fidling, a
Crown and Kingdom without worldly Splendor or Pomp, are such things as put
them quite out of liking with it. So that they care for Heaven only, when they
can have Earth no longer, and choose it as a place only more desirable than Hell.

The Application of this Point follows. First, To the Carnal world. Two Ways.
First, Of Conviction. Secondly, Of Exhortation.

First, Of Conviction. This convicteth some wicked men of a false slander. And,
Secondly, All of them of gross folly.

First, Some among them, of a slander and false report, they bring upon the
holy ways of God; as if it would not quit cost to be Religious; and to take
pains in its work, were labor lost. This, I confess, is an high charge, and
there is reason I should make it good, before I proceed to the refuting of it;
lest while I accuse others of slandering, my self be thought the Slanderer; and
to set up an enemy to shoot at, when there is none, except in mine own
imagination. But the proof is easy. The Devils Empire in the world, was
founded first of a lie; and as he got it, so he labors to keep it; he found
man at the first, happy in his willing subjection, and obedience to his God;
his only way therefore to undo him, was to inveigle him out of Gods service
into his own; to effect this his Policy, was to bring him into a dislike of his
present state; and to promise him, not only impunity, but strange advantages,
accruing upon the change of his Master. Thus as Enemies throw down Castles, by
blowing them up; so he by puffing man up with a conceit of being like God,
brought him down from the height of his Felicity; and instead of making him
like a God, made him like himself, who is an accursed Devil. Speeding so well
by this stratagem, he has used it ever since, to keep sinners from returning
to their first rightful Lord and Master, as he had done, to entice man, at
first from his service; that is, by slandering God and Religion. He must be a
hard Master, that reaps where he does not sow, or suffers not his Servants to
reap what they do sow. Either he exacts more than he gives ability to do, or he
does not reward the work they have done, and so makes them labor in vain. Both
false slanders. The first I must pass over as foreign to my subject. But the
second lies in my way; and God knows, though it be as untrue, as he is true,
yet it finds too easy credence among Sinners, who are glad to have any
pretense to excuse them from* the service of God, which their own corrupt
hearts do so much dislike. This, therefore, has been the old Plea, which
wicked men have made for their aversation to Religion, Job 22.17. Which said
unto God, depart from us, and what can the Almighty do for them? Oh what Sots
does sin make men? their Plea had been more plausible, if they had said, what
can the Unmighty do for them? but to call him Almighty, and then ask what he
can do, shows they were sunk beneath reason. Who, indeed, can exercise reason
against God? you see here this prejudice against Piety, is as Ancient, as Jobs
time, who is judged to have lived about, if not before Moses his Age. Yet was
it not then Novel, for Eliphas speaks, ver. 15. Have thou marked the old way
which wicked men have trodden? indeed, Luther said right. Cain would kill Abel
to the end of the world; and so had they, and will have vile and cheap thoughts
of Religion. It held, I am sure, in Malachi his time; Ye have said it is vain
to serve God, Chap. 3. ver. 14. And have we any reason to think, that the same
prejudice against Religion, continues not amongst many ungodly ones, in these
last times? wherein the world is grown as older, so colder to Religion. Old
Age, indeed, is not wont to cure, but rather increase diseases that are
hereditary: the prodigious profaneness, and filthiness, of our present Age,
with the scorn that is cast upon all serious endeavors, after Holiness, is no
good indication that it is ceased, but the contrary; that such as these have a
most vile and base opinion of Religion; how else were it possible they would
dub themselves, while wallowing in their brutish lusts, for the wise and happy
men; and despise others, as doting Fools, that dare not venture their Souls in
their company, by running with them into the same excess and riot? If they did
not first think Religion an insignificant thing, Piety a needless scrupulosity,
and all the Christians pains therein, in vain; and those to be in the right,
and go away with all the gains, who will have nothing to do with Religion, but
live in an open defiance of it. Now, though what has been said already of the
glorious reward, which will certainly crown the Christians labor, be enough to
wipe of this dirt from the face of Religion, and leave it on their own that
throw it; yet I shall a little, and ex abundanti, speak to the vindication of
it in this point. And who, though but a stripling, would not venture to cope
with such Goliahs, or Giants of the Earth; that defy the Living God, and his
Hosts of Saints? Is it not strange that those poor wretches should not take
notice in whose hand the Pencil is, by the illfavouredness of the Portraicture
that here is drawn of God and Religion? Who but the Devil himself, would
present him, and his holy ways, in such black lines and lineaments to their
thoughts? and is it not more strange, that any of mankind should so far forget,
or go against those common notions of the Divine goodness, which naturally are
impressed upon their minds, as to believe God to be such an one, as the Devil,
his sworn Enemy, tells them he is? But most of all strange it is, that those
who have read, or heard the Gospel, where God, not only, more fully makes known
the goodness and graciousness of his Nature, but also opens the counsel of his
Will and Mercy to poor sinners, and brings life and immortality to light, as
the sure reward of those, who at his gracious call, receive Christ as their
Lord and Savior, should after all this, sing the same old note with ignorant
Heathens; It Is in vain to serve God. And suitable to such apprehensions of him,
lead Irreligious and Flagitious Lives, having nothing but the word of a lying
Devil to secure them from Eternal misery. This is such an infatuation, as the
world cannot show the like; but who so blind as he, whose eyes are put out with
Gospel Light? into this righteous judgment upon them, for rebelling against
light, we must resolve this their folly. For judgment I am come into this
world, that they which see not, might see, and that they which see might be
made blind, John 9.39. But to reason a little with this sort of men; can you
think that the God of Truth has made so many Promises to his people to deceive
them with a false hope? will he be unrighteous to forget their labor of Love,
after he has made himself a Debtor, if not to them, yet to his own
faithfulness, by making his Promise? Can he, that rewards even the wicked for
any work, in which he uses them, let his own faithful servants lose their
pains? Nebuchadnezzar had the Land of Egypt given him for his service against
Tyrus, Ezekiel. 29.18.19. Cyrus had a great Empire for his expedition against
Babylon: though these meant nothing less than the serving and glorifying of
God, but aimed at the enlargement of their Dominions, and satisfying their own
ambition; yet because they were instruments to accomplish his secret Decrees,
in favor of his People, he gave them a reward. And did he reward them for his
peoples sake, and will he let these his own people sit down with loss, who out
of pure Conscience and Love to him, do his work, and fight his Battles against
Flesh, World, and Devil? It cannot be, he does indeed make them stay longer,
than the other, for their reward; but they are sure to speed better at last;
they, like Ishmael, are sent away presently with bread and bottle. Temporal
rewards, they have their Consolation here; but when their portion is spent,
then the Saint shall receive his reward, an Inheritance incorruptible, and
Eternal. Be patient (says the Apostle) and establish your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh. And when he comes, their reward comes with him.
Again, Do you not cross the experiences of all the Saints, do they not they all
give God and his service a good word? proclaiming him the best Master they ever
served. Psalm. 19.11. Psalm. 34.8.
In keeping thy commands is great reward, (says David) And again, Oh taste and
see how good the Lord is; once, I confess, in the Paroxism of a sore
Temptation, he spoke like one of the foolish world; I have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence, Psalm 73.13. But will ye believe what a
man says, when his head is hot and light in the fit of a Fever, rather than
when he is in his true and right temper? No sooner was this fit off, but he
befools and be beasts himself, and blesses himself in his approaching
happiness. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto
Glory, verse 24. And from this hope takes faster hold of God and his Holy ways;
But it is good for me to draw near to God, ver. 28. And surely one affirmative
testimony of a Saint, in vindication of God and Religion, is of more weight
than a thousand negative testimonies of the wicked world to the contrary, who
speak evil of what they understand not; condemn Religion before they have tried
it, and disgrace that service they were never in. Whereas the godly man has
served both Masters, and speaks from his own experience, where most is to be
got; professing that he has nothing to show of his gettings in the service of
sin, but shame. But in the Lords service, Romans 6.21.
present fruit unto Holiness, and a hope of Eternal life afterward. In a word,
needs there any more to make this appear a false slander, than to observe, how
these very wretches upon a sickbed, when they apprehend themselves on the
marches of death, do Court Religion; which in their jollity they Cart and
Scourge with their reviling Tongues? Oh how glad would they then be to creep
into a Saints clothes, and go by his name; how desirous to dye the Righteous
man's death, and to have an end like his? Oh how afraid to look into another
world, or to think of going hence as they are? Does not all this speak, that
they themselves secretly think there is more reality in Religion, and the
Eternal consequences of it, than they will in their Prosperity confess? The
truth is, God has their Conscience on his side, but their Lusts have their
Hearts; and these are they which gag their Conscience, that it may not speak
what it would: but at last, Conscience is even with them, and revengeth the
violence offered to it, upon them. And for stoping its mouth a while, opens it
the wider at last; both in accusing them for this their past wickedness, and
terrifying them with the fearful expectation of the Dismal Tempest of Fire and
Brimstone, ready now to pour down upon them. Thus as the hardest Frosts, when
they break, leave the deepest slugs behind them: so does the greatest Dedolency
and insensibility, in an Irreligious life, leave sinners (when Conscience
recovers its sense and feeling) sticking fast in the deepest horror and
desperation.

Secondly, This convicts the carnal world of gross folly, in refusing the
service of God, where the reward of their labor is so sure and
incomprehensibly great; and for misplacing their pains and labor for that
which is neither sure to be obtained, nor much worth the having, if it be
gotten; and so in both respects labor in vain. First, the sinner labors for
what he is not sure to obtain. The world has not to this day been able to give
a certain rule whereby the covetous Worldling, can be sure after all his toil
and drudgery, that he shall be rich; nor the ambitious, that he shall get up
the hill of honor, and not catch a fall in climbing it: the world is too like
a Lottery, where men know not whether they shall draw a Prize or Blank. Though
all come with heads full of hopes and projects into the world, yet most go out
with hearts full of shame and sorrow for their disappointments. But in
Religion, there is such a certain rule laid down in the good Word of God, that
whoever walks by it, Peace is upon him; say ye to the Righteous it shall be
well with him. Mark the Perfect man, Gal. 6. Isa. 3.10. Psalm. 57.37.
and behold the Upright, for the end of that man is Peace, Psalm 37.37. They
that wait on the Lord shall not be ashamed, because not disappointed of their
hope; but some carnal men will tell you, whatever the world is to others, yet
they can say their labor is not in vain. This worldling, who has prospered in
his way, can show you his filled bags, and tell you how many hundreds a year he
puts up as clear gain into his Purse. The Voluptuous person will tell you
stories of the many merry Meetings he has been at, Months and Years of
Pleasure he has enjoyed; saying with the carnal Jews, These are the rewards
our Lovers have given us, Hosea 2.12. How then say you, that we labor upon
such uncertainties? In the second place therefore, the prize that sinners get
by all their Labor, it is not so much worth, as to save them from losing their
Labor. For First, What they have got will ere long leave them. Secondly, It
will deceive them. Thirdly, It will damn them. First, It will leave them. It is
not in the power of man's wit to devise a way, how the Ambitious man should keep
his honor long, except his preferment could change his Nature, and make him
immortal; he is, alas, still of the same clay with other men, as he was before.
The Rainbow is a common watery Cloud, no more durable, than the rest, though
painted for a time with gayer colors. That which has been, is named already,
and it is known that it is man, Eccles. 6.10. (...) a lump of red earth, that
must return ere long to his first dust. As impossible it is for the Covetous
man to make his estate sure to him; his Riches will make wings to themselves,
though he does not as the Prodigal, Prove. 25.5. Jam. 5.3.
make wings for them; fly away they will, and that toward Heaven also, to
accuse him, and be a witness against him at the last day. If he should not see
them flown from him while he lives, yet to be sure when Death's Gun goes off,
these, and all the sinners joys, will fly away at once. And how near a step it
is to Death, the very Heathens can tell you, by their Hyroglyphick of an open
eye for life, and an eye shut for death; intimating, that death may come, ictu
oculi; man's life may be closed up, as soon as an eye can be shut: And is it not
folly and madness to bestow all a man's Labor, to raise the hopes of his
Felicity on such loose ground, where his building may fall as soon as it is up?
this made Solomon hate all his labor under the Sun, Eccles. 2.17. Because when
he had done all, he must leave all. Secondly, What Carnal men labor for, will
deceive them. Satan and the World are both very free of their Promises to their
Vassals and Servants; All these things, will I give thee, (said he) if thou will fall down and worship me. But alas, when the promised Feast comes to be
served in; it proves, as we say, nothing between two dishes: They spend their
Money for that which is not Bread; they labor for that which does not profit,
yea, it is worse than nothing. For Bread they have Stones, for Fish Scorpions
given them; instead of content, they have vexation, and a sting in their
Conscience. Hence the wicked are said, to work a deceitful work, Prove. 11.18.
Deceitful, because it deceives the worker; would not he be deceived, who
labors hard all day, in hope of a good reward at night from his Master, but is
then paid with nothing but a good Cudgel upon his bones? This is the reward
which Sinners have even in this life; many a blow and stripe laid upon him by
his Conscience, which others do not see, but he feels; he expects a Paradise,
but finds a Purgatory, and not only so, but sometimes God testifying openly
against him in his Judgments. No doubt Gehazi pleased himself with his Plot,
whereby he might get in one day, more than he was like to do in many years
service of his Master. Oh how brave should he be, when his new Clothes were on
his back? but, alas, he did not think of that other Garment of Leprosy, which
God would bestow on him, a Garment not like others, to cover his shame, but to
discover and proclaim his sin; a Garment that should last him to wear, and his
Children, from Generation to Generation. Thirdly, That which the Sinner labors
for, will not only leave and deceive, but also everlastingly damn him; they do
not only labor for vanity, but they labor in the fire for it, Habak. 2. Hell
fire, I am sure, will be the end of their labor; what the Apostle says of one
sort of Sinners, They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition, is as true of the rest. He that will have Pleasures, or he that will
have Honor; an Heart set violently on any thing here below, that makes it his
Treasure to enjoy, and therefore his chief Labor to obtain; this man must
needs fall into temptation, and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which (without Gods merciful hand, snatching him out of their Clutches) are
sure to drown them in Eternal Perdition. Was Shimei unwise, who by going out of
his Precincts to recover his runaway Servants, lost his own life? How much
more folly and madness is it, by hunting after the runaway Vanities of the
Creature, that are but thy servants to lose the life of thy Soul? Cur ea quae
ad usum diuturna esse non possunt, ad supplicium diuturna deposces? Why will thou, oh man, make that which is but temporary in the use, eternal is thy
punishment? Who would crave the sweetest morsel in the world, which after the
short Pleasure in swallowing of it down, would cause intolerable gripes in his
Bowels for but a month? and will thou devour that, which thou must be digesting
in Hell with Torments, as endless as easless?

Secondly, Of Exhortation, to all that are at present in the service of Sin, to
be persuaded to change your Master. Oh come now into the Lords service, that at
death you may enter into your Lords joy; enter into his Vineyard now, that you
may have your penny at night amongst his Faithful Laborers; labor for God in
this world, that you may rest with God from your labors in the other. It is
said of Caesar, that when he had brought his Army so near Rome, that they might
see it before them, he bad his Soldiers look upon it wishly, saying, What
think you? is not yonder brave City worth Fighting for? I have been speaking of
another guess place. Let me desire you to look once again up to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the City and Chamber of the great King, where is laid up this goodly
reward spoken to; is it not worth the laboring for, and going to, though every
step of the way were to be trod on points of Swords? Is it not a blessed thing
to behold God face to face? to be ever with the Lord? to bathe thy self in
those Pleasures that are at his right hand? to drink the wine of the Kingdom,
in the Kingdom of Heaven it self? Will thou lose it, as Lysimachus did his
worldly Kingdom, by staying to drink a draught of puddle water? the muddy
pleasures of Sin for a season? long thou can not stay here. Does it not
behove thee to make sure of an house above to receive thee, when thou art
turned out of thy Earthly Tabernacle here? and if it does, must thou not become
his Servant, do his work, or never look for his reward? And if thou will do it,
when mean thou to set about it, if not now? Heaven is won or lost here, now
and ever, now or never. When death takes thee off the stage, think not to have
leave to return, that thou may act thy part better. Times loss is the most
irrecoverable; thou may lose thy Ring, and find it again; thy House may be
burnt, and built again; but if time be lost, that never can be recovered. Death
is a change, that puts into an unchangeable state, the Saint into a state of
Bliss, the Sinner into a state of Misery. Heaven the reward of Gods Laborers,
and Hell the wages of wicked Workers and Loiterers. Oh think, and think again,
before it be too late, what rapping there will be at Heaven Gate, what calling,
and crying to be let in; yea, even by those, who now, when it stands open may,
and will not; and therefore then shall have no other answer, than that of our
Savior, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity; let him pay
you, that set you on work. Sinners, you think that at present you have the odds
and advantage of the Saints; they are Macerating themselves with Fasting, while
you are pampering your selves with Feasting; they are Mourning for their Sins,
while you are Pleasurably committing yours; they are Afflicted, and you are at
Ease; you get the World, and they lose it. But then the Tables will be turned,
they will recover all their losses here, and thou lose all thy gain; their
sorrows will take leave of them, never to trouble them more; but thy joys will
be at end, and thy sorrows come in the room of them. In a word, they shall be
comforted, and you tormented. 2. To the Saints. Walk in the view of this your
reward, and make an holy improvement of it in your lives. That which is the end
of our Faith, viz. Salvation, should be propounded as the end of all our
actings, and have an influence into our whole course. Finis principium est
omnium operationum; it should have the nature of a Direction what to do, and of
a Motive to enforce, and invigorate us in all we do. As the Bird is guided by
its Train, and the Ship by its Rudder, so the Christian should by his end.
First, Therefore let this Glorious Reward thou see before thee, keep thee
from accepting of the rewards of sin; let them love the reward of iniquity,
that look not for a reward of Righteousness. Abraham would not have it said,
the King of Sodom made him rich, who had God for his exceeding great reward.
Moses, who had respect unto the recompense of the reward, despised the
pleasures of sin for a season. It dishonoreth the Prince, when his Courtier
accepts a Pension from a strange, much more from an enemy Prince. When we yield
to any sin, we do what Satan tempted Christ unto, even worship and pay an
homage to him. I know no Argument to repel the Enemy, more forcible, nor more
honorable, than this; I will not disgrace my Masters service, the hopes I have
from him, to borrow a reward from his Enemy. Some Nations are wont to sight in
their richest Clothes and Jewels, to make them more valiant, by considering how
great their loss would be, by falling into their Enemies hands. Certainly,
Satan would not so easily foil thee (Christian) if thou did wear the rich
Bracelets of the Promises, and by Faith put on that robe of Glory, with which
thou shall ere long be clothed. How would a glorified Saint scorn a motion to
sin, Visio beatifica impotentes facit Angelos and sanctos ad peccandum. What,
they sin? the Sun might sooner be pulled out of its Orb, than they out of their
Obedience. What, they leave the Fatness and Sweetness they are satiated with,
for any thing that is to be got by a base sinner? Such a thought never did, nor
can enter into their Holy Heart. And we should be more like them, in our
detestation of all sin, had we more raised apprehensions of the greatness of
the Heavenly reward, and stronger hopes for our coming to it.

Secondly, Let it make thee steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord. This is the improvement which our Apostle makes in this
place, of this very Point; there is a (...) in Religion, much pressed by the
Apostle upon Believers, to walk as becomes the Gospel, as becomes Saints, to
walk worthy of God, worthy of our Holy Vocation. Now this becomingness lies
much in the sutableness of our present actings, to the height of our future
hopes. When we endeavor that the properties of our actions, may correspond,
and bear a resemblance to the reward expected by us. As the impression on the
Wax, answers to the Sculpture of the Seal; or as the Port and Garb of a great
Heir, is to the vast Inheritance he shall have. Now the Text, (for I go no
further) presents us with Two Properties of the Saints reward; Certainty, and
Immensity. And accordingly presses this double Duty, Stedfastness, or
unmoveableness, and abounding always in the work of the Lord, as bearing a
resemblance unto it. First, Therefore labor to be steadfast in thy profession
of the Faith; holding fast (says the Apostle) the Faithful Word, Titus 1.9.
How unsuitable to a Faithful Word, is a Faithless Heart? A wavering weak Faith,
to a sure Word? 2 Pet. 1.19. A Skeptical judgment, to a Doctrine that is
indubitable, and without controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16. How unbecoming is it to be
off and on, hot and cold, unstable and unconstant in an holy course, when thou
look for a Kingdom that cannot be shaken? Secondly, Let it make thee
abounding in the work of the Lord. How unsuitable is it to pinch God in thy
service, who is so magnificent in his reward? How unbecoming, to think any
measure enough in thy duty, when the reward promised, is without all measure?
Nay, do not only abound, but be always abounding in the Lords work, who will
make thee always happy. Alas, what is our always in abounding here; to the
always of his rewarding hereafter? the always of our service extends but to
the end of a short life; but the always of the reward to an endless Eternity.
Were there no reward at all hoped for, yet we ought; yea, the Saint would (for
his new Nature inclines him thereunto) serve his God. We see even our Children,
do love and obey us their Parents, though some of us have no Portion or
Inheritance to leave them? But it superadds a further Argument to a Rich man's
Child, to make him more abundantly dutiful and diligent, to consider what a
great estate his Father has; of all which he will make him Heir, though he
might not (if he pleased) have settled any thing on him at all. Thus when a
Saint considers, that God, who might have made a Law, binding him to Obedience,
without making a Promise to reward the same. It must needs much affect his
heart, to see God in his condescending Grace, and immense Bounty, thus to
sweeten, and facilitate his Obedience, with a promise of no less reward, than
of the Heavenly Inheritance. Think, oh Christian, how little the greatest
service thou can now do thy God, will in a dying hour appear to thine own
thoughts. I have observed, that the best of Saints, whose eminency in Grace,
and serviceableness in their Generations, others admired, have yet themselves,
upon a sick and dying bed, complained of their barrenness and unprofitableness.
Not bragged of their zeal, but bewailed their coldness; not applauded
themselves for what they had done, but mournfully confessed, what they had left
undone; the sense of their deficiencies, quite hiding from their eyes the sight
of their eminent diligence. As that famous Light in our British Church, and
laborious Servant of Christ, Bishop Usher, on his dying bed, thus Prayed, Oh
God forgive my sins of Omission: Who yet was admired of all that knew him, for
his laborious diligence in the Pulpit, and out of it also. And one reason, I
humbly conceive, why the best of Saints, at such an hour, are more than ever
sensible of their deficiencies, is, because they then standing nearest to
Eternity, have higher and wider apprehensions of the Majesty of God, and the
immense Glory of Heaven; which apprehensions must needs cause them to see the
vility and nothingness of their own sanctity, and all their services; and
consequently, fill them with an holy blushing and shame, that they have done so
little for God, who has laid up so much for them; that they have no more
glorified him on Earth, who hope, so soon to be glorified with him in Heaven.
And if the highest measures of the most fruitful Saints, which have done God
more service, than an hundred such as thy self, shrink into nothing, in their
own eye at such a time, and leave them full of shame and sorrow for their
unsuitable actings, to their high and glorious hopes; how much more will it
afflict thee with unspeakable grief and sorrow in the like hour (if thou have a
dram of Sincerity in thine Heart) to remember thy more palpable negligence and
barrenness. Oh what then will thou say of thy past life, which is so thin sown
with Holy Actions? now thou think thy self Religious enough, with thy
infrequent Devotions; if thou can get to the Church once in a week, and into
thy Closet, for a few moments, once in a day, it is well: But when thou come
to dye, thou will then complain, how thou have starved thy Soul, and robbed thy
God of much time, which might, and ought to have been employed in Communion
with him, and working out thy own Salvation. Now a few Pence out of thy great
Estate, passes for Charity; but when death comes to sweep all away at once,
then thou will complain thou have been a niggard of thy Purse, and did not
honor God with thy Substance. Now though thou speak, but once or twice in a
Moon of God, and Heaven in thy Family; and very seldom do Catechize thy
Children, and that but formally, without any affection, or with little desire
to affect them, with the concernment of those Truths, thou instructest them in,
yet thou please thy self, in having done thy duty to them so well. But when
death's cold sweat shall warn you of your approaching Dissolution, then thou will bewail, that Religion was so seldom the subject of thy discourse, in your
Family, that you did not more constantly instruct your Children and Servants;
and when you did, that you did not more passionately endeavor to move their
affections, and draw their hearts to the love and liking of Religion in its
Truths, and the practice of them.

Thirdly, Improve the hope thou have for this reward, to make thee live above
this present world. Truly, thou may well be content with a little here, who
look for so much hereafter. If the Labourer has but meat and drink at his
work, he asks no more, but stays willingly for the rest till night, when he
is to receive his wages. If thou have Food and Raiment here, and Heaven at the
end, does not God deal well with thee? Oh, it is for want of Faith in the
Promise, and activity in our Hope, to exercise it self on this Blessed Object,
that we are so having and craving after the things of this world, and so
dissatisfied with our portion here. We read of Solomon, that he made Silver to
be in Jerusalem, as stones, and Cedars as the Sycomore trees, 1 Kings 10.27.
The Christian might do more, had he a lively Faith and Hope; he might make all
this worlds Glory, Pleasures, and Treasures, to be but as dirt and dung in his
valuation, from what he expects to be preferred to, within a while in Heaven.
And he is the happier man, that can live above the world, than he that swims in
all its abundance. It is for want of better Metal, that Leather and Copper are
stamped for Coin; and for want of Faith, or exercising it on the Promise, that
we set too high a price of the things of this world. This would, and nothing
else can take off our Hearts from present things. Our Affections are too great
a stream to be dried up; but turned, they may be, into another Chanel; and
truly, the world is too narrow a Chanel to contain them: But here is roomth
enough, and more than enough for them all; here is a place of broad-water, no
fear of wanting Sea-room. If we would launch out into the Meditation of this
blessed place, oh how should we find our Hearts inflamed with longing desires
to be there, and no more envy the Carnal world, for what we leave them here to
enjoy, than you would the Swine his swill, if you were going to Feast at a
Princes Table; which minds me of the next particular.

Fourthly, Improve this Glorious Reward to reconcile death to thy thoughts, and
make thee rather desire, than fear to be dissolved. Many were the Arguments,
which the Philosophers, among the Heathens mustered up, to expel the fear of
this King of Terrors; but the wisest of them were baffled in all their attempts
therein. As it is said of Cicero, a little before his death, that he confessed
the remedies, which he had prepared against this Enemy, proved, he knew not
how, but too weak and feeble for that purpose. And one was bold to tell Plato,
when he spoke much of the contempt of death, Fortius loqueris, quam vivis; that
he spoke higher than he lived; and no wonder, if we consider, in how dark a
light they saw the existence of a future state; and much more, at what a loss
they were for finding the right way which leads to the happiness of it. Neither
do I wonder, that any wicked man under the Gospel, should be terrified at an
approaching death, and go down to the grave, as, they say, Bears go down an
Hill, backward; afraid to see, or think of that state they are going into. For
the more any knows of Heaven, without a well grounded hope of arriving there,
the greater must his dread needs be. He that increases knowledge here, will be
sure to increase his sorrow; but why any of the People of God, that have a hope
of Heaven, should not in some measure overcome the prevalency, at least of this
fear of death, is strange; and, indeed, casts a reproach upon Christianity. The
Turks (I have heard) some of them should say; they did not think Christians
believed there was an Heaven, because they saw them so loath to go to it. Labor
Christian, to wipe of this reproach, which these Infidels cast upon our
Religion. First, Look thou buildest thy hope of Heaven, deep, and strong, upon
a good ground; which is Regenerating Grace, (for a dead Soul, cannot have a
lively Hope) Then labor to hold fast the rejoicing of thy Hope unto the end,
to which it would much conduce, to preserve a right notion of death in thy
thoughts. What else (Christian) is death to thee, but what Jordan was to the
Israelites? a passage from an howling Wilderness, of a sinful miserable World,
where thou have been pinched with Wants, and stung with fiery Temptations, to a
Land of Promise, where is safety to security, and fullness to Felicity: where
thou will find the absence of nothing, but sin and sorrow. Look upon it, as the
uncovering of the Ark of thy body, wherein thou have been tossed and tumbled
sorely upon the waves of a restless life, to set thee on shore on Heavens firm
and peaceable Land. Is the betrothed Spouse afraid of her Marriage day? or a
Prince loath to cross a narrow Sea, to take possession of a wide Kingdom, and a
rich Crown, that wait only for his coming? No (Christian) fear not thou death,
but rather let thy heart revive with old Jacobs, at the sight of this Wagon or
Chariot, which is sent to bring thee over to thy Heavenly Fathers house.

Fifthly, Let it moderate your sorrow, for the death of your Pious Friends, and
useful Instruments in their Generations. Indeed, the loss of such is great, to
those that are left behind; and therefore God allows us to mourn, when such
breaches are made upon us; but withal, he sets bounds to our sorrow, that we
sorrow not even as others, which have no hope, nor mourn so as to refuse to be
comforted; to take our own loss so to heart, as not to rejoice in their gain:
Is this thy kindness to thy Friends? would thou have them labor, and never
rest? work, and never receive their reward? They could not have had these here,
but they have them where they are gone. Oh be not unkind to them, by being
over-kind to your selves. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, (says our Savior
to his Disciples) because I said I go to the Father, Joh. 16.28. As if he had
said to them, you are indeed (my Disciples) too selvish. You think what you
shall lose if I depart hence, but you do not consider, what I should lose, by
my staying here: You see the poor condition I live in here on Earth, and know
the Royalty and Glory I am going to be possessed of in Heaven; and are you
unwilling I should be advanced to my Throne there; and that after I shall have
finished the work of your Redemption here? Truly you are unkind, and show but
little love, in this, to me, your dear Lord and Savior. Nor do we express much
love to our deceased Friends, of whose happy change we have no reason to doubt,
if their incomparable advantage does not make us more rejoice for them, than
our loss, make us mourn for our selves. If we be, as they were, (sincere and
faithful Christians) our loss is but short; ere long we shall recover it, by
being taken up to them; they are not lost, but gone a little before, whither
the rest of their Brethren, ere long, shall be called. And while we are left
here behind, we have a God to live upon, who cannot dye, who will not leave us,
and whose presence is sufficient to compensate, I trow, the absence, not of
one, but all our Friends. Would Elkanah be thought better to his barren Wife,
than ten Sons? May not God then look his Children, when bereaved of any
Creature Comforts, should count the having him better, yea, infinitely better
than them all. Let therefore every Saint, in this, and all other bereavements,
solace himself with this of David, Psalm 18.46. The Lord lives, and blessed be
my rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted.

It is expected, I know, that I should now speak something of that Noble (and
without offense, I hope, I may say) Elect Lady; the Solemnization of whose
Funeral, occasioned this our sorrowful meeting; which should I not do, without
doubt, I should send you all away, very much dissatisfyed. But far be it from
me, that I should by my silence, put her light (now she is dead) under a
Bushel, which shined, before all your eyes, so radiently, while she was alive,
even as a great Candle, Mar. 11.32.
on an high Candlestick. It was said of John Baptist, all men counted John,
that he was a Prophet indeed. And I am persuaded, that all who knew her,
esteemed the Lady Vere a Christian indeed. Truly, if we may not think so of
her, we shall be at a great loss to find such Characters, by which we may judge
any at all to be so. I shall begin to speak of her, where she her self began to
be, her Birth, I mean, and Parentage, from which she had her Extraction. And
this was High and Ancient on both sides. For by her Mothers side, she sprang
from the chief of the Throg-mortons Family; and by the Fathers side, was
extracted of the Ancient Family of the Tracies, at Todington in
Gloucester-shire. She was the youngest of Fifteen Children; born on the
Eighteenth day of May, Anno 1581. being the 23. of Queen Elizabeth. Her Mother
dyed three days after she was Born; and her Father, when she was but eight
years old. Thus soon was she an Orphan; but, indeed, they only are Orphans, who
have no Father in Heaven. When her Father and her Mother thus forsook her, the
Lord took her up. The many Experiences she had all along her life, of Gods most
tender care over her, occasioned her to choose this for her Motto (which is
found written by her, in the front of most of her Books in her Closet) God will
Provide. She took much delight in speaking of one of her Ancestors, as one of
the greatest Honors to her Family. William Tracy of Toddington, Esquire,
mentioned by Mr. Fox in his Martyrology, who in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, for the sound Profession of his Faith, made by him in his last Will and
Testament, was after his Decease, condemned to have his body taken out of the
ground and burnt; which Sentence, accordingly was executed. She was twice
Married; to Mr. William Hobby, her first Husband, at Nineteen Years of Age, by
whom she had two Sons, which were Religiously Educated by her; the happy fruit
of this her care, she reaped at their Pious Deaths (for they both went young to
Heaven) the Younger dyed in the Fourteenth Year of his Age; the Elder in his
Three and Twentieth, much admired for his Parts, and loved for his Piety. Her
second Husband was, Sir Horace Vere, afterward Baron of Tilbury; so Noble and
Excellent a Person, that I must not name him without some Honorable
Reflection; one whose Coat Armor made more Renowned, than his Coat of Arms;
and his Personal Achievements in the field, ennobled more, than the High Blood
he borrowed from his Ancestors. But his Piety gave him the highest Character of
all; by the other he got a great Name, like unto the great Men, that are in the
Earth; 2 Samuel 2.19.
but by this he obtained a good Name. And even Tacitus, the Roman Historian,
prefers a praise from Goodness, before that which is obtained by Greatness. And
therefore speaking of a Noble Roman, says, he was, inter claros potius quam
inter bonos censendus. This Noble Lord was one, who could wrestle with God, as
well as fight with Men; and may be thought to have got his Victories upon his
knees in his Closet, before he drew his Sword in the Field. And when he had
overcome his Enemies, he could overcome himself also; being one of the humblest
Souls, in whom so much true worth lodged, that I have heard of. His good Lady
would say, she honored him for his Valor, but most, for the Grace of God
which shined in him. Thus she did, coruscare radiis Mariti, shined by the Rays
of her Husbands Excellencies; but not only with these, for she had radient
Beams of her own, by which she cast like Honor upon him, as she received from
him. So happily was this Noble Couple suited, us in the high Extraction of both
their Births, so also in the rest of their accomplishments, that they mutually
illustrated each the others Honor. But passing by all her secular
Prerogatives, we shall now present her to you, in some of her spiritual
Excellencies. These, indeed, give the intrinsic value to a person. He that
would take the true height of of a man, must not measure him with the
vantage-ground he stands on. I may say of this Gracious Lady, what Nehemiah
said of another Noble Person in his time; She was a Faithful Woman, and feared
God above many. Nehem. 7.2.
Some are so prodigiously wicked, that they seem to have wedded the Vices of
many others. But this good Lady may be said to have collected the Excellencies
of many other Christians. In her you might have seen these various Graces,
which grow to an eminency, but severally in others, met altogether in one knot;
I shall speak of a few.

First, The fear of the Great God, was very great in her; wonderful tender she
was of offending him. She has been often heard to say, and that solemnly; Oh,
I would not sin against my God. She professed, that she dreaded Hell most, as a
place where God was Blasphemed. Oh precious Saint, to dread Hells sin, more
than Hells fire.

Secondly, Her Zeal to the Worship of God, was eminent. First, To the Public,
this was evidenced many ways. First, By her Zeal, to get able and faithful
Ministers for those Livings she had in her dispose; and by improving her utmost
interest, to procure the like for this Parish, where she resided, in its
several vacancies. And herein the Noble Patron, did most kindly gratify her
with the choice, deeply obliging, not only her Honor, but the whole Town
thereby; so that you in this place, have lived in a Goshen of Gospel light for
a long season; and are able also to tell, how comfortably she spoke to those
that taught the good Word of the Lord amongst you. What countenance, and real
encouragement she gave them in the Lords Work, without sparing her purse to do
it. Secondly, By her constant attendance on the Public Worship, so long as the
Lord vouchsafed her any health: yea, she did not only attend on it her self,
but was careful that her Family should do the same with her. They that would
not serve God with her, were no Servants for her. Thirdly, She was no less
devout in, than constant at the Public Worship. She durst not trifle with Holy
things, which made one (in this respect) say of her, That this Lady, by her
Solemn and Reverent Deportment in Divine Worship, would make one believe that
there is a God indeed. As for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is so
dismally neglected by many; her desires were most Ardent to partake of it
frequently, saying, (as the Minister of the place informed me) that she durst
not neglect, no, not any one opportunity, that was offered for the enjoying
this Sacred Ordinance. And, oh, how intent was she in Preparation for it? the
whole preceding week was taken up by her for that work; in which, she would
always have a private Fast with her Family, or a secret one in her Closet. Was
not this one that meant to go to Heaven in good earnest? Secondly, The Private
Worship of God. Let us follow her from the Church, to her own House, and we
shall find, that she brought her Religion and Devotion home with her, and did
not leave them in her Pue behind her, till she returned to it again the next
Sabbath. Some can complement God Almighty, before their Neighbors, on the
Sabbath, but care not to acquaint with God at home all the week after. But if
ever any privite dwelling, might be called a Chapel or little Sanctuary, her
house was such. There you might find her, and her Family, twice every day, upon
their knees, solemnly Worshipping the Great God; there you might see them,
humbly sitting, at his feet, to hear his most Holy Word read unto them;
concluding constantly their Evening Service, with Singing one of David's Psalms.
What Strangers soever were present, there was no putting by, or adjoining the
Worship of God to a more convenient season. On the Lords day, you might hear
the Sermons Preached in Public, repeated to the Family, the Servants called to
give an account before her, or what they remembered, the high Praises of God
sounded forth by the whole Family together. After Supper again, you might hear
the Servants in their room, exercising themselves in the same Heavenly Duty of
Singing Psalms. And no sooner did the good Lady hear them strike up, but away
she would go to join with them in that duty. Follow her up the stairs, there
you should be sure to find her, twice every day, shut up some hours in her
Closet (which was excellently furnished with Pious Books of Practical Divinity)
Here she redeemed much precious time, in reading the holy Scriptures, and other
good Books, that might give her further light into them, and help to put more
heat into that light she had obtained. Here she poured out her devout Soul,
with such fervours of Spirit in Prayer, as could not be hid (sometimes) from
those her Maidens, whose occasions drew them, at any time, near her Closet
door; and yet are we not at an end of this good Ladies Devotions; for every
night she would, her self, pray with her Maidens, before she went to bed. And
now, is it any wonder, she grew so rich in Grace, who drove so great, and
constant a Trade in the means of Grace, and had so many ways to bring her in
Spiritual gains?

Thirdly, Her Love to God (besides what already has been said) did many ways
make it self evident to be of an high degree. First, The mournful complaints
she would make, that she could love God no more; the reason of which indeed
was, because she loved him so much. Therefore she thought she loved him so
little, because she knew she could never love him enough. The truth is, she had
such raised apprehensions of Gods Glorious Excellency, as caused her to think
her highest affections unworthy of him. None, indeed, that have such high
apprehensions of the Divine greatness and goodness, can love him little, or
think their love, when most, to be great. Secondly, The vehement desires, and
longings, she had to be gone hence, that she might be with Christ. She was one
of those very few Christians, which stood in need of old Mr. Dods use of
Exhortation; which I have heard he would make to the Saints, in his Preaching:
That they would he content and patient, though they were not taken up to Heaven
so soon as they desired. This good man (who was one of the most Heavenly Souls
that this Age knew) finding to do this, was something difficult in his own
Soul, thought it was ordinary for others to do the like; whereas (God knows)
most Christians, are of a lower form in Christ's School, prone rather to linger
too much here, than to be too hasty of going hence; so that they need rather
Spur than Bridle, and Ministers have more reason to take hold of them, with the
strongest Arguments they can find, to draw them out of the love of this world
(as the Angels did Lot out of Sodom) than to make them willing to continue
here. But this Gracious Lady, knew so much of Heaven, as made her stay here
tedious to her: the earnest option of her Soul was, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. She found to her great grief, that her imperfect state on Earth, made
it impossible to serve God here as she would, and therefore did wonderfully
complain she was unprofitable and unserviceable; and this deep sense of her
unserviceableness (while others admired her fruitfulness and usefulness) did
still increase her desires to be, where all these infirmities would be cured,
and where she knew her ability should fully correspond to the height of her
desires she had to serve and glorify her God. Thirdly, Her love to the Saints,
who are born of God, and have his lively Image stamped upon them. This in
Scripture, is made one of the fairest evidences for our love to God. Every one
that loves the Father that begat, loves him that is begotten, 1 John 5.1. A
man may love the Child, and not love his Father; but he cannot love him,
because he is his Child, and because he is like his Father, but he must needs
love his Father. Yea love him first and most, because his love to the Child,
springs from his love to the Father. This Good Lady then, was a great Lover,
doubtless, of God himself, because she had so dear an affection to his
Children. She did not praise the dead Saints, and persecute the Living; she did
not pretend love to those that lived far from her, but showed kindness to them
that lived near her: She did not factiously love some of one Party, and
reproach those of another. In a word, she did not love the Saints in an
equality with others, from a Natural tenderness, which disposes some to be
kind to all, good and bad; but her love was a Spiritual, Cordial, Special, and
Uniform Love to them. Wherever she saw any thing of God, her Love was drawn
out toward them, and had the most love for those, that discovered most of God;
she loved them so, as to delight in converse and communion with them; yea, and
the chief of her Charity was extended to them. As for the Faithful Ministers of
Christ, whose Function lifts them above private Christians, few ever exceeded
her, in loving and honoring of them; yea, she loved first the Ministry, and
then the Ministers; professing seriously, the great love and high esteem she
had for them, was for their dear Masters sake, whose Ambassadors they were. So
that what I have heard concerning her worthy Son-in-Law, in Norfolk, Sir Roger
Townsend, that for his Love to the Ministry, he got the title of being called,
Deliciae Cleri, The Ministers Delight; may be truly given to her.

Fourthly, Her works of Charity were remarkable, upon manifold accounts. First,
The largeness of her Charity, so great indeed it was, that it may well be
admired, how this Tree should not long ago have killed it self with
overbearing. The Trees in our Orchards yield their Fruit but once a year,
taking so long a time to be put in heart for bearing again. But her Charity was
dropping Fruit all the year long. Many ways it diffused it self; she had Silver
for the Moniless aliment for the Hungry, Medicaments for the Sick, Salves for
the Wounded. Abundance of good she did this way, in Town and Country; she did
not only give, but devised liberal things. If her Servants knew of any that
were in great need, and did not tell her of it, she would (when by otherways
she heard thereof) be very angry with them. It happened, that an honest poor
Neighbor dyed, before she knew he was sick, for which being troubled, she
asked her Servant, whether he had wanted in his Sickness, saying, with some
earnestness, I tell you, I had rather part with my Gown from my back, than the
Poor should want. Secondly, In the prime objects of her Charity, she cast her
seed upon all sorts of ground, but especially on Gods enclosure. The Household
of Faith, had her fullest handfulls; to such she never thought she gave enough.
Thirdly, Her Secrecy in giving. When it might be, she did not give her
Charity, as some throw their Money into a Basin at a Collection, so that it
rings again, but it fell like Oil into a vessel, without noise. Fourthly, Her
Self-denying Spirit in all this; she was no Merit-monger; good Lady, she never
thought to purchase Land in Heaven, with the money she gave on Earth. She was
no Merchant to sell her Charity, but a Faithful Steward, acknowledging, what
she gave, was not her own, but her Lords money; she was, notwithstanding all
her Charity, carried out to a naked Christ, desiring to be found alone in him,
and his Righteousness, as earnestly, as if she had not done one good work in
all her life. Hear this, Oh ye Papists, and be ashamed for your notorious
slander; who would make the world believe, that Protestant Religion, is too
cold a Soil for Charity to thrive in. Behold here, a Protestant Dorcas, full of
good Works, and Alms-deeds. Though she had no opinion of Merit to cherish the
root of her Charity, from which much of yours comes, had not hope of expiating
some foul Crimes, or conceit of meriting Heaven, been at the bottom of the
Charity of many in your Church, it may be believed, the first stone had this
day been to be laid in some of your Goodly Hospitals and Churches also.

Fifthly, Her Sincerity. This was as her under Garment, which she wore nearest
to her, and gave excellency to all her other Graces. Many notable testimonies
there were for this in her. First, The uniformity of her Holy Walking; her
Religion was not like a drift Snow, which lies thick in one place, and leaves
the ground bare in another; the Hypocrite has some naked plot in his
Conversation, that renders him suspicious; you may persuade him with Herod, to
do many things, but never make him with Saint Paul, willing in all things to
live honestly. But in this good Ladies Conversation, one part corresponded
admirably with another; an happy Symmetry appeared in her whole course, toward
God and Man, abroad, and also at home, among her Domestic Relations, those
that lived constantly with her, who saw her (as we are wont to say) hot and
cold, in her night-cloaths, as well as when dressed to go abroad. Few, I
believe, have had an higher testimony for Piety, from those that have lived
near, and long with them, than she has from all that dwelt under her roof.
Secondly, The great freedom she gave her Friends in speaking to her, of what
they saw amiss in her; she was wont much to applaud the privilege of having a
Faithful Friend, saying, others might see more by us, than we by our selves;
she would also say, It Is a great mercy to be convinced of any sin. Thirdly, Her
Faith, which was wont to be then strongest, when death appeared nearest. Like
that great Soldier I have read of, who would tremble every joint, whilst his
Armor was putting on in his Tent, but without all fear, when he engaged in the
Battle. A little more than a Twelvemonth since, she fell into a long swound,
which lasted about half an hour, without any visible hopes of her recovery; but
as soon as she came again to her self, she said, I know my Redeemer lives; and
being conveyed to her chamber, there, again, I know whom I have trusted: An
Hypocrites hope is compared, to the giving up the Ghost, Job 11.20. And in this
particular not unlike. As a dying man, his breath grows shorter and shorter,
till at the last it is quite puffed out; so commonly the Hypocrites hope
lesseneth, as death grows nearer, and commonly expires, before the man himself
does.

Sixthly, Her Humility. This we may call her upper Garment, with which she
strived to cover her other Excellencies, though their Beauty was rendered the
more conspicuous and amiable, by casting this veil over it. Grace, indeed, is
like an Ointment, which the closer it is held in a man's hand, the more strongly
it sends forth his sweet scent. Oh how meanly did she think of her self? she
saw not how her own Face shined, while others beheld and admired. Ever
complaining she was useless, and unprofitable, and did no good. Never spoke she
of her Perfections, but frequently other Imperfections and unworthiness; yea,
she would often say, I abhor my self, indeed I do. How easy of access, for the
meanest to come into her presence? how affable, courteous, and lowly to the
poorest? many times, when her very Servants had done a business well, she had
set them about, she would say I thank you, to them. The Law of kindness was in
her Tongue, to whomsoever she spoke.

I have but a word or two to speak of her gracious behavior in her last
Sickness, and I shall say no more of this Honorable Person; her Pains was
strong, but her Patience stronger; never was she heard to mutter, or utter any
repining word; but justified God in all his proceedings with her. Yea more, she
was much in admiring and blessing God for his Mercies, in her acutest Pains and
greatest Agonies. How does this Blessed Soul now Carol forth the Praises of God
in Heaven? who could sing them so sweetly, while these sharp Thorns were at her
Breast? that could keep her Heart in tune for this high note, in her greatest
bodily pains and dolours? She was not without assaults from Satan: it were
strange indeed, if he should not have considered this Precious Servant of
Christ, and not offered her some disturbance at this time, whom he had found so
great and old an enemy to him, and his Kingdom of darkness; but he came only to
be beaten back with shame, and to add more Trophies to all her former Victories
over him. The last words which, I find, were observed to be spoken by her,
(before a sleeping Lethargy seized on her poor spent body, (which in two days
carried her off the stage of this life) were, How shall I do to be thankful?
how shall I do to praise my God? Thus she ended her life here, in the exercise
of that Duty, which was to be her constant endless work in that life she was
now entering into.

I have done speaking of this Elect Lady, and have now only some reflections to
make from what I have said on her, upon our selves.

First, Let us all be stirred up to give God the praise of those his Graces,
which he so abundantly poured into this Elect Vessel; her light has shined
very radiently before most of your eyes, her good Works you have seen, and many
of you been refreshed by them; now glorify your Father which is in Heaven;
think it not enough to go home and say, she was a good Lady, a precious
Christian indeed; but as your eye passes through the Air, and stays not till
it terminateth on the Sun; so let your thoughts not stay in the admiring other
Perfections, but pass from her, and fix upon God the Donor, and Father of all
these good and perfect gifts. Say not only, she was a good Lady, but oh how
good and gracious is God, to fill such a poor Earthen vessel, with so much of
his Heavenly Treasure. Again, Let us bless God, who has so happily finished
her course, and delivered her from the snares and miseries of this evil world.
The Souls of the deceased Saints, are above our Praying for them, being at rest
in a glorified state; they are beneath our praying to them, being still but
Creatures in Heaven, though glorified; but they may, and ought to be the
subjects of our Thanksgiving unto God. This is a duty, therefore, the greater,
because it is for the greatest of Mercies, that which crowns the whole series
of Gods gracious past Providence to them. If you think your selves engaged to
bless God for your Friends, whom God has brought safe home to you, after a
long and dangerous journey, or recovered out of a perillious Sickness? how much
more then should we be thankful, to see any of our Godly Friends, carried safe
to the end of this great journey, and landed at their Heavenly Fathers House?
not recovered from a Sickness, which is but an adjournment to death; but to
have shot deaths gulf, and to be set everlastingly above it?

Secondly, Let the radient Excellencies that were in her, humble us for her
Deficiencies. A coorse piece of Cloth, never appears to coorse, as when laid by
a fine; nor a Dwarff so low, as when set by one that is tall. How may her
knowledge in the Scriptures, shame the ignorance of many of us? Her awful fear
of God, the little reverence we have of the Divine Majesty? Her zeal for God,
our coldness? Her reverence in the Worship of God, the rudeness of many, who
behave themselves therein, as if God Almighty, and they were fellows? Her
charitable Spirit, and large Heart, whereby she concerned her self in the wants
and miseries of others, the narrow and selfish Spirits of many? who like the
Hedghog, wrap themselves up in their own soft wool, and turn out bristles to
all others. Or, who say with that fat Monk, stroking his own filled Paunch, If
it be well here, all is well; though others be shithering with cold, pining
with hunger. How may her Humility, which hid so great Excellencies in her, from
her own observance, put them to the blush, that are puffed up with their poor
pittance of gifts or graces? much more, those who are swelled with a fancy of
having that, which none can see they have. In a word, How may her Patience,
under great Afflictions, reproach the murmurings of many, when they feel but a
little smart from a gentle Correction? as if they would turn again upon God,
and snatch the Rod out of his hand? I might say, I fear too many, that seem
here to mourn for the loss of this good Lady, as Christ to the Jews, Weep not
for her, but we for your selves, that you are so unlike to what she was.

Thirdly, Let the high measures of Grace, this Precious Servant of God attained
to, encourage all weak Christians to press forward, after further degrees of
Grace. Sit not still for shame, at the bottom of this Hill, when you see how
high she got in Grace and Godliness. She has not drawn up the Ladder after
her; take her course, tread in her steps, and by Gods blessing, though thou
may not come to her pitch here, yet thou shall have far more than now thou
have. She did not grow thus rich in Grace, with idleness and sloth, but by Gods
blessing on her diligence, in the use of means. She did not become so eminent
by proudly thinking her self so to be, but by Humility, and Poverty of Spirit.
Many had been better, if they had not thought themselves to be better than they
were.

Fourthly, A word to you that had the privilege to live in her Family: For
Gods sake look to your selves; happy you, if the holy Example you had in her,
and extraordinary means of Grace you enjoyed under her roof, have had a kindly
and powerful effect in you; if they have produced a serious resolution for an
holy life. But woe be to you, that shall bring a profane and wicked Spirit out
of such a Pious Family; think seriously, how sad it will be, to live so near
Heaven in this world, as there you did, and at last to miss of Heaven in the
other.

Fifthly, To those that are privileged with Noble Birth, or Gentile
Extraction, learn from this Lady; the best way in the world, to make the
Tribute of Honor, which is your due, surely and cheerfully to be paid you;
take but the same course that this Gracious Lady, and Noble Lord her Husband
did, and I dare promise, you shall obtain it. Labor to be good, and to do
good, be not afraid, or ashamed to be Religious; own God in his Holy Ways, and
Holy Ones; and then you shall be Honored of all, but by those that refuse to
Honor God himself: And who would accept of Honor at their hands, who rob God
of his? you have the Word of God for this, Them that honor me, I will honor,
1 Samuel 2.30. By Humility, and the fear of the Lord, are Riches, and Honor, and
Life, Prove. 22.4. A place of Scripture, which God fulfilled, remarkably, in the
deceased Lady. It fares with Gentlemen's Honors, as it does with Tradesmens
Wares, which while they are made true and good, their price keeps up in the
Market; but when they are made with little care, and of bad stuff, then it
falls, and they hardly go off.

Oh defile not your Honors by any debaucheries; Dignitas in indigno est
ornamentum in Luto, says Salvian. What pity is it a Scarlet Cloak should be
sopt in a swill tub? The corruption of the best is the worst. I do not clear
those of sin, who do not give him the Honor due to his Title and Place, that
is unworthy of them; but methinks, that those whom God has left so high in
dignity above others, should consider, that it is their duty, and wisdom also,
to shun all that may lead their Inferiors into this Temptation. How can he be
free to complain of others, denying him his Honor, who by his own profaneness
and wickedness, casts more dishonor on himself, than any other can do? To be
dishonorable, is worse than to be dishonored, as much as a sin is worse, than
an affliction. The Good and Pious, are sometimes dishonored by those that are
wicked, even for that which is their highest Honor; but it is sin and
wickedness that makes a person dishonorable, as also it does a Nation, Prove.
14.35. But sin is a reproach to any People.

FINIS.
An Epitaph on the Right Honorable, and Religious, the Lady Vere, Wife to the
most Noble, and Valiant Lord Horatio Vere, Baron of Tilbury, who dyed, December.
25. 1671. in the 90 Year of her Age.
BEneath this Marble Stone does lie
Wonder of Age, and Piety.
So Old, so Good; 'twas hard to say
Which striving in her won the day,
Or had most power to bow her down,
Her Age, or her Devotion.
Her Piety made the World confess
Old Age no bar to fruitfulness.
Her Age again so wondrous great,
Proved Piety never out of Date.
Well may she then a wonder go,
When as, to prove her to be so,
The two grand Topics do agree,
Both Scripture and Antiquity.
Thus was she like (none ever more)
That Widow of above Fourscore,
Who serving God both day and night,
At last of Jesus gat a sight.
Nay still, like her, in Temple, she
Her Savior waits, once more to see.
On Her sleeping Three days together, before she dyed.
Deaths Brother, Sleep, her Senses tied
Three days, and then she waking died.
Sleep was the Essay of Death's Cup,
Which first she sipt; then drank all up.
Thus Swimmers first with foot explore
The Gelid stream, then venture over.
Thus Martyr, for a Trial, first
Into the fire his Finger thrust,
To snip a Pattern of the flame,
Then clothes his Body with the same.
Thus Spies to Canaans Land are sent,
To view the Countries e're they went.
Sleep was the Mask, in which she saw
The Promised Land, Incognita.
Which done, she only wak't, to tell
Bystanders, that she liked it well.
Then, Reader, if thou wonder'st at
Her Three days Sleep; remember that
Three days to view the Triple-Heaven,
(One day spent in each Court) makes even.
But, Reader, when thou think upon
Her Third days Resurrection,
If you are amazed, wonder no more:
Her Savior did so before.
On her dying just on the day of Christ's Nativity.
Long time she sleeping lay, but could not dye
Until the day of Christ's Nativity.
No wonder then She slept and slumbered;
It was because the Bridegroom tarried.
On Her Nobility.
Noble herself, more Noble, 'cause so near
To the Thrice Noble, and Victorious Vere.
That Belgic Lion, whose loud fame did roar,
Heard from the German to the British shore.
His Trophies she was Joyntur'd in. (so say
The Lawyers) Wives shine by their Husbands Ray.
See therefore now, how by his side she stands,
Triumphing midst the Graves, those Netherlands.
Rather in Heaven. Those only we confess,
Are truly called, The United Provinces.
Charles Darby, Rector of Kediton in Suffolk.

Upon the Death of the Right Honorable, Lady Mary Vere.
WHat Marble Heart can choose but drop a Tear,
At the sad Funeral of the Lady Vere!
Whose Death's a public loss? Our spring is dry
That many an empty Cistern did supply.
God decked her Heaven-born Soul with Gems Divine
Of various luster, which did make her shine
That all that stood about her saw the light;
She made it day, even in the darkest night.
Her bounteous Hand, and truly noble Heart
Did noble Gifts to multitudes impart.
She was a flowing Spring, a Mine of Treasure.
To serve her Lord, and do good, was her pleasure.
Pattern of Goodness, and a Pillar too,
A few such losses might the World undo.
She gave her self to Christ with heart and might,
And was with him in Spirit day and night;
And when his Festival began on Earth,
But kept in Heaven with purer joy and mirth.
She longed to be there, which made her sing
Her Nunc Dimittis, and her Soul took wing,
To sing her Carol among those that are
Without temptation, fault, offense, or jar.
But when arrived, no Mortal can declare
What joys in Heaven; and what welcomes are
For this devoted Saint; whilst here on Earth
We mix Sin with our Songs, Tears with our Mirth.
She Is gone, but never perish shall her Name,
Her works abide to Eternize her Fame.
Anagr. Vere mira.
Mirror of Blessings! for what tongue can tell,
For Grace and Greatness where is her parallel.
Edward Thomas.

In obitum Nobilissimae lectissimaeque Heroinae, Mariae, Illustrissimi
fortissimique Ducis Horatii Vere Baronis de Tilbury, Viduae, Carmen Epitaphium.
NObilitas tibi Vera fuit, Prudentia Vera;
Vera tibi Pietas, and tibi Vera Fides.
Vera Dei cultrix fueras, and Vera Mariti:
Quaeque nitent, aderant omnia Vera tibi.
Acciderit tandem quod Mors tibi Vera, dolendum:
Excepto hoc, dete singula Vera juvant.
Simon Ford. S. T. D.

On the Death of the Right Honorable, and truly Religious, the Lady Vere.
Marie Vere

Ever I arm.

A Tribute who can here pretend
To pay, but he who has to spend
Whole Indies of refined Ore,
Ready to bring out of his store,
Which after all will prove to be
Too mean, yea bankrupt beggary.
See Name, Relation, Sat of Grace
Do march in correspondent pace,
Daring all Enemies to withstand
Her Generous Soul, or Countermand,
Its resolution never to yield,
But still to fight, and win the Field.
Ever I arm, and so do wait
My Captains Word, on Foes deceit,
Or when he musters up his strength,
Hoping to vanquish me at length,
Yet then I faint not, but being armed
Through Grace I stood and was not harmed.
Here, here is a She maintained the Fight,
Remained Conqueress in despite
Of all his Forces, till at last
Praises and Thanks were her repast;
Thus Faith, and Hope, and Patience,
Triumphant rode in the Chariot Hence.
But how sounds this ever I arm
Suiting a Lady once in the Arm,
Of such General whose story
Embalms our Nations dying Glory;
Embroiders Records with his Name,
Out-bids the narrow mouth of Fame.
Gurnall display thy Magazine,
Here thy whole Armor may be seen
Bright and well used, well buckled on,
A Cuiraseer, who having won
Many a Battle, now receives
The Crown which her great Captain gives.
Maria Vere
Jam re vera.
Jam re vera feror super astra, beata triumpho, Expectansque diu spesque
Fidesque satur.

Anthony Withers.

On the much Lamented Death, of the Worthy of all Memory, the Right Honorable,
the Lady Vere.
THrough Floods of Tears my Muse did wade,
To seek these Mourners, and this shade:
That she, poor heart! might sit and tell,
A grief defrauding Parable.
If in the dark she choose to walk,
Or with Ambages mar her talk;
Or too slow paces seems to go;
Admit Close Mourner so to do.
If Speech, or Memory, do fail,
Or if, perchance, she wear her Veil,
A day, a size or two too long;
Wink at small faults in Mourners Song.
Unto a Noble Favorite,
From Holy Land, by his own Sp'rite,
The King of Glory, and Renown,
Sent a choice Jewel of his Crown.
A Casket first he did prepare,
Wherein to put this Jewel rare:
Then this large token of his Love,
He dropped into it from above.
It was a cur'ous Artifice;
Of all brave works the Masterpiece;
Most worthy of that skilful hand,
Which formed all things on Sea and Land.
Its Substance was more pure than Gold:
More worth than thousands, though twice told.
For kind the best, of fittest size;
Which much in little did comprize.
It in form a Heart resembl'd,
A single Heart, that never dissembled;
A broken Heart, that often trembled,
A bleeding Heart, most deeply humbl'd.
Upon the Table of this Heart,
Not in proportion, but in part;
The graver by Divine impress,
Set the Image of his Holiness.
In it Twelve Precious Stones were set,
(None such in Princes Coronet)
In lovely order, and in place;
By three, and three, with goodly Grace.
In The first row Faith, Hope, Charity;
Next Temperance, Virtue, Purity;
Then Meekness, Kindness, Verity;
In The last, Love, Zeal, and Constancy.
In The midst there stood a massy thing,
Fit for a Royal Spouses Ring;
Humility men did it call,
This was the Gracing Grace of all.
Repentant Tears, to Pearls converted,
In the borders stood well sorted:
Where they in greatness, and in show,
In goodness too, did daily grow.
In early times it took a fall,
And thereby lost its Graces all;
It fell into a lothsom Lake,
Which did it foul and filthy make.
Yet a great Prince did not disdain,
To take it up and ope' a vein
In his own side, and with pure blood
Wash off the soil, and make it good.
This fall its Glory did impair,
This Friend its Breaches did repair;
'Cause mending would not serve, he knew,
He melted, molded, made it new.
Then like a Glorious Sun it shined,
With Rays most bright, enough to blind,
Presumptuous eyes which turned that way,
To see what 'twas out shined the day.
This Jem the owner of his Grace,
Most freely lent us for the space,
Of somewhat more than Ninety Years;
So long this Pendant decked our Ears.
But now, alas! for non-payment
Of Tribute Praise, an easy Rent,
It Is fetched away in great displeasure.
Oh what is the loss of such a treasure?
Put off thy Vizard Mask my Muse,
And don't our Patience still abuse;
Nor expectation higher raise:
But name the person thou do praise.
Content, for sure I am too blame,
So long to smother that great Name,
Which in all Countries where it came,
Was crowned with Honor and with Fame.
The Noble Soul described here,
Was one to God, and man most dear;
Who in Devotion had no peer,
The Great Good Lady Mary Vere.
EPITAPH.
THE Casket of this Jewel rare,
With deep laments we here Interre
In hallowed ground, which yet grows proud,
Of purer Earth to be the shroud.
And thou fair shrine, in whose close womb,
This Holy Relick we intomb;
Preserv't with care, and on it try
What may be done by Chimistry.
That when the Trump says, dead arise,
Thou may send forth thy wealthy prize;
Every Particle well calcined,
And every dust double refined.
Richard Howlett.

FINIS.

