PROTESTERS no Subverters, AND Presbytery no Papacy; OR, A VINDICATION of the
Protesting Brethren, and of the Government of the Kirk of Scotland, from the
Aspersions unjustly cast upon them, in a late Pamphlet of some of the
Resolution-party, Entitled, A DECLARATION, etc.

With a Discovery of the insufficiency, inequality and iniquity of the Things
propounded in that Pamphlet, as Overtures of Union and Peace.

Especially, Of the iniquity of that absolute and unlimited submission to the
Sentences of Church-Judicatories that is holden forth therein, and most
unjustly pleaded to belong to the Being and Essence of Presbyterial Government.

To the Law and to the Testimony,

Isa. 8. 20. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth,

2 Cor. 13. 8. By some Witnesses to the way of the Protestation.

EDINBURGH, Printed Anno Domini, 1658.

Protesters no Subverters, AND Presbytery no Papacy: OR, A Vindication of the
Protesting Brethren, and of the Government of the Kirk of Scotland, etc.
THough the Brethren for the Protestation are not unsensible of the manifold
injuries done unto them by a Pamphlet, bearing the title (but little more) of A
true Representation of the rise, progress and state of the present Divisions
of the Church of Scotland, And diligently spread at home and abroad, and
industriously put into the hands of public persons in both Nations, for making
them take up such thoughts, and entertain such impressions of these Brethren
and their principles and cause, as are with more animosity than candor or truth
represented therein; Yet has (as we conceive) the conscience of their own
innocence, and the testimony which they have thereof in the hearts of most of
the Godly in the Land, with the small delight they have to spend their spirits,
and their time, and to trouble the world with a frequent reiterating and
multiplying of Answers to groundless and unjust imputations, persuaded them
hithertills to be silent, and to rest satisfied with what was by them formerly
published in the defense of their cause and persons. Neither would we have any
to wonder that they do not return an Answer to that Paper, lately published,
bearing title, A Declaration of the Brethren, who are for the established
Government and Judicatories of this Kirk, expressing their earnest desires of
Union and Peace with their dissenting Brethren; Though we do not (as the
authors of this Paper, in order to the Publickresolution party) take upon us to
speak in their name, Yet may we, as not being altogether strangers to their
mind in these matters, say, that they are silent also at this Paper, 1.
because, though it do in some part of the Title and Contents thereof profess
for, and pretend unto peace; Yet, is it upon the matter, and for the body of
it, but crambe recocta with the former, a bundle of the same calumnies where
with the former was fraughted, a little more closely knit, and published to the
world in a new dress and set off with a profession and pretext of desires to
union and peace; And why should so many put themselves to the pains to assemble
together for answering things that have been often answered already; And, is
not indeed an overture of peace, but in effect a heap of bitter invectives and
reproaches. If the authors of it had not set the words of Union and Peace in
the frontispiece of it, we doubt that ever any should have owned it, or known
it by that name; for, it does everywhere breath discord and war: that we may
truly say with the Prophet Micah, chapter 3. 5. whilst they cry, Peace, peace,
they bite with their teeth: and with the Psalmist, Psalm. 55. 21. that whilst
the words of their mouth are smoother then butter, yet wa^ is in their heart,
that whilst (some of) their words are soft as oil, yet most of them are like
drawn swords; or, if there were any real inclinations to peace upon the spirits
of the authors of this Paper, we may fitly compare them to the first Painters
in some Countries of old, whose draughts were so rude, that unless they had
written above the head thereof, This is a Horse; This is an Ox, etc. the
beholders would never have discovered their aim therein. Or, we may say of
them, as Georgius major writes of the fathers of Berge, who were authors of
the book, called Formula concordiae Bergensis,

Aut men's Vulcanum, aut forceps indocta fefellit, (...) voluit cudere cudit
(...). The Smith's unskilful mind, or tongs, have, sure, deceived him far;
When as he would have forged a Peace, he hammereth out a War.


Union and peace, when stated upon the right basis, and carried-on by lawful
means, and in order to right ends, are things precious and excellent; How
seasonable, and strengthening, and refreshing a blessing would such an union be
unto the Church of Scotland in this day of her trial? Would God that these
Resolution-Brethren, who do in this Paper testify so highly of themselves, as
to their making consci^nce to lament our divisions before the Lord, and of
afflicting their souls because of them, and for the sins procuring the same,
and of their peaceable disposition and patience to bear, and readines^e to
forgive injuries, had been so happy therein as to tread the paths of peace, and
to speak the words of soberness and truth, we are hopeful it had found
answerable entertainment from their Brethren for the Protestation, who, from no
disrespect to them, but from the conscience of their duty and zeal of the
Lord's Cause, have in some things witnessed against their way; but when they do
thus use them, or rather abuse them, as seeming to speak them for union and
peace, and yet not only hold fast most of what has been the ground of their
grievance and complaint, but operously labor and industriously endeavor by a
congestion of groundless alleagences and gross misrepresentations of matters
of fact, with ill-knit consequences deduced therefrom, and from some other
things true and honest in themselves, to prove them, and proclaim them to the
world to be a party of ambitious, turbulent, subdolous men, who have been all
this while affecting domination in the Church, and designedly projecting the
subversion and overthrow of its Government; yea, that their leading men have of
late attempted the utter ruin of this Church, and of those who differ from
them. We hope that no man of an impartial judgment will think that the
protesting Brethren can otherwise entertain such a treaty of union and peace,
that is the eslux of so bitter and unpeaceable a spirit, than with deep silence
and just contempt, unless they would betray their own innocence, and the
justness of the cause which they do maintain, by treating a Peace upon such
perswasives and foundations, as do all-along heighten division and build up
war. 2. Though this Paper, bearing the name of A Declaration of the Brethren
who are for the established Government and Judicatories of the Church, And so
seem to lay claim to all the public resolution party, as its father; Yet is it
a thing very doubtful whose it is, or who do own it: certain it is that it did
not proceed from any Church Authority, but from some persons in an
extrajudicial capacity: whether these were entrusted by their Brethren in the
several parts of the Land for that effect, themselves best know. In the mean
while they must give us leave to tell what we know, that sundry of their
Brethren in several parts of the Country do profess themselves strangers to
the contrivement of it, and dis^atis ed therewith, some upon one account and
some upon another; And that a good while after it was published and going
abroad in print, as the Declaration of all that party, many of them in sev^rall
parts of the Country were inquiring* What is it? and, what says it? The truth
is, a Juncto of some few, who use to meet at E^inburgh* do in these things what
they judge convenient; and that they may not seem to take too much upon them,
they would make the world believe that all of their party do it, whilst it is
evident enough (many of that party being witnesses) that most of them are not
privi^ to it* and many of them are diss^tisfied with it, A thing hardly
tolerable in a public Declaration, that pretends to speak the mind and
judgment of the whole, and that in matters of such concernment and
contradiction: And we have the more reason to take notice of this, because
though after the publ^shing of that Declaration it was con^idently given out by
some of the public resolution Brethren, and generally expected by these of the
other judgment, that it should have been owned by the Kirk-Judicatories of that
judgment, and tendered by them to the protesting Brethren in a judicial way, as
containing fit means of union and peace; Yet cannot we hear that the
Presbyteries or Synods of that way have owned it, or approven thereof; yea,
sundry Synods being by men of the other judgment put to it, to declare
themselves whether they would own it or not, did refuse (some of them) to
declare themselves therein, till the other Brethren should first declare
themselves satisfied therewith: which was in effect but to seek a shadow of
some tolerable diversion, thereby to wave the determination of the question,
upon which they would probably have divided in their votes; and others of them
would not do so much as to take the desire in consideration: How then can the
protesting Brethren own it as a Declaration of the other party, or return any
Answer to it upon that account, as long as it is not able to fetch its descent
but from a few private persons (whose names also we are left to guess at) and
is not only not owned by their Judicatories, but by some not acknowledged, and
spoke against by other Brethren of that party.

These and such like considerations do sufficiently justify the protesting
party as to their sorbearing any common Answer to that unsavory Paper; Yet
seeing not a few of the other side do please themselves in the criminations
contained therein, as unanswerable, and in the proposals of peace which it does
hold forth as very equal and reasonable, whereby they heighten themselves in
their own way, and in groundless prejudices against others, and endeavor to
stumble such as are weak, We trust that it shall be service not unacceptable to
God, nor unpleasant to the protesting Brethren, nor unprofitable to those of
the resolution-way, nor unedifying to the Church and People of God, if we shall
give an Answer to that Paper, not tracing it word by word, or line by line, but
first by clearing innocent men and a good cause, of these groundless prejudices
that seem to be deeply rooted upon the spirits of the authors and owners of
that Paper, and are therein blazed abroad to the world against their Brethren.
2. By discovering the insufficiency, and inequality and iniquity of the
proposals of peace that are made therein, that (if the Lord so will) these
miserable mistakes being removed, they may see things as they are, and
attaining some right understanding thereof, may be brought to allay their
passions and cease from their persecutions, and to redintigrate their affection
to their Brethren, and to proffer unto them such terms of union and peace as
do beseem the men of God, who do indeed deny themselves, and seek not their own
glory, but the glory of Him who sent them: or, if they will not see nor
hearken, yet we may, according to our measure, bear record unto truth and
innocence; And let unbyas^ed persons know that the protesting Brethren are not
men of that spirit and character whom that Paper points forth. Besides the
inducements already mentioned, there is one particular that has in a special
way prevailed on us to take notice of that Paper, to wit, that the authors
thereof, and of the late Representation, do not only continue to plead for that
absolute and unlimited submission to the sentences of the Church-Judicatories
that was required by the resolution Brethren in the conference at Edinburgh,
November. 1655. but carry it so high as to assert it to be of the very es^ence
and being of presbyterial Government, by which instead of the sweet and gentle
yoke of Jesus Christ in that Ordinance, as it is delivered unto us in His Word,
they have labored (we fear) to introduce into the House of God a
Kirk-government that is too nigh of kin to that which is popish, prelatical and
tyrannical. There could not have been a more unhappy assertion concerning the
Government of the Kirk fallen upon and published in these times, not only in
order to the peace by them pretended, it being sadly suspicious that there is
no good intention under the o^fer, when the stronger party does so much press
the absolute submission of the weaker to all their sentences whatsoever,
whether jus^ or unjust; But also, it being more than probable that men of a
prelatical spirit will take hold thereof, and press it on as subservient to
the re-introducing of their way; and that those of the congregational and
independent judgment will make use of it for rendering presbyterial Government
hateful and odious, and bringing it in suspicion and jealousy with the godly:
And whether some of the resolution party who do retain their old love to the
prelatical way, or others of them, who (if good testimon^ man be credited) did
since the beginning of these differences profess their dislike of the
subordination of Kirk*Judicatories, and their respect to the congregational
way, have for their own ends had hand in this thing, we leave it to wise men to
consider. But now to proceed in our work.

The first and great prejudice which that Paper, and, as it seems, these
Brethren's spirits are filled with against the Brethren for the Protesta^ion,
is, That they do not only dissent from, but also have it in their thought and
design, to subvert and destroy the established Government of the Church of
Scotland by Presbyteries and Synods, and that their practices do manif^stly
t^nd ther^unto. The title and frontispiece of their Paper bear^th them to be
the Brethren who are for the established Government of the Kirk of Scotland,
And the other to be the dissenting Brethren: which circumscriptions of the two
parties in one sentence, without terminating their dissent to any thing else,
is obviously liable to this construction, That they do dissent from that
Government. In the beginning of the fifth page, they say, They did easily
foresee that their way did manifestly tend to the overturning of the
established Church Government, and a little downward in the same page, That
soon after, and constantly to this day by their irregular practices, contrary
to all order, they have bewrayed their small respect to the established
Government; and toward the close of that s^ction* that they expressly refused
subordination and ^ubmission to the Iudicatories of the Kirk, a principle
inconsistent with presbyterial Government in a constituted Church. And having
in the next page reckoned over some practices and proposals of the protesting
Brethren, they do thus conclude o^ them, These projects (say they) we look upon
as s^tting up in esfect a new (...) Jurisdiction, and a Plant which is not of
Gods planting, and not only suspending the established Church Government (...)
die, but totally subverting it to make way for the projecters their domination
in the Church and over their Brethren. When we read and repeat these things, we
cannot but bemoan the blindness and weakness of the sons of men as they are
now clothed with corruption and a body of death. Our Brethrens great quarr^l
and plea, they profess to be from their zeal to maintain the Government of the
House of God, which to their apprehensions the other would subvert and destroy.
And if the protesting Brethren were to give an account of the grounds of their
dissatisfaction with them in the proceedings, wherein they have been forced to
differ from them, and to testify against them, or of these courses and
practices which they call irregular, and altogether disorderly and destructive
to the Government, We trust they can in the simplicity of their souls say, That
next unto the great End for which Government was appointed by Jesus Christ in
His House, to wit, the edifying and building of His Body in those things that
pertain to life and godliness, the fear of the resolution Brethren their
ruining of the Government of the Kirk of Scotland, and other the precious
Ordinances of God, and the work of R^formation, by departing from the purity,
and genuine and primitive principles thereof, and neglecting to improve the
same to the ends for which they were appointed of God, and abusing them
oftentimes to contrary ends, together with a desire to preserve these things
unto edification, has been and is the thing that most prevails upon them in
all these m^tters; And what a sad thing is it that both having the confidence
to say that they are one in their end, and do design the same thing, that yet
the one of them should so far mistake their own way, as to choo^e means
destructive to their own ends; or, which is worse, that they should dissemble
and mock God, and abuse the world with making profession of one thing, whil^st
the contrary is designed in their hearts, and act^d by their hands.

But how shall we persuade the resolution Brethr^n that the other do not
dissent in the matter of Church Government, but do own Presbyteries and Synods
as an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and as the Government appointed by Him who is
faithful over all the House of God as a Son? For, to say that they do profess
for it, and preach for it, and plead and print for it, and that they own and
acknowledge themselves members of Presbyteries and Synods, and give obedience
unto, and put in execution their just Sentences; and that they do not profess,
nor preach, nor print, nor plead, nor act for, nor subject themselves unto any
other Church Government: Though these things be clear and evident, and such as
have been confirmed by the constant tenor of their way now for many years, and
is well known in all these three Nations; Yet happily it shall not ransom them in
this point from the bondage of their Brethrens jealousy: Shall they then open
their hearts unto them, and take God, who knows them, to record, upon their
souls, that so far as they have obtained mercy to know themselves and their own
judgment, in that which concerns Church Government, they do judge
Presbyterial Government, as it is holden forth in the second Book of
Discipline, and in the Acts of uncontroverted Assemblies of this Church, and
sworn to in the National Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant, to be
founded upon, and agreeable unto the Word o^ God, and the only Government
warranted and appointed of God, by which He would have His House to be ruled
under the New Testament, and has no thought nor design of subverting or
destroying the same, or introducing any other into the House of God, but
conceive themselves bound both by virtue of the Institution and Commandment of
God, and by virtue of the solemn Oath of both Covenants, and many ties besides,
to endeavor the preservation thereof in its purity and power unto the end of
their lives, and that it may be continued in the House of God amongst their
posterity and the generations that are to come; If after all this our Brethren
will not believe, we know not what they can do, or what they are bound to do
more to persuade them; but all this they have done already, and must therefore
possess their souls in patience, and commit the cause unto God who knows
their hearts and all the thoughts thereof afar off.

These things do happily prevail so far upon the apprehensions and thoughts of
some, at least, of these Brethren, as to make them allow the protesting
Brethren more charity than to think that they have changed their judgments
concerning the Government, or, that they do entertain formal and direct
intentions, and a stated design to subvert and destroy the same: We know that
they have always had that candid construction in the hearts of some of them,
though they have just cause to complain of others, that no professions, nor
protestations nor actions of theirs, could since our late differences, gain so
much credit with them as to vindicate them from some s^ated design against the
Government; Or, if they have a testimony in their consciences to the contrary,
yet they have judged it wisdom, and for the advantage of their cause, and
weakening of their Brethren, by presenting them in such a figure, to endeavor
to make the Nation and the World believe that it is otherwise; though we know
nothing that they have gained thereby, unless it be to make themselves at last
to believe what they would have had others to believe, and so in the end to
make them run quite away from their old friends, as men to be scarred at: like
children really afrighting themselves with the things which they devised to
afright others. But let us come to that upon which they lay the stresse and
weight of all these harsh constructions, to wit, their actings and irregular
practices (as they are pleased to call them) being such as in their opinion are
contrary to all order, and do clearly tend to the subversion of the Government.
Of these they do reckon a great many, in their Representation published at
London, which (as to that head (which yet takes up a great part of that Book)
is so fraughted with groundless alleagances and gross mis-representations (we
shall abstain from our Brethrens word of foul slanders) of matters of fact
(some of them feigned, and others reported with all the distortion that a
prejudiced mind can reach) that we do profess though proportionable and
correspondent assertions and carriages in their Agent and his industrious
spreading of it, did make us conceive that it might be his, yet until now that
they have owned it in a public Declaration, we could hardly be persuaded that
it was theirs. But we shall leave the full answering of these things to its
proper place, and shall now only speak to those particulars tha^ are shortly
repeated in their Declaration. And i^ the entry, do desire our Brethren
seriously to consider, whether they have done well by their departing from
their former principles in order to the Malignant party, and hugging them in
their arms, and bringing them into the Judicatories of State and Kirk, against
a public solemn Vow and Engagement, sworn by the whole Land to the Lord to the
contrary; and by abusing the Government, and turning the edge both of Doctrine
and of Discipline from off them, and against their Brethren and many of the
Godly in the Nation, to tempt them to cast at the Government, and to fall upon
means of defense that happily might have been prejudicial thereunto, We do
profess we do judge it a special mercy to this whole Church, that these things
have not prevailed upon the protesting Brethren, to the designing and doing of
that really wherewith they are unjustly charged; and if God had not instructed
them with a strong hand to the contrary, who knows but corruption meeting with
great provocations and strong temptations, might have turned them aside to such
unhappy purposes. It shall be our Brethrens wisdom, if they desire to preserve
the Government, to improve it to edification, and for the comfort and
encouraging of the Godly, and purging of the House of God, otherwise all their
professing and pleading, and appearing for it will do but little to commend it
to men's consciences; and if it have not a root there, it is not like long to
subsist in outward professions.

The first particular is (as they call it) The declining the Authority of the
supreme Church-Iudicatories of this Nation once and again; They mean the
Protestations against the two late pretended Assemblies at S. Andrews, and
Dundee, and Edinburgh, in both which the Government of the Church by
Presbyteries and Synods, National and Provincial is clearly asserted, and an
honorable testimony given thereunto by the protesting Brethren, with distinct
and full profession of their purpose and resolution to adhere thereunto; Nor is
there in any of these Protestations, nor in any thing of theirs that has been
w^itten or published in defense thereof, one tittle that strikes against any
thing that relates to the intrinsecal constitution and being of the Government
of the Kirk of Scotland, but all the reasons of the Protestations against those
meetings, are upon the undue qualifications of, and prelimitations made by
persons assuming the exercise of Government, with such other things as are
altogether extrinseck to the Government it self: they have learned to
distinguish betwixt the Government of the Church, and the male-administrations
and Corruptions of the Church-Governors; and not to condemn the one when they
are necessarily called to give a testimony against the other; Yea, the duty and
care they owe to the preservation of the Government constrains them to
testify against the abusing and cortupting of it: So did our fathers of old,
whose Protestations against corrupt National Church Assemblies are upon record
to this day, and so far have they been by men of sound judgments, from being
judged because thereof to be against the Government, that they are honored
amongst the greatest patrons and preservers thereof. The protesting Brethren do
not acknowledge these two Meetings to be any of the supreme Church-Judicatories
in this Nation, nor to have any Authority belonging unto them, but look upon
them as unfree and corrupt Assemblies (for the reasons long ago published to
the world) that have not upon them the stamp of any of the Courts of Jesus
Christ; neither do they think that testifying against the corruptions of many
of these that are now in the exercise of the Government of the Church, is to
dissent from, or to do injury to the Government it self; And we cannot but say,
whatever be our Brethren's intentions in studying some way to wrap up the
Authority of these two Meetings, and of that part of the Ministerial Church
which is of their judgment, as it were, in the very being of the Government
(for this they seem to hint, though it be not directly spoke in that word of
the established Government and Iudicatories of this Kirk, which they set in the
frontispiece, and carry along in their Paper) as if the Government could not be
owned nor subsist, the Authority of these two Meetings being denied, and the
corruptions of men discovered and acknowledged; We say, whatsoever they do
herein to please themselves, and to amuse the ignorant, yet the protesting
Brethren do not so judge, and the other by doing, so make more adversaries to
the ^overnment than there is just cause.

^he second particular which they allege, is, Their planting of Congregations
in a tumultuous and disorderly way, without respect to the Iudicatories of the
Kirk, or to the just interest of the People of the Congregation, and
counteracting to the resolutions and determinations of the Iudicatories when
any of them are pleased to be dissatisfied therewith. To carry on the great
things of God that do concern the Kingdom of His Son Jesus Christ, and the
eternal state of souls in a tumultuous and disorderly way, though there were no
more, were a fault great enough; but to do it upon no better foundations than
mere pleasure, and for no better ends, but for serving of our own lusts, were a
very grievous and hateful sin: But let us see what cause there is ^or this
great charge; The resolution Brethren did by those Resolutions of theirs, taken
in an occasional meeting of the Commissioners of the General Assembly (many of
that number receiving either no advertisement, or else such as was out of time
to keep the meeting in the year, 1651.) give their judgment and advice unto the
State, concerning the capacity of the Malignant-party (who were before that
time excluded from all Public Trust in the Army, and in the Judicatories Civil
and Ecclesiastic, and debarred from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and
from having hand in the Election of Ministers) in order to Civil Trust, and the
matter being generally much stumbled at by the Godly in the Land, they did a
little thereaf^er, whether for the allaying of that offense, or (...)
considerations best known to themselves, sudd^nly, and contrary to Acts made by
themselves, receive them to a shadow of public repentance, or, to a
mock-repentance; We may justly and with grief of heart call it so, because God
was thereby mocked, and sin and wrath increased; and though these Brethren may
deny it, and love not to hear it, yet not only the Godly, but the Body of the
Land are witnesses, and do bear record of it; yea, that party themselves are
witnesses, and do make it the matter of their sporting to this day, by this
semblance of repentance they were made capable of all Church Priviledges, and
put in equal footing for calling of Ministers, and ruling in Congregations,
with men of a blameless and christian conversation, and of known integrity and
good affection to the work of Reformation; And when the diet of the General
Assembly came, having first done what they could for incapacitating all
Brethren of differing judgment from these Resolutions, to sit in the Assembly,
by citing them to the Assembly as guilty persons, and excluding them from being
elected Commissioners, where they could have power, they did not only ratify
these Resolutions, with all the proceedings of those Commissioners (who were
authors thereof) relating thereunto, but did also make Acts, appointing and
ordaining Censures against all persons in this Church, whether Ministers or
Professors, that did not acknowledge the Authority, and submit to the Acts and
Constitutions of that Assembly concerning those Resolutions, and barring all
such Expectants from entrance to the Ministry as should not acknowledge that
Authority, and submit to those Constitutions; And in their Assembly of the next
yeat at Edinburgh, do provide and ordain Presbyteries to take special care,
that upon the calling of any Expectant to a particular charge of the Ministry,
before they admit him to his trials, they require him under his hand to pass
from the Protestations and Declinators against this and the preceding General
Assembly, if he has been accessory to the same; And to promise and give
assurance that he shall abstain from holding up debates and controversies about
matters of differences in this Kirk since the Assembly, 1650. in preaching,
writing, or otherwise; upon the performance whereof, the Presbytery shall
proceed to his trials; If not, in that case the Presbytery shall forbear to
proceed, until the next General Assembly; leaving liberty to the Presbytery or
Congregation for planting of the place otherwise: And, that Presbyteries shall
require the same things forementioned of every ruling Elder that comes to sit
and act in Presbyteries; and, in case of his refusal, not admit him to act as
an Elder in the Presbytery, but require the Kirk-Session from which he is sent
to make choice of, and send another, who, for the peace of the Church, shall
agree to perform the conditions required. By these proceedings and practices,
the most unjust and irregular that we have known in this Church since we did
begin to look at Reformation, in the year, 1638. and which were indeed the
great cause of the distempers and distractions that have since followed,
malignant and disaffected men in Congregations and Presbyteries have got up the
head, and having the advantage of the Acts, already mentioned, they do make a
bar thereof to shut the door against the calling of able and godly men to the
work of the Ministry, who cannot bring their consciences in bondage to these
things; And do labor everywhere almost, to thrust-in others according to
their own heart, notwithstanding of the dislike and dissent of many of the
godly and wellaffected, who are best able to judge; or, if any such happen to
be called, a stop is put to their trials and admission upon the same account;
or, if admitted, and received by the Presbytery, then refused to be
acknowledged Ministers by the Synod; And the intrudings of others upon their
charges, allowed and confirmed. If in the midst of all these difficulties and
straits, whereby they that love the Gospel are barred from the precious sood of
their souls, and have men thrust upon them who know not how to speak a word in
season to a weary soul, nor to divide the Word aright, but do make glad the
hearts of those whom God has not made glad; and make sad the hearts of those
whom God has not made sad: what wonder were it though the gaining or
preserving of that which is more excellent and necessary, and for avoiding of a
greater evil, should sometimes and in some cases, persuade unto a sinless
preterition of some things, otherwise fit to be observed in the course of
formality and order; though yet the protesting Brethren have been tender even
of these things, and have made conscience, as to do nothing evil and sinful in
it self, so to do nothing from contempt or disrespect to the least point of
order; yea, they have been careful to keep within the bounds, warranted and
allowed unto them of God; And, if it be fit to compare, we may truly say, that
for all the noise our Brethren make against them, for the violation of order,
and taking irregular courses, they have been more careful then themselves have
been, and that they have more just and weighty grievance against them, even
upon this account, than they have against the protesting Brethren: Have not
these Brethren, some of them, intruded both upon the people and charges of
other able and godly Ministers already settled? Have not others of them, being
the smaller part, and sometimes a very small part of the Presbytery, separated
and withdrawn themselves from the body and greater part thereof, because they
were of the other judgment? Have they not counteracted and been isntrumental
to cause people in Congregations counteract to the Determinations and Sentences
of their own Presbyteries and Synods? Have they not in Synods violently taken
things out of the hands of the Presbytery, when there was neither reference,
nor appeal, nor maladministration? Have they not refused to acknowledge
Ministers for members of the Synod, or to suffer them to sit and vote among
them, though called by the whole Congregation, and duly tried and admitted by
the Presbytery? Have not some of their Synods taken upon them the power of a
Genesis Assembly? and other things of that kind which were tedious to collect and
enumerate. They that teach others, would teach them own selves. And if they
would have their Brethren to abhor Idols, they would not commit sacrilege. If
they say, that there is a difference upon the matter betwixt that which is done
by them, and done by the other: take the matter simply and without respect to
their numbers, and we believe the protesting Brethren will be content to stand
or fall by it: and if it be the plurality of the number only, we cannot account
that, ^specially in a time of corruption, a sufficient plea either for
condemning the one, or justifying the other.

The third thing wherewith they labor to make out the designs and endeavors
of the protesting Brethren to subvert the Government, is, as they are pleased
to express it in the fourth page of their Declaration, That they have cast
many and foul reproaches upon them at home and abroad, both by word and writ,
that so they might make them hateful, and purchase credit and power to their
own party, whereby also they have endeavored to render this National Church
odious in the view of the world, and exposed her to be a laughing stock to all
her enemies, and furnished them with weapons ( if (say they) their foul
slanders deserve to have credit) whereby to fight against her, and justify
their opposition to her, when her own children bear such witness against her.
And as they express it in the fifth page of that Paper, their branding
Church Officers and inferior Iudicatories, as generally corrupt, that so all
of them might be cast loose, or at least molded to their mind. If our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ had not forewarned us herein, we should have wondered that
the Brethren for the public Resolutions should see a mote in their neighbors
eye, and not consider the beam in their own eye: Has it not been their work at
home and abroad, in private and public, in print and writ, to cast foul
reproaches and slanders upon the protesting Brethren? That one scurril
pamphlet, published under the name of Uldericus Veridicus, (which had been
better styled Falsidicus) may testify of what spirit some of our Brethren are,
who knowing that the tongue of the poor man the Author thereof would be no
slander at home, (so small was his credit in this Church when he lived) that
now after his death they have sent his crazie discourses abroad in a Latin
dress, to gain credit to their cause amongst strangers in the Reformed
Churches, and make the world believe the Protesters are men fanatic and
abominable, like Thomas Munster or John of Leyden: But would any be at the
pains to turn it into the Scottish tongue, it should not only prove a sufficient
resutation of the manifold lies and calumnies therein contained, but open the
eyes of many, that they might perceive by what pillars that cause is supported*
But it does most grieve us that the Name of the Lord is so often taken in vain,
by our Brethren's filling their preachings and prayers in the pulpit with such
stuff as goes abroad in others of their pamphlets; whether it be for
scarscity of other purpose, or from the abundance of that humor predomining in
their breasts, we shall not determine; but sure we are, that thereby not only
many hungry souls are disappointed of their food, but those Ordinances are
rendered irksome even to many hearers of their own judgment, and the (...) sort
are furnished with a common theme for the tavern. But to leave this, and answer
that which is charged upon the Protesters. Our Brethren (as we conceive) do by
these reproaches and slanders, and brandings, mean a Paper of the protesting
Brethren, which holds forth the evidences of the growing defection in the
Land, with another Paper that holds forth a corrupt party amongst the
Ministry since the days of the Prelates, who, by the late public Resolutions
for bringing-in of the Malignant party, have got up the head, and carry the
vote and sway in many the Judicatories of the Kirk; with some (...) Papers and
Conferences of that kind, (...) these Brethren have been necessarily drawn in
(...) own defense: Concerning which we say, (...) That if these things be
indeed slanders and false (...) themselves, and have been coined and vented
(...) the protesting Brethren for the ends alleged, (...) ly they are great
transgressors, and wretched (...) whom the resolution Brethren have at a (...)
advantage, and if they can but a little wait (...) possess their souls with
patience, God will (...) their innocence, and discover the others malice
against them* and their treachery against His Cause* But, secondly, if these
things be no inventions (...) theirs, but have real and sad truth in the bottom
and have been vented by them, not out of malice against the persons, nor for
rendering the Church odious, or subverting the Government, or any such
sinistrous ends as these, but that, according to the Commandment of God, they
may plead with their Mother, Hos. 2. 2. that free and faithful warning being
given of her backsliding revolting condition, the sin might be repented of, and
reformed by those who are guilty, and the danger avoided by those who desire to
keep their* garments pure; And that it might appear that* they do not without
just reason call and cry for purging of the House of God, that insufficient,
and scandalous and corrupt men being removed from the exercise of Government,
and the administration of holy things, the Government may be preserved and
improved to edification, and the sons of Levi being purified and purged, they
may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness, and that the offerings
of His people may be pleasing ^o Him, as in the days of old, and as in former
years: If (we say) there be truth at the bottom of these things, and if in
speaking and writing thereof they have these good ends before them which they
have professed, then may the Lord through grace therein accept, and hear, and
have compassion upon them and His people, by finding out the means to purge His
House, though men will not hear, nor pity, but account them foul slanderers
and subtle subverters for discovering and complaining of these things. Th^rdly,
To the thing it self they have frequently acknowledged and testified, that
there is a precious Gospel-godly Ministry in Scotland, which they do not
confine to these of their own judgment only, but extend also to not a few of
the Brethren of the other judgment also, though they dare not approve of their
way, as to these late revolutions, and are much grieved in spirit, and judge it
a matter to be lamented before the Lord, that they should so far mistake their
old friends (who strive, though in much weakness, to keep the good old way
wherein both were wont to walk for carrying-on of the wo^k of Reformation) as
to account them the wasters and destroyers of the Lords Vine, and become so
kindly companions and patrons to men of another stamp that they judge
themselves wounded if their sore be touched. But, fourthly, Are the protesting
Brethren in fault, if they have often bemoaned it before God, and complained of
it unto men (both to our Brethren and others) when called thereunto, that there
be a great many ignorant insufficient and corrupt scandalous Ministers (...)
Elders, wherewith the Judicatories of the Kirk many places of the Land are
pestered, and (...) either do little or nothing to edification, or (...) too
much to destruction? We shall not for proof (...) this, repeat in this place
those evidences of (...) ing defection, the truth of which is but too (...)
ble, and can be attested by many sufficient (...) ses. But we would desire our
Brethren (and (...) if they shall slight it) seriously to consider these (...)
things, 1. That this Church was but a few (...) before these public
Resolutions recovered (...) under the tyranny and corruptions of the (...) and
their adherents, under which she had (...) and languished for the space of
about forty years by reason whereof, though a remnant was preserved through
grace, yet the body of the Ministry was become either insufficient, as to
their gifts, (...) corrupt in their judgment, or scandalous in (...)
conversation. 2. That it was oftentimes after the Reformation begun in the
year, 1638. not only by godly men in private, but publicly by our General
Assemblies in their public Warnings and Declarations, and Causes of
Humiliation, acknowledged, that though there was an external forsaking of the
prelatical way, and engaging in the Covenant, Yet that the sin of former
defection and backsliding was by many still unrepented of, that many did still
remain either neutral and cold, or backward and ill-affected to the work of
God. 3. That the General Assemblies in the progress of Reformation did begin
to be so sensible of the multitude of insufficient and scandalous men that did
still remain in Presbyteries and Synods, that they did judge Presbyteries and
Synods not able to purge themselves, and that therefore it was necessary to
give Commission to some select Brethren, nominated by themselves, for visiting
the bounds of Presbyteries and Synods, with power to these Brethren to try and
censure such Ministers and Elders as they found insufficient or scandalous. 4.
That these Brethren found so much work in many places of the Country as they
were not able soon to overtake, but after the continuing of their diligence by
renewed Commissions for two or three years space, the General Assembly, upon
the report of what was yet to do in places that had only been in part visited,
and in consideration of the condition of other places, not yet visited, did
find it necessary to appoint select persons, nominated by themselves, for
visiting most of the Presbyteri^s and Synods in the Country, with power to try
and censure, as aforesaid. 5. That those almost general visitations of the
whole Land, albeit judged most necessary for purging of the Kirk of the
multitude of corrupt or insufficient men, whom Presbyteri^s and Synods were
either no^ able, or not willing to censure, was never kept, because of the War
immediately following betwixt the two Nations. 6. That few or none have since
that time been purged-out by Presbyteries and Synods, the zeal that was
formerly in good men amongst them being in a great measure cooled in those who
do adhere to the public Resolutions, and the endeavors of these who differ
from them, being opposed and rendered ineffectual by men of another spirit, who
have got up the head in the (...) of the Kirk, and have turned the stream of
their public actings into another (...), to wit, against those whom they call
(...) Brethren. 7. That a great many of these (...), who were formerly
purged-out for the profanity and malignancy, are again taken (...) the
Ministry without sufficient evidences of the repentance, and have now no small
hand in (...) governing of things in sundry Presbyteries (...) Synods: we know
their repentance is talked (...) but we do as well know that it is but a mere
tall some of them having made no (...) at all of any of the offenses for which
they (...) deposed; others of them not having acknowledge all the particulars
contained in their Sentence and most of them either prevaricating or
extenu^ting in the matter of their acknowledgments, (...) continuing to be what
they were: Sundry (...) Brethren of the public judgment bemoan with (...) the
taking-in of such, and in such a way; and (...) not themselves profess to be
what they were? (...) dare appeal themselves, and others who b^st kno^ them,
whether they did judge themselves justl^ deposed, and have really repented of,
and change^ their way, as to the things for which they were deposed. 8. That
there is an universal groanin^ and sad complaint of the godly generally
throughout the Land, of the insufficiency and negligence* and of scandalous and
malignant corrupt carriag^ of many Ministers throughout the Land, and of the
proceedings of many Presbyteries and Synods, that these seven or eight years
past they have done little or nothing to edification and for promoving of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the power of godliness, Do they not generally be
wail* it, that the meetings of many of the Judicatories of the Kirk are for
most part rather matter of grievance and (...) unto them, than matter of
comfort and rejoicing? And if we shall set over against this, that universal
testimony that is given by the multitude of s^andalous and disaffected
malignant men in the Land, to the Ministers of the public judgment and to the
most of Presbyteries and Synods of that way in most of their actings, Does it
not say that there is prevailing corruption and defection in the Church, and in
her Judicatories? What a strange change is it, that profane malignant men in
the Land, who were known opposers and haters of Godliness and of the work of
Reformation, and of the Discipline and Government of the Kirk, and to whom the
name of the Kirk was wont to be hateful and odious, and her Judicatories
terrible as an Army with Banners, that now their ordinary plea should be, the
Kirk of Scotland, and the General Assembly, and the Presbytery, and the Synod,
and such and such Ministers, And that the Godly in the Land should be filled
with sorrow, and put to open shame, whilst through the prevailing corruptions
and backslidings of men, advantage is given to adversaries to fight against
them with the weapons that were appointed unto them of God for their defense
and comfort, and for bearing down of the profane and ungodly.

The fourth thing, whence they labor to conclude the protesting Brethren
adversaries unto, and projecters against the Government of the Church, is, as
they represent it in the fifth page of their Declaration; That they did break
up the Conference for Union with (...) in November? 1655. ^hiefly upon this
account, That they could not (...) the Iudicatories of the Church of their just
power, (...) devolve matters into the hands of an extrajudicial (...) of equal
numbers. Which point they resum^ again and prosecute at length in the sixth and
seventh pages of that Paper, setting down the word of the protesting Brethren
their Overture there anent in a distinct character, and laboring (...) hold
forth the absurdity thereof from several considerations.

Whether the Conference for Union in (...) 1655. was broak either by them, or,
chiefly upon this account (though we have reason to gainsay yet) we shall not
now, nor is it needful to stan^ to debate, but that this Overture will
conclud^ them to be adversaries unto, or projecters against the Government,
that we do altogether deny: No^ do any of these things, alleged by our (...)
prove it. It were tedious and little to edificatio^ of the Readers, to give a
particular distinct Answer to the heaps of aggravations and bad consequents
they load this Overture with; therefore we do offer unto our Brethren's more
sober and serious, or (if they do not judge them worthy o^ their entertainment)
unto the sober and serious thoughts of others these few considerations, for
vindicating this Overture from all those mistakes our Brethren have about it.
1. That there is a difference betwixt a sound or a healthful growing
reforming, and an unsound sickly decaying declining state of a Church. 2. That
there is a difference betwixt a troubled distempered, and a quiet peaceable
state of a Church. If our Church were altogether sound and healthful, if in a
growing, reforming condition, if in a peaceable and welltempered state, there
would be no need of any such overture; And we believe the protesting Brethren
would be in that case as far from pressing it as any other: but her sickly,
decaying, declining, troubled, distempered condition does necessarily call for,
and allow for something of that kind. 2. The General Assemblies (as we have
already showed) did conceive extraordinary Commissions and Visitations to be
needful, when the Church was in a much better condition than she is now; And
though not a few in Presbyteries and Synods did then speak the same language
that our Brethren do now, to wit, that it did lay a foundation for an universal
imputation upon the Synods and other Church-Judicatories as not worthy to be
trusted with the work committed to them by Christ, and was a tyrannical
imposition upon them; Yet that did not hinder the Assembly so to do, because
they did see that such a way of Commissions and Visitations was necessary for
the time, when Presbyteries and Synods (many of them) were either no^ able, or
not willing to do that duty in order to the purging of the Church of corrupt
officers. 3. That there is a difference betwixt the essentials and
circumstantials of Presbyterial Government; the one being such as are of divine
or scriptural institution, and in themselves unalterable; the other being such
as are of positive humane institution, which are to be regulated by that great
end of edification, and therefore may be altered accordingly as they do or do
not contribute for that end. It is observable that the resolution Brethren in
this and sundry other of their Papers, do in many of these challenges which
they bring against the protestin^ Brethren, (as proceeding in their planting
(...) Churches, and ordaining and admitting of (...), and propounding of
Overtures for purgin^ and planting the Church in such a disorderly wa^ as is
destructive to the being of the Government We say, they do confound these
things, and oftentimes take circumstantials for essentials: As (...) instance,
That a Minister shall be ordained by (...) plurality of Presbyters, we hold
with them to (...) of scriptural divine institution, but that he be ordained by
such a number, officiating in such bounds, the Scripture has not determined;
An^ therefore, if the major part of a Presbyteri^ conspire for keeping out a
godly man from the Ministry, that is lawfully called by the Congregation and
rightly qualified, because he is not of their judgment in declining courses,
its no breach upon the being and essentials of the Government, (...) he receive
his Ordination and Admission to the Ministry from a neighboring Presbytery,
especially when this conspiracy is generally throughout the Country, and no
remedy thereof can b^ had by a superior Judicatory: So in the case o^ the
Overture in hand, though because of the present condition of Synods, and for
edification, there be a little alteration of some things from the common way of
order, yet does it not involve any thing destructive to the being of the
Government* No persons are desired to be upon these Visitation^ but Ministers
and Elders duly qualified, and members of the respective Synods; No power is
desired to be given, but that which is properly Ecclesiastical; Nor is it
desired to be derived from any fountain, but from the Synod it self; Nor to
proceed by any rule but by the Word of God, and the Acts of uncontroverted
General Assemblies; Nor are they to exercise it independantly, but with
subordination unto, and being accomptable to the Synod from whence they do
receive it: All which will be evident to any that shall impartially consider
the Overture it self. And to put it above question, there is express mention
of their qualification, and power, and commission, and subordination, and the
rule by which they are to procee^ in the Overture, the same for substance as it
was propounded to our Brethren in the Conference at Edinburgh, November. 8. and
27. 1655. Whence i^ appears that our Brethren speak more passion than reason,
when they say, It is a tyrannical imposition upon Synods, that they must give
their power to persons whom they have not liberty to choose, nor power to call
them to an account, and must set up a Jurisdiction above themselves, with at
least a negative voice, to frustrate all their actings, if these Delegates
please. Is it tyrannically to impose, to desire the Synod for the better and
more unanimous carrying-on the Work of God, to ratify the Nomination of some
of the choicest of their own members, made by no forinsick persons, or party,
or power* but by the intrinsic members of the Synod it self, and that in such
a distracted condition of the Church, And that they are not comptable, is
alleged gratis. The Article, as propounded to our Brethren, does expressly
provide, that these Committees shall in their proceedings be comptable to the
Synods, nor does that clause of the Synods not reversing any thing ^one by
these Committees, without the previous advice and consent of the general
Committee of Delegates, import any thing to the contrary, but that the Synod
may take an account of the proceedings of their own Committee, and admonish and
rebuke them; yea, and take away their Commission and Power, in the case of
maladministration, and give it to others of their number, nominated as
aforesaid: And for a Jurisdiction by this means set up above themselves, we can
see no such thing in the Overture, but only a power of advice upon the part of
these Delegates (which yet the Synod are not simply tied by the Overture to
follow, as in the case of their advising the Synod to reverse the deeds of
these Committees) and a brotherly condescension in the Synods in the present
condition of the Church, not to reverse things done by these Committees without
the advice and consent of these Delegates. Neither will our Brethren's negative
voice prove it; because as these Delegates have not a negative voice in all
cases, as we have already showed, to wit, in the case of ratifying of the
proceedings of these Committees, the Synod being free, notwithstanding any
thing in the Overture to ratify, albeit the Delegates should not consent, but
advise otherwise; So it is a new device to say, that a negative voice infers
a superior jurisdiction and power; for, at most it makes but a coordinate
power: And that there is any absurdity in this, That a Committee of Delegates,
nominated by the common consent of all the Synods, should, in this condition of
the Church, have such a power (if yet it be a power of Jurisdiction) we do not
see. 4. This Overture was not propounded as a perpetual standing way, always
to be followed and kept up in the Church, as our Brethren are pleased to
insinuate, much less was it propounded hereby to lay a way for perpetuating of
differences and contentions (a prejudice also they are pleased to load it with)
but, as it expressly bears, to continue only till the present differences be
healed, or, till the Lord in providence minister some better way for settling
peace amongst us. Will the resolution Brethren in this present sickly declining
and distracted condition of the Church, allow of no remedy for purging thereof,
and composing differences, that is in any circumstance out of the common road
of the ordinary procedures of Presbyteries and Synods? We know that they will
tell us that the Church is sound and healthy, and sufficiently able by
Presbyteries and Synods to purge her self. But why then (we pray our Brethren
to tell us) did the General Assembly, before these differences did arise,
unanimously, judge that Presbyteries and Synods were not sufficiently able to
do it, and did, upon conviction hereof, appoint extraordinary Commissions and
Visitations for doing of it? If our Brethren say, That the Genesis Assembly is the
supreme Church-Judicatorie in the Nation, and therefore may so do. They can
easily answer themselves, That the question is of the moving cause; or, the
ground or reason upon which they did it, it was not to show their Supremacy and
Authority, which was not questioned nor controverted by any Synod or
Presbytery* but (as our Brethren well know) because they did conceive and were
convinced, that Presbyteries and Synods were not so healthy as to do these
duties of themselves; and if they were not so then when neutral, and malignant,
and disaffected (...) were under board, how much less now, when (...) of them
are got above the hatches, and sundry (...) them are set to stir the rudder?
Or, if they will say, That Presbyteries and Synods are now sufficiently able and
willing of themselves to do the work. We pray them then to tell us why it is
no^ done? Have not most of the Godly of the Lan^ been crying upon them these
seven years bygone that they would arise and be doing that good an^ necessary
work? and yet what have all their (...) prevailed? are they not heard with deaf
ears? What wonder is it then though the protesting Brethren do propound such
Overtures, as, being embraced, might probably in some measure satisfi^ somewhat
of the lawful and just desires of the Godly in that soul-concerning matter, in
propounding whereof, their design is none of those sinistrous things that are
cast upon them by their Brethren; but, that by some mean or another that is not
sinful, the House of God might be purged; And therefore, that it might appear
to their Brethren that it was not domination, nor the setting up of themselves,
and the treading down of the other, that they were seeking, they were content
not to exercise the power given by the Commissions of the Assembly, 1650. which
in their judgment (because no lawful General Assembly has since interveened)
is still in force, and did propound unto them in that meeting at Edinburgh,
that for making of the work of purging effectual, and in order to other public
affairs of the Church, that those persons who were nominated upon the
Commission and Visitations by the Assembly, 1650. might sit; if not by the
Authority derived from that Assembly, yet by the mutual condescendence and
approbation of Presbyteries, and by the same mutual condescendence and
approbation these persons might have power to compose the particular
differences that are now, or shall be hereafter in particular Presbyteries and
Congregations; this was not to assume the particular nomination of any person
to themselves, or to state business upon difference of judgment, or to make
any thing like a party or a faction, or to desire an equality of the number of
both judgments, or to do any injury unto, or make any incroachment upon the due
right of Presbyteries and Synods, (unless we will say, that the General
Assembly wronged them by appointing those Commissions and Visitations) yet was
this also refused and rejected by our Brethren: Whence it appears, that nothing
will please, unless the protesting Brethren condescend, as Asses, to bow down
under the burden by an absolute submission to Presbyteries and Synods, as now
constituted (that is* upon the matter to the Brethren for the public
Resolutions, the protesting Brethren being, by their own verdict, a few number
in comparison of the Body of the Ministry of this Church) in their present and
future actings, how negligent or corrupt soever, which themselves make evident
in the next thing whereupon they impeach them, as projecters against, and
subverters of the Government of the Church, to wit, their refusing to engage
themselves to an absolute submission to the sentences of the ChurchJudicatories.

They did (say they (toward the end of the fifth page of their Declaration)
expressly refuse subordination and submission to the Church-Iudicatories, to
which they and we were solemnly engaged at our admission to the Ministry, and
which we were willing* to renew for our parts, and without which our
established Iudicatories shall be nothing else but so many consultative
meetings; a principle inconsistent with presbyterial Government. In speaking to
this particular we shall first shortly repeat the sum of the protesting
Brethren their Desires, and Offers, and Answers thereanent, in the Conference
at Edinburgh* November. 1655. And, in the next place, shall speak somewhat to the
matter it self. As to the first. In so far as concerns Presbyterial
Government, and the due subordination of Church-Judicatories, that they might
testify their approbation there^, and that they did continue constant in their
former solemn public Professions and Engagements, they did propound unto their
Brethren, That in matters concerning the Doctrine, Worship, Government and
Discipline of this Church, and the Enemies of Truth and Godliness, and the
work of Reformation, there may be mutual evidence and assurance given for
adherence unto these Articles of our Covenants, and the solemn public
Confession of Sins and Engagement unto Duties, and all the Acts of
uncontroverted Assemblies relating thereunto, in the literal and genuine
meaning thereof: By which, we hope, that unless they be taken for gross
dissemblers, it does manifestly appear that they are willing to six themselves,
and desirous also to have their Brethren (who gave but a shie answer in this
particular) also fixed in the matter of the Government of the Church. But,
secondly, our Brethren, having in that Conference overtured, That all the
members of this Kirk, Ministers and People, shall submit themselves to their
Presbyteries and Synods respectively: And if any be grieved with the
Determination of Presbyteries, they may appeal to the Synods: And if any be
grieved with the Determination of a Synod, they may appeal to a General
Assembly; but that in the mean time the Sentences of Presbyteries and Synods
are to be acquiesced unto, until the Determination of the respective supreme
Iudicatories thereupon. The protesting Brethren did quere upon this Article,
Whether the submission and acquiescence required in the same, does import a
submission and acqutescence in every person, in all cases, even when the
plunality of a Kirk-Iudicatory does act contrary to the Word of God, and employ
their power to destruction and not to edification, and their Determinations
does necessarily infer present detriment to the Church; and finding that by
their Answers they did upon the matter require an absolute and unlimited
submission to the Sentences of the Church-Judicatories whether just or unjust;
They did declare unto them, That as they did not willingly desire to enter in
any debate anent that matter, conceiving it unexpedient to start and debate
such questions at that time, or to make any Declarations thereanent; So they
did conceive that such a submission has not hithertils been required, nor
could warrantably be yielded in such a way as it was then required, especially
there being to their sense and apprehension so much corruption in the plurality
of Presbyteries and Synods, whereof they professed themselves willing and ready
to give the evidences. And afterward, That they did not differ with their
Brethren about what was cited by them in that Conference, from the Acts of the
General Assemblies of this Kirk concerning subordination and submission,
particularly from the Act of the General Assembly, 1647. concerning the hundred
and eleven Propositions, and in the seventh head of doctrine therein contained;
but that they did not see how that which i^ required by them, is no other than
that which is established by the General Assemblies of this Kirk; because they
require such a Declaration of subjection and submission to the Sentences of the
Iudicatories of this Kirk, as has not hithertils been established by the
uncontroverted Assemblies thereof, to wit, that which does import a like
submission to sentences whether just or unjust, or of corrupt or incorrupt
Iudicatories, and does exclude Declin^^^or and contrary actings in every case,
which could not but probably put the People of God in a worse condition than
they were before; because it would take away from them the use of lawful
remedies, and is contrary to the practice of the Apostle in the fourth and
fifth of the Acts, and to the practice of our forefathers in the time of former
defections.

But because this point is of importance, and stateth the Brethren for the
Protestation in the apprehensions of the more rigid of the Resolutioners, as
adversaries to the very essence and being of Presbyterial Government; therefore
it is necessary, in order to their vindication, to speak more fully to it. The
Question (so far as we can understand them in it) is, Whether such a submission
be due from all the members of this Kirk, Ministers and People, to the
Judicatories of the Kirk, and from the inferior to the superior
Kirk-Judicatories in matters of Government and Discipline, as ought upon the
sentence (whether just or unjust) of these Judicatories to sist the proceedings
of the person or party grieved therewith, and make them aquiesce thereunto,
until the determination of the respective superior Judicatory therein,
without any counteracting to the same, unless it be to appeal unto, and follow
their appeal before the superior Judicatory? Upon this Question we find the
Brethren for the Protestation in their last Paper at the Conference November. 25.
1655. expressing their judgment thus; We are willing to subject our selves to
all the just sentences of the lawf^ll Assemblies of this Kirk; and if the case
were only of a few particular persons, in things of more private interest and
personal concernment, and of Iudicatories employing their power to edification
in the current of their actings, we should not much contend about it; but when
it is of a great number of godly Ministers and Elders and Professors throughout
the Land, who do desire to stand in the breach, and to oppose the present
course of defection, and of Iudicatories, the plurality whereof in many places
do not act unto edification and for promoving the power of godliness, but to
the contrary, it alters the case. The resolution Brethren without admitting
these qualifications and restrictions upon the sentences, or the persons
sentenced and the grounds of their censure, and without acknowledging any
corruption in the Church-Judicatories, are for the affirmative of the Question,
to wit, subjection and submission to all the sentences of the respective
KirkJudicatories, just or unjust, by all the members of this Kirk, Ministers
and Professors, without any counteracting, unless it be to appeal unto, and
prosecute their appeal before the superior Judicatorie, as is evident from
their Overtur^ propounded unto the protesting Brethren, June (...) 1655. and
from the Papers that passed (...) them thereupon in the Conference at Edinburg^
from November 8. till November. 29. 1655. and from their late Representation,
page 39. sect. 43. an^ page 47. sect. 53. and from this present (...). But let
us examine their Reasons. Their first Reason, is, That such a submission is of
the ver^ essence and being of Presbyterial Government Our Brethren (say they)
do strike at the very being of Presbyterial Government, etc. Represent. page
39^ sect. 2. And again, they declined also to engage themselves to that
submission ^o the Government, and to observe that subordination of persons and
Iudicatori^ in matters of discipline, which we were willing should be mutual;
And albeit we required nothing but (...) is essential to Presbyterial
Government -- Yet they di^ wholly decline it, Represent. page 47. sect. 3. An^
in the fifth page of their present Declaration, They expressly refused
subordination and submission to the Church-Iudicatories, to which we and they
were solemnly engaged at our admission to the Ministry, and which we were
willing to renew for our parts, and without which our established Iudicatories
would be nothing but consultative meetings; a principle inconsist^nt with
Presbyterial Government in a constitute^ Church. Answ. It is to us, and we
believe will be to all sober and unbyassed men, who understand the principles
of Church Government, new and strange doctrine, That an absolute and unlimited
subjection to all sentences (whether just or unjust, or agreeable or repugnant
to the Word of God) should be asserted to be at all of kin or alliance to the
divine Ordinance of Presbyterial Government, which is a part of the sweet and
gentle yoke of Jesus Christ, that is far from tyranny and oppression. The man
who in a raving fit of a notional spirit first preached, and afterward printed
those shrewd comparisons betwixt the Northern Pr^sbyterie and the Roman
Papacy, may happily think himself now justified, when he hears so great
pretenders to that Government minister by this new doctrine of theirs such
ground for some parts of that comparison. If Presbyterial Government has (as
we do believe and assert it to have) its foundation in the Testament of Jesus
Christ, upon whose shoulder the Government is, then whatsoever is of the
essence and being thereof, must derive it self from the fountain of Christ's
revealed Will about the Constitution and Essentials of that Government? But we
know no tittle in his Book that says as our Brethren say, or from which, what
they say in this matter, can be deduced by good and necessary consequence, to
wit, that it is essential to the Government which He has appointed His House
to be ruled by, that all the Children of the House should submit unto, and
acquiesce in the Determination of the Governors, without any counteracting,
though their Sentence be contrary to the Law and the Testimony; and therefore
till our Brethren prove thi^ they will give us leave to deny it. We acknowledge
that power and authority, and subjection, and submission are co-relatives, and
that the power and authority of the superior can no more actually subsist
without the subjection and submission of the inferior, than one relative can
subsist without its co-relative: But all Church Power and authority is bounded
by the Word of God, and is for edification only; And therefore all the
subjection that is due thereunto, is in the Lord only; And when we are thus
subject, the power and authority is sufficiently acknowledged and preserved*
But, say our Brethren, without this submission* which they plead for, our
established Judicatories would be nothing but consultative meetings. But this
we also deny; because what is resolved and determined by Kirk-Judicatories in a
right way, does not only bind by virtue of the intrinsecal lawfulness thereof,
^t being for matter, God's Word, and by virtue o^ the reverence that is due to
the gifts and endowments of brethren and friends counselling right things,
which is all that can be attributed to a consultative meeting, but also by
virtue of a positive Law of God, by which He has commanded us to hear the
Church, and those that sit in Moses Chair, and to be subject in the Lord to
Church Governors, to whom He has given a Ministerial and Official Authority
and Power to assemble in His Name in the respective Courts appointed by Himself
for governing His House according to the rule of His Word; And therefore as
they have Authority or a superiority of Jurisdiction, which no consultative
meeting has; So whosoever resists their power, when put forth to
edification, and not to destruction, does not only sin, by despising that Word
of God which is the matter of their Decree, and by despising the gifts and
graces of their Brethren that are exercised in holding forth light unto them,
but does also sin, by resisting the Ordinance of God: A Kirk-judicatory
modelled according to the pattern showed in the Mount, and clothed with
Authority from Jesus Christ, and proceeding according to the Law and to the
Testimony, to which they ought to be subject, God having commanded us so to do.

Their second Reason is, That without this submission and subordination they do
not see how Unity and Order can be continued in the Kirk, It being in vain to
think of a remedy by superior Iudicatories without this, the refusing thereof
being the way to make all Union void: So in their Answer to the Queries
propounded upon their Overtures, November. 16* 1655. And in their Represent. page
39. sect. 4. and page 47. sect. 3. Answ. This is the very argument and language
of the Advocates of the Sea of Rome, whilst they plead the Popes visible
headship and irrefragable authority and jurisdiction over the Church, to which
all ought to submit without gainsaying, or counteracting, the very thing that
has set up the Man of sin, to sit a^ God in the Temple of God, unto the
enslaving both of the Word of God and the consciences of men, by requiring of
them subjection and blind obedience to his dictates, without examining the same
according to the light of the Word. If, according to the revealed Will of God,
there ought to be such a submission in all cases, without counteracting, What
shall we say of the practices of the Prophets and Apostles, and others of the
Servants of God who have lived before us in corrupt times? must all their
preachings and other actings, though most agreeable to the Word of God, be
condemned, because they were contrary to the (...) of the Church wherein they
lived? (...) were indeed to set up a power over the Word (...) God, a power for
destruction and not for (...), That would indeed make a sinful unity a^ order,
and teach a way to avoid persecution, an readily to obtain peace with men, but
with (...) loss of Truth and a good conscience. The wa^ to preserve Unity and
Order in the House of Go^ is, not to hearken to the counsels of flesh an^
blood, by setting up the will of man for a La^ and establishing an arbitrary
and tyrannica^ power over consciences, to which they shall b^ tied to submit to
iniquity and injustice; for, Go^ has said, that the (...) of iniquity that
framet^ mischief into a law shall have no fellowship wit^ Him; And therefore
that may destroy Unity an^ Order, it will not preserve it. But to let the Wor^
of God (which is both the rule and bond of Unit^ and Order) have place, Gal. 6.
16. and Judicatories proceeding according to this, is an effectua remedy actu
primo and objective, as in every Ordinance of Christ; albeit actu secundo there
is n^ efficacious remedy in either Word, Sacraments, Admonitions, Suspension,
Deposition, Excommunications, Presbyteries, Synods, or any Ordinance the Church
does enjoy or can exercise without the effectual blessing and influence of the
Spirit of God, who is the author and appointer o^ these, and concurreth
therewith upon the consciences of men according to the pleasure of His own
will. Shall persons sentenced unjustly, submit? Yes, say our Brethren, for
preserving Unity and Order. What remedy then, say we, for preserving the Truth?
They may appeal, say they. But, say we, they have appealed, and have therein
succumbed. What remedy now? No remedy, but that at one stroke the precious
Truths of God, and interests of Jesus Christ must be born down and buried in
oblivion; And the Saints and Ministers of the Gospel be buried under the
rubbish thereof, because one Assembly will have it so. But say our Brethren,
how shall Unity and Order otherwise be preserved in the Church of God? We
Answer, Very well; because if the Sentence be unjust, it ought to be recognized
and repealed: If it be just, and of an inferior nature; If the persons will
not submit, they are, after due procedure, to be cast out, as those that will
not hear the Church, and so both Unity and Purity, both Order and Truth are
preserved. Will our Brethren under a pretext of Order, destroy
Christian-liberty, and bring-in Popish-tyranny? It is Christ's Order and the
King of Saints Peace, that every Believer have the judgment of discretion,
whether the Judicatories of the Kirk speak according to the Scriptures, or
whether they ought to obey or submit, or gainsay or counteract, and what Christ
has given them, no man can take from them.

Their third Argument, is taken from the judgment and practice of this, and
other Churches, which (as they affirm) plead for this subordination and
submission, required by them in their Answer to the Queries of the 16. of
November, 1655. they say, That this submission has been established by the
General Assemblies, especially by the Assembly in Anno 1648. sess. 30. and
practiced by the General Assembly, 1646. in the case of Mr. James Morison and
the Presbytery of Kirkwall; And that it has been the constant practice of all
the Iudicatories and members of this Kirk, ever since the late Reformation*
until our present differences did arise. And in their Paper of the 24. of
November. 1655. they do cite for proving of this submission, the Act of the
General Assembly, 1647. concerning the hundred and eleven Propositions, and the
seventh head of doctrine therein contained. And in the 39. page and 43. section
of their Representation, they are so confident as to tell the Brethren for the
Protestation, that their practice in matters of Discipline and Government was
never heard of in this Church, nor we believe (say they) in any Church where
the Officers and constitution thereof were acknowledged to be agreeable to the
Word of God; but whatever the superior Iudicatories might do as they would be
answerable notwithstanding an appeal, yet the appealer and inferior did
always submit and sist their proceedings till their cause wa^ heard and tried.
And to confirm all this, in the fifth page of their Declaration, they tell us,
that both themselves and the pr^testing Brethren were solemnly engaged to this
submission at their admission to the Ministry. As to the judgment of our
Church and of her General Assemblies, we do deny that ever they were of this
judgment, or have declared any such thing; but upon the contrary, let the
Confession of Faith, presented unto the Parliament, and ratified by them in the
year, 1567. bear witness, Artic. 21. concerning the power and authority of
Councils lawfully gathered; the words are these, So far as the Council proves
the Determination and Commandment that it gives by the plain Word of God, so
soo^ do we reverence and embrace the same: But if men, under the name of a
Council, pretend to forge unto us new Articles of our Faith, or to make
constitutions repugn^ng to the Word of God, then utterly we must refuse the
same, as the doctrine of devils, which draws our souls from the voice of our
only God, to follow the doctrines and constitutions of men. In the beginning of
the Reformation, 1562. It is concluded by the whole Ministry, in the Assembly
held that year, sess. 2. That Ministers shall be subject in all lawful
admonitions, as is prescribed in the Book of Discipline. Likewise, it is
provided in the Articles agreed upon by the Genesis Assembly held at Edinburgh, in
March, 1570. sess. 2. concerning the Jurisdiction of the Kirk, That the
suspension and deprivation of Ministers and others, admitted to functions in
the Kirk, charge of souls, etc. shall be for lawful causes. In the Book of
Discipline, agreed upon in diverse preceding General Assemblies, and recorded in
the year, 1581. by order of the Assembly, held in April, sess. 9. to the
defense of which Discipline the King and Subjects of all ranks did then
subscribe and swear; which was also renewed in the year, 1638. It is expressly
declared, chap. 7. concerning Elderships, Assemblies, and Discipline* That
Office-bearers are to be deposed for good and just causes deserving
deprivation. If it were needful, we could cite more of this kind: We shall
only add other two testimonies from very late Assemblies of this Kirk. The
Assembly conveened at S. Andrews, in Anno 1642. ^ess. 8. in the Overture for
transplantation of Ministers, do declare, That no Presbytery or Assembly
should pass a sentence for transportation of any Minister, till they give
reasons for the expediency of the same, both t^ him and his Congregation, and
to the Presbytery whereof he is a member; That if they acquiesce to the
reasons given, it is so much the better; if they do not acquiesce, yet the
Presbytery, or Assembly, by giving such reasons before the passing of their
sentence, shall make it manifest that what they do, is not pro arbitratu vel
imperio only, but upon grounds of reason. And the Assembly conveened at
Edinburgh, in Anno 1647. in their brotherly exhortation to their Brethren of
England, do declare as follows; We would not (say they) have our zeal for
Presbyteriall Government misunderstood, as if it tended to any rigor or
domineering over the flock, or to hinder and exclude that instructing in
meekness, them that oppose themselves, which the apostolical rule holds
forth; or, as if we would have any such to be entrusted with that Government,
as are found not yet purged, either from their old profaneness, or from the
prelatical principles and practices: which were to put a piece of new cloth
into an old garment, and so to make the rent worse; or to put new wine into old
bottles, and so to lose both wine and bottles. From these passages, impartially
considered, it is manifest, that the General Assemblies have judged, that as it
is rigor and a domineering over the Lord's flock, for the Judicatories of the
Kirk to determine, or do any thing pro arbitratu vel ^mperio, or without giving
a reason thereof from the Word; so when they do thus determine and judge, there
is no reason to submit thereunto, or acquiesce therein. As to what is cited by
our Brethren, from the Act of the General Assembly, in Anno, 1648. sess. 30. We
answer, That though the word, justly, be not expressed in the letter of the
Act, that being amongst the praecognita or praesupposita of all those that do
make or require obedience to Laws, that they make and mean of just Laws; yet it
is evident that it speaks of those Ministers, who being justly suspended, or
deposed from the function of the Ministry, shall continue in the exercise of
their Ministry, or intromet with the stipends belonging to those Kirks they
served at, as does appear from the passages before cited. If our Brethren will
not admit this gloss, then surely the meaning must be this; Whatsoever
Minister justly, or unjustly and contrary to the rule of the Word of God,
suspended or deposed from his Ministry, shall continue to preach the Gospel,
or to intromet with his stipend, We, the General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, do appoint, that because of his disobedience to our Sentence, whether
just or unjust, he shall be excommunicated and cast out of the Church: But as
we abhor to fasten such a meaning upon that reverend and grave Assembly* So we
desire to think that our Brethren, upon sober and serious thoughts, will abhor
it also, and will acknowledge with us, that it is to be understood of just
Sentences only; and if so, we do willingly acknowledge and profess, that who
so, being justly suspended or deposed from the function of the Ministry, does
continue in the exercise thereof, does deserve to be processed with
Excommunication. What was practiced by the General Assembly, 1646. in the case
of Mr. James Morison, because we have not the Records of that Assembly
concerning that matter, we will not take upon us to speak positively to their
Determination, what it was, or to the reasons thereof, in that particular, it
being a matter of fact done long ago, and clothed with many circumstances,
some of which have happily escaped our memory; but as we remember, and can
collect from the printed Index of the Acts of that Assembly, not printed, the
case was this; Mr. James Morison being sentenced with suspension from the
exercise of his Ministry by the Presbytery of Kirkwall, did appeal to the
General Assembly and go on in his Ministerial function, for which the
Presbytery did pronounce against him the sentence of Deposition: The process
coming before the Assembly, they did sustean his appeal, and rebuking both him
and the Presbytery for their contentious and litigious carriage one toward
another in that business, did (without (so far as we remember) any
ratification of the Presbyteries sentence of Deposition, or appointing of Mr.
James Morison to make any acknowledgement of his offense, for violating the
just submission and subordination due to the Judicatories of the Kirk, (which
doubtless they would have done before his reposition, if they had been of our
Brethrens judgment) did appoint him to be reponed again to his Ministry. If
the case was this, our Brethren have no advantage, but rather disadvantage in
alleging of it; because the Assembly were so far from proceeding to a further
sentence against Mr. James Morison, for counteracting the Sentence of the
Presbytery, that they did appoint him to be again reponed to his Ministry.
When our Brethren shall make it appear from the Registers to have been
otherwise, we shall lay the weight upon it that it does deserve. Our Brethren
overshoot, when they say. That thus to submit, has been the constant practice
of all the members and Judicatories of this Kirk ever since the late
Reformation; If they mean of the Reformation of this Church from Popery, they
cannot but know that there was nothing more ordinary sor the members and
Judicatories of this Kirk than not to submit unto, but to counteract the
Determinations and Sentences of the Prelates and their Synods and Assemblies,
not only in matters of Doctrine and Worship, but also of Discipline and
Government. It was ordinary for godly men, who were deposed by them and their
Courts, to preach and continue in the exercise of their Ministry,
notwithstanding of their Sentences. Some of our Brethren themselves did it.
It Is true, that the Prelates were not a lawful Authority, nor Church Officers
agreeable to the Word of God: but our Brethren do very well know, that as the
Prelates, according to the Act of their Assembly at Glasgow, did sometimes in
the suspension and deposition of Ministers, associate to themselves the
Ministry of those bounds, where the supposed Delinquent served, that is, the
Presbytery, whereof he was a member, which was a lawfully Authority; and that as
they did plead for such a submission to their Decrees and Sentences, as these
Brethren do now plead for, and upon the same grounds of its being essential to
Government and preserving of Unity and Order, and shunning of Confusion, etc.
so also that those who did refuse and decline that submission, did it not only
upon the ground of their want of lawful Authority, but also upon this ground,
That no obedience nor subjection is due to Ecclesiastic Laws thatare unjust
and contrary to the Word of God; as will appear to any that shall read the
Treatises that were published by the defenders of the Truth in that hour of
temptation, concerning the binding power of Ecclesiastical Laws. And for the
practice of the Members and Judicatories of this Kirk since the Reformation
begun in Anno 1638. until these differences did arise, when our Brethren shall
bring instances of unjust sentences pronounced in that time by the Judicatories
of the Kirk, it will be time for the protesting Brethren to bring instances of
not submitting thereto, or counteracting the same. If the sentences were just,
submission was due unto them; and they do but trifle to make that submission a
precedent to that unlimited submission which they do now plead-for.

Their citation from the Act of the General Assembly, in Anno 1647. concerning
the hundred and eleven Propositions, and the seventh head of Doctrine therein
contained, does make against our Brethren, and not for them: 1. Because the
foregoing words of that Act do clear, that the Assembly speaks of
Ecclesiastical Government, committed and entrusted by Christ to the Assemblies
of the Kirk: but Christ has committed no power to any Assembly to tyrannize,
nor has He commanded any Churchmember, or any inferior Church-judicatorie to
subject themselves to Ecclesiastical tyranny. 2. Because the Propositions
themselves to which that Act do relate, do confine the obedience and subjection
that is to be given to the Ordinances and Decrees of Classes and Synods, to
lawful Ordinances and Decrees; It is not lawful, say they, to particular
Churches, or (as commonly they are called) Parochial, eitherto decline the
Authority of Classes or Synods where they are lawfully settled, or may be had
(much less to withdraw themselves from that Authority if they have once
acknowledged it) or to refuse such lawful Ordinances and Decrees of the
Classes or Synods, as being agreeable to the Word of God, are with Authority
imposed upon them, Act. 15. 2, 6, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29. Act. 16. 4. Prop. 32. It
seems it came not into the minds of our Brethren who were appointed to
prepare these Articles and Propositions (though they did well understand the
nature of Presbyteriall Government) and tendered them unto the Assembly, nor
into the Assemblies mind, who after hearing of them publicly read, did
unanimously vote and agree to the eight general heads of Doctrine therein
contained and asserted, that men should submit to unlawful Ordinances and
Decrees of Classes and Synods; and therefore we wonder that our Brethren should
cite such testimonies for confirmation of their new doctrine, as do indeed make
against it. Neither have our Brethren been more happy in what they tell us in
their Representation, that this practice of ours in matters of Discipline and
Government, was never heard of in any Church where the Officers and
constitution thereof were acknowledged to be agreeable to the Word of God. What
has been heard of in this Church we have already told them, and for other
Churches, we would desire them to look upon the story of the Church within the
first four or five hundred years after Christ, and see whether many of the
worthy Servants of Christ who lived of old, such as Athanasius, etc. did not
refuse submission to Sentences and Decrees of Synods, and counteract thereunto,
not only by preaching contrary to their Determinations, but by preaching and
exercising their ministerial function after Sentences of Deposition and
Excommunication passed against them: and it will be but a poor shift for our
Brethren to tell us, that these Synods did not consist of Officers and of a
Constitution agreeable to the Word of God, because these worthy men had no
exception against the Officers, because of their office of Bishops or such
like, they being such themselves, nor against the constitution, but their
exception was against the heterodoxie and iniquity of their Decrees and
Sentences, upon which account they did refuse obedience and subjection
thereunto, and did counteract them, to the utmost of their power; and though
because of their so doing, they were then persecuted and reproached by many of
their Brethren, and of the Kirk-judicatories of these times, a^ the firebrarnds
of the time, and troublers of the peace of the Church; yet has their praise
been amongst all sober and sound men in all the Churches of Christ throughout
many generations, and will be so to the end of the world. And those who did
persecute them for so doing, are, and will be justly condemned as men of a
malignant spirit. We remember, to this purpose, an observation of Osiander upon
one of the Canons of a Council at Antioch, in which it was decided, That if any
Ecclesiastical persons, should without the advice and letters of the Bishop of
the Province, and chiefly of the Metropolitan, go to the Emperor to put up any
grievance unto him, he should be cast out, not only from the holy communion,
but from his proper dignity which he had in the Church. This Canon (says
Osiander) was composed against holy Athanasius; for Athanasius being expelled
by the Arians, had fled to the Emperor Constantine the younger, and bad from
him obtained regresse to his own Church. Now this Canon (says he) is very
unjust, which forbids that a Bishop, or any other Minister of the Church
being unjustly oppressed, fly to his godly civil Magistrate, since it was
lawful to the Apostle Paul to appeal to the Roman Emperor, wicked Nero, as
the Acts of the Apostle witness: but it may be seen in this place, that
Bishops were very soon seeking dominion (says he) yea, tyranny over the
Church and over their colleagues, Hist. Eccl. Cent. 4. lib. 2. cap. 48. page
242.

The last part of their alleagance, that both the protesting Brethren and they,
were solemnly engaged to this submission at their admission to the Ministry,
if it were meaned of such as were admitted by, and gave engagements to the
Prelates, it has indeed too much truth in it, that many of their number, and
happily some of the other also, did at their admission to the Ministry, give
these engagements for absolute and implicit submission to their ordinary, the
Lord-Prelate, to which the submission required by our Brethren, as we shall
afterward show, is too near a kin; but that ever such an absolute unlimited
submission, was either required by Presbyteries, or engaged into by intrants
since the casting out of the Prelates, we do deny, and are confident, that our
Brethren can bring no relevant proof of it in the form and order of the
electing of Ministers, condescended upon in the Assembly at Edinburgh, March 9.
1560. where John Knox was Moderator; sundry questions are ordered to be
propounded to the intrant to the Ministry, which (for ought we know) are (and
no other for substance) the same that have been propounded since the Assembly
at Glasgow, 1638 Among other things, It is demanded of him, if he will not be
subject to the Discipline of the Church with the rest of his Brethren? And the
answer is, That he does most willingly submit himself to the wholesome
Discipline of the Church; yea, to the Discipline of the same Church, by which
he is now called to this office and charge, and that he does in Gods presence,
and theirs, promise obedience to all admonitions, etc. Now, what does this
amount unto, will our Brethren say, to such a subjection as they contend for?
The subjection here spoken of, is upon express supposall of sliding and
offending upon his part who promises the subjection: upon which case, the
protesting Brethren are as much for subjection to Discipline as the resolution
Brethren are: But if they will extend it further, and say, that it is meaned
of absolute subjection to the sentence of his Brethren, whether he have
osfended or not, they may as well, and with more color of reason, say, that he
is bound by his oath, not only to give subjection, but also obedience to all
their admonitions, whether just or unjust, lawful or unlawful; because there
is no express limitation in the words of the oath, these qualifications, being
as we said before, amongst the praecognita and praesupposita of all such
questions and answers, and there being no need to express them, except where
there are grounds of jealousy. As to the reasons and arguments which do plead
against this submission, so much contended for by the resolution Brethren, we
shall set them down when we come to speak of the iniquity of these Brethren
their demands in order to Union and Peace.

The sixth thing that our Brethren bring in, for attesting the protesting
Brethren their projecting to subvert the Government of the Church, is, That
some of them did endeavor to enervate the power of Church-judicatories, by
procuring an order, putting the power of giving testimony to intrants (which is
due to Presbyteries only who are authorized to judge of their call, and to try
and to ordain them) in the hands of some select persons of their own choosing,
Declar. page 6. We do somewhat wonder at our Brethrens mentioning of this, and
that in a Paper pretending to earnest desires of Union and Peace. 1. Because
the whole Land, and their consciences know, that that order was not embraced
nor made use of by the protesting party in Scotland, and that many of those
whose names were in it, gave their reasons why they were not clear in their
consciences to close with it. 2. Because it is well known to themselves, that
the reverend Brother, upon whom they would cast the blame in this matter, and
others of both judgments, were required by the Lord Protector to go to London;
where being demanded, he gave his opinion, That seeing there was a Court
established in Scotland for disposing of the legal maintenance to such
Intrants of the Ministry, as upon certificates should be approved of by the
Judges of that Court, whereby the Judges were left to an uncertainty, whose
certificates to receive; It was therefore fittest in the present distractions
of the Church, that those certificate should be granted by a select number of
both judgments; which being embraced by my Lord Protector and his Council, and
an Ordinance passed for that effect, and sent to Scotland; When the reverend
Brother did perceive that it was not accepted, he laid it aside and did not
prosecute i^ any further; And we wish the Brethren for the public Resolutions
would follow the example of his condescendencie in the like cases. But may i^
not be truly said, that our Brethren have done much more themselves for
enervating the power of Church-Judicatories, and bringing the Ministry into
bondage by clandestine capitulations of theirs, about Intrants to the
Ministry, the effects whereof are so well known as we need not to mention
them? But (say they in the next place) When it pleased the Lord to break that
snare their leading men have again of late attempted the utter ruin of this
Church, and of these who differ from them, under the pretext of seeking a
Commission for plantation of Churches, they projected to have the power of
disposing the legal maintenance of Ministers pu^ in the hands of that
Commission; though they know such a power was never given nor assumed by such a
Iudicatorie, but that it is contrary to the order established by the Law of
the Land: the great design thereof being not only to call the Authority of the
late Assemblies in question, as they express in their desire, but to have the
maintenance put in the hands of men to their mind, who were the proposers of
the Overture, that so they might discourage all who are opposite to them from
the Ministry. What poor and weak premises are he^r to draw such a conclusion
from! That the protesting Brethren, or their leading men* have of late
attempted the utter ruin of this Church* and of those who differ from them.
When the civil powers were pleased to put in the hands, first, of a peculiar
Court appointed for that end, and afterward into the hands of the Council, the
disposing of the legal maintenance of Ministers to such Intrants, as upon
certificates should be approven by them; The protesting Brethren having
represented the inconveniencie of this thing unto his Highness Council in
Scotland, and finding that they were not empowered to change that way* did
afterward by some of their number, supplicate his Highness, That as it is
allowed to the Nation to be governed by her own Laws, the like freedom may be
given to the Church to be governed by her own uncontroverted Acts and
Constitutions, and that Intrants to the Ministry might have full access to
their stipends and maintenance, conform to the Laws of the Nation, without any
bonds or engagements of a civil nature, directly or indirectly, and that all
the Acts of Parliamen^ which do relate to the liberties of the Kirk, may be
declared to be still in force; and that there might be a Commission of able and
godly men, who know and understand our Church affairs, nominated by his
Highness, which might exercise the power which was formerly in the Commission
of Plantation of Churches in Scotland; and also do the duty of the Civil
Magistrate anent Ecclesiastic matters, according to the Rules and Acts of
uncontroverted Assemblies, and Laws of the Land preceding the year, 1651. Was
there herein any thing faulty, much less so hainously faulty as an attempt for
the utter ruin of the Church and of the resolution Brethren? Yes, say they,
there was a project in it to have the power of disposing the legal maintenance
of Ministers put into the hands of that Commission, though such a power was
never given nor assumed by such a Judicatory, and is contrary to the order
established by the Law of the Land: But as the first part of the protesting
Brethren their desire, which we have already set down, does expressly bear, That
Ministers might have access to their stipends in such a way, as i^ conform to
the Laws of the Land; So does the last part expressly qualify the power which
they desire to be given to the Commission of Plantation of Kirks in the
exercise of it, that it might be according to Acts of uncontroverted Assemblies
and the Laws of the Land: It is neither falsehood nor vanity for the protesting
Brethren when they are charged as underminers of the Liberties of thi^ Kirk, to
say, that in their essays for preserving and vindicating of these, they have
been nothing short, if not somewhat beyond these men who challenge them; And
what though (upon supposall of the purpose and resolution of the civ^ powers
not to alter the former way of disposin^ of the legal maintenance of
Ministers) they ha^ desired that the disposing of Ministers maintenance might
be in the hands of that Commission^ was it a fault, when they could not prevail
to bring it in conformity to the Laws of the Land, to desi^ that there might be
a translation of the power in its exercise from one subject to another, who
being not necessarily diverted with multiplicity of affairs, as the Council is,
might more conveniently attend it? But, say they, the great design of this was,
to call the Authority of late Assemblies in question. Supposing that to be
true, that the Authority of these Assemblies were not only called in question,
but pronounced null, would that bring utter ruin to this Church, and to those
who plead for them? do our Brethren think that the Church and themselves must
stand or fall with the Authority of these late A ssemblies? We wish the Church
and them too, better foundations then such bowing walls and tottering fences.
But could not the Commission for plantation of Kirks have exercised that Power,
and the Authority of these Assemblies have also stood? we see no inconsistencie
between them. Next, say they, The design was to have the maintenance put in the
hands of men to their mind, that so they might discourage all from the
Ministry who are opposite to themselves. If our Brethren judge such
discouragement to be so great a crime, why have they so much practiced it, and
framed the mischief thereof into a Law, that none shall have liberty to be a
Burser in a DivinityCollege, or to wait upon a Family, much less to be
admitted to the Ministry, that does not acknowledge the Constitution, and
submit to the Acts of these two late Assemblies? But as concerning the men into
whose hands the protesting Brethren would have had the disposing of the
maintenance put, though we cannot say that they are, or ought to be so
self-denied that they would not have wished it to have been so, yet did they
never expect such a Commission as should wholly consist of men according to
their mind* nor was that ever any of their Propositions to his Highness*
directly or indirectly; Yea, their Propositions did not contain that
qualification, as to any of them. And we can also say, That though they had
been mostly or wholly of that mind, there would have been room and
encouragement for men of our Brethrens judgment, both to continue, and enter
into the Ministry.

Thus now have we answered that first and great prejudice, wherewith our
Brethrens Paper, and (it seems) their spirits, are fraughted, against the
protesting Brethren, to wit, That they do not only dissent from, but also that
they have it in their thoughts and design, to subvert and destroy the
established Government of the Kirk of Scotland by Presbyteries and Synods, and
that their practices do manifestly tend thereunto. And in this we have been the
larger, not only because we have more then probable ground to look upon it, as
the great scope of our Brethrens Paper, to fill and possess this Church, and
the Churches abroad, with this opinion of these Brethren that they are indeed
such a shrewd party as they describe them to be, that so they may acquit and
justify the resolution Brethren in all that they have hitherto done, or shall
hereafter do against them; but also, because if there be any remnants of real
inclinations in our Brethrens bosoms to a Peace approven of God and tending to
edification; we did conceive it necessary to endeavor, though with much
weakness, to roll out of their way that great rock of offense, which they have
by their own mistakes so long and so much stumbled upon, unto the making of
them halt more and more, day by day, in their affections toward the protesting
Brethren.

There be yet two prejudices more, which we find in their Declaration, that we
shall more briefly speak unto; one is, That they have begun a needless rent in
the Church upon a question so extrinseck to our Doctrine, Worship and
Government; so they speak in the fourth page of their Declaration: and in the
third page they call it a tossing about a debate, now so far removed out of our
way. To which we answer; first, Whatever be the nature of the Question about
the public Resolutions, it is certain and manifest that the Rent thereupon was
begun by the resolution Brethren; because they did in a surreptitious meeting
of some of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, without giving timous and
due warning to others, in the year 1651. suddenly take these Resolutions, when
the whole Church of Scotland was in possession of, and by solemn Covenants and
Vows engaged to the Truths, to which these Resolutions are contrary and
destructive. 2. This Question is not so extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and
Government, as our Brethren would make the world believe; it does involve a
portion of the precious Truth of God, which he has been pleased to reveal and
hold forth in His Word for the edification of His Church and People, that they
may know what they ought to do, and what they ought not to do, in the case of
intrusting of known wicked malignant men, enemies to Truth and Godliness, with
the interests of the Lords Work and People; And this Truth, as it has all
along since the Reformation from Popery been taught and holden forth by the
Kirk of Scotland, so has the preservation and practice thereof been judged
necessary for preserving the rest of the Doctrine, and the Worship and
Government in their purity, and from the pollutions and corruptions which evil
men use to bring in, or give way unto; yea, this very thing (as our Brethren do
well know) was no small part of the controversy all along from the year 1638.
betwixt the well-affected, and the Popish and Prelaticall and Malignant party?
they may take One instance of many, to wit, the desires of the Commission of
the General Assembly, in Anno 1648. concerning the unlawful Engagement;
amongst which, that about the qualification of instruments was one of the
chief. We desire them to remember what spirit that man would have beenjudged
of, who in the Assembly, Anno 1650. should have pleaded that to be a question
much extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and Government, and that it would
furnish just ground of complaint against the Assembly, if they should, because
thereof, divide from the Parliament which carried on that unlawful Engagement
in war against England? 3. If our Brethren do indeed judge this question to be
so extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and Government, How comes it to pass
that they are so tenacious of the determinations of their Assemblies about it?
If Doctrine, and Worship, and Government may be preserved entire without it,
may they not for the Peace of the Church condescend to take course that these
Determinations shall not be looked upon as the definitive judgment of this
Kirk, or any of the Judicatories thereof in these matters? And how comes it to
pass, that upon a question so extrinsick, they did make and still keep up
against Ministers, Elders, Expectants and Professors, Acts imporrting so
severe censures against those who do not submit to the Determinations of their
Assemblies concerning these things? Next, If the question be so extrinsick, how
comes it that they sometime place the standing or falling of this Church
therein, and now again they would make it of no moment? But further we say, The
subject matter of these debates is not so far removed out of the way as our
Brethren do talk, but do still continue in many respects: 1. In regard of the
sin and guilt thereof, which has not been taken-with, nor repented-of till
this day. And as the resolution Brethren judge it hard for the protesting
Brethren to be satisfied with nothing, unless they do repent of that, as a sin
which in their consciences they judge to be a duty; So they must give leave to
the protesting Brethren to judge it hard, that the Church, of which they are
Members and Ministers, should lie under the guilt of a public transgression,
and under great and sore wrath, because thereof, and they in the mean while not
be permitted to discover her iniquity therein, that her captivity may be turned
away, especially when they are engaged by Covenant so to do. 2. These
Resolutions do continue, in regard of the Synodicall approbation and tie
thereof upon all the Members of this Kirk. 3. They do continue in regard of the
Acts which were made for carrying on thereof, to wit those which appoint
censures against all the Members of this Kirk, who do not approve of the
Authority of that Assembly at Saint Andrews and Dundee, and submit to the Acts
and Constitutions thereof. 4. They do continue in regard of the public
Warnings, Remonstrances and Declarations of the Commission, 1650. and the
pretended Assembly following, against the opposers thereof. 5. In regard of the
authoritative approbation of many of these things by Provincial Synods and
Presbyteries, many of which have made and past particular Acts for that effect.
6. In regard of the execution of the Acts of the pretended Assemblies at Saint
Andrews, Dundee, and Edinburgh, against Ministers, Elders and Expectants, who
adhere to the Protestation. 7. In order to the taking-in of many disaffected
and malignant persons, and making them capable of Ecclesiastic privileges and
trust, such having vote in Congregations in the Election of Ministers and
Elders, and sitting as Elders in Kirk-judicatories in a wrong way. 8. They do
continue in all these sad fruits and evidences of defection, which the
protesting Brethren did long ago represent to the several Synods, and have
since that time collected together in one; And therefore the Authors of this
Declaration do give their Readers but words, and wrong the protesting Brethren,
when they tell them of tossing about a debate now so far removed out of the
way; and so do others of their party when they do discourse and write in such a
strain, as if there, were no obstruction of Peace and of an Agreement, from any
thing p^rtaining to these Resolutions that is now in being, or that is urged by
these who do adhere thereunto, upon, or against the protesting Brethren; but
that all the ground of the continuing of the difference, is, because the
resolution Brethren will not quit their judgments and profess Repentance for
what they have done; When as, besides repentance and changing of their judgment
(which though the protesting Brethren do wish, and pray for, and hold forth as
their duty) yet do they not make it a condition, without which they will have
no Union and Peace with them. There be many things relating to these
Resolutions that are still in being, and are adhered unto, and prosecuted by
these Brethren, that do prove hindrances and impediments of an Agreement
betwixt them and the protesting Brethren; which, as it is partly manifest from
what is already said, so shall it more evidently and fully be made to appear
when we shall take in consideration the Overtures of Union propounded by them
in this Paper.

Another of their prejudices, is, That the protesting Brethren affect
pre-eminence, and would set up a domination of their party in this Church, and
over their Brethren, Decl. page 4. and page 6. If we should say, that there is
nothing of that root of pride and ambition in the protesting Brethren, that
took hold on our first parents in paradise, and has from them been derived
unto all the posterity descended from them by ordinary generation, and keeps
some footing in the best of men, in whom a body of death dwells, we should
but flatter them, and lie against the Truth; there is, no doubt, as much of
that bitter root in them as may be matter of bitter mourning and humiliation
unto them before God; neither will they (we believe) deny, but that they would
wish the whole Church of God in this Land, and the Judicatories thereof, to be
of their judgment in these points of difference, though, we hope, not upon the
account that it is theirs, but because they judge it to be of the Lord, and
consonant to the rule of His Word; but that they do affect pre-eminence, and
would set up a domination of their party over the Church, and over their
Brethren, We have confidence and clearness to deny it, and have their works to
witness the contrary. Our Brethren do well know that in their judgments, the
Commission of the General Assembly, 1650. is still in force; and might they
not, if they had been a party affecting pre-eminence, have exercised the Power
contained therein these years past? But how soon those of their number, who are
members thereof, had, with the advice of other Brethren of that judgment,
holden-forth the causes of the Lords controversy against the Land, they did
abstain and have hithertills abstained from acting in that capacity; How
frequently also have they offered unto the resolution Brethren, that if they
would by themselves alone, and without them purge the House of God, that it
should satisfy them to look on and rejoice in their work; and if when they had
long waited for it and saw them like to do nothing in it; yea, that most of
them were adverse to it, and were polluting in stead of purging, Must it be an
affecting of domination for Ministers and Elders in the House of God, to
propound such means and overtures as do carry in them some probability toward
doing somewhat in that necessary work, wherein they are yet still willing that
the Resolution Brethren should have more than equal share with themselves? It
has been ordinary for righteous men, whose consciences could not suffer them
to be silent and to couch under public corruptions without bearing testimony
against the same, and endeavoring a remedy thereof, to meet with such
reproaches from oppressing and loose parties and persons that have stood in the
way of Reformation, that they would needs be judges, and did take too much upon
them, and were seeking to set up themselves: It being amongst the policies of
Satan (wherein not only the common world, but even good men may sometimes
through weakness and mistake be subservient unto him) because he cannot find
in the outward carriage of those whom God calls to witness against, or pull
down his kingdom, sufficient ground of challenge by which they may be made
odious to the world; therefore he thinks it for his advantage to charge them
with inward abominations, such as hypocrisy, and ambition, and covetousness,
and mischievous projects and designs, etc* knowing that though they may justly
deny these things, yet they shall not be able easily to refute them, there
being always somewhat in the most innocent and best actions of the best and
most innocent men, that may by an uncharitable judgment be construed to spring
from such roots.

It remains in the last place, that we should speak to those Proposals, and
Overtures of Union and Peace, that are tendered to the Protesting Brethren, and
published to the world in that Declaration; concerning which, before we descend
into particulars, we offer these general Observations; 1. That in the very
entry, they lay such a stumbling block in the way, as seems to render Union
very hopeless: For, having spoken of the terms of Union, propounded by the
Protesting Brethren, and of the pretended injuries done by them to the
Government, they do the in eight page conclude thus; For our part (say they) we
resolve in the power of the Lord's grace never to accord thereunto, nor to
reced^ from the estbalished Government, be the hazard what it will; that is in
plain English, We resolve never to condescend to any overture of purging of the
Church, that has in it any circumstance out of the common road of doing it, by
the plurality of corrupt men in Presbyteries and Synods, nor to recede from
that arbitrary unlimited submission, which we have declared to belong to the
essence and being of the Government. As long as these Brethren will condescend
to no effectual means of purging the Church, and will unite with the
Protesting Brethren upon no other terms, then upon their yielding to such a
submission; How can there be a comfortable Union and Peace? 2. That whilst
they make an offer of Peace, and profess themselves to be heartily content to
bury in oblivion all former injuries, and to be far from any animosities which
might have flowed from the same: They do in this Paper rake the very bowels of
bygone actings; and from thence come and raise heaps of alleged injuries,
and that with such a height of animosity, that we believe, open and professed
enemies could hardly outstrip them therein: so that the white and black of that
printed Paper are not more opposite, then their professions and practices
therein are inconsistent. 3. That it cannot be certainly and distinctly known*
what are the Overtures of Union and Peace, which they tender to their Brethren
in that Declaration; because they do for the full knowledge of their mind in
order thereunto, refer to the Conference at Edinburgh, November 1655. and to
their late Representation: And do thereafter in this Declaration enumerate some
particulars, passing by others mentioned in the Conference, without declaring
themselves, whether they do continue still of the same mind, as to these;
whereby the Protesting Brethren and others are left in the dark, as to their
present thoughts about these things. It is true, that in the last page of their
Declaration they do tell us, That notwithstanding all the violent attempts of
the Protesting Brethren against the ChurchGovernment and them, since their
Conference with them, yet they are not at all irritated thereby to recede from
the condescentions and offers then made. Whether the frame of their spirits, as
to the matter of irritation, does answer so fair expressions, let the tenor of
their Representation and this Declaration bear witness. But as to their
Proposals, if they do not recede from any of their condescentions and offers,
made at the Conference at Edinburgh, November 1655. Wherefore is it that after
they have expressed but a few of them, without mentioning the rest, they do in
the penult page of their Declaration tell us, That they have made choice of
this way of making known their inclinations to Peace, that their condescentions
may not be hudled up in a Conference with some few, who may keep them up, or
represent them to others as they please? These words seem to us in the scope of
them clearly to import, that this Declaration bears all, and the outmost length
of their condescentions; and yet it comes short in sundry particulars of what
they granted in the Conference, and also of what they required; and therefore,
though they may understand themselves, yet we believe, it will be hard for
others to understand them; whether from this Pap^r only, or also from the
Papers at the Conference, we be to take the just measure of their Proposals and
Desi^es. 4. That they do usher in these things, which they would make the world
believe to be great condescentions to the protesting Brethren, with great
misrepresentations of the nature of their Acts and illgrounded assertions of
matters of fact. As first, Speaking to these Acts of their Assemblies, that are
a Bar in the way to keep Protesting Brethren from the Ministry, and from
being members of Churchjudicatories. We shall not now insist (say they) to
clear the justice and necessity of the conclusions of these Assemblies at that
time, and to show that nothing was then done but what was done formerly in like
cases. Our Brethren do by these hints, give the Protesting Brethren clearly
enough to understand what lot they might have expected from them, as to the
execution of these Acts, if the times had not altered. Were these Acts just and
necessary at that time, and are not so now also? What has made them change
their nature? Our Brethren give just occasion to people to stumble, and have
the Ministry in contempt, by pleading conscience, and justice, and necessity a
long while for things; and then receding from them upon politic grounds, as if
there were no conscience, nor justice, nor necessity of duty in them. Surely,
if there be any variation, as to these Acts, it is not from the nature of the
things themselves, but because the times have changed; and if the times should
change again, it is more than probable that they would find the same justice
and necessity in them still: We do not know why when they proffer a suspension
of the execution of them they should assert the justice and necessity of them,
but that they may have a handsome regresse to take them up again when they find
an opportunity, which says, that it is not regard to justice, but to
necessity, that prevails upon them to lay them down. But what justice or
necessity was there for such conclusions as these, that did enact censures of
Deposition against all the Ministers, and of Excommunication against the
Professors of this Church, that did not acknowledge the Constitution and submit
unto the Acts of these Assemblies? Was there justice and necessity for so
severe procedure for refusiing submission in things, which in our Brethrens
opinion are so extrinsick to our Doctrine, and Worship, and Discipline, and
Government? Or, was there justice and necessity to persecute all those who did
plead, and bear testimony against the open breach of a sworn Covenant and
Engagement? We know no precedent or parallel that our Brethren can show for
this, unless they fetch it from the times of Popery and Prelacy. We might also
(say they) instruct, that though some very few Presbyteries have required of
Intrants to the Ministry, of whatsoever judgment, that they should promise not
to trouble the peace of the Church with these needless debates; Yet, to our
best knowledge, none of these Acts have been de facto a bar to hold out any
godly man who was lawfully and orderly called and tried; though we may but too
justly complain how industrious and active they have been to thrust-in men of
their judgment, and crush godly and able men, who did not agree with them.
Though all that is here asserted were true, yet has there been too much
mischief done by these Acts, to wit, the thrusting of godly men out of
Elderships, Presbyteries and Synods, and the barring of hopeful young men from
trials, in order to publickpreaching, and of able and godly Expectants from
being called and tried, in order to their entrance in the Ministry; because
they had no freedom in their consciences to take upon them the bonds required,
which we have already set down: for, this Act, as it has kept sundry
Congregations from calling Expectants of that judgment, because there was no
probable way how they could b^ tried or admitted to the Ministry; So have
sundry Expectants, being called, been thereby barr^ from proceeding to their
trials, and sundry rulin^ Elders been excluded from sitting and voting i^
Presbyteries and Synods; and sundry hopefu^ young men have been necessitated to
remove from the Presbyteries and Provinces wherein they d^ live, before they
could be admitted to give any proof of their gifts for preaching, which the
Resolution Brethren throughout the Country do ve^ well know to be a truth, that
can be verified b^ instructing of particulars in several Presbyteri^ and
Synods. But besides those sad effects of the^ Acts, which are here buried in
silence, it seeme^ that the Authors of this Paper, though they wou^ ^ain deny,
yet cannot get it avoided, that these Acts have been put in execution; for,
they a^ forced to confess, that some few Presbyteries ha^ required these bonds
of Intrants to the Ministry only they say that they have been required of me^
of whatsoever judgment, as if they had required of men of their own judgment,
as well as of those who are for the Protestation; so serious are our Brethren in
these matters, that it seems they love to jest: But who gave them this power to
require these bonds of men of their own judgment, seeing the Act speaks only
of men of the other judgment? Or, if they do exercise it, do they mean to bind
up men of their own judgment from debating for the Protestation and against the
Public Resolutions? or, to bind them up from debating for the Public
Resolutions, and against the Protestation? If so, why do they themselves show
them so bad example in their Representation and Declaration, which are
fraughted with debates of that nature? Why do they that teach others, not teach
them ownselves? But what rational man, who reads these Acts, will think that
they were equally made for, or that they can be equally extended against men of
both judgments? Their last refuge is, That, to their best knowledge none of
these Acts have been de facto a bar to hold out any godly man, who was lawfully
and orderly called and tried. We have already told them, that it is a bar to
keep some from being called, and others from being tried; and therefore this,
though true, were but a sophistication as to the point they speak unto: but
there is not truth in the thing it self, because godly men, lawfully and
orderly called and tried, have been barred from entering the Ministry by this
Act, as themselves do well know, and whereof we can give the instances. As to
what they speak of the protesting Brethren, that they may but too justly
complain that they have been industrious and active to thrust-in men of their
judgment, and to crush godly and able men who did not agree with them: it is
but a groundless complaint, that is as easily denied as asserted; For our
parts, we think that there is cause to wish there were more industry and
activity amongst the protesting Brethren for their duty, and that there were
more ability and godliness amongst the Expectants who are of the Resolution
judgment. Next, they tell the protesting Brethren, That though they make a
great noise of the Censures inflicted on some of their number, by the Assembly,
1651. yet they might say much on the behalf of the Assembly their proceeding at
that time, and of their lenity, who did only censure four of their number; who
yet have never submitted to these Censures, and consequently have the less
cause to complain. It seems they do still resolve to justify all their
unluckie proceedings to a tittle, and that they do rather repent that they have
done so little, in persecuting the protesting Brethren, then that they have
done so much: Was it lenity, first, to suspend and depose innocent men from
their Ministry, because of their witnessing against Covenant-breaches, and
then to ordain the Judicatories of the Kirk to proceed against them with the
sentence of Excommunication, if they should not submit to their unjust
Censures? That they have not submitted, was not because of any abatement of
rigor upon the part of the Brethren who are for the public Resolutions, (they
having caused some of these Sentences to be publicly intimated, four or five
years time after the enacting of them, and having denied to admit others of
them as correspondents, though clothed with a commission from their own Synods,
for that effect) but from the conscience of their own innoc^ncie and of the
iniquity and nullity of these Sentences, as being unjust in themselves, and
proceeding from these who had no Authority; and yet, have they great cause to
complain, because they have thereby not only been violently thrust out of these
Kirk- Judicatories, where the resolution Brethren could carry the vote, but
also have been exposed to railing and reproach and hazard from profane and
malignant men throughout the Land, and sundry of them to suffering and
pers^cution from illaffected persons in their own Congregations, who have, upon
that account, not only separated themselves from their Ministry, and set up
others according to their own heart in their stead, but done their utmost to
thrust them out of their stations, and when that could not be obtained, have
done what they can to make their life a burden and comfortless unto them; in
all which (for ought that ever we did hear) they have been connived at by the
resolution Brethren, and in most of these things countenanced and assisted, by
not a few of the chief of them, who have thought it good service to God, so to
do: but bles^ed be His holy Majesty that has not herein accomplished their
desires, but has upholden His weak Servants and kept them from fainting in
the day of their trouble. And though the resolution Brethren do now seem to
proffer some mitigation in the matter of these Censures, yet is it (being duly
weighed) in such a way and upon such hard conditions as makes it nothing upon
the matter* For why? They do not offer that these Censures shall be declared
void or null, or, that these Ministers, notwithstanding thereof, shall be
declared standing Ministers of the Gospel; but after a preface of the justice
of these Censures, they are content that the Synods do take off the Censures
that are upon their respective Members; which does suppose, and lay for a
gronnd, that they have been real and just Sentences, rightly inflicted, for
real and just causes, and are now taken off (as these Brethren explain
themselves at the conference at Edinburgh) for the Peace of the Church; which
is, in stead of making them void, in effect to establish and fix them, as to
the equity of them, however a dispensation be granted to these Brethren, whom
they concern, to exercise their Ministry for Peaces sake; and neither is even
this to be done, but upon their giving assurance of their submission to the
Judicatories; that is, in our Brethrens sense, never to counteract any of the
Sentences of the Church- Judicatories hereafter, but to submit thereunto,
whether they be just or unjust, the iniquity whereof we shall afterward
discover.

But leaving these general considerations, we shall take notice of the
insufficiency, inequality and iniquity of their proposals for Union and Peace.
First, They are insufficient; because, 1. There is no remedy, unless it be a
mock-remedie, holden forth therein, as to the matter of the public
Resolutions, and the corrupt constitution of the two pretended Assemblies, at
Saint Andrews, and Dundee, and Edinburgh, for preventing the like corrupt
constitution for the time to come; which things they know to be two great
grounds of the protesting Brethren their grievances. These Brethren do in the
conference at Edinburgh, November. 8. 1655. propound and desire, That the Acts of
the Commission of the General Assembly, 1650. concerning the public
Resolutions, and their Declarations, and Warnings, and Acts resulting
thereupon, and the Declarations and Acts of the two late contraverted
Assemblies of Dundee and Edinburgh, and all other Declarations and Acts in
Presbyteries and Synods, that are the results thereof, be rendered of none
effect, in order to censure past or to come; and also, so far as they do
import, or may be alleged as the public definitive judgment of this Kirk, or
of any of the Iudicatories thereof, anent the matters contained therein, and
that they be not re-acted in any time hereafter. Next, that it be declared,
That the two controverted Assemblies at Saint Andrews, and Dundee, and
Edinburgh, shall be, as to their constitution in the things protested and
excepted against, no precedent nor prejudice to the constitution of future
General Assemblies. Of all that is contained in these desires, they do only
proffer a cessation from the execution of these Acts, whereby a bar is laid in
the way to keep men who are not of their judgment from the Ministry, and
that they shall agree that they be made void and null by the next General
Assembly. If it be said, that they do also agree that the matter concerning the
public Resolutions be remitted to the Determination of a General Assembly. It
is true, they do so, and that is the mock-remedie we spoke of, conceiving we
have just reason to call it so; not only, because in the same place they will
have it an Assembly according to the established order, which, being expounded
according to the Acts of their two late Assemblies, imports an admitting of
such only to be Members, who do acknowledge the constitution, and submit to the
Acts of these Assemblies that ratified these Resolutions, and the things
relating thereunto, all others by their established order being incapable to be
chosen Members; but also, because they are sure to have an Assembly according
to their mind, the plurality of Presbyteries being of that judgment, and the
protesting Brethren being (as they call them) but a small number in comparison
of these who are for the public Resolutions. But happily, some will say, That
the resolution Brethren cannot, without quitting of their judgment, condescend
that the public Resolutions shall not hereafter be looked upon or acknowledged
as the public definitive judgment of the Kirk of Scotland. We know, that
themselves do so say, but of this we could never hear a satisfying reason from
them; and, we believe, men of more piercing judgments then we are, shall
hardly reach it. Is the repealing of one Act of that Assembly, to which they
did vote, and which they do still in their judgments approve, as just and
equitable upon the matter, a quitting of their judgments, more then the
repealing of another, to which they did also vote, and do still approve of?
They are content for the peace of the Church to repeal these Acts that do
relate to the censuring of such as do oppose these Resolutions, and this they
can do without condemning or quitting of their judgment: And may they not
also, without condemning or quitting of their judgment, for the peace of the
Church, repeal these Acts that declare these Resolutions to be the definitive
sentence of the Kirk of Scotland? this would not be a quitting or altering
their judgments concerning the things themselves, but only the taking-off the
Synodicall or Juridicall tie; not because of any error in the things
themselves, but upon other extrinsick considerations, a thing very ordinary in
Judicatories both Civil and Ecclesiastic: And we believe, unbyassed men will
think that our Brethren, who profess and publish the matter of the public
Resolutions, to be a question so extrinsick to our Doctrine, Worship and
Government, and a debate now so far removed out of our way, are bound the
rather so to do, because our Doctrine, Worship and Government can receive no
prejudice by taking-off a Synodicall tie in matters of opinion that are so
extrinsick thereto. If our resolution Brethren do indeed judge them so
extrinsick, and yet will not herein condescend, they give more then cause even
to indifferent men, to apprehend that all their professions for, and
pretensions unto Peace, are but professious and pretensious; or else, that they
mean to hold up the tottering foundations of these rotten Resolutions, in order
to some new fabric that they intend to build thereupon when opportunity shall
serve, unto the producing of the like or worse divisions and persecutions in
the Church then they have formerly brought forth.

Secondly, These Proposals of theirs are unsufficient, because they do contain
or hold forth no effectual means for purging of the Lords House of
insufficient and scandalous and corrupt Ministers and Elders, which is one of
the main desires propounded by the protesting Brethren, and one of the most
necessary duties that lies upon the Church at this time, there being so many
of that sort in the Land: they do in this particular give them a number of good
words, but when they are compared with their practices and performances, they
shall be found but words and no more; they tell them that they do not
contravert with them in this business, having often professed their
willingness to go about that work in the most strict way, according to
justice, and the common rules of Church-Iudicatories in such cases; and that
they have not only often entreated them to unite upon this very account, that
the work of purging might be carried-on more effectually, but have upon all
occasions of any report of scandal or insufficiency, laid forth themselves to
the utmost to try and examine the truth thereof, and have not been wanting in
inflicting due censure for any thing that at any time was found. When we read
these words, our spirits were filled with astonishment and grief, and what
answer to return to such asseverations, we do not know, unless it be to commit
the cause unto God, who knows their way in these matters, and whether they
have made conscience of the work of purging these seven years past, or have
neglected and obstructed the same; yea, have in a great measure undone what was
formerly done therein. How few insufficient, scandalous Ministers, since the
birth of these public Resolutions to this day have been removed from bearing
charge in the House of God, and how many such have been brought-in? We do
believe that it may be truly asserted, that the resolution Brethren in one
Synod since that time have brought in more, who were formerly publicly censured
for their scandalous and malignant carriage, then all the Synods in Scotland,
of that judgment, have purged out. There be in one Synod nine or ten such
brought into the Ministry, besides four or five others, whose mouths are
opened to preach publicly, and likewise some others who are connived at to
preach and administer the Ordinances, notwithstanding of their being twice
deposed formerly, because of gross offenses. Let them name us, if they can, so
many purged-out by the Resolution-party in all the Synods of their way these
seven years past; Why then do they speak such big words of their willingness
to, and activity in purging? Yea, who knows not that many of their party
oppose Union upon this very account, and that even good men amongst them, who
were wont to be of another spirit, are too slow and backward in this duty, by
which it has come to pass that a few processes that have by importunity been
set on foot against some naughty men in some Synods, have by the Resolution
Brethren their exercising their wits and inventions to find out and cast in
legal shows of defense, such as variety of exceptions against witnesses, and
glosses upon their depositions, and such like, been rendered more tedious, and
involved in more notional debates than readily are to be found at the most
litigious Civil Bar; and after all, these things have come but to a poor issue
in the end, very few (if any) of these men being deposed from the Ministry,
notwithstanding of many and gross scandals which they do lie under. It is the
sad complaint of the Godly, that the simplicity of the Gospel, and the good old
way that was wont to be used in the Church, in the trying of insufficient and
scandalou^ Ministers is forsaken, and such a way taken as rather gives them
ground and encouragement to cover and hold fast their iniquity, than does
contribute to the convincing of their consciences and making them acknowledge
their sin, by which it comes to pass that poor souls, who groan under the
burden, are discouraged to offer the grounds of their grievance, as much
dispairing to find any remedy thereof: But, say the Resolution Brethren, they
are so far from foreslowing or obstructing purging, that, to delare their
readiness and sincerity in that matter, they are content, if their Brethren be
not satisfied with the Rules of procedure hitherto agreed upon, that they
condescend upon the strictest Rules can be desired in justice for trial and
censure, and that they shall be willing to observe them; providing they be
Rules binding for all, and to which all will submit, both we and they. To which
we answer, first, That they do not adhere unto, nor put in practice the Rules
already agreed upon, to what purpose then should new Rules be agreed upon? It
was formerly agreed upon* That Synods ought, in the case of the negligence of
Presbyteries, to appoint Visitations for trial and censure in their several
bounds: but in very few of the Synods of the Resolution judgment have there
been any such Visitations appointed or kept since these Resolutions had a
being, albeit Presbyteries be negligent of their duty; yea, sundry Brethren in
sundry of these Synods show themselves dissatisfied with, and speak against
such Visitations; And as long as the Synods themselves do not practice them,
there being so much need of them, how can we otherwise judge but that they do
dislike them? Secondly, It was formerly agreed upon, That the Kirk-judicatories
might, in the trial of Ministers, proceed by way of Inquisition: but now this
is dissented from and casten at by many of the Resolution Brethren, who will
have no trial; some of them without a Libel and others of them without a Libel
and an Accuser too, engaging to prove his Allegiance under pain of being
censured as a Slanderer. Thirdly, Sundry things, such as drunkenness*
swearing, etc. which were formerly proceeded against with the censures of
Suspension and Deposition, are now so ext^nuated by many of these Brethren,
that they do refuse to censure them with these Censures, unless the habits or
many continued re-iterated acts of these things can be proven; And yet the
Authors of this Declaration do so talk, as if all the Brethren of that judgment
did strictly adhere unto, and were unanimous about the former way of procedure
in the trial and censure of Ministers: but besides this departure from former
Rules, they do but trifle when they say, that they are content that the
Protesting Brethren condescend upon the strictest Rules can be desired in
justice for trial and censure, because it is always with the supposal of this
foundation which they have already laid, to wit, That these Rules shall be
applied or executed by men of their own judgment, who are the plurality in
Presbyteries and Synods, And what purging we may expect from them, these seven
years practice do now sufficiently manifest.

Thirdly, The insufficiency of these Proposals does appear from this, That they
do offer and hold forth no remedy for the grievance of the Protesting Brethren,
and of the Godly throughout the Land, in the matter of planting Congregations
upon the Call of the plurality in Paroches, many of which are ignorant, and
disaffected, and malignant, by which it comes to pass that men get into the
Ministry, that cannot speak a word in season to a weary soul, and who
discountenance piety and godliness, which (if there be not some effectual
remedy provided against it) cannot but prove an evil very destructive to the
Church, and afflicting to all who do unfeignedly desire and seek the
advancement of the Gospel, and of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, These Proposals do not mention any remedy against such Ministers,
Expectants and Schoolmasters, who were deposed or silenced, or removed from
their Charges by General Assemblies or Synods, or their Commissioners, or by
Presbyteries before these differences did arise, and have again intruded
themselves, or are reponed into public stations in the Ministry, or Schools,
or have their mouths opened by Presbyteries or Synods, without confession and
acknowledgement of, and repentance for all the particulars contained in their
sentence and otherwise, then is provided in the Acts of uncontroverted General
Assemblies: Nor do they hold forth any thing as to the way of calling of a
General Assembly, and the electing of Commissioners thereunto, and handling of
matters therein; all which, as also the giving of mutual evidence and assurance
in matters concerning the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this
Church, and the enemies of Truth and Godliness, and the work of Reformation,
for adhering unto these Articles of our Covenants, and the solemn public
Confession of Sins and Engagement unto Duties, and all the Acts of
uncontroverted Assemblies relating thereunto, in the literal and genuine sense
and meaning thereof, which were propounded by the Brethren for the Protestation
in the Conference at Edinburgh, November 1655. as conducible and fit means to
the making up of a solid Union and well-grounded Peace.

In the next place, we desire it to be considered, Whether these Overtures of
Union and Peace propounded by these Brethren, be not very unequal: It has
been, and is their manner to profess and print, that they are willing to offer
very equal terms of Peace; So in the ninth page of this Declaration, That
they have already offered, that t^ough they hold fast their own judgment, yet
they will not impose upon the Protesting Brethren their judgments in the matter
of their first difference. But these professions notwithstanding, they do in
sundry particulars impose upon their judgment; As first, in the matter of the
Protestation: They do require that these Brethren do declare, that their
Protestations against the two late controverted Assemblies and their
Resolutions and Acts thereunto relating, shall not hereafter be made use of in
any Judicatory of this Kirk, for continuing (as they are pleased to express
it) or holding up debates about the matter of our present differences; So in
their Paper of the sixteenth of November 1655. in the Conference at Edinburgh,
which in another Paper of the 24. of November at that Conference, they expound
thus, That their meaning is that they shall not make use of these Protestations
in any Judicatory to call in question and anul the Constitution and Authority
of these two late Assemblies; which if the protesting Brethren should consent
unto, would upon the matter make them to condemn their own judgment, and infer
their passing from, and renouncing of these Protestations in so far as they
might be a remedy against the corrupt Constitution of these two Assemblies* in
order to which they did conceive themselves bound in duty and conscience to
make them; yea, it should with their consent make way to establish for the
future the Constitution and Authority of these two Assemblies, because it
should with their own consent, take out of the way all the legal bar that is
standing against that Constitution and Authority. Secondly, What greater
imposing can there be upon their judgments, or what more unequal conditions of
Peace can be propounded unto them then to require that they should engage
themselves to an absolute and unlimited submission to the Sentences of the
Kirk-judicatories especially when the Resolution Brethren are not only the
plurality in most of the Judicatories, but when many of them are not such for
qualification and carriage as they ought to be; What were this but to giveup
their judgments and consciences unto the mere arbitriment and will of men, to
be imposed upon by them, and ruled at their pleasure? Thirdly, How unequal a
Proposal is it, that the matters in difference shall be referred and submitted
to the determination of the next General Assembly, when most of the Ministers
of the Land, of whom that Assembly is in all probability to be made up, (how
contrary to the Covenant, and many Acts and Declarations of former
uncontroverted Assemblies is already declared) have engaged themselves many
ways for these Resolutions, which are the ground of the difference. These few
particulars may make it appear that the Resolution Brethren do not walk with an
equal and even ^oot in their Proposals; We mean, they do not offer such terms
of Peace as are equally free of imposing upon either party, or do equally ye^ld
as much as they require; which we do not take notice of as if this were a
commendable and approven way in the things of God, we judge it but the effect
of the wisdom of the flesh and to smell rankly of a carnal poltick spirit, to
half and divide the thiugs of God, for making Peace amongst men: But to
discover that our Brethren do not walk up to their own professions in the
matter of Union and Peace, and that whilst they would make the Nation and the
World believe, that they offer equal Conditions, and do not desire in any thing
to impose upon their Brethren; yet their Conditions are very unequal, and that
they would highly impose upon them.

But if the Overtures for Union and Peace, propounded by these Brethren, were
insufficient and unequal only, though upon these two branches there be just
ground for the Protesting Brethren to deny them entertainment; yet were they
more tolerable, if they did not involve injustice and iniquity, which might be
showed in sundry particulars: But this Answer having drawn to a greater length
then was at first intended, we shall now only speak to that one, in which these
Brethren assert the essence and being of Presbyteriall Government to consist;
and for denying of which, they hold forth the Protesting Brethren, as men that
have receded from their former principles, and have in their judgments and
practices turned adversaries to the very being of the Government, to wit, That
arbitary and unlimited submission to the Sentences of the Church-judicatories,
in matters of Discipline and Government, which is required by these Brethren.
We have already spoke unto the state of the question, and have showed how far
submission to the Sentences of the Judicatories of the Kirk is condescended and
y^lded unto by the Protesting Brethren; as also, how far it is urged and
required by the Brethren for the Resolutions, and what Reasons and Grounds they
do bring for their judgment in that particular, to which we have answered. It
now remains that we should bring these Reasons, that seem to plead the
unwarrantableness and iniquity of that Submission required by them, that if
they can conveniently satisfy therein, they may be receded from; or if
otherwise, that they may cease to urge that matter any further; or at least,
that indifferent persons may know that it is not refused, but upon weighty
reasons. Before we propound our Argument, we shall premise some common and
known truths, concerning Church- Judicatories, and their Decrees and Sentences;
As, 1. That (to express it in Calvin's words, in the eight chap. of the fourth
book of his Institutions) whatsoever reverence or dignity is by the Spirit of
God in the Scriptures given, whether to the Priests, o^ Prophets, or Apostles,
or their successors, all of it is given not properly to men themselves, but to
the Ministry, wherewhtih they are clothed; or (to speak more expeditly) to the
Word; the Ministry whereof is committed unto them, Exodus 3. 4. Exodus 14. 31.
Deuteronomy. 17. ^. Mal. 2. 46. Deuteronomy. 17. 10. Ezekiel. 3. 17. Ier. 23. 28. Ier. 1. 6.
Matthew. 28. 19. Acts 15. 10, etc. 2. That as their Authority is founded upon,
and wholly derived from the Word of God; so in the administration and exercise
thereof, thy are in all things to walk according to this rule, Isa. 8. 19, 20.
Mal. 2. 6, 7. Matthew. 28. 19. 3. That Church Power is not a Lordly and
Magisterialpower, but a Lowly and Ministerial-power, not an absolute and
Autocratorick, but a limited and Hyperetick-power; and that Church Decrees and
Sentences are all of them regulae regulatae, rules that are subordinated, and
do not bind but in the Lord, and so far as they are conform to that first
inflexible and un erring-rule, prescribed by Himself, Luke 22. 24* 25, 26* 27.
Gal. 6. 16. 1 Peter 5. 2, 3. ^ Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. 1 These. 5. 12. Ephesians. 6. 1.
Calvin treating of Church Power, says well* Non est igitur Ecclesiae potestas
in^inita, sed subjecta Verbo Domini, and in eo quasi inclusa. Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 8. 4 That all Church-judicatories, whether Congregational-Ederships, or
Presbyteries or Synods, whether Provincial or National, or oecumenick, being
constituted of men that are weak, frail and ignorant in part, are in their
det^rminations fallible and subject to Error, Isai. 40* 6* 7* 8. Romans 3. 4. 1
Cor. 13. 9, 12. 5. That in so far as any of these do actually err and decline
from the Truth, they do in so far act without power and authority from Jesus
Christ: They can do nothing (of themselves, they may do, but not by His
Commission and Warrant) against the Truth, but for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. The
Power which He has given them being to Edification, and not to Destruction, 2
Cor. 13. 12. 6. Sad experience, almost in every generation, does teach us, that
Churchguides and Church-judicatories do oftentimes decline from the
streig^t-wayes of the Lord, and decree unrighteous decrees, and write grievous
things, which they have prescribed, Isa. 9. 15, 16. Ier. 8. 8, 9. Mal. 2. 8, 9.
Ier. 2. 8. And that whilst they are boasting of the Authority given to them of
God, and of their skill in the Law, and professing to walk according thereto,
they are perverting the precious Truths of God, and persecu^ing these who
cleave thereunto, Ier* 18. 18. Isa. 66. 5. Ioh. 7. 48, 49. 7. That the same
Lord, who has commanded us not to despise Prophesying, 1 These. 5. 19. has
also commanded us to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good,
ver. 20. And no to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they
be of God, because many false prophets are gone forth into the world, 1 Ioh. 4.
1. And that whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14. 15. And that we ought
not to be the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. That is to do things (especially
in the matters of God) for which we have no other warrant, but the mear
pleasure and will of men, which the apostle Peter calls living to the lusts of
men, and not to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2. And that it is therefore both the
duty and privilege of every Churchmember, and of every inferior
Church-judicatory, to examine by the judgment of discretion every thing which
the Church Authority joyneth, whether it be agreeable or repugnant to the rules
of the Word; and if after a diligent and impartial search it be found
repugnant, they are not to bring their consciences in bondage thereto, neither
is the allowing and exercising of the judgment of descretion by inferiors,
the setting them as judges over their superiors, or making them transgress the
line, or limits of that due subordination and submission appointed unto them of
God. Protestant Divines in their writings, de judice Controverstarum have fully
answered this, and showed us, That it does not make a private man or an
inferior, Judge of the Sentences and Decrees of his superiors, but only of
his own actions. Having premised these things, we offer these Reasons against
the Submission, so much pleaded for by our Brethren.

First, This submission, we mean an absolute submission, or such a submission
as is comprehensive of subjection to such Decrees and Sentences of
Church-Judicatories as are upon the matter, and for the ground of them unjust
and repugnant to the Word of God, has neither precept nor precedent for it in
the Book of God; if any man say, it has, we desire him to bring it forth: we
know that the Lord did enjoin His People under the Old Testament, under very
severe punishments, to do according to the sentence which they should be taught
by the Priests, the Levits, in the place which the Lord should choose, Deuteronomy.
17. 9, 10, 11, 12. But Calvin tells us well, Ubi de ijs audiendis agitur, ibi
nominatim ponitur, ut secundum Legem Dei respondeant: That in the same
Scripture where it is commanded to hear them, that it is also commanded, that
they should answer according to the Law of the Lord. We also know, that under
the New Testament we are commanded to obey them that have the rule over us, and
to submit our selves* but it is in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. that which we call
for is some precept or binding precedent in Scripture* that holds forth
submission to a^ Ecclesiastic Determination or Sentence, that is unjust and
contrary to the Word of God.

2. It is contrary to clear Scripture precepts and Scripture precedents: to
Scripture precepts, such as these, Be not servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Stand
fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. It is better to obey God
then men, Act. 5. 29. Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season,
2 Timothy 4. 2. Do this in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11. 24. To refrain from duty
upon the mere will and commandment of men, is to be a servant unto men, and to
betray Christian liberty, and to be entangled with the yoke of bondage, and to
obey man rather then God: and to say, that we will not preach the Gospel, nor
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, though God has commanded us so to
do; Let us suppose that a man duly qualified is suspended from the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, or from the exercise of the Ministry, or excommunicated
and cast out of the Church, because of his pressing and holding forth some
precious Truth of God* which a Kirk-Judicatory condemns for a lie, and
passes such Sentences and Censures upon him because he does adhere thereunto;
Shall we say, that this man is bound not to communicate, not to preach the
Gospel, to absent himself from the fellowship and Prayers of the Saints? Our
Brethren will happily tell us, that he is bound for Peaces sake so to do, till
his appeal be discussed* But what shall the innocent man do when it is
discussed against him, and the unjust sentence of the inferior Judicatorie
confirmed by the superior? shall he go to a higher, and when he is gone to the
highest, and is condemned there too, (as Christ was crucified at Jerusalem,)
what will they now allow him? will they have him still to be a servant of men,
and still to be in bondage? and though the Lord Jesus has commanded him to
preach the Gospel, and said unto him, Woe unto thee, if thou preach not the
Gospel; and has commanded him, to eat of His body, and drink of His blood, and
not to forsake the assembling himself with the Saints of God; yet, because men
pro arbitratu and imperio; yea, because of his adhering to the Truth of God
which they have rejected and condemned, has forbidden him so to do; That be
shall not obey God, this is a hard saying, who can receive it? It is also
contary to clear Scripture precedents, Jeremiah was often commanded by the
Authority both Ecclesiastic and Civil, to forbear speaking of the Word of the
Lord; yet did he give no subjection to the sentence, either of the one or of
the other, but went on in his Ministry, notwithstanding of all the Inhibitions
and Censures past against him, Chap. 26. chapter 32. chapter 37. and chapter 38. Amos was
commanded by Amaziah the Priest, to prophecy no more at Bethel, because it was
the Kings Chapel and the Kings Court; yet he did not submit, but did
counteract that commandment, and did continue to prophecy in the Name of the
Lord, Amos 5. 13, 14* 15, 16. Daniel was commanded to make no petition to any
God or Man for thirty days, save to King Darius; yet did he not submit, but
counteract, by going into his house, and opening his Chamber-window toward
Jerusalem, and kneeling on his knees three times a day, and praying, and giving
thanks before His God as he did aforetime, Dan. 6* 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The Jews did
agree, that if any man did confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be put
out of the Synagogue; yet did the poor man, whose eyes He had opened, confess
Him openly; and though he was actually cast out for doing of it, yet did he not
submit, but went on to confess Him still, Joh. 9. 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38. The Apostles were commanded once and again by the Council at
Jerusalem, not to speak nor teach any more in the Name of JESUS; but they told
them, that they could not but speak the things which they had seen and heard,
and that they ought to obey God rather then men, and notwithstanding they were
first threatened, and afterward imprisoned, and thirdly beaten by them for so
doing; yet did they not submit nor forbear, but daily in the Temple and from
house to house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 19,
20, 21. Act. 5. 17, 18, 29, 40, 42. Paul being accused, first before Festus,
and afterward before Felix, the Roman Deputies, That he was a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition amongst the Jews throughout the world, and a
ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, who also had gone about to profane the
Temple; Did not only appeal to Caesar, but went on in his course, and preached
the Gospel, and preached that the Jews killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, and pleased not God, and were contrary
to all men, Act. 24. 5, 6. Act. 25. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15.

3. This submission dethroneth Jesus Christ, who only has power over the
consciences of men, to bind them by His Authority, by attributing such a Power
and Authority to Church-Judicatorics as does bind men's consciences upon their
mere arbitrament and pleasure: for, we must be subject, because they will have
it so, though the reason why they command this subjection, to wit, our supposed
delinquencie, be a mere non ens and such as has no foundation in truth and
equity. If it be told us, that the conscience is not bound, because the
judgment is still left free, and the outward acts only restrained. We would
have our Brethren to remember, that some of themselves, and others who did
oppose conformity to the Ceremonies, did tell the Prelates and their party, when
they used this defense against the argument taken from binding the conscience,
to wit, That if the bare Authority of an Ecclesiastical Law, without any other
reason then the will and pleasure of men, be made to restrain us in the use of
things which are in themselves indifferent, then is Christian liberty taken
away; and if so in things indifferent, how much more is it so in things
necessary, such as keeping fellowship with the Assembly of the Saints in
public Prayers and Praises, and eating and drinking at the Table of the Lord,
and preaching the Gospel* etc the practice whereof are things commanded of God
unto persons duly qualified and instructed thereunto. If it be said, That
these things cease to be obliging duties to such a person hic and nunc, and
that the sentence of the Church commanding him to abstain, loses him from the
obedience that he does otherwise owe unto the Commandment of God: we desire a
warrant from the Scripture of Truth for such Doctrine, as that which prefers
the Commandments of men unto the Commandments of God, and say, That it is
better to obey men than God. Shall the sole will and mere pleasures of men
loose a man from the obligation he owes unto the Commandments of God? If so,
let us no more blame the Pope for dispensing with divine Laws. I cannot abstain
from taking Christ's body and blood, or from preaching the Gospel, says the
innocent man, unjustly sentenced, because I am thereunto called and commanded
of God. But says the Synod or Kirk-judicatory, We have commanded you to
abstain, and therefore you should abstain, and may be satisfied in your
conscience so to do; because our Command loses you from the Commandment of
God. Hence a fourth Argument.

4. This submission concludes a man under a necessity of sinning against God,
by omitting those necessary duties that are commanded him of God, upon a
non-relevant reason, to wit, the mere will and pleasure of men, to whom God
has given no power against the Truth, but for the Truth; no power to
destruction, but to edification.

5. If such a submission be due to the Judicatories of the Kirk in matters of
Discipline and Government, We do not see how it is not also due unto them in
matters of Doctrine and Worship. The authoritative and juridical power
belonging to Classes and Synods is threefold, Dogmatick, Diatactick and
Critic. Dogmatick, in reference to matters of Faith and Rules of Worship,
which God has laid down and prescribed to us in His Word, and the
inconsistency of heresies, errors, and corruptions therewith. Diatactick, in
reference to external order and policy in matters circumstantial, relating to
time, place and persons, the convenience whereof is determinable by the light
of Nature and Christian prudence, and the general Rules of the Word; such as
these, That we should do all to the glory of God, to the edification of the
Church, and in order and decency, etc. Critic, in reference to the repressing
of Scandal, Error, Heresy, Schism, Obstinacy and Contempt, and preserving of
the Purity of the Truth, and Holiness of Conversation, and Unity of Judgment
and Affection in the Church of God, by exercising the spiritual censures of
Admonition, Suspension from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Excommunication
and Suspension, and Deposition from the Ministry. Now all these Powers being
authoritative, and in their determinations and exercise confined unto, and
circumscribed within the bounds of the Word of God, for their rule and being,
given to the Church for edification and not for destruction. We would desire
from our Brethren a Reason, why the Critickpower should be more binding than
the other? or, why submission is due to an unjust sentence proceeding from the
Critick-power, whilst it is not due to any erroneous or corrupt Decree
proceeding from the Dogmatick or Diatactick power; Has God put more honor and
respect upon the last than upon the two first? Or, has He given greater
latitude in the exercise of the last nor of the two first? or, is the last
binding by the mere will and arbitrament of men, whil^st the two first bind
only when agreeable to the Word of God: If our Brethren do so judge, We desire
to know where these foundations of difference betwixt these powers are written,
or what they do bring for them from the Book of God? or, how in reason they can
consist, when the last shall be contrary to the two first? And if this
submission be equally due to the judicatories of the Kirk in all the three;
then if they shall determine that Justification by Faith alone is an error,
That Communion under both kinds is not necessary, That kneeling is a necessary
gesture at the Sacrament; That it is necessary to forbear working on Yuleday
and to keep it holy, and such like; We are bound not to profess, nor preach,
nor act contrary to these their determinations: which were to be ashamed of,
and to deny the Lord Jesus and His Word before men, and to bring upon our souls
the dreadful Gospel-curse of His denying, and being ashamed of us before His
Father and the Angels which are in Heaven, Matthew. 10. 33. Mark 8. 38. Luke 26.

6. But upon supposal that this submission were not due to the Decrees of the
Church in matters of Doctrine, Worship and external Order, by virtue of the
Dogmatick and Diatactick power in themselves; yet the asserting of it in
matters of Discipline shall also necessarily infer the asserting of it in
matters of Doctrine and Worship, and external Order. The Commissioners of the
Genesis Assembly, 1650. did declare, That a great company and faction of wicked
men, sons of Belial, being subjects, may and ought, in the case of necessity,
be employed in a Christian Army and Covenanted Nation, for the defense of
Religion and the Country. And the Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, in anno
1651. do by virtue of their Dogmatickpower approve of, and ratify this
Doctrine and Declaration, and do withal by their Critickpower appoint and
ordain, That whosoever will not submit to this Determination, but shall oppose
by professing or preaching otherwise, shall be proceeded against with the
censures of the Kirk. We ask, whether these censures, being put in execution,
by suspension from the Sacrament, against these who profess otherwise, or by
Suspension or Deposition from the Ministry, against those who preach
otherwise: if this submission which is required (being given to these censures)
will not necessarily infer, that they must not continue to profess or preach
any more so: And if this by necessary consequence be not an absolute submission
to the Dogmatick-power as well as to the Critic: Or, let us take it in the case
of Athanasius, who was deposed and excommunicated for professing, and
preaching, and pleading Jesus Christ to be the consubstantial Son of God, or in
the case of a person suspended from the Sacrament, or deposed from the
Ministry, because of their professing and preaching against kneeling at the
Communion* Will not such submission to these sentences as excludes all
counteracting, unless it be to appeal, necessarily infer submission to the
Decrees themselves, so as the person censured must be silenced, and not
profess, nor preach, nor plead any more for the one Truth, nor against the
other Error.

7. To wave a little that which concerns private and particular persons, We
offer it to consideration, whether inferior Kirk-judicatories are subordinate
to the greater, and superior simply and absolutely* because they are greater
and superior, or, because the inferior have no intrinsical power given them
by Jesus Christ, but in, and wi^h subordination to the greater, because
greater. If so, it would seem that all the inferior Judicatories of the Kirk.
Congregational-Elderships, Presbyteries, and Provincial Synods must befenced
and act in the name, and by virtue of the authority derived from the General
Assembly, as all those Civil Courts that have no intrinsic power in
themselves, but in, and with subordination to the supreme Civil Magistrate, are
fenced in his Name and act by virtue of his Authority. Inferior
Kirk-judicatories* being Ordinances of Jesus Christ, have the promise made to
them when they meet in His Name and do adhere to His Truth, Mat. 18* 18, 19.
And if so, shall the sentence of the superior Judicatory, when wrong upon the
matter, oblige them to submission. If a Presbytery, or a Synod with the
consent of the Presbytery, do in an orderly way of procedure, castout an
heterodox and scandalous Minister, Must they, because the Synod or General
Assembly does sustain his unjust appeal, be obliged in conscience again to
receive him as a member of the Presbytery or Synod, and acknowledge him for a
lawful Minister of the Gospel; or, if they have in an orderly way of
procedure, admitted an able orthodoxe godly man to the Ministry: Must they,
because the superior Judicatory commands them so to do* cease to acknowledge
him or own him for one of their number, or as a Minister of the Gospel: if so,
it seems to be an ill-grounded Truth that is commonly delivered by some
Divines, writing of Synods, That the power of Synods is not corruptive,
privative, or destructive to the power of Classical Presbyteries or single
Congregations, but perfective, acumulative, and conservative thereunto.

8. What is denied jure to oecomenick Councels, and so lawfully called Prophets
and Ministers of the Gospel, to Nathan, to David, to Paul, to an Angel from
heaven, Gal. 1. 8. cannot warrantably be given to General Assemblies. If
oecomenick Counsels, lawfully called Ministers, if Nathan, if Samuel, if Paul,
if an Angel teach or decree but according to the Word of the Lord, we are to
counteract, and to contradict, Gal. 1. 8. But though we or an Angel from
heaven, preach to you, (...) beside what we have preached, let him be accursed,
Gal. 1. 8. Therefore, etc.

9. What is proprium quarto modo to the Scripture of Truth, it cannot
warrantably be given to the Judicatories of the Kirk, but not to be
counteracted nor contradicted, is proprium quarto modo to the Scriptures of
Truth, these being the only infallible rule in matters of Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Therefore it cannot
be given to the Judicatories of the Kirk; and to give it, infers their
infallibility, and exposes our Government to the calumny of Sectaries, who
say, we make Synods as infallible as the Word of God.

10. This argues the Scriptures of imperfection, and sets up the necessity
of humane traditions; because every warrantable subordination and submission
due to the Judicatories of the Kirk, must be given of Christ; but no where is
it written in the Book of God, that a General Assembly has power given of
Christ, to teach and enact such Points and Doctrines, and inflict such
Censures, as no man may or ought lawfully to counteract or contradict;
Therefore, etc.

11. This submission does infer, That if a General Assembly, lawfully
conveened, should enact the Mass, and all the heresies of the Council of
Trent, we may not preach nor write the contrary; for that is to counteract and
contradict: But this is absurd, Therefore, etc.

12. Sentences of Kirk Judicatories, that are for the ground of them unjust and
repugnant to the Word of God, are in themselves null; because all Church Power
and Authoriry is included in the Word of the Lord, and to be regulated
according thereto, Isa. 8. 20. 2 Corinthians. 13. 8, 10. and what is null in it
^elf cannot bind unto submission and subjection; Therefore, When
Kirk-Judicatories act not in subordination to Jesus Christ, from, and under
whom they have all their power, they may lawfully be contradicted and
counteracted.

13 This submission is prelaticall, and introduces a lordly and absolute power
and dominion in the Church of God, over the Flock and Ministers of Jesus
Christ. It is indeed the very image and likeness of that subjection and
submission that was required by prelates of Intrants to the Ministry, Bishop
Spotswood in his S^rmon at Perth Assembly, tells his hearers, That the
sentence of superiors as long as it has the force of a constitution, though
happily otherwise established then it can set forward Godliness and Piety; and
that we be persuaded that such things are not right nor well appointed, yet
ought to di^ect us, and is a sufficient ground to our consciences for obeying.
Narrat. of the proceedings of Perth Assembly, by Doctor Lindsay. page 29. And
in the same place he gives this as the reason of his judgment. Except this be
(says he) there can be no order, and all must be filled with strife and
contention; The same thing that our Brethren now tell us, that they do not see
how without this submission, Unity and and Order can be continued in the Kirk.
Doctor Lindsay also himself, afterward Bishop of Edinb* in his Epistle to the
Pastors and Ministers of the Church of Scotland, prefixed to his book of the
proceedings of the Assembly at Perth tells us, That where a man has not a
law, his judgment is the rule of his conscience: but where there is a law, the
law must be the rule. And in the Oath which was ministered to the Intrants to
the Ministry in this Church by the Prelates, they make the Intrants to swear,
That they shall live peaceable Ministers in thi^ Church, subjecting themselves
to the Orders that therein are, or shall be established, and that by all means
that they can use, they shall procure others to the due reverence of the same;
which things (says the intrant in that oath) if we shall contraveen ( as God
forbid) we are content upon trial and cognition taken, by our ordinary without
all reclamation, or gainsaying, to be deprived of our Ministry and be reputed
Infamous and Perjured Persons for ever. And to the same purpose there is in the
Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical for the Government of the Kirk
of Scotland, ratified and published by Authority, 1636. A Canon appointing,
That if any person in holy Orders, lawfully Suspended, or Deposed (that is) in
their sense, Suspended or Deposed by his ordinary, for transgressing any of
these prelaticall Cannons, Shall presume to exercise any Ecclesiastical
Function during the time of his suspension, or after he is degraded, let him be
Excommunicated, and delivered to the ^y-power as incorrigible. Just so our
Brethren will have the Protesting Brethren to engage and promise absolute
submission to the Sentences of the Judicatories of the Kirk, whether just or
unjust; and because they do refuse it, charge them with breach of their
Engagements at their entrance to ^he Ministry, and as subverters of the very
being ^f the Government. And what they would do, if ^hey had the Civil-power to
concur, is but too apparent, from these hard representations they gave of them
to the Civil-power, in the year 1651. and ^rewd hints and insinuations which
they made ^ereupon.

14. This submission is so far from being any part of Catholic truth, much
less of the essence and being of Presbyterial Government that it seems to be a
tenet purely Popish and Antichristian; and pl^ades for a Government that is not
Presbyterian, but Popish and An^ichristian: Who knows not that the favorites
and Emmisaries of the Sea of Rome do with might and main plead for this
absolute and unlimited subjection and submission to the Decrees and Sentences
of the Pope, wherein they are opposed by Protestant Divines: Debe^
excommunicatus, and si innocens (says a Popish Author) aliorum consortia
fugere and a sacris abstinere; igitur vnproprte Christi instrumentum dicitur
Papa cum aliquae illius actiones, a Christo non impellantur nec acceptantur.
Andr. D^valius, in 22. part, quest. 8. He that is excommunicate (says h^)
albeit innocent, yet ought to sh^n the fellowship of others, and to abstain
from holy things; therefore the Pope is (says he) improperly called Christ's
instrument, because some of his a^tions are neither impelled by him, nor
accepted of him. So our Brethren will have a man that is suspended from ^he
Sacrament, or deposed from the Ministry, or excommunicated* though unjustly*
to abstain from the Sacra^ent, and from preaching, and from the fellowship of
others* and from holy things: And whether this be in the dispencing of
Church Discipline and Government, to be the Instruments and Ministers of
Christ, or if it b^ not indeed to play the Pope, and to set up Ministers and
Servants above the Master of the house, we leave it to sober and unbyassed men
to judge?

15. This unlimited submission leaves the Church destitute of all
Ecclesiastical remedies, in the case of a general defection, and does open a
wide door for making the Government of the House of God degenerate into
Tyranny, and in stead of being a mean of purging and preserving of Religion, to
be a mean of polluting and destroying the same, and persecuting and bearing
down such as desire to keep their garments pure, whether Ministers or
Professors: What is Tyranny? but when these that are in power will have
inferiors, without gainsaying or coun^eracting to yield subjection to their
dictates and commands, though there be nothing but sic volo sic jubeo, no
reason of ^quity in them, but their own mere arbitrament and pleasure; or
though there be iniquity and injustice in them, Dan. 11. 36. and when
subjection without gainsaying is not only required of private and particular
men, but also o^ all inferior Judicatories, and even of these that are clothed
with lawful power and authority* Was not this the State-tyranny that was
formerly exercised and (...) for by the Malignant-party, to which there was
public opposition made by defensive Arms, that are generally acknowledged by
all sober men, both Politicians and Divines, to be a lawful mean of a peoples
preservation from the mine that is threatened by Tyranny? And shall we now set
up a Church-tyranny, the mere will and abitrement* yea* the unjust Sentences of
Church-judicatories, for Laws, and require absolute submission thereunto, not
only of private and single persons, but of all in^iour Judicatories* not
allowing the Congr^gational-eldership once to whisper against what is resolved
by the Presbytery, or the Presbytery against what is resolved by the Synod,
or the Synod against what is resolved by the General Assembly. If then the
superior Judicatories will tyrannize, what remedy is there? or if they become
corrupt, how shall the ruin of Religion, or the persecution and oppression of
these who desire to keep Faith and a good Conscience, be avoided? Have the
Ministers and Saints and Courts of Jesus Christ received Religion and His
Ordinances upon these terms, that if a superior Court will have it so, they
shall all crouch down, as Asses under the burden, and let them, without
gainsaying (they being now cudgel'd into silence by a sentence of suspension
from the Sacrament, or Deposition or Excommunication) ruin Church, and
Ministers, and Ordinances, and Professors, and all the precious interests of
Jesus Christ; And shall we say that such a submission is required in this case,
as though they ought to do nothing but weep and pray in secret? How great
tyranny is this, and how remediless a way to ruin? And yet, this is the
consequent of our Brethren's opinion. If they tell us, that there is no hazard
of these things, because the Church of Scotland is sound in Doctrine, and
Worship, and Discipline, and Government, and that it is upon the account of the
soundness of the Church-judicatories only, that they challenge this submission
as due unto them: We desire 1. to know whether they will grant that such a
submission, as they do now plead for, may be denied to Church-judicatories that
are unsound? and what degrees of unsoundnesse they will have them to fall into
before this submission can be warrantably denied unto them? It seems to us, by
our Brethrens judgment, as long as they keep any thing of the being and
authority of Kirk-judicatories, though they be corrupt, not only in the
particular Determinations, to which submission is required, but in many things
besides, both in Doctrine, and Discipline, and Government, this submission must
be granted them, because to deny it, is to deny the very being and essence of
the Government: How this shall be avoided we do not see, unless they say, That
a Church-judicatory that is unsound in any point of Truth does lose its being
and authority, which we hope they will not say, having in some of their Papers
charged it as heterodoxie upon the Protesting Brethren. 2. As we shall be glad
that they will confine this submission to sound Judicatories, upon the account
of their soundness only; so in the case of their so doing, we do not see what
this imports more in the matter of submission than the Protesting Brethren
are willing to yield, to wit, A submission to all sound Determinations and just
Sentences of the respective Judicatories of the Kirk, without any
counteracting; because if it be given to them upon that account only, that they
are sound, then is it only to be given to them when they are sound and right in
their resolutions and actings, which the Protesting Brethren willingly yield,
and be like, in some particular cases somewhat more. We find them in their
last Paper, in the Conference at Edinburgh, November, 25. 1655. professing that
if the case were only of particular persons, in things of more private interest
and personal concernment, and of Judicatories employing their power to
edi^ication in the current of their actings, they would not much contend about
it. But 3. the Protesting Brethren do deny tha^ the Church of Scotland is now
sound: It is their sad complaint, that there is in the Church the plu^ality of
her Judica^ories, very much practical^ unsoundnesse, not only because of their
not improving the precious Ordinances of God, for bearing down of the kingdom
of sin and Satan, and advancing the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, but also
because of their abusing of them in many things, for a carrying on of a course
of defection from former integrity and purity, and a course of persecution
against godly Ministers, and Elders and Professors in the Land, who cannot be
consenting to their backsliding courses: therefore, do these Brethren conceive
that they have the more reason to refuse to engage themselves to an absolute
submission to the Sentences of the Church*Judicatories, whilst the power is in
such hands, because it were to betray themselves and the Work and People of
God, to the lusts and will of men. We conclude this debate of the nature of
that submission that is due to Church-Judicatories, with two testimonies of
men, who are deservedly acknowledged to be great and worthy asserters of
Presbyteriall* Government. The first is of the Authors of the Divine-right of
ChurchGovernment, who in the 15. Chap. of that book treating of the
subordination of particular Churches to greater Assemblies, for their
authoritative judging and determining of causes Ecclesiastical, and the Divine
right thereof, do write thus; It is granted (say they) that the highest
Ecclesiastical Assembly in the world, cannot require from the lowest, a
subordination absolute and pro arbitrio, i. e. at their own mere will and
pleasure; but only in some respect, subordination absolute, being only to the
Law of God, laid down in the Scripture. We detest Popish tyranny which
claims a power of giving their will for a Law. It is subjection in the Lord
that is pleaded-for, the streightest rule in the world, unless the holy
Scricpture, we affirm to be regulam regulatam, i. e. a rule to be regulated,
peace being only in walking according to Scripture Canon. Gal. 6. ver. 16. The
other is of our Countryman, Mr. George Gillespie in his Assertion of the
Government of the Church of Scotland, the sec. part, chapter 2. page 127. We must
distinguish (says he) betwixt a dependence absolute, and in some respect; a
Congregation does absolutely depend upon the holy Scriptures alone, as the
perfect rule of Faith, and manners, of Worship and of Church Government; for we
accurse the tyranny of Prelates, who claimed to themselves autocratorick power
over Congregations to whom they gave their Naked-will for a Law: one of
themselves told a whole Synod, that they ought to esteem that best which
seems so to superiors; and that this is a sufficient ground to the
conscience for obeying, though the thing be inconvenient. We say, that
Congregations ought indeed to be subject to Presbyteries and Synods, yet not
absolutely, but in the Lord, and in things lawful: and to this purpose the
constitutions of Presbyteries and Synods, are to be examined by the judgment
of Christian discretion; for a Synod is judex judicandus, and regula regulata,
so that it ought not to be blindly obeyed, whether the Ordinances be convenient
or inconvenient.

Having now vindicated the Protesting Brethren from the Aspersions unjustly
cast upon them in that Declaration, and given a Reason why they cannot accept
thereof, as containing right and fit foundations of Union; We have only to add,
That we know and are persuaded in our spirits, that as the divisions of this
Church, are amongst the deepest wounds and greatest afflictions of their souls;
so there is nothing (next unto communion and fellowship with God in his Truth)
which they do more earnestly desire, than a sinlesse Union and Peace in the
Church; and would redeem it at any rate that shall not pollute their
consciences, and widen the breach with God: And therefore, as through the
goodness and mercy of God, these Brethren have a witness of their innocence,
and of the justice of their cause in the hearts of many of the precious and
godly in the Land: So we desire, that none of the Lord's People will receive
the accusations that are laid against them, or look upon them as men of
implacable spirits, who hold up contention and division in the Church, but
esteem them such as stand for the defense of the Truth, and are seeking and
pursuing such an Union and Peace as may be not for the destruction, but for the
preservation of the Truth and Cause of God, which they conceive themselves
bound to, and tender before their own Persons and Ministry

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter that this Answer was sent to the Press, the Authors of the Declaration,
to which it does contain a Reply, together with several other Brethren of their
judgment, meeting at Edinburgh, in an extrajudicial way, two months after the
first publishing thereof, did resolve that the Declaration should be tendered
to the several Presbyteries of that judgment, for their approbation, and
thereafter offered by them to the Protesting Brethren in the several parts of
the Country, and that their Answer should be desired thereupon. Whether the
imputation which they conceived to be cast upon them, by some Synods ref^sing
to declare themselves, as to their approving thereof, (of which we have had a
credible report) or any other consideration did lead them hereunto, we shall
not determine; but we cannot but take notice, 1. That herein they have had
little or no regard to the due liberty of Presbyteries and Synods,
notwithstanding of their great pretentions and professions unto the contrary in
all their debates with the Protesting Brethren, a few private persons having
first, without acquainting them with that Paper, or desiring their approbation
thereof, published the same as the Judgment, and in the Name of the Brethren
who are for the established Government of the Kirk of Scotland, and then ex
post facto a long time after it had gone abroad materially in their names, to
endeavor to engage them in the approbation thereof. 2. That the Presbyteries
of that judgment have walked in a very different and dissonant way in order to
that ^ without justifying the Narrative (...); and others having approven the
whole Paper, Title and Body, as it stands, and in these terms tendered it, as
a ground of Union and Peace. 3. That sundry of these Brethren and Presbyteries
of the Resolution judgment, who have approven and tendered this Paper to
several of the Protesting Breth^en, have done it in such a way as does more
savor of the customs of litigious men than does beseem the Gospel and Servants
of Jesus Christ, to wit, by Civil Notaries, and Instruments required under
their hand. 4. That some Presbyteries of that judgment, have, because of some
Protesting Brethren of the Presbytery their refusing to join with them in
condemning the practices and proposals mentioned in that Declaration, as
contrary and destructive to the Government of this Kirk, declared them to be
such as do dissent from the Government it self. Besides any thing that is said
in the body of this Reply, it may by these things further appear what reason
there was upon the one han^ to hasten forth an Answer to that Paper, and upon
the other, how small reason from the Paper it self, how lub^ick grounds from
the dissonant proceedings of the Resolution Brethren thereupon, the Brethren
for the Protestation have to embrace the same, as a foundation of Union and
Peace: Or, if they do so, in how great ^ cloud of uncertainty they must walk,
and what hard conditions they must swallow.

FINIS.

