THE CHRISTIANS Great Interest: Or a short TREATISE, Divided into two Parts:
The First whereof contains, The Trial of a Saving Interest in Christ.

The Second, points forth plainly, The Way [How] to Attain it: Wherein
somewhat is likewise spoken to the manner of Express Covenanting with God.

By W. GVTHRIE, Minister of the Gospel in SCOTLAND.

2. Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, etc. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye
be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that
Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? The Seventh Impression:
Wherein the Errata's of the former Impressions are amended, and several words,
which sounded hard in the English, rendered more clear and intelligible.

LONDON, Printed, for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in Poultry. 1681.

THE Stationer TO THE READER.
The Epistle Commendatory from a Christian Friend, giving an account of his
thoughts upon perusal of This Book.
Christian Friend.
I Have sent you by the Bearer, this Book, which by Providence came to my hand,
and a Blessed Providence indeed it was to me, for I hope the same mercy that
brought it to my hand, has brought the savor of it to my heart.

Upon peru^al of it, I find such a blessed and happy conjunction, betwixt the
Gifts and the Graces of the Spirit, such a holy and humble Condescension, to my
plain capacity, such a serious handling of serious truths, that the language of
my heart, upon perusal of it, was somewhat like that of the woman of Canaan,
Joh. 4. 29. Come see one that has told me all that ever I did, or rather, all
that God has done in me, and for me. He that has waded much in the waters of
soul-trouble, may here behold a lively description of the spirit of bondage in
all its Terrors and Troubles: And he who is got out of these, and is sunning
his soul in the light of Gods Countenance, may here behold the light side of
the Cloud; I mean the Spirit of Adoption, in all its beautiful colors.

The former part of this Book sets forth the soul in a storm, when the Law
comes thundering to the Conscience; the latter leads it into a Calm of sweet
peace and serenity. When the Spirit of God comes to a troubled soul, as the Son
of God once came to the troubled Sea, with A peace, be still, Mat. 4. 29. But
if it should not be thus, the Believer is here directed to be willing to want
what God is not willing to give, and to know, he is wise to give when he will,
what he will, and how he will, I find now that peace is sown for the Righteous,
Psalm. 97. 11. but all do not reap the crop till they come into Emmanuel's land,
Isa. 8. 8. there our joy, as well as our light, shall be clear, and our love
perfect.

And if there be any more concerned in this Piece than others, (though it deals
forth its bread to all) it is young Men and young Converts; the latter may here
behold, as in a Map or Mirror, the several Providence, and various workings
of the blessed Spirit, that have all concurred in the bringing them home to
God; and may take notice of all the inducements and remora's they met with in
the way; That as Moses was to write a History of the Children of Israel passing
through the Wilderness, Numb. 33. 2. so does this Book, with a holy kind of
Elegancy, describe the Spirits leading the soul out of its bewildered estate,
into the Spiritual Canaan, never leaving it, till it comes to the Mountain of
Spices, Cant. 8. 14. out of Satan's gunshot, where his habitation shall be a
Munition of Rocks, Isa. 33. 16. neither is there one path omitted, so far as I
could ever read or gather from my own or others experience; So that it may not
be unfitly termed, A Spiritual day-Book of all the passages between the Spirit
of God, and the soul in its regeneration work; Which is no loss profitable than
delightful for the believer to be reading over the Records of Gods love
manifested in the Gospel; What care and cost he took with him, to recover him
out of the Gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity: For trial bring^ truth to
light, and those things which through many Cloud^ intercepting, may have lost
their remembrance in the soul, are here clearly discovered, that they have
been, although for the present the beli^^ (...), How is the Gold become dim?
How is the fine gold hanged? And the looking over pa^ experien^^ brings a
renewed favor, and spiritual relli^^ of those things upon the heart to them,
who have thus tasted that the Lord is good, at least supports the Soul under
the want of sensible feeling: whilst it calls to remembrance the days of old,
the years of Gods right hand: But I have done, and yet methinks I can never
write enough of the excellency and utility of this piece; The Lord make it so
profitable to others, as it has been to me. To his blessing, I leave both you
and it, and remain,

Your true Christian Friend, G. B.

TO THE READER
Christian Reader.
WHile the generality of Men, especially in these days, by their eager pursuit
after low and base interests, have proclaimed as upon the house tops, how much
they have forgotten to make choice of that better part, which (if chosen)
should never be taken from them; I have made an Essay, such as it is, in the
following Treatise, to take thee off from this unprofitable, though painful
pursuit, by proposing the chiefest of interests, even the Christians Great
Interest, to be seriously pondered, and constantly pursued by thee: Thou may
think it strange, to see any in Print from my Pen; (as indeed it is a surprise
to my self) But necessity has made me for this once to offer so much violence
to my own inclination, in regard that some, without my knowledge, have lately
published some imperfect Notes of a few of my Sermons, most confusedly
together, prefixing withal this vain Title (as dispealsing to my self, as the
publishing of the thing) A Clear Attractive Warming-Beam, etc. Upon this
occasion I was prevailed with to publish this late Piece, wherein I have
purposely used a most homely and plain style, lest other ways, (though when I
have stretched my self to the utmost I am below the Judicious and more
Understanding) I should be above the reach of the Rude and Ignorant, whose
advantage I have mainly, if not only consulted: I have likewise studied brevity
in every thing, so far as I conceived it to be consistent with plainness and
perspic^ity; knowing that the persons to whom I address my self herein, have
neither much money to spend upon Books, nor much time to spare upon Reading. If
thou be a Rigid Critic, I know thou may meet with several things to carp
at, yet assure thy self, that I had no design to offend thee, neither will thy
simple approbation satisfy me; It Is thy edification I intend, together with
the incitement of some others, more expert, and experienced in this Excellent
Subject, to handle the same at greater length, which I have more briefly hinted
at, who am,

Thy Servant in the Word of the Gospel, W. Guthery.

The Trial of a Saving Interest in CHRIST.
SInce there be so many people living under the Ordinances, pretending without
ground to a special interest in Christ, and to his favor and salvation, as is
clear, Mat. 7. 22, 23. and 25. 11, 12. Luke. 13. 24. And since many who have
good ground of claim to Christ, are not established in the confidence of his
favor, but remain in the dark, without comfort, hesitating concerning the
reality of godliness in themselves, and speaking a little to the commendation
of Religion to others, especially in the time of their straits, I shall speak a
little to two things of greatest concernment. The one is, How a person shall
know if he has a true and special interest in Christ, and whether he does lay
just claim to Gods favor and salvation? The other is, In case a person fall
short in the foresaid trial, what course he shall take for making sure Gods
friendship and salvation to himself?

Quest. 1. How shall a man know if he has a true and special interest in
Christ, and whether he has or may lay ^laim justly to Gods favor and
salvation?

Answer. Before we speak directly to the Question, (...) shall premise some
things to make way for the An^wer.

As First, That a man's interest in Christ, or gracius state, may be known, and
that with more certainty than people do conjecture; yea, and the knowledge of it
may be more easily attained unto than many do imagine: For not only has the
Lord commanded men to know their interest in him, as a thing attainable, 2.
Cor. 13. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 10. But many of the Saints have attained unto the clear
persuasion of their interest in Christ, and in God, as their own God; How often
do they call him their God and their portion; and how persuaded is Paul, that
nothing can separate him from the love of God? Romans 8. 38, 39. Therefore the
knowledge of a man's gracious state is attainable: and this knowledge of it,
which may be attained, is no fancy and bare conceit, but it is most sure:
Doubtless thou art our Father, says the Prophet in name of the Church, Isa.
23. 16. It is clear thus; 1. That can be no fancy, but a very sure knowledge,
which does yield to a rational man comfort in most real straits: But so does
this, 1. Sam. 30. 6. when the people spoke of stoning David, he encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, Psalm. 3. 6. he says there, he will not be afraid
of ten thousand that rise against him. Compare these words with ver. 3. of that
Psalm, Psalm. 27. 1, 3. Although an host encamp against him, he is confident in
this. 2. That is a sure knowledge of a thing, which makes a wise Merchant sell
all he has that he may keep it sure, that makes a man forgo children, lands,
life, and suffer the spoiling of all joyfully: But so does this Mat. 13. 44.
Mar. 1^. 28, 29 Heb. 10. 34. Romans 5. Act. 5. 41. (13) That must be a sure and
certain knowledge, and no fancy, whereupon a man voluntarily and freely does
adventure his soul, when he is stepping into eternity with this word in his
mouth, This is all my desire. But such a knowledge is 2 Samuel 25. 5. And again,
Not only may a godly man come to the sure knowledge of his gracious state, but
it is more easily attainable than many do apprehend: for (supposing what shall
be afterward proved, that a man may know the gracious work of Gods Spirit in
himself) if he will but argue rationally from thence he shall be forced to
conclude his interest in Christ unless he deny clear Scripture truths. I shall
only make use of one here, because we are to speak more directly to this
afterward. A godly man may argue thus: whosoever receive Christ, are justly
reputed the Children of God, John 1. 12. But I have received Christ all the
ways which the Word there can import: for, I am well pleased with the device,
or way of salvation by Christ, I agree to the terms; I welcome the offer of
Christ in all his offices, as a King to rule over me, as a Priest to offer and
intercede for me, as a Prophet to teach me; I lay out my heart for Him and
toward Him, resting on Him, as I am able; what else can be meant by the word
receiving? Therefore may I say and conclude plainly and warrantably, I am
justly to reckon my self Gods child according to the aforesaid Scripture, which
cannot fail.

The second thing to be premised is, That a man be savingly in Covenant with
God, is a matter of highest importance; it is his life, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. and yet
very few have or seek after a saving interest in the Covenant: and many
foolishly think they have such a thing without any solid ground, Mat. 7. 14.
few find or walk in the narrow way. This should alarm people to be serious
about the matter, since it is of so great consequence to be in Christ, and
since there be but few that may lay just claim to him, and yet many do
foolishly fancy an interest in him, who are deceived by a false confidence, as
the foolish Virgins do, Mat. 25.

The third thing to be premised, is, Men must resolve to be determined by
Scripture, in this matter of their interest in Christ. The Spirit speaking in
the Scripture, is judge of all Controversies ( Isa. 8. 20. To the law and the
Prophets, and it speak not according to these, there is no truth in it) and of
this also, whether a man be savingly in Covenant with God, or not. Therefore do
not mock God whilst you seem to search after such a thing. If we prove from
Scripture (which is the uncontroverted rule) that you are gracious, and have
stricken Covenant savingly with God, then resolve to grant so much as to
acquiesce in it, and if the contrary appear, let there be a determination of
the controversy; else you do but mock the Lord, and so your bonds shall be
made strong, Isa. 28. 22. for, a jot of his Word cannot fail, Mat. 5. 18.
Therefore seek eye salve from Christ to judge of things, according as the word
of God shall discover them to be.

The fourth thing to be premised, is, although the matter of a man's interest in
Christ be of so great importance, and the way to attain to the knowledge of it,
so plainly held forth in the Scriptures, yet there be but few who reach the
distinct knowledge of it; And that this may not discourage any person from
attempting it, I shall hint some few reasons, why so few come to the clear
knowledge of it, which will also prepare the way for what is to be spoken
afterward.

The first thing which does hinder many from the knowledge of their interest in
Christ, is, their ignorance of some special principles of Religion: as, 1. That
it was free love in Gods bosom, and nothing in man, that moved him to send a
Savior to perfect the work of Redemption. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World,
that he sent, etc. Men are still seeking some ground for that business in
themselves, which leads away from suitable and high apprehensions of the first
spring and rise of Gods Covenant-favour to his people, which has no reason,
cause, or motive in us, and so they cannot come to the knowledge of their
interest. 2. They are ignorant how that love does effectually discover it self
to a man's heart, so as he has ground to lay claim to it, viz. That ordinarily
it does first discover his broken state in himself because of sin and
corruption defiling the whole man, and any thing in him that might be called a
righteousness; all these things are loss and dung, Phil. 3. 6, 7, Secondly, It
discovers Christ as the full and satisfying treasure above all things. The
man finds a treasure, for which, with joy, he sells all, etc. Mat. 13. 44,
46. Thirdly, it determines the heart, and causes it to approach unto a living
God in the ordinances, Psalm. 65. 4. and causes the heart to wait upon him, and
him alone, 62. 5. My soul, wait thou only upon God. Thus, having dropped in the
seed of God in the heart, and formed Christ there, Gal. 4. 19. The heart is
changed and made new in the aforesaid work, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and Gods Law is so
stamped upon the heart in that change, Jer. 31. 33. that the whole yoke of
Christ is commended to the man without exception, Romans 7. 12. 16. The Law is
acknowledged good, holy, just and spiritual: upon all which, from that new
principle of life, there flow out acts of a new life, (Gal. 5. 6. Faith works
by love, Romans 6. 18, 22. and the man becomes a servant of righteousness and
unto God) which does especially appear in the spirituality of worship, ( Joh.
4. 24. Romans 7. 6. men then serve God in spirit, and truth, and in the newness
of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter) and tenderness in all
manner of conversation; The man then exercises himself how to keep a
conscience void of offense, etc. Acts 24. 16. Now, this way does the love, God
discover it self unto man, and acts on him, so as he has ground of laying
some good claim to it; so as he may justly think, that the love which sent a
Savior, had respect to such a man as has found these things made out unto
him. Surely, Ignorance of this does hinder many from the knowledge of their
interest in Christ, for if a man know not how God works with a person, so as
he may justly lay claim to his love, which was from eternity, he will wander in
the dark, and not come to the knowledge of an interest in him. 3. Many are also
ignorant of this, That God alone is the hope of his people; he is called the
hope of Israel, Jer. 14. 8. Although inherent quallifications are evidences of
it; yet the staying of the heart upon him as a full blessing and satisfying
portion, is faith (1 Pet. 1. 21. the faith and hope must be in God) and the
only proper condition which gives right to the saving blessings of the
Covenant, Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes, faith is imputed
for righteousness. Indeed if any person take liberty here, and turn grace into
wantonness, there is, without doubt, in so far a delusion; since there is mercy
with him, upon condition, that it conciliate fear to him, Psalm. 130. 14. Yea,
hardly can any man, who has found the foresaid expressions of Gods love made
out upon him, make a cloak of the Covenant for sinful liberty without some
measure of a spiritual conflict: In this respect he that is born of God, does
not sin; and he who does so sin, has not seen God, 1 John 3. 6, 9. I say, God
is the hope of his people, and not their own holiness. If they intend honestly,
and long seriously to be like unto him, many failings should not weaken their
hope and confidence: for, it is in him who changes not, Mal. 3. 6. And if any
man sins, he has an Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. Now, when men place their hope
in any other thing beside the Lord, it is no wonder they be kept in a
staggering condition, according to the changes of the thing which they make the
ground of their hope, since they give not to God the Glory due to his Name, and
which he will not give unto another: compare, Psalm. 9. 10. ( They who know thy
Name, will put their trust in thee) with Isa. 42. 9. My glory will I not give
to another: I am the Lord, that is my Name. 4. Many are ignorant of the
different ways and degrees of Gods working with his people, and it does much
darken their knowledge and reflex acts of their interest in him. This ignorance
does run mainly on three heads (1.) They are ignorant of the different degrees
and ways of that Law-work which ordinarily deals with men, and of the
different way how the Lord brings home people at first to Christ. They
consider not that the Jailer is not kept an hour in bondage, Acts 16. Paul is
kept in suspense three days, Acts 9. Zacheus not one moment, Luke 19. (2.) They
are ignorant of, or at least do not consider, how different the degrees of
Sanctification are in the Saints, and the honorable appearings thereof before
men in some, and the sad blemishing thereof in others: Some, are very
blameless, and more free of gross outbreakings, adorning their profession much,
as Job, Job 1. and Zachariah, Luke 1. Those are said to be perfect, walking in
all the Commandments of God. Others were subject to very gross and sad evils,
as Solomon, Asa, etc. (3.) They are ignorant of the different communications of
Gods face, and expression of his presence. Some do walk much in the Light of
Gods countenance, and are much in sensible fellowship with Him, as David was;
others are all their days kept in bondage through ^ear of death, Heb. 2. 25.
Surely the ignorance of the different ways of God's working and dealing with
his people, does very much darken the knowledge of their Interest in him,
whilst they usually stint the Lord to one way of working, which he does not
keep, as we have showed in the former examples.

The second thing which does darken men about their interest in Christ, is,
There is one thing or other, wherein their heart in some respect, does condemn
them, as dealing deceitfully and guilefully with God. It is not to be expected,
that these can come to clearness about their interest, whose heart does condemn
them for keeping up some known transgression against the Lord; which they will
not let go, neither are using the means which they know to be appointed by God
for delivering them from it; neither can these come to clearness, who know some
positive duty commanded them in their stations, which they deceitfully shift
and shun, not closing cheerfully with it, or not willing to be led into it.
These are also, in some respect, condemned of their own heart, as the former
sort; and in that case it is difficult to come to a distinct knowledge of their
state. 1 John 3. 21. it is supposed there, that a self-condemning heart makes
void a man's confidence proportionally before God. I do not deny but that men
may, on good grounds, plead an interest in Christ, in the case of prevailing
iniquity, Psalm. 65. 3. Romans 7. 23, 25. but it is hard to be attained, if at all
attainable, when the heart is dealing deceitfully, and entertaining known guile
in particular: Therefore let people clear themselves of the particular which
they know too well. It is the thing which does meet them, marring their
confidence and access in all their approaches unto God. See Judge. 10. 10, 13.
The Idolatries of the people are cast up to them by the Lord, and their suit
rejected thereupon. That which draws away the heart first in the morning, and
last at night; like an Oven heated at night, and it burns as a flaming fire
in the Morning, spoken of the wicked, Hos. 7. 6. And takes up their thoughts
often on their bed, as it is said of some, Psalm. 36. 4. That which does lead
away the heart in time of religious duty ordinarily, and the remembrance of
which has power to enliven and quicken the Spirits, more than the remembrance
of God, so as their heart is after the heart of some detestable thing. Ezekiel.
11. 21. That which withstandeth men when they would lay hold on the Promise, as
God casts up men's sins to them who were meddling with his Covenant, Psalm. 50.
16, 17. That is the thing which does mar the knowledge of a gracious state,
let it go, and it will be more easy to reach the knowledge of an interest in
Christ.

The third thing which hinders the knowledge of an interest in Christ, is a
spirit of sloth and careless negligence in many. They complain that they know
not whether they be in Christ or not; but, as few take pains to be in him, so
few take pains to try if they be in him. It is a work and business which cannot
be done sleeping, 2 Cor. 13. 5. The several words used there, viz. examine,
prove, know, say that there is a labor in it; diligence must be used to make
our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. it is a business above flesh and
blood; The holy anointing, which teaches all things, must make us know the
things Freely given us of God, 1. Cor. 2. 12. Shall the Lord impart a business
of so great concernment and not so much as be enquired after to do it for men?
Ezekiel. 36. 37. Be ashamed you who spend so much time in reading Romances, in
adorning your persons, in hawking, and hunting, in consulting the Law,
concerning your outward state in the World, and it may be, in worse things than
those: Be ashamed that you spend so little time in the search of this, whether
you be an heir of Glory or not; whether you be in the way that leads to
Heaven, or that which will land you in darkness for ever. You who judge this
below you, and unworthy of your pains, any part or minute of your time, it is
like in Gods account, you have judged your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
so as you have no lot with Gods people in this matter.

The fourth thing that does darken the knowledge of interest in Christ, is, men
do not condescend upon what would satisfy them; but complain that God will not
show unto them what he is about to do with them; but cannot yet say they know
what would satisfy concerning his purpose: this is a sad thing. Shall we think
those are serious, who have never as yet, pitched on what would satisfy them,
nor are making earnest enquiry after what should satisfy? If the Lord had left
us in the dark in that matter, we were less inexcusable: but since the grounds
of satisfaction and the true marks of interest in Christ, are so clear and
frequent in Scripture, and so many things written that our joy may be full, 1 John 1. 4. and that those who believe may know that they have eternal life, 1 John 5. 13. and since he that believes has a Witness of it in himself, 1 John
5. 10. none can pretend excuse here. We may not here insist to show what may
and should satisfy concerning our interest, since we are to speak directly to
it afterward.

The fifth thing that helps much to keep men in the dark, concerning their
interest in Christ, is, they pitch upon some mutable grounds, which are not so
apposite proofs of the truths of an interest in Christ, as of the comfortable
state of a triumphing soul sailing before the wind, and marks, which I grant
are precious in themselves, and do make out an interest clearly where they are;
Yet they are such, as without them, an interest in Christ may be, and be known
also in a good measure. We shall touch a few of them. 1. Some think that all
who have a true interest in him are above the prevailing power of every sin.
But this is contrary to that of Psalm. 65. 3. where we find that holy man laying
just claim to pardon, in the case of prevailing iniquity; and that of Romans 7.
23, 24, 25. where Paul thanketh God through Christ, as freed from the
condemnation of the. Law, even whilst a law in his members leads him captive
unto sin. 2. Some think that all true Saints have constantly access unto God in
prayer, and sensible returns of Prayer at all times. But this is contrary to
the many sad exercises of God's people, complaining often, that they are not
heard nor regarded of God. Psalm. 13. 1. and 22. 1, 2. (3.) Some think, that all
who have any true interest in him have God witnessing the same unto them by a
high operation of that witnessing spirit of his, spoken of Romans 8. 16.
(whereof afterward) and so they still suspect their own interest in Christ,
because of the want of this. But they do not remember that they must first
believe, and give credit to that record, which God has given to his Son, that
there is life enough in him for men, 1 John 5. 10, 11. and then look for the
seal and witness of the spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye believed ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise, etc. As long as people hold fast these
principles and the like, they can hardly come to the knowledge of their
gracious state, (which God has warranted people to prove and clear up to
themselves) otherways than by the aforesaid things.

The fifth thing to be premised, is, The removal of some mistakes, whereunto
people may readily run themselves, when we are about to prove their interest in
Christ. As, 1. It is a mistake to think, that every one who is in Christ, does
know that he is in Him. For many are truly gracious, and have a good title to
eternal life, who do not know so much, until it be made out afterward, 1 John
5. 13, These things are written to believers, that they may know they have a
true title to eternal life; that is, that they may know they are believers, and
so it is supposed they knew it not before. 2. It is a mistake to think, that
all who come to the knowledge of their interest in Christ, do attain an equal
certainty about the same: One may say, he is persuaded, nothing present or to
come, can separate him from the love of God, Rom* 8. 38. Another comes but
this length, I believe, help mine unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. 3. It is a mistake to
think, that every one who attaineth to a strong persuasion of his interest,
does always hold there; for he who to day may say of the Lord, He is his
refuge, Psalm. 21. 2. and kis portion, Psalm. 119. 57. will at another time say,
he is cut off, Psalm. 31. 22. and will ask, if the truth of Gods promise does
fail for evermore? Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9. 4. It is also a mistake to think, that
every one who does attain a good knowledge of their gracious state, can
formally answer all objections made to the contrary; But yet they may hold fast
the conclusion, and say, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1. 12. There be
few grounds of Christian Religion, whereof many people are so persuaded, as
that they are able to maintain them formally against all arguments brought to
the contrary, and yet they may and will hold the conclusion steadfastly and
justly: So it is in this case in hand. It is no less a mistake to imagine, that
the vain, groundless confidence which many profane, ignorant Atheists do
maintain, is this knowledge of an interest in Christ which we plead for; Many
do falsely avouch him to be their Father, Joh. 8. 41. and many look for Heaven,
who will be beguiled with those foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 12. Yet we must not
think, because of this, that all knowledge of interest is a delusion and fancy,
although these fools be deceived: for whilst thousands are deluded, some can
say on good and solid grounds; We know that we are of God, and that the whole
world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19.

Having premised these things, it now follows, that we give some marks by
which a man may know if he be savingly in Covenant with God, and has a special
interest in Christ, so as he may warrantably lay claim to Gods favor and
salvation. We shall only pitch upon two great and principal marks, not willing
to trouble people with many. And before we fall upon these, we will speak of a
preparatory work of the Law, whereof the Lord does ordinarily make use, to
prepare his own way in men's souls. This may have its own weight, as a mark,
with some persons. It is called the work of the Law, or, the work of
humiliation. It has some proportion to that spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15. and
does now under the New Testament answer unto it, and usually leads on to the
Spirit of adoption. Only here let it be remembered, 1. That we are not to speak
of this preparatory work of the Law, as a negative mark of true interest in
Christ, as if none might lay claim to Gods favor, who has not had this
preparatory work in the several steps of it, as we are to speak of it; for, as
we shall hear, the Lord does not always keep that path with men. 2. The great
reason why we speak of it, is, because the Lord deals with many (whom he does
effectually call) by some such preparatory work. And to those, who have been so
dealt with, it may prove strengthening, and will confirm them in laying the more
weight on the marks which follow. 3. It may help to encourage others, who are
under such bondage of spirit, as a good prognostic of a gracious work to
follow: for as we shall circumstantiate it, it will be rarely found to
miscarry, and fail of a gracious issue. 4. Where God uses such a preparatory
work, he does not keep one way or measure in it, as we shall hear.

For the more distinct handling of this preparatory work, we shall shortly hint
the most ordinary ways, by which the Lord leads people into the Covenant
savingly, and draws them unto Christ.

First, There are some called from the Womb, as John the Baptist was, Luke 1.
41, 44, or, in their very young years, before they can be deeply engaged
actively in Satan's ways, 2 Timothy 3. 15. It cannot be supposed that those have
such a preparatory work as we are to speak of. And because some persons may
pretend to this way of e^^ectual calling* we offer these marks of it, whereby
those who have been so called may be confirmed, (1.) Such use from their
Childhood to be kept free of ordinary pollutions, wherewith Children usually
are defiled; as swearing, lying, mocking of Religion, and religious persons,
etc. Those whom God calls effectually, he sanctifies them from the time of
that effectual calling: Sin cannot have dominion over them as over others,
because they are under grace, Romans 6. 14. (2.) Religion is, as it were, natural
to them; I mean, they need not be much pressed to religious duties, even when
they are but children; They willingly run that way, because there is an inward
principle, of love constraining them, 2 Cor. 5. 14. so as they yield themselves
servants of righteousness, without outward constraint, Romans 6. 16. (3.)
Although such know not when they were first acquainted with God, yet afterward
they have such exercises of spirit befalling, as the Saints in Scripture (of
whose first conversion we hear not) do speak of. They are shut out from God
upon some occasion now and then, and are admitted to come nearer again, (to
their apprehension.) Their heart is also further broken up by the ordinances,
as is said of Lydia, Act. 16. 14. and ordinarily they do remember, when some
special piece of Religion and Duty, or when some sin, of which they were not
taking notice before, was discovered to them. They who can apply these things
to themselves, have much to say for their effectual calling from their youth.

Secondly, Some are brought in to Christ in a sovereign Gospel way: when the
Lord, by some few words of love swallowing up any Law-work, quickly takes a
person prisoner at the first, as he did Zacheus, Luke. 19. and others, who upon
a word spoken by Christ, did leave all and follow him; and we hear no noise of
a Law-work dealing with them before they close with Christ Jesus. And because
some pretend to this way of calling, we shall touch some things most remarkable
in that transaction with Zacheus, for clearing and confirmation. 1. He had some
desire to see Christ, and such a desire, as made him wave that which some would
have judged prudence and discretion, whilst he climbeth up upon a tree that he
might see him. 2. Christ spoke to his heart, and that word took such hold upon
him, that presently with joy he did accept of Christ's offer, and closed with
Christ as Lord, whilst few of any note were following him. 3. Upon this his
heart did open to the poor, although it seems, he was a covetous man before. 4.
He had a due impression of his former ways, evidencing his respect to Moses
his Law; and this he did signify before all the company then present, not
caring to shame himself in such things as (probably) were not known to the
World. 5. Upon all these things, Christ confirms and ratifieth the bargain by
his word, recommending to him that oneness of interest, which behoved to be
between him and the Saints, and the thoughts of his own lost condition, if
Christ had not come and sought him, and found him: All which are clear, Luke
19. 3, -- 10. We grant, the Lord calls some so; and if any can lay claim to
the special things we have now hinted, they have a good confirmation of Gods
dealing with them from that Scripture; Neither are they to vex themselves
because of the want of a distinct preparatory Law-work if their heart have
yielded unto Christ. For, a Law work is not desirable except for this end.
Therefore Christ does offer himself directly in the Scripture, and people are
invited to come to him: and although many will not come to him, who is the
surety, until the spirit of bondage distress them for their debt; yet if any
upon the knowledge of their lost estate, would flee and yield to Christ, none
might warrantably press a Law-work upon them. As for others, whom Christ
persuaded by a word to follow him, whatsoever he did, or howsoever he spoke to
them at his first meeting with them, we must rationally suppose, that then he
discovered so much of their own necessity, and his own fullness and excellency
to them, as made them quit all, and run after him. And if he do so to any, we
crave no more, since there is room enough there for the Physician. So that from
all this, as some may be confirmed and strengthened, with whom God has so
dealt; So there is no ground nor occasion for deluded souls to flatter
themselves in their condition, who remain ignorant and senseless of their own
miseries and Christ's all sufficiency, and hold fast deceit.

Thirdly, There are some brought in to Christ in a way yet more declarative of
his free grace, and this is, when he effectually calls men at the hour of
death. We find somewhat recorded of this way in that pregnant example of the
Thief on the Cross; Luke 23. 39, 41. Although this seems not very pertinent for
the purpose in hand; yet we shall speak a little of it, that on the one hand
men may be sparing to judge and pass Sentence upon either themselves or others,
before the last breath. And we shall so circumstantiate it, that, on the other
hand, none may dare to delay so great a business to the last hour of their
life. We find these things remarkable in that business between Christ and the
Thief; 1. The man falls at odds with his former Companion. 2. He dares not
speak a wrong word of God, whose hand is on him, but justifies him in all that
is befallen him. 3. He now sees Jesus Christ persecuted by the World, without
a cause, and most injuriously. 4. He discovers Christ to be a Lord and a
King, whilst enemies seem to have him under. 5. He believes a being of glory
after death so really, that he prefers a portion of it to the present safety
of his bodily life, which he knew Christ was able to grant to him at that time,
and he might have chosen that with the other Thief. 6. Although he was much
abased in himself, and humbled, that he pleaded but that Christ would remember
him, yet he was nobly daring to throw himself upon the Covenant, on life and
death; and he had so much faith of Christ's all sufficiency, that he judged a
simple remembrance from Christ would satisfyingly do his business. 7. He
acquiesced sweetly in the word which Christ spoke to him, for the ground of his
comfort. All which are very clear in the case of that poor dying man, and do
prove a very real work of God upon his heart. As this example may encourage
some to wait for good from God, who cannot as yet lay clear claim to any
gracious work of his Spirit: So we beseech all, as they love their souls, not
to delay their soul-businesses, hoping for such a cast of Christ's hand in the
end, as too many do: This being a rare miracle of mercy with the glory whereof
Christ did honorably triumph over the ignominy of his cross (a parallel of
which we shall hardly find in all the Scripture beside:) yea, as there be but
few at all saved, Mat. 20. 16. and most few saved this way: So the Lord has
peremptorily threatened to laugh at the calamity, and not to hear the cry of
such as mocked formerly at his reproof, and would not hear when he called to
them, Prove. 1. 24, 26. which Scripture, although it does not shut mercies door
upon any, who at the hour of death, do sincerely judge themselves and flee unto
Christ as this penitent Thief did: Yet it is certain, it implies that very few
who fit the offer until then, are honored with repentance, as he was, and so
their cry, as not being sincere and of the right stamp, shall not be heard.

The fourth, and most ordinary way, by which many are brought in to Christ, is,
by a clear and discernable work of the law and humiliation, which we ordinarily
call the spirit of bondage, as was hinted before. We do not mean that every one
whose conscience is awakened with sin and fear of wrath, does really close with
Christ; the contrary does appear in Gain, Saul, Judas etc. But that wherein
there is a conviction of sin, awakening of conscience, and work of humiliation,
which, as we shall circumstantiate it, does rarely miscarry or fail of a
gracious issue, but ordinarily does resolve into the spirit of adoption, and a
gracious work of Gods Spirit: and because the Lord deals with many sinners
this way, and we find that many are much puzzled about the giving judgment of
this Law-work.

This work is either more violent and sudden, or it is more sober and longer,
protracted through a great length of time, and so as the steps of it are very
discernable. It is more violent in some, as in the Jailer, Paul, and some other
converts in the book of the Acts of the Apostles, on whom Christ did break in
at an instant, and fell on them as with Fire and Sword, and led them captive
terribly; And because some great legal shakings are deceitful, and turn to
nothing, if not worse, we shall point at some things remarkable in these
converts, spoken of before, which did prove the work of the Law on them, to
have had a gracious issue and result. 1. Some word of truth or dispensation,
puts the person to a dreadful stand, with a great stir in the Soul: Some are
pricked in heart, Acts 2. 27. Some fell on trembling, Acts 16. 29. and this is
such a stir, that the person is brought to his wits end. What will thou have me
to do? says Paul, Acts 9. What shall I do? says the Jailer, Acts 16. 30. 2.
The person is content to have Salvation, and Gods friendship on any terms, as
the questions do import, What shall I do? as if he had said, What would I not
do? What would I not forego? What would I not undergo? 3. The person accepts
the condition offered by Christ and his Servants, as is clear in the forecited
Scriptures, 4. The person presently becomes of one interest with the Saints,
joining himself with that persecuted society, putting respect on those whom he
had formerly persecuted, joining and continuing with them in the profession of
Christ on all hazards. Those with whom the Lord has so dealt have much to say
for a gracious work of Gods spirit in them; and it is like many of them can
date their work from such a particular time and word, or dispensation, and can
give some account of what past between God and them, and of a sensible change
following in them from that time forward, as Paul gives a good account of the
work and way of God with him afterward, Acts 22.

Again, The Lord sometimes carries on this work more calmly, foftly, and
gently, protracting it so as the steps of men's exercise under it are very
discernable. It would draw a great length to enlarge every step of it; we shall
touch the most observable things in it.

1. The Lord Iayeth siege to men (who, it may be, have often refused to yield
to him, offering himself in the Ordinances) and by some word Preached, Read, or
born in on the mind, or by some providence leading in unto the Word, he does
also assault the house kept peaceably by the strong man, the Devil; and thus
Christ, who is the stronger man, comes upon him, Luke 11. 22. and by the
Spirit of truth, does fasten the Word on the man, in which Gods curse is
denounced against such and such sinners, whereof the man knows himself
guilty. The spirit convinces the man, and binds it upon him, that he is the
same person against whom the Word of God does speak, because he is guilty of
such sins, and from such sins the man is led on to see more until (ordinarily)
he comes to see the sins of his youth, sins of omission, etc. yea, he is led on
until he sees himself guilty almost of the breach of the whole Law; he sees
innumerable evils compassing him, as David speaks in a fit of exercise, Isa.
40. 12. A man sometimes will see ugly sights of sin in this case, and is
sharp-sighted to reckon a filthiness to every sin almost. Thus the spirit
convinces of sin, Jo. 16. 8. 2. The Lord shakes a special strong hold in the
garrison, a refuge of lies, to which the man betaketh himself when his sins are
thus discovered to him. The poor man pretends to faith in Christ, whereby he
thinks his burden is taken off him, as the Pharisees said, John 8. 41. We have
on Father, even God. They pretend to a special relation of God as a common
Lord. The Spirit, of God beats the man from this, by the truth of the
Scriptures, proving that he has no true faith, and so no interest in Christ,
nor any true saving grace; showing clear differences between true grace and the
counterfeit fancies which the man has in him, and between him, and the truly
Godly, as Christ labors to do those, Joh. 8. 42, 44. If God were your
father, ye would love me. Ye are of the Devil, for ye do the lusts of such a
father. So, fear surpriseth the Hypocrite in heart, Isa 33. 14. especially when
the Lord discovers to him conditions in many of these promises (wherein he
trusted most) not easily attainable, he now sees grace and faith another thing
than once he judged them to be. We may in some respect, apply that word here,
The Spirit convinces him of sin, because he has not believed on the Son: he
is particularly convinced of unbelief, John 16. 9. he sees now a huge distance
between himself and the godly, whom he thought before out-stripped him in only
some unnecessary, proud, hateful preciseness; he now sees himself deluded, and
in the broad way with the perishing multitude; and so in the sight of his
misery, coucheth down under his own burden, which, before this time, he
thought Christ did bear for him; he now begins to be afraid of the Promises,
because of that and such other words, What has^ thou to do to take my Covenant
in thy mouth? etc. Psalm. 50* 16

3. The man becomes careful about his salvation, and begins to take it to
heart, as the one thing necessary: he is brought to this with the Jailer, Act.
16. What shall I do to be saved? His salvation becomes the leading thing with
him: It was least in his thoughts before, but now it prevails, and other
things are much mis-regarded by him, since his soul is ready to perish, What
shall it profit him to gain the whole world if he lose his soul; Mat. 16. 26.
Some here are much puzzled with thoughts of an irrecoverable decree to their
prejudice, and with the fears of uncertain death, which may attach them before
they get matters put to a point; and some are vexed with apprehensions, that
they are guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is unpardonable, and
so are driven a dangerous length, Satan still casting up to them many sad
examples of people, who have dolefully put an end to their own exercise: but
they are in the hand of one, who knows how to succor them that are tempted,
Heb. 2. 18.

4. When a man is thus in hazard of miscarrying, the Lord uses a work of
preventing mercy toward him; quietly, and underhand supporting him; and this
is by bearing upon his mind the possibility of his Salvation, leading the man
to the remembrance of pregnant proofs of Gods free and rich grace, pardoning
gross transgressors, such as Manasseth; who was a bloody idolatrous man, and
had correspondence with the Devil, and yet obtained mercy, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13.
and other Scriptures bearing offers of grace and favor indifferently to all
who will yield to Christ, whatsoever they have been formerly: So as the man is
brought again to this, What shall I do to be saved? which does suppose, that he
apprehends a possibility of being saved, else he would not propound the
question. He applies that, or the like word, to himself, It may be ye shall be
hid, Zeph. 2. 3. he finds nothing excluding him from mercy now, if he have a
heart for the thing. Although here it may be, the man does does not perceive
that it is the Lord who upholdeth, yet afterward he can tell* that when his
foot was slipping, Gods mercy held him up, as Psalm. 94. 17. 18. the Psalmist
speaks in another case. And he will afterward say, When he was as a Beast,
and as fool in many respects, God held him by the hand, Psalm. 73. 22, 23.

5. After this discovery of a possibility to be saved, there is a work of
desire quickened in the Soul; which is clear in that same expression, What shall
I do to be saved? But sometimes this desire is not regular, whilst it goes out
thus, what shall I do that I may work the works of God Joh. 6. 28. In which
case, the man formerly perplexed with fear and care about his Salvation would
be at some work of his own, to extricate himself; And here he suddenly
resolves to do all that is commanded, and to forego every evil way (yet much
slighting Christ Jesus) and so begins to take some courage to himself again
establishing his own righteousness, but not submitting to the Righteousness of
God, Romans 10. 3. whereupon the Lord makes a new assault on him, intending the
discovery of his absolutely broken state in himself, that so room might be made
for the Surety; as Joshua did to the people, when he found them so bold in
their undertakings, Josh. 24. 18. 19. You cannot serve the Lord, says he, fer
he is a Holy God etc. In this new assault, the Lord, 1. Bends up against the
man the spirituality of the Law, the Commandment comes with a new change in
the spiritual meaning of it, Romans 7. 9. The Law came (says Paul) viz. in the
spiritual meaning of it. Paul had never seen such a sight of the Law before* 2.
God most holily does loose the restraining bonds, which he had laid upon the
man's corruptions, and suffers it not only to boil and swell within, but to
threaten, to break out in all the outward members. Thus sin grows bold, and
kicketh at the law, becoming exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 8, 9, 13. 3. The Lord
does discover to man, more now than ever before, the uncleanness of his
righteousness, and what spots are in his best things. These things kill the
mast, and he dies in his own conceit, Romans 7. 9. and dispaireth of releif in
himself, if it come not from some other way.

6. After many ups and downs here, ordinarily the man resolves some
retirement, he desires to be alone, he cannot keep company as before; like
those who in a besieging City, when they see they cannot hold out, and would be
glad of any good condition from the besieging enemy, they go to a council, that
they may resolve somewhat. So the man here retireth, that he may speak with
himself. This is like that communing with our own heart Psalm. 4. 4. Thus God
leads to the wilderness, that he may speak to the heart, Hos. 2. 14. When the
person is retired, the thoughts of the heart which were scattered in former
steps of exercise, do more observable throng in here. We shall reduce them into
this method. (1.) The man thinks of his unhappy folly, in bearing arms against
God, and here there be large thoughts of former ways, with a blushing
countenance and self-loathing, Ezekiel. 36. 31. like that of Psalm. 51. 3. his sin
is before him. (2.) Then he remembers how fair opportunities of yiedling to
God he has basely lost; his spirit is like to faint when he remembers that,
as is said in another case, Psalm. 42. 4, 5. (3) He now thinks of many
Christians, whom he mocked and despised in his heart, persuading himself now
that they are happy, as having chosen the better part; he thinks of the
condition of those who wait on Christ, as the Queen of Sheba did of Solomon's
servants: Happy are thy servants (says she) who stand continually before thee,
and that hear thy wisdom, 1 Kings 10. 8. Blessed are they that dwell in thy
house, etc. Psalm. 8. 4. 4. He wishes to be one of the meanest who have any
near relation to God, as the (...) Son does speak* he would be as one of the
Fathers hired servants, Luke 15. 17. 19. (5.) Then he calls to mind the good
report that is gone abroad of God, according to that testimony, Jonah 4. 2. The
Prophet knew that God was a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, etc. The free and large promises and offers of grace come in
here; and the glorious practices which have past upon sinners of all sorts,
according to the same of God in Scripture. (5.) He thinks with himself, why
has God spared me so long, and why have I got such a sight of my sin? why has
he kept me from breaking prison at my own hand, in choosing some unhappy way of
escape? Why has he made this strange change on me? It may be it is in his
heart to do me good, O that it may be so! -- Although all these thoughts be not
in the preparatory work of every one, yet they are with many, and very
promising where they are.

7. Upon all these Thoughts and Meditations, the man more seriously than ever
before, resolves to pray, and to make some essay with God, upon Life and
Death; he concludes, it can be no worse with him: for, if he sit still, he
perishes, as the Lepers speak, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4. He considers with the
pinched Prodigal Son, that there is bread enough in the Fathers House, and to
spare* while he perishes for want: so he goes to God, for he knows not what
else to make of his condition, as the Prodigal Son does, Luke 15. 17, 18. and,
it may be, here he resolves that to speak; but readily things do vary when he
is arraigned before God, as the Prodigal Son forgot some of his premediated
prayers, Luke 15. 18, 19, 21. And now when he comes before God more observably
than ever before, (1.) He begins with the Publican, a far off, Luke 18. 13.
with many through confessions and self-condemnings, whereof he is very
Prodigal, as Luke 15. 21. I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am
no more worthy, etc. (2.) Now begin his thoughts about the hearing of his
prayer, which he was not wont to question much* he now knows what those
expressions of the Saints, about the hearing of their prayers, do import. (3.)
It is observable in this address, that there are many broken Sentences, like
that of Psalm. 6. 3. ( But thou, O Lord, how long?) supplied with sighs and
groans, Romans 8. 26. and greedy looking upward, thereby speaking more than can
be expressed by words. (4.) There be ordinarily some interruptions, and (as it
were) diversions, the man speaking sometimes to the enemy, sometimes to his own
heart, sometimes to the multitude in the world, as David did in other cases,
Psalm. 9. 6. Psalm. 42. 5. Psalm. 4. 2. (5.) It is observable here, that sometimes
the man will halt and be silent to hear some indistinct whispering of a joyful
sound glancing on the mind, or some news in some broken word of Scripture,
which, it may be, the man scarcely knows to be Scripture, or whether it is
come from God or Satan to delude him: yet this he has resolved, only to hear
what God the Lord will speak, as upon another occasion, Psalm. 85. 8. (6.) More
distinct promises comes into the man's mind, whereupon he assayeth to lay hold,
but is beaten off with objections, as in another case the Psalmist is, Psalm.
20. 3. 6. But thou art holy, But I am a Worm. Now it is about the dawning of
the day with the man, and Faith will stir as soon as the Lord imparteth the
joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. This is the substance of the Covenant, which may be
shortly summed up in these words, Christ Jesns is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear ye him. We can speak no further of the man's exercise as a
preparatory work; for, what follows, is more than preparatory. Yet, that the
exercise may appear complete and full, we shall add here, That after all these
things, the Lord (it may be after many answers of diverse sorts) mightily
conveyeth the sound of his Covenant to the heart and determines the heart to
close with it, and God now draws him so to Christ, Joh. 6. 44. and so shapeth
out the heart for him, that the conception cannot miscarry; for now the heart
is so in breadth and length for him, as that less cannot satisfy, and more is
not desired, like that of Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? or whom
have I desired on earth besides thee? The soul now resolves to die, (if he
command so) yet at his door, and facing to himwards.

We have drawn this preparatory work to some length, not tying any man to such
a work so circumstantiate; only, we say, the Lord deals so with some; and
where he so convinces of sin, corruption, and self emptiness, and makes a man
take salvation to heart, as the one thing necessary, and sets him on work in
the use of the means, which God has appointed for relief; I say such a work
rarely shall be found to fail of a good issue and gracious result.

Object. Hypocrites and reprobates have great stirrings of Conscience, and deep
convictions about sin, setting them on work sometimes, and I do suspect any
preparatory work of the Law I ever had, to be but such as they have.

Answ. It will be heard to give sure essential differences between the
preparatory work in those in whom afterward Christ is formed, and those legal
stirrings which are sometimes in Reprobates: If there were not some gracious
result of these convictions, and wakenings of conscience in the Lords people,
and other marks, (of which we shall speak afterward) it were hard to adventure
upon any difference that is clear in these legal stirrings. Yet, for answer to
the Objection, I shall offer some things, which rarely will be found in the
stirring of reprobates, and which are ordinarily found in that Law-work which
has a gracious issue. 1. The convictions of hypocrites and reprobates, are
usually confined to some few very gross transgressions. Saul grants no more but
the persecuting of David, 1 Samuel 26. 21. Judas grants only the betraying of
innocent blood, Mat. 27. 4. But usually these convictions by which the Lord
prepares his own way in the soul, although they may begin at one or more gross
particular transgressions; yet they rest not there, but the man is led on to
see many breaches of the Law, and innumerable evils compassing him, as David
speaks in the sight of his sin. Psalm. 40. 12. and withal, that universal
conviction (if I may call it so) is not general, as usually we hear senseless
men saying, that in all things they sin: But it is particular and
condescending, as Paul afterward spoke of himself, he not only is the chief of
sinners, but particularly, he was a blasphemer, a persecuter, 1 Timothy 1. 13. 2.
The convictions which Hypocrites have, do seldom reach their Corruption, and
that body of death which breeds an averseness from what is good, and strongly
inclines to what is evil. Ordinarily where we find Hypocrites speaking of
themselves in Scripture, they speak loftily, and with some self conceit, both
as to their freedom from corruption, Joh. 9. 34. The Pharisees say to the poor
man, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and do thou teach us? (as if they
themselves were not as corrupt by nature as he) They speak of great sins as
Hazael did, 2 Kings 8. 13. Am I a Dog that I should do this great thing? And
also in their undertakings of duty, as that man spoke, Mat. 8. 19. I will
follow thee whithersoever thou go. See how the people do speak, Jer. 42. 2.
to 7. They undertake to do all that God will command them, so that they still
go about in any case to establish their own righteousness, not submitting unto
the righteousness of God. But I may say, that convictions and exercise about
corruption, and that body of death, inclining to evil, and disenabling for
good, is not the leas^ part of the work, where the Lord is preparing his own
way. They use to judge themselves very wretched, because of a body of sin, and
are at their wits end how to be delivered, as Paul speaks when he is under
the exercise of it afterward, Romans 7. 19. 3. It will ordinarily be found, that
the convictions which are in hypocrites, either are not so serious, as that
some other business will not put^ them out of head before any satisfaction be
gotten, as in Cain, who went and built a City, and we hear no more o^ his
Convictions, Genesis 4. Felix went away until a more convenient time, and we hear
no more of his trembling, Act^ 24. 25. Or, if that work become very serious,
then i^ runs to the other extremity and despair of relief, leaving no room
for any escape. So we find Judas very serious in his Convictions, yet he grew
desperate, and hanged himself, Mat. 27. 4, 5. But where the Lord prepares his
own way, the work is both so serious, as the person cannot be put off it,
(until he find some satisfaction) and yet under that very seriousness he lies
open for relief: both which are clear in the Gaolers words, What shall I do to
be saved? Acts 16. 30. This serious enquiry after Relief, is a very observable
thing in the preparatory work which leads on to Christ; yet we desire none to
lay too much weight on these things, since God has allowed clearer differences
between the precious and the vile.

Object. I still fear, I have not had so through a sight of my sin and misery,
as the Lord gives to many whom he effectually calls, especially to great
Transgressors, such as I am.

Answ. It is true* the Lord discovers to some, great sight of their sin and
misery, and they are thereby put under great legal terrors. But as all are not
brought in by that sensible preparatory Law-work, (as we showed before) So even
those who are dealt with after that way, are very differently and variously
exercised in regard of degrees of terror, and of continuance of that work: The
Jailer has a violent work of very short continuance; Paul has a work
continuing three days: Some persons are in bondage through fear of death all
their days, Heb. 2. so that we must not limit the Lord to one way of working
here. The main thing we are to look unto in these legal wakenings and
convictions of sin and misery, is, If the Lord reach these ends in us, for
which usually these stirrings and convictions are sent into the soul; and if
these ends be reached, it is well, we are not to vex our selves about any
preparatory work further. Now, these ends which God drives ordinarily with
sinners, by these legal terrors and wakenings of conscience, are four.

First, The Lord discovers sights of men's sin and misery to them, to chase them
out of themselves, and to put them out of conceit of their own righteousness.
Men naturally have great thoughts of themselves, and do incline much to the
covenant of works. The Lord therefore does discover to them so much of their
sin and corruption, even in their best things, that they are made to loath
themselves, and to despair of relief in themselves, and so they are forced to
flee out of themselves, and from the Covenant of works, to seek refuge
elsewhere, Heb, 6. 18. They become dead to themselves and the Law, as to the
point of justification, Romans 7. 4. Then have they no more considence in the
flesh, Phil. 3, 3. This is supposed in the offers of Christ, coming to seek and
save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. and to be Physician to those who are
sick, Mat. 9. 12.

The second great end, is, to commend Christ Jesus to men's hearts above all
things, that so they might fall in love with him, and betake themselves to that
treasure and jewel which only enricheth, Mat. 12. 44. and by so doing may serve
the Lords design in the contrivement of the Gospel, which was the manifestation
of his frec grace through Christ Jesus, in the salvation of men. The sight of a
man's own misery and damnable estate by nature, is a ready way to make him prize
Christ highly, who alone can set such a wretch at liberty. Yea, it not only
leads a man to an high esteem of Christ, but also of all things that relate
to that way of Salvation, as Grace, New Covenant, Faith, etc. and makes him
carefully to gather and treasure up his Michtams or golden Scriptures for the
confirmation of his interest in these things.

The third great end, is, To deter and scar people from sin, and to make them
fall out with it, and consent to put their neck under all his yoke. God
kindles some sparkles of Hell in men's bosoms by the discovery of their sin, as
a ready mean to make them henceforth stand in awe, knowing how bitter a thing
it is to depart from the Lord, Jer. 2. 19. So we find rest offered to the
weary, upon condition they will take on Christ's yoke, Mat. 11. 29. And God
offers to own men as their God and Father, upon condition they will allow no
peaceable abode to Belial, 2. Cor. 6. 14, 17. 18.

The fourth great end, is, to work up men to a patient and thankful submission
to all the Masters pleasure. This is a singular piece of work, Ezekiel. 16. 63.
Then shall thou not open thy mouth any more, The sight of a man's own vileness
and deservings, makes him silent, and to lay his hand on his mouth, whatsoever
God does unto him, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. Ezra 9. 13. God has punished us less than o^r iniquities.
Micah. 7, 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned.
The man cares not what God does to him, or how he deal with him, if he save
him from the deserved wrath to come. Also, any mercy is a large mercy to him
who has seen such a sight of himself, Genesis 32. 10. he is less than the least
of mercies, any crumb falling from his Masters Table is welcome, Mat. 15. 27.
he thinks it rich mercy that he is not consumed, Lam. 3. 22. This is the thing
that marvelously makes his poor afflicted people so silent under, and
satisfied with their lot; Nay, they think he deserves Hell, who opens his
mouth at any thing God does to him, since he has pardoned his transgressions.
So then, for satisfying the Objection, I say, if the Lord has driven thee out
of thy self, and commended Christ to thy heart above all things, and made thee
resolve on his strength to wage War with every known transgression and thou
art, in some measure, as a weaned Child, acquiescing in what he does unto thee,
desiring to lay thy hand on thy mouth thankfully; Then thy convictions of sin
and misery, and whatsoever thou do, plead as a preparatory work, is
sufficient, and thou art to debate no more about it; only be advised to study
new discoveries of the sense of thy lost condition every day, because of thy
old and new sins, and also to see fresh help in Christ, who is a Priest for
ever to make intercession and to have the work of sanctification and patience
with thankfulness renewed and quickened often: for somewhat of that work, which
abaseth thee, exalts Christ, and conformeth to his will, must conveigh thee
throughout all thy lifetime in this World.

We come now to speak of some more clear and sure marks, by which men may take
up their gracious state and interest in Christ.

The first thing whereby men know it, is, their closing with Christ in the
Gospel, wherein he is held forth. This is believing, or Faith, which is the
condition of the Covenant. Romans 4. 16. It is faith, etc. Act 16 31. Believe --
and thou shall be Saved. Now, although^ in propriety of speech, it is hard to
prove an interest (...) faith, it being our very interest in him; yet the heart
closing with Christ Jesus, is so discernable in it self, that it may well be
placed amongst the marks, of a gracious state: And if a man can make out this,
that he believes on, and in Christ Jesus, he thereby does prove a very true
interest in him. Many are prejudiced at this as a mark, upon one of these three
grounds ordinarily. (1.) Some conceive faith to be a difficult mysterious
thing, hardly attainable. To these I say, do not mistake; Faith is not so
difficult as many do apprehend it to be. I grant true faith in the meanest
degree is the gift of God, and above the power of flesh and blood: for God must
draw men to Christ, Phil. 1. 29. Joh. 6. 44. Yet, it were a reflection upon
Christ, and all he has done, to say it were a matter of insuperable
difficulty, as is clear, Romans 10. 6, -- 11. it were according to that
Scripture, as much upon the matter, as to say, Christ came not from Heaven, is
not risen from the dead, or ascended victorious to Heaven. I say, he has made
the way to Heaven most easy; and faith, which is the condition required on our
part, more easy than men do imagine. For the better understanding of this,
consider, that justifying faith, is not to believe that I am elected, or, to
believe that God loves me, or that Christ died for me, or the like. These
things are indeed very difficult and almost impossible at the first hand to be
obtained by those who are serious, whilst natural Athiests, and deluded
Hypocrites find no difficulty in asserting all those things. I say, true
justifying faith is not any of the foresaid things: neither is it simply the
believing of any sentence that is written or that can be thought upon. I grant,
he that believes on Christ Jesus, believes what God has said about man's
sinful miserable condition by nature, and he believes that to be true, That
there is life in the Son, who was slain, and is risen again from the dead, etc.
But none of these, nor the believing of many such truths, do speak out
justifying faith, or that believing on the Son of God spoken of in Scripture;
for then it were simply an act of the understanding: But true justifying Faith,
which we now seek after, as a good mark of Interest in Christ, is chiefly and
principally an act or work of the heart and will, having presupposed sundry
things about truth in the understanding, with the heart it is believed unto
Salvation, Romans 10. 10. and although it seem (verse. 9 of that Chapter) that a
man is saved upon condition that he believe this truth, God raised Christ from
the dead; yet we must understand another thing there, and verse. 10. than the
believing the truth of that proposition: For, beside that all Devils have that
Faith whereby they believe that God raised Christ from the dead. So the
Scripture has clearly resolved justifying Faith into a receiving of Christ,
Joh. 1. 12. The receiving of Christ is there explained to be the believing on
his Name, it is still called a staying on the Lord, Isa. 26. 3. a trusting in
God, often mentioned in the Psalms, and the word is a leaning on him, it is a
believing on Christ, Joh 6. 29. and often so expressed in the New Testament. When
God makes men believe savingly, He is said to draw them unto Christ; and when
the Lord inviteth them to believe, he calls them to come to him, Joh. 6. 37,
44. The ^ingdom of Heaven is like a man ^^nding a Jewel, wherewith he falls
in love, Mat. 13. 14, to 46. Now I say, this action of the heart on Christ
Jesus, is not so difficult a thing as is conceived: Shall that be judged a
mysterious difficult thing, which does consist much in desire? If man have but
an appetite, ^ey have it; for, they are blessed that hunger after
righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. If you will, you are welcome, Rev. 22. 17. It is a
matter of such intricacy, and insuperable difficulty, greedily to look to that
exalted Savior, Isa. 45. 22. and to receive a thing that is offered, held
forth, and declared to be mine, if I will but accept and take i^; and in a
manner open my mouth and give way to it? Such a thing is faith, Psalm 81 10. if
not less. Oh if I could persuade people what is justifying Faith, which
impropriateth Christ to me! We often fright people from their just rest and
quiet, by making them apprehend faith to be some deep mysterious thing, and by
moving unnecessary doubts about it, whereby it is needlessly darkened. (2.) Some
make no use of this mark, as judging it a high presumptuous crime to pretend to
so excellent a thing as is the very condition of the New Covenant. To those I
say, you need not startle so much as it, as if it were high pride to pretend to
it; for whatsoever true Faith be, men must resolve to have it, or nothing at
all; all other marks are in vain without it; a thousand things besides will not
do the business: Unless a man believe, he abides in the state of Condemnation.
Joh. 3. 18, 36. (3.) Others do not meddle with this noble mark of faith,
because they judge it a work of greatest difficulty to find out Faith where it
is. To those I say, It is not so difficult to find it out since he that
believes, has the witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10. It is a thing which by
some serious search may be known, not only may we do much to find it out by the
preparatory work going before it in many, as the apprehending and believing of
a man's lost estate, and that he cannot do his own business, and that there is
satisfying fullness in Christ, very desirable, if he could overtake it. A
serious minding of this, with a heart laid open for relief; as also by the
ordinary companions and concomitans of it, viz. the liking of Christ's Dominion,
his Kingh and prophetical Office, a desire to resign my self wholly up to him
to be at his disposing: As also by the native consequences of it, viz. the
managings of the World, the managings of my own conscience according to the
Word, a heart purifying work, a working love, etc. I say, not only may we know
faith by these things, but it is discernable by it self and of its own nature:
although I deny not but that there must be some help of Gods Spirit, by which
we know what is freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12, As also that God
has allowed many evidences and marks, as precious helps, whereby men may clear
up faith more fully to themselves, 1 John 5. 13. Yet I still say, that faith,
or believing which is some acting of the heart upon Christ in the Gospel, and
the transacting with him there, is discernable of it self, and by it self, to a
judicious understanding person, with an ordinary influence of the spirit;
unless the Lord, for reasons known to himself, do overcloud a man's reflex
light, by which he should take up and perceive what is in him.

This justifying faith which we assert to be so discernable, is, in the Lords
deep wisdom and gracious condescendence, variously expressed in Scripture,
according to the different actings of it upon God, and outgoings after him, so
as every one, who has it, may find and take it up in his own mould. It
sometimes acted by a desire of union with him in Christ. This is that looking
to him, Isa. 45. 22. This seems to be a weak act of faith, and far below other
actings of it at other times perhaps in that same person. Men will look to what
they dare not approach (to their apprehension) which they dare not touch or
embrace. They may look to one, to whom they dare not speak. Yet God has made
the promise to faith in that acting, as the forecited Scripture does show, and
this he has done mercifully and wisely; for this is the only discernable way
of the acting of faith of some persons sometimes: such are the actings our
outgoings of faith expressed in Scripture by hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. and that expressed by w^lling, Rev. 22. 17. Again, this
faith goes out sometimes in the act of, recumbency, or leaning on the Lord,
the soul taking up Christ then as a resting stone; and God has so held him
out, although he be a stumbling stone to others, Romans 9. 33. This acting of it,
is hinted in the expressions of trusting and staying on God, so often mentioned
in Scripture; and precious promises are made to this acting of faith, Isa. 26.
34. God will keep them in prerfect peace whose minds are staid on him, because
such do trust in him. Trust in the Lord, for with him is everlasting strength,
So Psalm. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Zion which
abides for ever. I say the Lord has made promises to this way of Faiths
acting, as knowing it will go often out after him in this way with many
persons, and this way of its acting will be most discernable to them. It goes
out after God sometimes by an act of waiting, when the Soul has somewhat
depending before God, and has not got out his mind satisfyingly about that
thing; then Faith does wait, and so it has the Promise, Isa. 49. 23. Sometimes
it acts in a wilful way upon the Lord, when the Soul apprehends God
thrusting it away, and threatening its ruin; So Job 13. 15. Though he slay me,
yet I will trust in him. The faith of that poor woman, Mat. 15. 22, 28. so
highly commended by Christ, did go out in this way of wilful acting over the
difficulties; and the Lord speaks much good of it, and to it, because some
will be put to it, to exercise faith that way sometimes, and so they have that
for their encouragement. It were tedious to instance all the several ways of
the acting of faith upon, and its exercise about, and outgoing after Christ. I
may say, according to the various conditions and pressures of the soul of man,
the Lord has variously held out himself and his fullness in Christ under diverse
notions, as might most fitly meet the distress or condition of man; and
accordinly, Faith, which God has appointed to traffic and travel between
Christ and Man, as the instrument of conveyance of his fullness unto man, and of
maintaining union and communion with him, acts variously and differently upon
God in Christ; for, Faith is the very shaping out of a man's heart, according to
Gods contrivement of Salvation by Christ Jesus, in whom it pleased the Father
that fullness should dwell; So that let Christ turn what way he will, Faith
turns and points that way. Now, he turns all ways, in which he can be
useful to poor man, and therefore faith acts accordingly on him, for drawing
out of that fullness, according to a man's case and condition. As for example,
The soul is naked, destitute of a covering to keep it from the storms of Gods
wrath; Christ is fine raiment, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Then accordingly Faiths work
here is to put on the Lord Jesus, Gal. 3. 27. The Soul is hungry and thirsty
after somewhat that may everlastingly satisfy: Christ Jesus is Milk, Wine,
Water, Bread of Life, and the true Manna, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Joh. 6. 4, 51. He is
the feast of Fat things, and of Wine refined, Isa. 25. 6. Then the work and
exercise of faith, is, to go buy, eat and drink abundantly, Isa. 55. 1. Joh. 6.
53. 57. The soul is pursued for guilt more or less, and is not Law-biding;
Christ Jesus is the City of refuge, and the High Priest there, during whose
lifetime (that is for ever) the poor man who wins this, is safe. Then the work
and exercise of faith is to flee thither for refuge, to lay hold on the hope
set before us, Heb. 6. 1. In a word, whatsoever way he may benefit poor man, so
he speaks of himself; and as he holds out himself in the Scripture, so
faith does point toward him. If he be a Bridegroom, faith will go out in a
marriage relation; If he be a Father, Faith pleads the man to be a child; If he
be a shepherd, faith pleads the man may be one of his sheep; if he be a Lord,
faith calls him so, which none can do but by the Spirit of Jesus; If he be dead
and risen again for our Justification, faith believes God has raised him on
that account. Romans 10. 9. wheresoever he be, there would faith be; and
whatsoever he is, faith would be somewhat proportionally. For, by faith the
heart is shapen out in breadth and length for him: yea, when the fame and
report of him goes abroad in his truth, although faith see not much, yet it
believes on his Name, upon the very fame he has sent abroad of himself, Joh.
1. 12.

But here for avoiding of mistakes, consider, 1. That although justifying Faith
acts so variously; yet every Believer, who has a good title to Christ Jesus,
has not all these various actings and exercises of Faith; for his condition
craveth them not: and also the Master is pleased not to lead out the faith of
some persons at some times in some of these ways (for reasons known to himself)
even when their necessity (to their apprehension) calls for such acting of
faith. Surely every one dare not say, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in
him. Many would not have gone up with that woman I spoke of, Mat. 15. but would
have been discouraged and quit the pursuit. It is on this account that Christ
does highly commend the faith of some, beyond the faith of others, Mat. 8. 10.
and 15. 28. Many good people are much disquieted about their faith, because it
goes not out in all those ways we find recorded in Scripture; But there is
hardly and man will be found, whose faith has acted all these ways. 2. Many of
these actings of faith are much intended and remitted. They are sometimes
strong and vigorous, and discernable; and sometimes they fail, and misbelief
does prevail, so as it were an uncertain thing to judge of a man's estate by
these. We find the Saints very different from themselves in regard of the
actings of faith sometimes, as we showed before. 3. Each one of these actings
of faith, speaks good to the person in whom it is, and has promises annexed
unto it, as we have said. Yet 4. Although these Actings of faith have promises
annexed unto them, they are not, for that, the condition of the New Conenant;
for then every one behoved to have each one of them, which is not true, as we
have said before. A promise is made to him who overcomes, but perseverance is
not the condition of the New Covenant, but does suppose it. There are promises
made to the exercises of all Graces in Scripture; but only faith is the
condition of the Covenant. I say then these promises are made to these actings
of Faith, not as such, but as they do suppose Justifying faith, which is the
condition of the Covenant: All these are actings of faith, but not as it is
justifying. Therefore 5. There is somewhat common to all gracious persons,
which may be supposed by all the foresaid actings of faith, wherein the nature
and essence of justifying faith stands; and this is the hearts satisfaction
about Gods contrivance of Salvation by Christ; when man pleads Gods invention
of satisfaction to justice through Jesus Christ, in whom all fullness does dwell
now by the Fathers pleasure; when the soul and heart of man acquiesceth in
that, then it believes unto Salvation. As at first, the Lord made man suitable
to the Covenant of Works, by creating him perfect, and so putting him in a
capacity to perform his Will in that Covenant: So under the New Covenant, when
God gives the new heart to man, he sets the Idea and stamp of all his device
in the New Covenant upon the man, so as there is a consonancy to Gods will
there: Thus he bears the image of the second (...), Christ Jesus, on him.
This is a great part of the new heart, and is most opposed to works; since now
the man absolutely falls off from works, becoming (...) (as to the point of
justificatim) (...) a Romans 7. 4. Man perceiving, (...) way of satisfying Divine
(...) by the incarnation of (...) sure a way, that he absolute (...) I said
before, and closes with this contrivement^; and this is believing or faith,
very opposite to works, and all resting thereupon: this cannot fail to be in
all gracious persons, in whom many of the actions of faith are not to be found.
This does clearly suppose known distress in a man, without all relief in
himself; this supposes known fullness in Christ as the alone sufficient relief,
this imports a sort of impropriation: for the heart pleasing that contrivement,
it so far swayeth toward it. This is a thing clearly supposed in all the
actings of faith, spoken of before. He that greedily hungereth, has this; and
he that leans has this, and he that puts on Christ has this, etc. This
is to esteem Christ the wisdom and power of God to Salvation. So is he said to
be all that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 24. They esteem that contrivance wise and sure,
beseeming God, and that is to believe. On this account Christ, who is the
rejected stone to many, is precious to them who believe; a fit stone to
recover, fortify, and beautify the tottering building, and fabric of l^st man.
1 Pet. 1. The Kingdom of God is like a man finding a treasure, for which with
joy he sells all, Mat. 13. 44. These words hold out the very way of
believing, viz. Salvation is discovered in the Gospel to be by Christ; the
heart vallueth that invention as satisfying. This is to believe on the Son of
God lifted up, which is compared to the looking up to the brazen Serpent, John
3. 14. It was man's approbation of that device, which made it effectual for his
healing. So is it here, He that believes, sets to his seal that God is
true. True! wherein? In that record he has born, That God has provided life
for men; and placed it all in Christ, 1. Joh. 5. 10. 11. He that believes not,
makes God a liar. Where? In his saying that Christ is a safe and sure way to
Heaven. This is well pleased with and acquiescing in that devise, and it is
consonant to all, I know, spoken of Justifying Faith in Scripture. This is in
the believing on Christ and on his Name, the receiving of him, and resting on
him for Salvation in our Catechism. The believing that Jesus is the Christ,
that is, the Anointed one whom the father has sealed, and set apart and
qualified for the work of reconciling man unto God; and he that believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1. Joh. 5. 1. This is to believe with the
heart that God has raised Christ from the dead. The man believes Christ died,
and is raised on the account of satisfaction for man's transgression: Devils may
believe that. Nay, but the man I speak of, believes it with his heart, (which
no natural man does, until a new heart be given unto him) that is, he
cordially pleads, is satisfied with, and acquiesceth in this noble invention.
And thus faith lays out it self now and then in its actings, outgoings, and
excrcise. according to all the Covenant relations, under which Christ is held
forth in the Scripture.

Now; I say, This faith is discernable, not only in these actings many times; a
man may know if his heart does hunger after Christ and flee for refuge to him,
when pursued, and if he does commit himself unto God, etc. but also in its very
nature, as it is justifying, it is discernable, and may be known. A man may
clearly know, if from known dis^^ess in himself upon the report and fame of
Christ's fullness, his heart is well pleased with Gods contrivement in the new
Covenant, if it goes out after Christ in that invention, and pleads him a
Lord of the life of men, terminating and resting there, and no where else,
acquiescing in that contrivement with desire and complacency. This is a
discernable thing. Therefore I beseech men impartially to examine themselves;
and if they find that their heart has closed so with that invention of
salvation, and is gone out after him as precious, that thereupon they would
conclude a sure and true interest in Christ Jesus, and a good claim and title
to the crown, since he that helieveth shall never perish, but have everlasting
life. John 3. 16. 36.

Object. Hypocrites and Reprobates have a sort of faith, and are said to
believe, Joh. 2. 23. Acts 3. 13. and cannot choose but go out after Christ, and
that invention of Salvation, when they hear of it; and they profess they do so,
yet are deluded, and so may I be.

Answ. To say nothing of that thought of your heart, [whereby you wonder that
any man should not please the contrivement of salvation by Christ, and lead out
toward him] as a very promising thing, and speaking out justifying faith to be
in your bosom; and to say nothing in contradiction to that which you think,
That a natural man whilst such, and before he get a new heart, can please that
contrivement, and believe with his heart and affectionately, that which
perfectly overthrows the Covenant of works, and abaseth man in the point of
self-righteousness already attained, or that can be won at by him, which is
inconsistent with many Scriptural truths; I offer these differences between the
faith of all Hypocrites or reprobates, and that true saving justifying faith
whereof we have spoken. 1. They never close with Jesus Christ (in that
contrivement) and him alone as a sufficient covering of the eyes, as is said of
Abraham to Sarah, Genesis 20. 16. They still hold fast somewhat of their own, at
least to help to procure Gods favor and salvation: Their heart does still
speak, as that young man's speech, Luke. 18 18, 21. does insinuate, What want I
that I may inherit life? Beside that, they do still retain their former lovers,
and will not break their Covenants with Hell and Death, imagining they may have
Christ with these things equally sharing in their heart, contrary to that, A
man cannot serve two Masters, Mat. 6. 24. Either Christ must be judged absolute
Lord, and worthy to be so, or nothing at all. And so it is clear, their heart
is not shapen out for that way of salvation by Christ, whom God has alone made
Lord here, in whom all fullness shall dwell. But where justifying faith is, the
soul of a man and his heart does close with Christ, and him alone, having no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3. Psalm. 62. 5. he trusts only in God. As
also the man here gives up with other lovers, as they stand in competition
with Christ; they resolve not to be for another, Hos, 3. 3. They call him Lord,
which a man can only do by the Spirit of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 3. 2. As
Hypocrites and Reprobates do never close with Christ alone; so they do never
close with full Christ as he is anointed to be a King to rule over a man in
all things; a Priest, to procure pardon, and to make peace for man upon all
occasions; a Prophet, to be wisdom, and a Teacher and Counselor in all cases
to man. So they do not receive Christ, especially in the first and third
offices. But where true justifying faith is, a man closes with whole Christ in
all his offices, judging all his will good, holy, just and spiritual, Romans 7.
12. and right concerning all things, Psalm 119. 128. making mention of his
righteousness only, Psalm. 71, 16. The man also gives up himself to be taught
of him, Mat. 11. 29. So that Christ is made to the true believer with his own
consent, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and complete redemption, 1.
Cor. 1. 30. And although he has not all these things formally in exercise when
his heart goes out after Christ; yet, upon search and trial, it will be found
with him as I have said. 3. Hypocrites and Reprobates do never close with
Christ, and all the inconveniences may follow him; they stick at that, with
that man Mat. 8. 19. 20. But where true justifying says is, a man does close
with him on all hazards; he resolves to forego all, rather than to forego
Christ, Mar. 10. 28. he reckons all to be loss and dung for the excellency of
Christ Jesus, as his Lord, and to be found in him, Phil. 3. 8. We might give
other differences also, as that true faith is operative, purifying the heart,
Acts 15. 9. working by love, Gal. 5. 44. Whilst Hypocrites do only cleanse the
outside of the platter, Mat. 23. 25. and do all to be seen of men, Mat 6. 5.
not seeking the honor that is of God only, and so cannot believe, John. 5. 6.
We might also show that true faith is never alone in a man, but attended with
other saving graces: But because these things will co-incide with what
follows, and here we are showing that a man may take up his gracious state by
his faith, and the actings thereof on Christ, we pass these things.

The second great mark of a gracious state and true saving interest in Jesus
Christ, is, the new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature. That new creation or renovation of that man, is a very sensible
change, although not in those who are effectually called from the womb, or in
their younger years; because those have had this new creature from that time in
them, so as this charge in after period of time, is not discernable: yet in
those who have been regenerated and brought unto Christ, after they were come
to greater age, and so have been more palpably unde the power of darkness,
before they were translated into the Kingdom of Christ, Col. 1. 13. But in all
who do warrantably pretend to Christ, this new creature must be, although some
do not know experimentally the contraries of every part of it, so as others do,
because they have not been equally, in regard of practice, under the power of
darkness. This new creature is called the new man, Gal. 3. 10. which does hold
out the extent of it. It is not simply a new tongue, or a new hand, but a new
man. There is a principle of new life and motion put in the man, which is, the
new heart: which new principle of life sends forth acts of life, or of
conformity to the image of him who created it, Col. 3. 10. So as the party is
renewed in some measure every way. This renovation of the man who is in Christ,
may be reduced to these two great heads.

First, There is a renovation, of the man's person, soul and body, in some
measure. 1. His understanding is renewed, so as he judges Christ Preached in
the Gospel, to be the wisdom and power of God, a wise, strong contrivement
beseeming God, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. He knows the things of God really and
solidly, not to be yea and nay, and uncertain fancies, but all to be yea and
amen, solid, certain, substantial things, having a desirable accomplishment in
Christ, and resolving much in him, 1 Cor. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 18. Natural men,
educated under Gospel ordinances, although they have some notional knowledge of
God, Christ, Promises, the motions of the holy Spirit, etc. so as they may
Confer, Preach, and dispute of these things; yet they look on them as common
received Maxims of Christianity, from which to recede were a singularity and
disgrace; but not as real, solid, substantial truths, so as to adventure their
Souls and Everlasting being on them. The understanding is renewed also to take
up somewhat of God in the creatures, as bearing sparks of his glorious
attribute^ Psalm. 10. 1. They see the Heavens declaring his Glory and Power, and
somewhat of God in providence an^ dispensations that fall out: His wondrous
works declaring that his Name is near, Psalm. 75. 1. The understanding also
takes up the conditions and cases of the soul otherwise than it was wont to
do; As we find the Saint^ usually speaking in Scripture, O my Soul thou have
sai^ unto the Lord, etc. Psalm 16. 2. My Soul said thy fac^ will I seek, Pral.
26. 8. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Psalm. 42. 5. Psalm. 43. 5. Return unto
thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116. 7. 2. The heart and affections are renewed. The
heart is made a new heart, a hear^ of flesh, capable of impressions, having a
copy of his law stamped on it, and fear of God put into it, whereby the man's
duty becomes in a manner native and kindly to the man, Jer. 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel.
36. 26. It was before a heart of stone, void of the fear of God, The affections
are renewed now. The love is renewed in some good measure: it goes out after
God; I will love the Lord, Psalm. 18. 1. after his Law, O how I love thy Law
Psalm. 119. 97. after those who have Gods Image in them, John 13. 35. 1 John 3.
14. This love to Gods people is upon a pure account, as they are the children
of God, and do keep his Statutes, 1 Pet. 1. 22. It is with a pure heart, Psalm.
119. 63. and therefore it goes toward all such whom the man knows or
apprehends to be such, Psalm. 119. 63. I am a Companion to al^ them, etc. In
all cases and conditions, even where there is nothing to beautify or commend
but the Image of God And this love is so fervent many times, 1 Pet. 1. 22. tha^
it puts it self out in all relations, so as a man seeks a Godly Wife, a
Godly Master, a Godly Servant, a Godly Counselor, if he have to choose upon,
Psalm. 101. 6. and it is not quenched by many waters, Cant. 8. 7. many
imperfections and infirmities, difference in opinion, wrong received will not
altogether quench love. Also it is communicative of good according to its
measure, and as the case of the poor godly requires, Psalm. 16. 2. 1 John 3.
17, 18. 19. The man's hatred is also renewed, and is now bent against sin, Psalm.
119. 113. I hate vain thoughts: against Gods enemies, as such, Psalm. 139. 21,
22. Do not I hate them that hate thee? etc. The joy or delight is renewed, for
it runs toward God, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven? etc. toward his
Law and Will, Psalm. 1. 2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord. And toward
the Godly and their followship, Psalm. 16. 3. -- In whom is all my delight. The
sorrow is turned against sin which has wronged Christ, Zech. 12. 10. Looking
on him whom they have pierced, they mourn, 2 Cor. 7. 11. The sorrow is godly
there, and against what incroacheth upon Gods honor; they are sorrowful for
the -- assemblies, and the reproach of that is their burden, Zeph. 3. 18. There
is some renovation in all the affections, as in every other part of the soul
pointing now toward God. 3. The very outward members of the man are renewed,
as the Scriptures speak, the tongue, the eye, the ear, the hand, the foot, etc.
so that those members. which once were improved as weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin, are now improved as weapons of righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.
19.

Secondly, A man who is in Christ, is renewed in some measure in all his ways.
Behold all things are new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. The man becomes new, 1. In the way of
his interest. He was upon any good before, though but apparent, and at best but
external, Psalm. 4. 6. But now his interest and business is, how to be found in
Christ, in that day, Phil. 3. 9. or, how to be forthcoming to him, and walk
before him in the land of the living, Psalm. 56. 13. which he would choose among
all the mercies that ^ill this earth, Psalm. 119. 64. The interest of Christ
also becom^ eth the man's interest, as appears in the song of Hannah, 1 Samuel
2. And in the song of Mary, Luke 1. ^ is strange to see people newly converted,
and having reached unto the beginnings of knowledge, concern an^ interest
themselves in the public matters of Christ^ Kingdom, so desirous to have him
riding prosperously^ and subduing the people under him. 2. The man that i^ in
Christ, is renewed in the way of his worship. He wa^ wont to serve God in the
oldness of the letter, for the fashion, answering the letter of the command in
the outside of duty, which one in whom the Old man has absolute dominion can
do? But now he worshippeth God in th^^ newness of the Spirit Romans 7. 6. In a
new way, wherein he is helped by the Spirit of God, Rom, 8. 26. beyond the
reach of flesh and blood. He serves now the true and living God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
9. in Spirit and in truth. John 4. 24. having spiritual apprehensions of God,
and engaged in his very soul in that work, doing and saying truly, and not
feignedly, when he worshippeth, still desiring to approach unto him as a living
God, who hears and sees him, and can accept his service. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. I
grant he fails of this many times; yet I may say, such worship he intends,
and sometimes overtaketh, and does not much reckon worship, which is not so
performed unto God; and the iniquity of his holy things, is not the least part
of his burden and exercise: Such a worship, natural men are strargers unto,
whilst they babble out of their vainglorious boastings, Luke 18. 11, 12. to an
unknown God. Acts 17. 23. 3. The man that is in Christ, is renewed in the way
of hit outward calling and employment in the world; he now resolves to be
about it, because God has commanded so, Romans 12. 11. and to eye God in it as
his last end, doing it to his glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and studieth to keep some
intercourse with God, in the exercise of his outward employments, as Jacob does
in his latter Will, Genesis 49. 18. and Nehemiah did, Nehem. 2. 4. So as the man
resolves to walk with God, and set him always before him, Psalm. 16. 8.
wherein I deny not he fails often. 4. He becomes new in the way of his
relations; he becomes a more dutiful Husband. Father, Brother, Master,
Servant, Neighbor, etc. Herein does he exercise himself to keep a conscience
void of offense toward men, as well as toward God, Acts 24. 16. 1 Cor. 22.
Becoming all things to all men. 5. He becomes now in the way of his lawful
liberties, he studieth to make use of meat, drink, sleep, recreation, apparel,
with an eye to God, laboring not to come under the power of any lawful thing,
1 Cor. 6. 12, 13. Nor to give offense to others in the use of these things,
Romans 14. 20, 21. and 15. 2. nor using liberty as an occasion to the flesh, Gal.
5. 13. Yea, he labors to use all these things is a stranger on earth, so as
his moderations may appear, Phil. 4. 5. And some way he does eye God, as the
last end in these things, 1 Cor. 10 31. doing all to the glory of God: So as we
may say of that man, old things are much past away, all things are in some
measure become ^ew, 2 Cor. 5. 15. He that is so new a creature, is ^ndoubtedly
in Christ.

This renovation of a man in all manner of conversa^ion, and this being under
law to God in all things, is ^^at holiness without which none shall see God.
Heb. 12. ^^. Men may fancy things to themselves, but unless they ^^^dy to
approve themselves, unto God in all well-plea^^ngs, and reach some inward
testimony of sincerity that ^ay, they shall not assure their hearts before him.
The ^^stimony of men's conscience is their rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 2. By this we
know that we know him, if we keep (...) Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. 1 John 3.
20, 21. No confidence if the heart condemn. This is the New Creature, having a
principle of new spiritual life infused by God into the heart* whereby it
becomes new, and puteth forth acts of new life throughout the whole man, as we
have said, so as he points toward the whole Law, both the commands which
forbid sin; so he resolves to set against secret sins, not to lay a stumbling
block before the blind, Lev. 19. 14. little sins, which are judged so by many,
the least things of the Law, Matthew. 5. 19. spiritual sins, filthiness of the
spirit, ^ Cor. 7. 1. sins of omission, as well as commission, since men are to
be judged by these, Mat. 25. 42, 43, 44 yea, sins that are winded into his
natural humor and constitution, and so are as a right eye or hand to him,
Matthew, 5. 29. This new principle of life, by the good hand of God, makes the
man set against every known sin, so far as not to allow peaceable abode (...)
any known darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14. As also he poin^eth toward those commands
which relate to duty, an^ the quickening of grace in man. It makes a man
respec^ all known commands, Psalm. 110. 6. to live godly, righteously, and
soberly. T^t. 2. 12. yea, and to study a righ^ and sincere way and manner of
doing things, resolving not to give over the study of conformity to Gods Will
whilst he lives on earth, but still to bend forwardtoward the price of the high
calling of God, Phil. 3. 13, 14. The is true holiness, very becoming all those
who pretend ^ be heirs of that holy habitation in the immediate company and
fellowship of a holy God, 1 John 3. 3.

Some may think these things high seize, a^ very hard to be attained to.
I grant it is true. But fir^^ Remember, that there is a very large allowance in
the Covenant promised to his people, which makes thing more easy. The Lord
has engaged to take away (...) stong heart, to give a heart of flesh, a new
heart, a hea^ to fear him for ever; he has engaged to put his law in men's
heart, to put his fear in their heart, to make them keep that Law; to put his
Spirit within them to cause them to keep it: He has promised to satisfy the
Priests with fatness, that the souls of the people may be satiated with
goodness, and to keep, and water them continually every moment, Ezekiel 26. 29.
Jer. 32. 39, 49. and 31. 33. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Jer. 31. 14. and 31. 12. Isa. 27. 3.
and if he must be enquired to do all these things unto men, he engages to pour
out the Spirit of grace and supplication on them, and so to learn them how to
seek these things, and how to put him to it, to do all for them, Zech. 12. 10.
Secondly, for the satisfaction of the weaker, I grant this new creature, as we
have circumscribed and enlarged it, will not be found, in all the degrees of
it, in every gracious person. But it is well, if 1. There be a new man, we
cannot grant less; If any man be in Christ, there must be a new creature; and
that is the new man, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. which all must put on who are
savingly taught of Christ, There must be some renewing after the image of God
in a man's soul and body; There must be somewhat of every part of the man
pointing toward God: although I grant every one cannot prove this to others,
neither discern it in himself, because many know not the distinct parts of the
soul, nor pieces of reformation competent to every part of soul and body. Yet
it will be found there is some such thing in them, yea, they have a witness of
it within them, if you make the thing plain and clear to them what it is. 2.
There must be such a respect unto Gods known Commands, that a man does not
allow peaceably any known iniquity to dwell in him, for what concord is between
light and darkness? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 119. and 66. 18. he must not
regard iniquity. I grant men may be ignorant of many commands, and many sins,
and may imagine in some cases, that some sins are not hateful unto God. But
supposing that they are instructed in these things, there can be no agreement
between righteousness and unrighteousness. 3. Men must point toward all the
Law of God, in their honest resolutions; for this is nothing else, than to give
up the heart unto God, to put his Law in it without exception, which is a part
of the Covenant we are to make with God, Heb. 8. 10. I grant many know not how
to point toward Gods Law in all their ways; but if it be made manifest unto
them, how that should be done, they will point at it. And it is true, they will
many times fail of their resolutions in their practice; yet when they have
failed, they can say, They did resolve other-wayes, and will yet honestly, and
without guile resolve to do other ways, and it will prove their affliction to
have failed of their resolution, when the Lord discovers it to them, which he
will in due time. 4. When we are to judge of our state by the new creature, we
must do it at a convenient time, when we are in good case, at least, not when
we are in worst case; for the flesh and spirit do Lust and Fight against other,
Gal. 5. 17. and sometimes the one, and sometimes the other does prevail. Now I
say, we must choose a convenient time, when the spiritual part is not by some
tentation worsted and over-powred by the flesh; for in that case the new
creature is recoyled back in its streams, and much returned to the fountain and
the habits, except in some small things not easily discernable, whereby it
makes opposition to the flesh, according to the foresaid Scripture: for, now
it is time of winter in the soul, and we may not expect fruit, yea, not leaves,
as in some other season; only here, lest profane Atheists should make advantage
of this, we will say, That the Spirit does often prevail over the flesh in a
godly man, and the scope, aim, tenor, and drift of his way is in the Law of
the Lord, that is his walk. Psalm. 119. 1. whereas the pathway, and ordinary
course of the wicked is sin, as is oftten hinted in the book of the Proverbs of
Solomon. And if it happen that a godly man be over-mastered by any
transgression, ordinarily it is his sad exercise; and we suppose he keeps it
still in dependency before God, to have it rectified, as David speaks, Psalm.
56. 13. Will thou not deliver my feet from falling?

Object. Athrists and Hypocrites may have great changes and renovation wrought
upon them, and in them, and I fear mine be such.

Answer. I grant that Atheists and hypocrites have many things in them which do
look like the new Creature.

First, In regard of the parts of the man. They may (1.) Come to much
knowledge, as Heb. 6. 4* They are enlightened. (2.) There may be a zeal amongst
their affections, as they receive the word with joy, Mat. 13. 20. (3.) They may
reach a great deal of outward reformation in the outward man, both about
freedom from sin, and engagement to positive duty, as that Pharisee did, Luke
18. 11, 12. Yea, (4.) In regard of their practical understanding, they may
judge some things of God to be excellent. The people said that never man spoke
as Christ, John 7. 46.

Secondly, Hypocrites, may have a great deal of profession (1) They may talk of
the Law and Gospel, and Covenant, as the wicked do, Psalm. 50. 16. (2.) They may
confess sin openly to their own shame, as King Saul did, 1 Samuel 26. 21. (3)
They may humble themselves in sackcloth with Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 27. (4.) They
may enquire busily after duty, and come cheerfully to receive it, Isa. 58. 2.
(5) They may join with Gods interest in a hard and difficult time, as Demas,
and other hypocrites in the book of the Acts of the Apostles* who afterward
fell off. (6.) They may give much of their goods to God and the Saints, as Acts
5. 1, 2. if not all their goods, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Yea, (7.) It is not impossible
for some such, being straightly engaged in their credit, to give their bodies to
be burnt, as in the forecited place.

Thirdly, Hypocrites may advance far in the common and ordinary steps of a
Christian work, such as the Elect have, when God leads them captive. As, (1)
They may be under great convictions of sin, as Judas was, Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5. So
was King Saul often. (2.) They may tremble at the word of God, and be under
much terror, as Felix was, Act. 24. 25. (3.) They may rejoice in receiving of
the Truth, as Mat. 13. 20. (4.) They may be in some peace and quiet in
expectation of salvation by Christ, as the foolish Virgins were, Mat. 25. 24.
(5.) All this may be backed and followed with some good measure of reformation.
The unclean spirit may go out of them, Mat. 22. 43. Luke 18. 11, 12. (6.) This
work may seem to be confirmed by some special experiences and tastings of the
good word of God, Heb. 6. 4.

Fourthly, Hypocrites may have some things very like the saving graces of the
Spirit: As, (1) They may have a sort of faith with Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13.
(2.) A sort of repentance, and walk mournfully, Mal. 3. 14. (3.) A great fear
of God, such as Balaam, who for a house full of gold would not go with the
messenger of Balak, without leave asked of God, and given, Number. 22. 18. (4.)
They have a sort of hope, Job 13. 13. (5.) They have some love: So had Herod to
John, Mar. 6. 26. I need not to insist, it is out of all question they have
counterfeits of all saving gr^ces.

Fifthly, They have somewhat like the special communications of God, and the
witnessing of his Spirit, as somewhat like the Powers of the World to come
powerfully on them, with some flashes of joy arising thence, as Heb. 6. 4, 5.
Notwithstanding all which they are but almost persuaded with Agrippa to be
Christians, Acts 26. 28.

It were tedious to speak particularly to each of these things, and to clear
up, that they are all but rotten ware: I shall condescend upon some few things,
wherein a truly renewed man, who is in Christ, does differ from hypocrites and
reprobates.

1. Whatsoever change be in Hypocrites yet their heart is not changed, and made
new. The new heart is only given to the Elect, when they are converted, and
brought under the bond of the Covenant, J^r. 32. 39 Ezekiel. 36. 26. Hypocrites
did never apprehend Christ as the only satisfying good in all the world, for
which with joy, they would quit all: for then the Kingdom of God were entered in
them, Mat. 13. 44. The truly renewed man dare and can upon good ground say, and
has a testimony of it from on high, that his heart has been changed in taking
up of Christ, and has been led out after him, as the only enriching Treasure,
in whom to be found, he accounts all things else loss and dung, Phil. 3. 8. 9.

2. Whatsoever reformation and profession Hypocrites do attain unto, as it
comes not from a new heart, and pure principle of zeal for God, so it is
always for some wicked and by-end, as to be seen of men. Mat. 6. 5. or to
evite and shun some outward strait, to be free of Gods wrath, and the trouble
of their own conscience, Isa. 59. 3. Mal. 3. 14. In testimony of this, they
never have respect to all known commands, else they should never be ashamed,
Ps. 119. 6. nor do they without approved guile in their own heart, resolve
against a very known iniquity; else they were freed of heart-condemnings, and
so might justly have confidence before God. 1 John 3. 20. If in never so mean a
case, they did from a principle of love unto, and of zeal for Christ, and for a
right end, confess and profess him, Christ were obliged by his own word to
confess them before his Father, Mat. 10. 30.

3. Whatsoever length Hypocrites advance in that work, by which the people are
led in unto Christ. yet they never seek, First, the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. 33. the one thing that is necessary, ( viz.)
Christ's friendship and fellowship, is never their one thing, and
heart-satisfying choice; else that better part would never be taken from them,
Luke 10. 42.

4. Whatsoever counterfeits of grace are in hypocrites, yet they are all bred
there, without any saving work of the Spirit of Christ, and it is enough to
exclude them from the benefit of this mark, that they are never denied to those
things, nor emptied of them, but still to rest on them as their Savior, so
that they submit not unto the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. and that is
enough to keep them at a distance from Christ, who will never clout that old
garment of hypocrites with his fine new Linen, nor put his new Wine in these
old bottels, Mat. 9^. 16, 17.

5. We may say, let Hypocrites, Reprobates, or Atheists have what they can,
they want the three great essentials of Religion and true Christianity. First,
They are not broken in themselves, and emptied even of their righteousness, the
length of self-loathing, yet lying open for relief. Such lost ones Christ came
to seek and save, Luke 19. 10. Secondly, They never took up Christ Jesus as the
only treasure and jewel that can only enrich, and should satisfy, and
therefore have never cordially agreed unto Gods contrivement in the Covenant,
and so are not worthy of him; neither has the Kingdom of God savingly entered
into their heart, Mat. 13. 44. Thirdly, They never in earnest do close with
Christ's whole yoke without exception, judging all his will just and good, holy
and spiritual, as Romans 7. 12. and therefore no rest allowed on them by Christ,
Mat. 11. 29. Therefore whosoever thou art who can lay clear and just claim to
these three foresaid things, thou art beyond the reach of all atheists,
hypocrites and reprobates in the world, as having answered the great ends and
intents of Law and Gospel.

Object. I am clear sometimes, I think to lay claim to that mark of the new
creature; yet at other times, sin does so prevail over me, that I am made to
question all the work within me.

Answ. It is much to be lamented, that people professing his Name, should be so
slighted and enslaved by trangression as many are. Yet in answer to the
objection, if it be seriously propounded, we say, the Saints are found in
Scripture justly laying claim unto God and his Covenant, when iniquity did
prevail over them, as we find, Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me, as
for our trangressions, thus wilt do them away, Romans 7. 25. Paul thanks God
through Christ, when a law in his members leads him captive unto sin: But for
the better understanding, and safe application of such truths, we must
difference betwixt gross outbreakings and ordinary infirmities, or sins that
come unawares upon a man, without forethought or any deliberation. As for the
former sort it is hard for a man, whilst he is under the power of them, to see
his gracious change, although it be in him, and very hard to draw any comfort
from it, until the man be in some measure recovered, and beginning seriously to
resent such sins, and to resolve against them. We find David calling himself
Gods servant, quickly after his numbering of Gods people, but he was then under
the serious resentment of sin, Sam. 24. 18. Jonah lays claim to God as his
Master under his rebellion, but he is then repenting it, and in a spirit of
revenge against himself for his sin, Jon 1. 9, 10, 12. Next, as for these sins
of infirmity, and daily incursion, and heart-ills, such as these whereof Paul
does complain (it is like) were. We shall draw out some things from that
seventh Chapter to the Romans, whereupon Paul maintains his interest in Christ;
and if you can apply them it is well. (1.) When Paul finds that he does much
fail, and cannot reach conformity to Gods Law, he does not blame the Law, as
being too ^rict, so as men cannot keep it, as Hypocrites use to speak, but he
does blame himself as being carnal; and he says of the Law, that it is Good
Holy and Spiritual, Rev. 7. 12, 14. (2.) He can say, he failed of a good which
he intended and did out-shoot himself, and he had often honestly resolved
against the evil which he fell into, Romans 7. 15, 18, 19. (3.) He says that the
prevailing of sin over him is his exercise, so as he judges himself wretched,
because of such a body of death, from which he longs to be delivered, Rom: 7.
24, (4.) He says, that whilst he is under the power and law of sin, There is
somewhat in the bottom of his heart opposing it, although over-mastered by it
which would be another way, and when that gets the upper hand, it is a delight
some thing, Romans 7. 22, 25. upon these things he thanks God in Christ, that
there is no condemnation, Romans 7. 25. Romans 8. 1. Now then look if ye can lay
claim to these things (1.) If you do blame your self, and approve the Law,
whilst you fail. (2.) If you can say that you do often resolve against sin
honestly, and without known guile, and do so resolve the contrary good before
the evil break in upon you. (3.) If you can say, that you are so far exercised
with your failings as to judge your self wretched, because of such things, and
a body of death, which is the Root and Fountain of such things. (4.) If you can
say, that there is a party within you opposing these evils, which would be at
the right way, and, as it were, is in its Element, when it is in Gods way, it
is well; only be advised not to take rest until in some measure, you be rid of
the ground of this objection, or at least, until you can very clearly say, you
are waging war with these things: Now a good help against the prevailing power
of sin, is, to cleave close to Christ Jesus by Faith, which as it is a
desirable part of sanctification, and a notable piece of Con^ormity to Gods
will, and most subservient unto his design in the Gospel, Gal. 2, 20, 21. and
so should be much endeavored by people, as a work pleasing to God, Job. 6. 29.
So it is the ready way to draw life and sap from Christ, the blessed root for
fruitfulness in all cases, as John 15. 4, 5.

Object. I do not partake of these special communicati^ns of God, mentioned in
the Scripture, and actings and ^utgoing of his Spirit, whereof gracious people
often are speak^^g, and whereunto they attain, the want of these things makes
me much suspect my state.

Answ. I shall shortly hint some of these excellent comunications, and I hope
upon a right discovery of them ^here will be but small ground found for the
jealous com^laints of many gracious people.

First, (besides these convictions of the Spirit of God, which use to usher
Christ's way unto the Souls of men, and these also which afterward do
ordinarily attend them) ^^ere is a Seal of the Spirit of God spoken of in
Scrip^^re, the principal thing whereof is the Sanctifying work ^f the Holy
Ghost imprinting the draughts and lineaments (...) Gods Image, and revealed
will upon a man, as a seal^ (...) signet does leave an impression and stamp of
its like^^ss upon the thing sealed: so it is 2 Timothy 2. 19. The ^^undation of
God -- having this seal, The Lord knows them who are his. And let every one
that names the (...) of Christ depart from iniquity: And thus I conceive,
(...) Seal to be called a Witness, 1 John 5. 10. He that (...) lieveth, has
the witness in himself, that is, the grou^^ upon which an interest in Christ is
to be made out a^proved, are in every believer; for he has somewh^^ of the
sanctifying work of Gods Spirit in him, which (...) a sure (although not always
a clear and manifest) w^^ness.

Secondly, there is Communion with God, much tal^^ed of among Christians,
whereby they understand the sensible presence of God, refreshing the soul
exceedingly, but if we speak properly, communion with God, is a mutual interest
between God and Man, who has close^ with him in Christ. It is a commonness, or
a common interest between God and a Man; not only is a man interested in God
himself, but in all that is the Lords so the Lord has a special interest in
the man, and also all that belongs to him. There is a communion between Husband
and Wife, whereby they have a specia^ Interest in each others persons goods and
concernments (...) so is it here: there is such a Communion with God. He is our
God, and all things are ours, because he is ours^ this Communion with God, all
true believers have at a^times, as we shall show afterward: I grant there, is
a^ actual improvement of that Communion, whereby men d^ boldly meddle with any
thing that belongs unto God, and do meddle with himself as their own, with much
homeliness and familiarity, especially in worship: when the soul does converse
with a living God, partaking of the Divine Nature, growing like unto him, and
sweetly traveling through his Attributes, and, with some confidence of
interest, viewing these things, as the man's ow^ goods and gear, this we call
Communion with God i^ ordinances. This indeed is not ordinarily nor frequent^y
made out to men, and all his people do not equally par^ake of it; and it is
true, that what is in God, goes not out for the behoof of the man, to his
apprehension e^ually at all times: yet certainly Communion with God, ^roperly
so called, ( viz.) that commonness of interest ^etween God and a Man, who is
savingly in Covenant with him, does always stand firm and sure: and so much of
Communion with God in Ordinances, have all Believers, as that their heart
converseth with a Living God there now, and then, and is in some measure
chang^d into that same Image, and there needs be no doubt any further about
it.

Thirdly, There is a thing which is called Fellowship ^ith God, often mistaken
also among believers. If by ^ellowship, be meant the walking in our duty, as in
the ^ight of a living God, who sees and hears us, and is ^imess to all our
carriage. It is a thing common unto ^ll gracious men, they have it habitually,
and in design, ^sal. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me, yea, and
often they have it actually in exercise, when their spirit is in any good
frame; they walk, as if they saw God standing by them, and have some thoughts
of his fa^our through Christ; Truly our fellowship is with the Fa^er, and with
his Son, 1 John 1. 3. If we by Fellowship, do mean a sweet, refreshing,
familiar, sensible con^ersing with God, which does delight and refresh the ^ul,
(beside what the conscience of duty does;) It is ^hen a walking in the light of
his countenance, and a ^ood part of sensible presence; and although it seems
^och had much of it, whilst it is said be walked with ^od, Genesis 5. 24. Yet it
is not so ordinary as the former, ^or so common to all Christians; for here the
soul is fill^^as with marrow and fatness, following hard after its ^ide, and
singularly upheld by his right hand, Psalm. 3. 5, 8.

Fourthly, there is a thing which is called Access u^ to God, and this I take
to be the removing of obstruct^ons out of the way between a Man and God, so as
the m^ is admitted to come near. We are said to have acc^ to a great person,
when doors are cast open, guards r^moved from about him, and we admitted to
come clo^ at him; so it is here. Now this Access in Scripture, (...) sometimes
taken for Christ's preparing of the way, the removing of enmity between God and
Sinners, so as m^now have a patent way to come unto God through Christ Ephesians.
2. 18. Sometimes it is taken for the actual improvement of that access
purchased by Christ, when a m^ finds all obstructions and differences, which do
ordina^^ly fall in between him and God, removed; God is nauncouth to him, nor
as a stranger, keeping up himse^ from him, or frowning on him, but the man is
admitt^ to come even unto his seat, as Job 23. 3. Of the wante^ this does Job
complain, Job 23. 8, 9. whilst he says, go forward, backward, to the right and
left hand, and find him not. The first sort of access is common to all
Believers, they are brought near by the blood of the Covenant, and are no more
far off, as the deadly enmity between God and them is removed. But access, in
the other sense is dispensed more, according to the Lords absolue^ sovereignty
and pleasure, and it is left in the power (...) Believers to obstruct it unto
themselves, until it pleas^ the Lord mercifully and freely to grant it unto
them against so it is up and down, and there needs be no question ((...) to
man's state) about it.

Fifthly, There is a thing called Liberty before God and this properly is
freedom, or free speaking unto God many do much question their state, because
of the wa^ of this now and then, since the Scripture has said, Wha^ the Spirit
is, there is liberty 2 Cor. 3. 17. but they (...) justly confine that liberty,
spoken of there, unto this fre^ spaking before God. I grant where the Spirit of
the Lord does savingly discover Gods will in the Scripture to a man, There is
liberty from any obligation to the Ceremonial Law, and from the condemning
power of the Moral Law, and from much of that gross darkness and ignorance,
which is on natural hearts as a vail hiding Christ in the Gospel from them. I
grant also, that sometimes, even this liberty which is a free communion with
God, and ordering of our case before him, and filling of our mouths with
Arguments, Job. 23. 4. is granted to the godly, but not as liberty taken in the
former senses. Although the Lord has obliged himself to pour out the Spirit of
prayer upon all the house of David in some measure Zech. 12. 10. Yet this
communication of the Spirit, which we call liberty, or free speaking unto God,
depends much on the Lords absolute pleasure, when, and what measure to allow
it. This liberty which we call freedom, or free speaking with God in prayer, is
sometimes much abstracted from any great confidence in the time of prayer, (at
least, until it draw toward the close of it) it stands much in a vivacity of
the understanding to take up the case which a man is to speak before God, so as
he can order his case; and next, there be words or verbal expressions, elegant,
suitable, and very emphatical, or powerful and pithy; there is also joined a
fervency of spirit in prayer, whereof the Scripture speaks; the soul is hot
and bended, and very intent: There is also ordinarily in this liberty, a
special melting of the heart (often joined with a great measure of the Spirit
of grace and supplication, Zech. 10. 11.) for so the soul in poured out before
God as for a first born: Such is the liberty, which many Saints get before God,
whilst in much brekenness of heart, and fervency of spirit, they are admitted
to speak their mind fully to God, as a Living God, noticing (at least) their
Prayer. Sometimes this liberty is joined with confidence, and then it is not
only a free, but also a bold speaking before God; it is that boldness with
confidence, Ephesians. 3. 12. this is more rarely imparted unto men than the
former, yet it is ordinary. It has in it beside what we spoke before, some
influence of the Spirit upon faith, making it put out some vigorous acting in
Prayer; there is a sweet mournful frame of Spirit, by which a man pours out
his heart in Gods bosom, and with some confidence of his Favor and good will,
pleads his cause before him, as a living God; and this is all the sensible
presence that many Saints do attain unto: there is no ground of doubt about a
man's estate in point of liberty before God in this last sense, because there is
nothing essential to the making up of a gracious state here: some have it, some
want; some have it at sometimes, and not at other times, so that it is much up
and down; yet I may say, gracious men may do much (by a very ordinary
influence) in contributing toward the attaining and retaining, or keeping of
such a frame of spirit.

Sixthly, There is a thing called Influence, or breathing of the Spirit. This
gracious influence (for of such only do I now speak) is either ordinary, and
this is the operation of the holy Spirit on the soul; and the habits of grace
there, whereby they are still kept alive, and in some exercise and acting,
although not very discernable. This influence (I conceive) does always attend
Believers, and is that keeping and watering night and day, and every moment,
promised, Isa. 27. 3. Or, this influence is more singular and special, and is
the same to a gracious (although a withered) soul, as the wind and breath to
the dry bones, putting them in good ease, Ezekiel. 37. 9, 10. And as the dew or
rain to the grass, or newly mowen field and parched ground. Psalm. 72. 6. Such
influence is meant, Cant. 4. 16. by the blowing of the South wind, making the
Spices to flow out. When the Spirit moves thus, there is an edge put upon the
gra^es of God in the soul, and they are mad to act more vi^orously. This is the
enlarging of the heart, by which a (...) does run in the ways of God, Psalm.
119. 32. This influence is more discernable than the former, and not so
ordinarily communicated. Also here, sometimes the wind blows more upon one
grace, and sometimes more discernably upon another, and often upon many of the
graces together; and according to the lesser, or greater measure of this
influence, the soul acts more or less vigorously toward God: and since faith
is a created grace in the soul, this influence of the Spirit is upon it,
sometimes less, sometimes more, and accordingly is the assurance of faith,
small or great.

Seventhly, There is the hearing of prayer often spoken of in Scripture, and
many vex themselves about it, alleging that they know nothing of it
experimentally. I grant there is a favorable hearing of prayer: But we must
remember it is two fold.

Either, 1. It is such as a man is simply to believe by way of argument on
Scriptural grounds. As if I be fled unto Christ, and do approach unto God in
him, pray according to his will, not regarding iniquity in my heart, exercising
faith about the thing I pray for, absolutely or conditionally, according to the
nature of the thing and promises about it. I am obliged to believe that God
hears my prayer, and will give what is good, according to the Scriptures,
Joh. 14. 13, 14. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, I will do it, 1 John 5. 14. This
is our confidence, that whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears us,
Mark 3. 24. Believe that you receive, and you shall have what you desire, Psalm.
66. 18. If I regard iniquity, he will not hear. Then if I regard not iniquity,
I may believe that he does hear me. Or, 2. A man does sensibly perceive that
God hears his prayer, It is made out to his heart without any syllogistical
deduction. Such a hearing of prayer got Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8. Her countenance
was no more sad. Surely the Lord did breath upon her faith, and made her
believe that she was heard, and she could not make it out by any argument, for
she had not grounds whereupon to build the premises of the argument according
to Scripture in that particular. God did stamp it in some way upon her heart
sensibly, and so made her believe it. This is but rarely granted, especially in
cases clearly deducible in Scripture. And therefore people are much to be
satisfied in exercising their faith about the other, and let God give of this
latter what he pleases. A man's gracious state should not be brought upon
debate, upon the account of such hearing of prayer.

Eighthly, There is Assureance of Gods favor by the witnessing of our own
spirits; which assurance, is deduced by way of argument syllogistically, Thus,
Whosoever believes on Christ shall never perish; But I do believe on Christ:
Therefore I shall never perish. Whosoever has respect unto all Gods Commandments,
shall never be ashamed; But I have respect unto all his Commands: Therefore, I
shall never be ashamed. I say, by reasoning thus, and comparing Spiritual
things with spiritual things, a man may attain unto a good certainty of his
Gracious State. It is supposed, 1 John 3. 18, 19. That by loving the Brethren
in deed and in truth, we may assure our hearts before God, and that a man may
rejoice upon the Testimony of a Good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. A man may have
confidence, if his heart do not condemn him, 1 John 3. 21. We may then attain
unto some assurance (although not full assurance) by the witness of our own
spirit. I do not deny, that in this witnessing of our Spirits toward
Assurance, there is some concurrence of the Spirit of God. But, I conceive
there needs but a very ordinary influence, without which we can do nothing.
Now, this assurance, such as it is, may be reached by intelligent Believers,
who keep a good conscience in their walk. So I hope, there needs be no debate
about it, as to a man's gracious state; for if a man will clear himself of heart
condemnings, he will speedily reach this assurance.

Ninthly, There is a Witnessing of Gods Spirit mentioned, Romans 8. 16. A bearing
witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. This operation of the
Spirit is best understood, if we produce any syllogism by which our spirit does
witness our Sonship: as for example, Whosoever loves the Brethren, is past
from Death to Life, and consequently is in Christ, But I love the Brethern;
Therefore I am passed from Death to Life, Here there is a threefold operation
of the Spirit, or Three Operations rather.

The first is a beam of Divine Light upon the first Proposition, persuading the
Divine Authority of it as the Word of God; the Spirit of the Lord must witness
the Divinity of the Scripture, and that is the infallible Word of God, far
beyond all other arguments can be used for it.

The second Operation is, A Glorious beam of Light from the Spirit, shining
upon the second proposi^^n, and so upon his own graces in the Soul, discovering
them to be true graces; and such as the Scripture calls so. Thus are we said
to know by his Spirit, the things freely given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 13.

The third Operation is, in order to the third proposition of the Argument, or
the Conclusion; and this I conceive, to be nothing else, but an influence upon
Faith, strengthening it to draw a conclusion of full assurance upon the foresaid
premises. Now (with submission unto others, who have greater light in the
Scripture, and more experience of these precious communications) I do conceive
the Witness of the Spirit, or witness of it, which is mentioned, Romans 8. 16. is
not that first operation upon the first proposition; for that operation is that
testimony of the Spirit, by which he bears witness to the Divinity of the
whole Scripture, and asserteth the Divine authority of it unto the souls of
gracious men; and such an operation may be upon a truth of Scripture, which
does not relate to a man's sonship or interest in Christ at all. The Spirit may
so shine upon any truth, relating to duty, or any other fundamental truth
persuading the Divinity of it, upon and unto the soul, and speaking nothing
relating to a man's interest in Christ. Neither is the third operation of the
Spirit, by which he makes faith boldly draw the conclusion this witnessing of
the Spirit; for that operation is nothing else but influence upon faith,
bringing it out to full assurance: but that whereupon this full assurance is
drawn or put out, is somewhat deponed and witnessed already. Therefore I
conceive the second operation of the Spirit upon the second proposition, and so
upon the graces in the man, is that witness of Gods Spirit, that ^ea^ of divine
light, shining upon those graces, whereby they are made very conspicuous to the
understanding: That is the witness, the shining so on them in his witnessing:
For only here in this proposition and in this operation, does the Spirit of God
prove a co-witness with our spirit: For, the main thing wherein the witness of
our spirit lies, is the second proposition, and so the Spirit of God,
witnessing with our spirits, is also in that same proposition. So these two
witnesses, having deponed and witnessed one and the same thing, viz. The truth
and reality of such and such graces in the man, which our own spirit or
conscience does depone, according to its knowledge, and the Spirit of the Lord
does certainly affirm and witness to be so. There is a sentence drawn forth,
and a conclusion of the man's sonship, by the man's faith, breathed upon by the
spirit for that effect, and this conclusion bears the full assurance of a
man's sonship. It may be presumed, that some true Saints do not partake of this
all their days, as Heb. 2. 15.

Tenthly, (I speak with the experience of many (...) and, I hope, according to
Scripture,) If, I say, there is a communication of the Spirit of God which is
let out to some of his people sometimes; it is somewhat beside, if not beyond
that witnessing of a sonship, spoken of before. It is a glorious divine
manifestation of God unto the soul, shedding abroad Gods love in the heart; It
is a thing better felt than spoken of; It is no audible voice, but it is a
glance of glory, filling the soul with God, as he is life, light, love, and
liberty, countervailing that audible voice, O man greatly beloved, Dan. 9. 22,
33. putting a man in a transport, with this on his heart, It is good to be
here, as Mat. 17. 4. It is that which went out from Christ to Mary, when He but
mentioned her name, John 20. 16. he had spoken some words to her before, and
she understood not that it was he. But when he uttered this one word, MARY,
there was some admirable divine conveyance and manifestation made out unto her
heart, by which she was so satisfyingly filled, that there was no place for
arguing and disputing, whether or not, that was Christ, and if she had any
interest in him. That manifestation made faith to it self, and did purchase
credit and trust to it self, and was equivalent with, T^us says the Lord. This
is such a glance of glory, that it may in the highest sense, be called the
earnest, or first fruits of the inheritance: For it is a felt armful of the
Holy God, almost wholly conforming the man unto his likeness, so swallowing him
up that he forgets all things, except the present manifestation: O how
glorious is this manifestation of the Spirit* Faith here rises to so full an
assurance, that it resolves wholly into sensible embracements of God. This is
the thing which does best deserve the title of sensible presence. And, it is
like, is not given unto all Believers; some whereof are all their days under
bondage, and in fear, Heb. 2. 15. But here love, almost perfect, casts out
fear. This is so absolutely let out upon the Masters pleasure, and so transient
and passing, or quickly gone when it is, that no man may bring his gracious
state upon debate for want of it.

Eleventhly, There is a thing we call Peace, about which many do vex
themselves. This Peace is either about a man's state, that he is reconciled unto
God by Jesus Christ, or it is about his present case and condition, that he is
walking so, as approved of God, at least, so far, as there is no quarrel or
controversy between God and him threatening a stroke: Both of these, are either
such in the court of Scripture, and consequently in Gods account, or in the
court of a man's own conscience. Peace, about a man's state, as being in Christ,
is sure in the court of Scripture, and of Heaven, when a man does by Faith
close with Christ and the New Covenant, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God. It Being sure and solid in the court of Scripture, it
should hold sure in the court of man's conscience, it being rightly informed;
for in that case, it still speaks according to Scripture; but, because often
the conscience is misinformed, or in the dark, therefore there is often peace
about a man's state according to Scripture, whilst his conscience does threaten
the contrary, and does still condemn, and refuses to assoil the man, as being
reconciled unto God through Christ. In this case the conscience must be
informed, and the man's gracious state made out by the marks of grace, as we
showed before; and here the witness of my own spirit, will do much to allay the
cry of the conscience; and if the Spirit of the Lord join his witness and
testimony, the conscience is perfectly satisfied, and proclaims peace to the
man. The other peace, about a man's present case or condition, viz. That it is
approved of God in a Gospel sense, it may be wanting, and justly wanting,
although the other peace about a man's state be sure. This peace about a man's
case and condition, it is either such in the court of Scripture, and this is
when a a man is not regarding iniquity, and expecting the Commands of God
without exception; then the Scripture says, he stands in an even place, and he
(...) fear no stated quarrel between God and him, in order to a temporary
stroke; and when it is thus, his conscience should also assoil him that same
way; and would do so, if it were rightly informed; but because the conscience
is often in the dark, therefore a man may be alarmed with evil in the court of
conscience, as if he were justly to expect a stroke from God because of his
sin, and some quarrel God has at him, although he intends salvation for him;
this is enough to keep a man in disquiet, and to inhibit him, the rejoicing
allowed unto him, whilst he is walking in his integrity: Therefore a man must
here also inform his conscience, and receive no accusations, nor condemnings
from it, unless it make them clear by Scripture. At that Bar let every man
stand, both about his state, and his condition or case; and let him appeal from
all other courts to that, and not receive any indictment but conform to the
truth, of God, by which the conscience is to proceed in all things: and if this
were well looked unto, there would not be so many groundless suspicions, amongst
the Lords people, either about their state, or condition, upon every thought
which enters their mind.

Twelfthly, There is the Joy of the Holy Ghost, and this is when the spirit
does breath upon our rejoicing in God (which is a grace very little in exercise
with many) and makes it set out sensibly and vigorously; and he exciteth and
stirs the passion of joy and delight in the soul, so as there is an
unspeakable and glorious joy in the soul, in the apprehension of Gods
friendship and nearness unto him, 1 Pet. 1. 8. This joy follows upon peace,
and peace follows righteousness, Romans 14. 17. This joy readily will not fail
to be according to the measure of the assurance of Faith, as 1 Pet. 1. 8. In
whom believing, ye rejoyee, etc. So that the removal of mistakes about other
things, will allay doubts about this.

Now, because some of these excellent communications of the spirit, after they
are gone, are brought in question, as delusions of Satan. For vindication of
them we say, that the special operations of Gods Spirit in any high degree,
usually are communicated to people after such brokenness of Spirit, Psalm. 51.
8. after so singular pains in Religious duty, Dan. 9. 3, 21. or in time of such
suffering for righteousness, 1. Pet. 4. 14. or if they break in as the rain
that waits not for man, then they do so humble and abase the person, Isa. 6.
5. and there are found so many evidences of grace in the man, Romans 8. 16. or
these things do so provoke unto holiness, and to have every thing answerable;
and conform unto these manifestations of God, 2. Tim. 2. 19. the person under
them does so loath all things beside Gods friendship and fellowship, Mat. 17.
4. and these things do carry on them and with them so much authority, and
divine superscription, whilst they are in the Soul, that afterward they may
appear sufficiently to be special communications of God, and singular gracious
operations of his spirit, and no delusions of Satan transforming himself unto
an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. nor such common flashes of the spirit, as may
admit afterward irrecoverable Apostasy from God, Heb, 6. 4, 5, 6.

Now then, to conclude this part of the work that relates unto trial, I say,
to all these who complain of the want of the precious out-lettings of the
Spirit. 1. Bless God if you want nothing essential for making out of a saving
interest in Christ. God has given unto you Christ Jesus, the greatest gift he
had, and since your heart is shapen out for him, he will with him give you all
things that are good for you in their seasons. 2. I do believe, upon a right
search and trial, after you have understood the communications of the Spirit,
you are not so great a stranger to many things, as you did suspect your self to
be. But 3. Remember the promises of life, and of peace with God, are now here
in Scripture made unto these special things whereof you allege the want: The
promises are made unto Faith, followed with holiness: And it may be presumed,
that many heirs of glory not in this life partake of some of these things, but
are in bondage all their days through fear of death, Heb. 2. 15. so that there
should be no mistake about these things we may seek after them, but God is free
to give or withhold them. 4. Many do seek after such manifestations before they
give credit by faith unto Gods word; He has born record that there is life
enough for men in Christ Jesus, and if men would by believing set to their
seal, that God is true, they should partake of more of these excellent things.
5. I may say, many have not honorable apprehensions and thoughts of the spirit
of God whose proper work it is, to put out the foresaid noble operations: they
do not adore him as God, but vex, grieve, quench, and resist him, and many
people complaining of the want of these things, are not at the pains to seek
the spirit in his outgoings, and few do set themselves apart for such precious
receipts: Therefore be at more pains in Religion, give more credit to his Word,
and esteem more highly of the Spirit of God, and so you may find more of these
excellent things.

How to attain unto A Saving interest in CHRIST.
HAving in the former part of this Treatise put every man's state to trial; It
now remains, th^^ in this following part, we give advice to those who neither
can, nor dare lay claim to the marks formerly mentioned.

Quest. What shall they do who want the marks of a true and saving interest in
Christ, already spoken of, and neither can nor dare pretend unto them?

Answ. If men miss in themselves the marks of a Saving Interest in Christ,
spoken of before: Then it is their duty, and of all that hear this Gospel,
personally and heartily to close with Gods Contrivance of saving sinners by
Christ Jesus, and this shall secure thy state.

For the better understanding of this, we shall pr^mise some things for
information of those who are more ignorant and then speak more directly to the
thing. As for the things to be premised,

1. The Lord did at the beginning, out of his bounty, make a Covenant with man
in Adam, Genesis 2. 17. and did enable man to abide in that Covenant, Eccle. 7.
29. But man by eating of that forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. did break the Covenant,
Hos. 6. 7. and made it void for ever, Romans 2. 20. involved himself into all
misery thereby, Romans 5. 12.

2. The Lord did most freely, from everlasting purpose and intend to save men
another way, viz. by Christ Jesus, and the Covenant of grace, in which he
intended reconcilement with the Elect through Christ Jesus (God and Man, born
of a woman in due time, to make this agreement effectual.) And this device of
satisfying his own justice, and saving of the elect by Christ, he did at first
intimate to our parents in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15. where he says, that the seed
of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head: and the Lord has in all
Generations made this known to his Church.

3. The Lord has in all ages Covenanted to be the reconciled God of all these;
who by their subjection to his Ordinances, did profess their satisfaction with
this device, and oblige themselves to acquiesce in the same, and to seek
salvation by Christ Jesus, as God does offer him in the Gospel: so all the
people of Israel are called the Lords People, and are said to avouch him to be
their God, and he does avouch them to be his People, Exodus 19. 5. 8, Deuteronomy. 26.
17, 18. yea, the Lord does also engage himself to be the God of the seed and
children of these who do so subject to his Ordinances. The Covenant is said to
be made between God and all the People, young and old, present and not present
that day, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11 -- 15. and all are appointed to come under some seal
of that Covenant, as was en^oyned to Abrabam, Genesis 7. 10. not only was it so in
^he Old Testament, but it is so in the New Testament also. The Lord makes offer
of himself, to be our God (...) Christ Jesus, and the people, professing their
satisfaction in that offer, and in Testimony thereof, subjecting themselves
unto the Ordinances, they are reckoned a Covenanted people, and are joined unto
his Church in Thousands, receiving a seal of the Covenant, without a^y further
particular previous trial, Acts. 2. 38. 41. 4. Many do deal treacherously with
God in this Covenant, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. and although they do profes^ their
estimation of Christ the Savior, and heart-satisfaction with that device of
saving sinners by him, an^ having the Image of God restored by him, in them;
ye^ their heart is not right with God, and they do conte^^ themselves with an
empty title, of being in a sealed Covenant with God, John. 8. 39. Abraham is
our Father (say they) For although the Lord obliges ever^ man who professes
his satisfaction with Christ Jesus the devised ransom, to be cordial and
sincere herein, an^ only to these who are so, does he make out the Spiritua^
Promises of the Covenant, (they only being priviledge^ to be the Sons of God,
who do really receive Christ John 1. 12. yet the Lord does permit many to
profes^ their closing with him in Christ, both in the Old and New Testament,
whilst their heart is not engaged; and he does admit them to be members of his
Church, granting unto them the use of Ordinances, and many other external
mercies and Privileges denied unto the Heathen, who are not in Covenant with
him.

5. Although the great part of people do foolishly fancy, that they have closed
with God in Christ Jesus sincerely and heartily, or at least, they do without
any ground or warrant, promise a new heart to themselves before they depart
this life; yet there be but very few, who d^ really and cordially close with
God in Christ Jesus, as he is offered in the Gospel; and so there be but very
fe^ saved, as is clear, Mat. 7. 14. Strait is the gate, an^ narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and few ther^ be who find it. Mat. 20. 16. Many are
called, but fe^ are chosen. If people would believe this, it might he^^ to
alarm them.

6. Although none at all do cordially close with Go^ in Christ Jesus, and
acquiesce in that ransom found (...) by God, except only such as are elected,
Romans 11. 7. and whose hearts the Lord does soveraignly determine to that
blessed choice, John 6. 44. yet the Lord has left it as a duty upon people who
hear this Gospel, to close with his offer of Salvation through Christ Jesus, as
if it were in their power to do it. And the Lord, through these Commands and
Exhortations (wherein he obliges men to the thing) does convey life and
strength to the elect, and does therein convey the new heart unto them, which
points kindly toward this new Contrivance of saving sinners, and toward
Christ in his Covenant relations; or, it is the Lords mind in these commands
and invitations, to put people on some duty, with which he uses to concur, for
accomplishing* that business between him and them; so then, it is a coming on
our part, and yet a drawing on his part, John 6. 44. it is a drawing on his
part, and running on our part. Cant. 1. 4. it is an approaching on our part,
and yet a choosing and causing to approach on his part, Psalm. 65. 4. it is a
believing, or receiving on our part, John 1. 12. and yet it is given us to
believe, Phil. 1. 29.

Having premised these things, I say, if men miss in themselves the marks of a
saving interest in Christ, spoken of in the former part of the Treatise; then
for securing their state, they are obliged with all diligence personally and
heartily to accept of and close with Gods design or contrivance of saving
sinners by Christ Jesus, held out in the Gospel. In handling of this, we shall
1. Show what it is to accept of, and close with that noble invention. 2. We
shall show, that it is the necessary duty of those who would be in favor with
God and secure their Souls. 3. What is previously required of those who perform
this duty. 4. What are the qualifications and properties of this Duty, if
rightly managed. 5. What be the native consequents of it, if it be performed
aright.

As for the first, What is it to close with Gods device of saving sinners by
Christ Jesus, held out in the Gospel* Here we must remember (as we showed
before) that a^ first God willed man to abide in his favor, by holding fast
his first integrity in which he was Created; but man by his transgression lost
Gods favor, made void tha^ Covenant of Works, and put himself in an utter
incapacity to regain the Lords friendship, which he had los^ by his sin, and to
rescue himself from the curse and wrath now due to him for the same, or any way
to procure his own salvation: But the Lord freely has manifested another way
of repairing man's lost estate, viz. by sending his Son Christ Jesus in the
flesh to satisfy his justice for the sins of the Elect, and to restore in them
his Image now defaced, and to bring them unto glory; and he has made open
Proclamation in the Church, That whosoever will lay aside all thoughts of
saving themselves by the Covenant of Works, or inherent righteousness, and will
agree heartily to be saved by Christ Jesus; they shall be restored to a better
condition, than formerly man was in, and shall be saved. So then, to close with
Gods device of saving sinners by Christ Jesus, is, to quit and forego all
thoughts of help or salvation by our own Righteousness, and to agree unto this
way which God has found out; It is to value and highly esteem of Christ Jesus,
as the treasure sufficient to enrich poor man, and with the heart to believe
this record, That there is life enough in him for men. It is to plead this
invention, and to acquiesce in it, as the only way to true happiness: It is to
point toward this Mediator, as God holds him out in the Gospel, with desire
to lay the stress of our whole estate on him. This is that which is called
Faith or Believing, the receiving of Christ, or believing on his Name, John 1.
12. This is that believing on the Name of the Lord Jesus, commanded unto the
Jailer for his safety, Acts 10. 31. This agrees to all the descriptions of
justifying faith in the Scripture, this does answer the type of looking to the
Brazen Serpent lifted up in the Wilderness, John 3. 14, 15. and this is
supposed in all these ordinary actings of Faith; to which, promises are annexed
in the Scripture, and will be found in all who have got the new heart from God,
and it will be found in none else.

As to the Second thing, viz. That this is the necessary duty of all such who
would be in favor with God, and secure their Souls. It appears thus.

1. This closing with Gods contrivance, or believing in Christ, is commanded
every where in Scripture by the Lord, as the condition of the new Covenant,
giving title and right unto all the spiritual blessings of the same; for it is,
upon the matter, the receiving of Christ: This is commanded, whilst God bids
men come and buy; that is impropiate all, by closing with that contrivement
Isa. 55. 1. the weary are commanded to come uuto him thus for their rest, Mat.
11. 28. This is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son, 1.
John 3. 23. this is enough to prove it a duty incumbent. But further, it is
such a duty, as only gives title and right to a Sonship; for, only they who
receive him, are privileged to be Sons, John 1. 12. To as many as received
him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to such as believed on
his name.

2. It appears to be the necessary duty of all, thus: No less than this does
give a meeting unto God, offering himself to be our God in Christ, and no less
than this does answer our profession, as we are in Covenant with him, as
Members of his visible Church. The Lord offers to be our God in Christ; if we
do not close with the offer, in laying aside all thoughts of other ways, by
which we may attain to happiness, we give no meeting to him; he says, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17. 5. If we close
not with the offer, we give no answer unto God. Moreover, we are all baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins, Acts 2. 38.
Now unless we close with Christ, as is said, we falsify that profession;
therefore since this is the thing which does answer Gods offer in the Gospel,
and make good our profession, as members of his Church, it is a necessary duty
lying upon us.

3. Whatsoever a man has else, if he do not thus close with Gods Invention
about Christ Jesus, and do not receive him, it does not avail, either as to the
accepting of his person, or of his performances, or as to the saving of his
soul. Men are accepted only in Christ the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Abel and his
offering are accepted by faith, Heb. 11. 4. Without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11. 6. and, He that believes not, is condemned already, and
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 18. 36. for
want of this, no external title does avail; the Children of the Kingdom are
cast out, if this be wanting, Mat. 8. 10, 11, 12. The people of Israel are like
other Heathens, in regard of a graceless state, lying open to the wrath of God,
Jer. 9. 25, 26. If men do not believe, that he who was slain at Jerusalem, who
was called Christ Jesus, and witnessed unto by the Prophets, and declared to be
the Son of God by many mighty works: I say, if men do not believe that he is
the way, and close not with him as the only way, they shall dye in their sins,
John 8. 24.

We say then, it is a most necessary duty thus to close with Christ Jesus, as
the blessed relief appointed for sinners; every one who is come to years of
understanding, and hears this Gospel, is obliged to take to heart his own
lost condition, and Gods gracious offer of peace and salvation, throngh Christ
Jesus, and speedily to fly from the wrath to come, by accepting and closing
with this offer, heartily acquiescing therein, as a satisfying way for saving
of poor Sinners: And that all may be the more encouraged to set about this
duty, when they hear him praying them to be reconciled unto them, let them
remember that peace and salvation is offered to the people in universal terms,
to all without exception: If any man will, he shall be welcome, Rev. 22. 17. If
any thirst, (although after that which will never profit) yet they shall be
welcome here, on the condition aforesaid, Isa. 55. 2, 3. all are commanded to
believe, 1 John 3. 23. The promises are to all who are externally called by the
Gospel; God excludes none, if they do not exclude themselves, Acts 2. 39. so
that if any have a mind for the thing, they may come forward, he will in no
wise cast them out, John 6. 37. being able to save to the utmost, them who come
to God through him, Heb. 7. 25. And these who have long delayed to take this
matter to heart, had now the more need to look to it, lest what belongs to
their peace, be hid from their Eyes: but all these words will not take effect
with people, until God pour out his Spirit from on high, Isa. 32. 15. to cause
men to approach unto God in Christ, yet we must still press men's duty upon
them, and beseech and charge them, by the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and their reckoning to him in that day, that they give the Lord no rest, until
he send out that Spirit (which he will give to them who ask it, Luke 11. 13.)
and cause them to know what belongs unto their peace, and bring them up to
their duty.

We come now to speak of the Third thing, ( viz.) What is previously required
of these who are to perform this duty: Men must not rashly, inconsiderately and
ignorantly rush in upon this matter, saying, They will plead that device of
saving sinners by Christ, and will acquiesce and rest on him for safety: Often
men do deceive themselves here, and do imagine that they have done the thing;
We shall therefore hold out some things pre-required in a person, who is to
close with Christ Jesus, which although we offer not as positive
qualifications; fitting a man for Christ that way, Isa. 55. 1. yet they are
such things, as without them a man cannot knowingly and cordially perform the
duty of believing on Christ Jesus. Beside the common principles which are to be
snpposed in these who live under Gospel Ordinances, as, The knowledge that men
have immortal souls; Soul and body will be united again at the last day, There
is a Heaven and Hell, one of which will be the everlasting Lot of all men; The
Old and New Testament is the true Word of God, and the rule of faith and
manners; Every man is by nature void of the grace of God, and is an enemy unto
God, and an heir of condemnation: Reconciliation is only by the Mediator Christ
Jesus; Faith unites unto him, and is the condition of the new Covenant;
Holiness is the fruit of true faith, and is to be studied, as that without
which no man shall see God: I say, beside these things, the knowledge of which
is necessary, it is required of him who would believe on Christ Jesus.

1. That he take to heart his natural condition. And here he must know some
things, and also be very serious about them: I say, he must know some things;
as (1.) That as he was born a Rebel and outlaw unto God, so he has by many
actual transgressions disobliged God, and ratified the forfeiture of his
favor; yea, a man should know many particular instances of his rebellion on
all hands, as that he is a liar, sabbath-breaker* blasphemer, or the like, as
Paul speaks very particularly of himself afterward, 1. Tim. 1. 15. (2.) The
man must know, that the wrath of God denounced in Scripture, is standing in
force against these very sins whereof he is guilty, and so consequently, he is
the party undoubtedly against whom God (who cannot lie) has denounced war. A
man must know, that when the Scripture says, Cursed is he that offers a
corrupt thing unto God, Mal. 1. 14. it speaks against him for his superficial
service performed unto God with the outward man, when his heart was far off.
When the word says, God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain, Exodus 20. 7. the man must know it speaks against himself, who has
often carelessly profained that dreadful name before which all knees should bow,
Phil. 2. 10. and which his enemies do take in vain, Psalm 139. 20. When the Word
says, Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48. 10.
the man must know that it speaks against himself, who has irreverently, with
much wandering of heart, and drowsiness, heard the Word preached; and without
sense, faith, or understanding, has often prayed before him: When the Word
says, Woe be unto him who gives his neighbor drink, and puts his bottle to
him, to make him drink also, that he may look on his nakedness, Hab. 2. 15. 16.
the man must know that it is spoken against himself, who has gloried in making
his neighbor drunk, and that dreadful wrath is determined by the Lord against
him, according to that Scripture: When the Word says, God will judge unclean
persons, Heb. 13. 4. and will shut them out of the (...) Jerusalem, Rev, 21. 8.
the man must know that the Scripture speaks these words against him, he being
an unclean person, so that he is the person against whom the curses of the Law
do directly strike. (3.) A man must know that he has nothing of his own to
procure his peace, and to set him free of the hazard under which he lies,
because all his righteousness in an unclean ^^ing, Isa. 64. 6. his prayers, his
other service done to God, his alms-indeed; etc. are not guiltless before God,
since they come not from a right principle in h^^ heart, and were not performed
in a right way, nor upon a right account, nor for a right end, his Sacrifice*
have been an abomination unto God, Prove. 21. 27. (4.) He must know, that as he
is void of all the saving graces of the Spirit, as the true love of God, the
true fear of his Name, godly sorrow for sin, etc. so particularly, that he
wants Faith in Christ, who takes burden for all them wbo believe on him: Until
a man know this, he will still leave all his debt and burden without care or
regard, at the door of Christ, the common cautioner.

Now not only must a man know these things, as I sail before, but must also
very seriously take them to heart, that is to say, he must be affected with
these things, and be in sad earnest about them, as he uses to be in other
cases, wherein he uses to be most serious; yea, he should be more in earnest
here, than in other cases, because (...) is of greater concernment unto him.
This seriousness produces, (1.) A taking of Salvation to heart, more than any
thing else. Shall men be obliged to seek first t^^ Kingdom? Mat. 6. 33. Is
there but one thing necessary* Luke 10. 42. Shall Paul count all things loss
and dung for this matter? Phil. 3. 8. Is a Man a loser, gaining all the World,
if he lose his soul? Mark 8. 36. Shall this be the only ground of joy, that
men's names are written in the book of life? Luke 10. 26. and shall not men (who
would be reckoned serious) take their soul and salvation more to heart than any
thing else? Surely it cannot fail. Let none deceive themselves. If the hazard
(...) their soul, and the salvation thereof, and how to be i^ favor with God,
has not gone nearer to their heart tha^ any thing in the world beside, it
cannot be presumed upon just grounds, that they ever knew sin, or the eve^
lastingness of God, or his wrath aright (2.) This seriousness breaks the man's
heart, and faints the stoutness of it, and leads it out to sorrow as one
does for her first born: Zech. 12. 10. I grant their sorrow will better suit
that Scripture afterward, when they apprehend Christ pierced by their sins.
(3.) It leads the man to self-loathing. A man taking up himself so, cannot
but loath himself for his abomination, whereby he has destroyed himself. There
is somewhat of that spirit of revenge, which is mentioned as a fruit of true
repentance, 1 Cor. 7. 11. (4.) this seriousness does make the man peremptory to
find relief; since it is not in himself, he dare not put off and delay his
business, as before: and this is indeed required that he finds himself, so
pursued and put to it, that he flees for refuge somewhere. I grant some have a
higher, and some a lesser degree of this seriousness, as we show in the former
part of this Treatise. But if we speak of the Lords ordinary way of working
with those who are come to age, we say, they must very seriously take their
souls estate to heart, despairing of help in themselves, Since the whole need
no Physician, but those who are sick, Mat. 9. 12. As for the measure, we plead
on that which probably does suppose, that a man will be induced thereby to
transact cordially with Christ, on any terms he does offer himself to be closed
with.

The second thing pre-required of him who would believe on Christ Jesus, is* He
must know and take to heart the way of escape from Gods wrath; The Spirit must
convince him of that righteousness. Here a man must understand somewhat
distinctly, that God has devised a way to save poor lost man by Jesus Christ,
whose perfect righteousness has satisfied offended justice, and procured
pardon and everlasting favor to all those whom he persuades by his Gospel, to
accept of Gods offer. Acts 13. 38, 39. John. 1. 12. So that no person is
excluded of whatsoever rank or condition, whatsoever has been his former way
(unless he be guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is, a malicious
hatred and rejection of the remedy appointed for sinners, as we shall hear)
for, all manner of sin is given unto those who accept of the offer in Gods way,
Matthew. 12. 13. He is able to save to the uttermost those that come unto God
through him, Heb. 7. 25.

The third thing pre-required is, A man must know that as God has not excluded
him, from the relief appointed; so he is willing to be reconciled unto men
through Christ, and has obliged men to close with him through Christ Jesus,
and so to impropriate that salvation to themselves. He not only invites all to
come, Isa. 55. 1, 2. And welcometh all that come, as we find in the Gospel, and
commends those who come, Matthew. 8. 10. and 15. 28. and chideth for not coming
and closing with him, Joh. 3. 18. But also he commands all to believe on
Christ, 1 John 3. 23. So as a man is not to question the Lords willingness to
receive men, who go to Christ honestly, for God has abundantly cleared that in
Scripture; unless that a man know so much, he will scarcely dare to lay his
heart open for that noble device of saving sinners, or adventure his own weight
and stress upon Christ Jesus.

The fourth thing pre-required, is, The man who would close with Christ Jesus,
must resolve to break all Covenants with Hell and death, Isa. 28. 15.
Whatsoever known evil men are engaged into, they must resolve to forego it; for
there is no concord between Christ and Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
The Lord requires that they who would expect him to be for them, should not be
for another, Hos. 3. 3. This is far from Evangelick repentance, which (I grant)
does not precede a man's closing with Christ by faith; there is little here
beyond a mis-regard of these things unto which a man was formerly devoted, and
a slighting what he was mad upon, because he sees himself destroyed thereby,
and relief now offered, whereupon his heart begins to be more intent than
formerly it was. After this, when Christ is looked upon alone, his worth and
beauty does appear, so as among all the gods there is none like unto him, and
he looks out as a sufficient covering of the eyes to all who get him. Upon
which the heart loves Gods device in the new Covenant, and loves to lay its
weight upon Christ, rather than any other way, bending toward him, and so the
man becomes a believer. Now I will not say that all these things whereof we
have spoken, are formally, orderly and distinctly found in every person before
he close with God in Christ; for the way of the heart with Christ, may be added
to the four wonderful things, Prove. 18. 19. It is hard to trace the heart in
its translation from darkness to light; yet we hold out the most ordinary and
likely way, to him who does ask the way, debarring thereby ignorant and
senseless persons from meddling, and discharging them to pretend to any interest
in him whilst they remain such.

The fourth thing we propose to speak to, is, The properties of this duty, when
rightly gone about. I shall only hint a few.

1. Believing in Christ must be Personal; a man himself, and in his own proper
person must close with Christ Jesus. The just shall live by his faith? Heb. 2.
4. This faith, that it will not suffice; for a man's safety and relief, that he
is in Covenant with God, as a born member of the visible Church by virtue of
the parents subjection to Christ's Ordinances, neither will it suffice that the
person had the initiating seal of Baptism added, and that he then vertually
engaged to seek salvation by Christ's blood, as all infants do. Neither does it
suffice that men are come of believing parents; their faith will not instate
their children into a right to the spiritual blessings of the Covenant. Neither
will it suffice that parents did in some respect engage for their children, and
give them away unto God; all these things do not avail. The children of the
kingdom and of godly predecessors are cast out; unless a man in his own person,
put out faith in Christ Jesus, and with his own heart please and acquiesce in
that device of saving sinners, he cannot be saved. I grant this faith is given
unto him by Christ: but certain it is, that it must be personal.

2. This duty must be cordial and hearty: with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10. 10. A man must be sincere, and without guile in closing
with Christ, judging him the only covering of the eyes, not hankering after
another way. The matter must not swim only in the head or understanding, but it
must be in the heart; the man not only must be persuaded that Christ is the
way, but affectionately persuaded of it, loving and liking the thing, having
complacency in it; so that it is all a man's desire, as David speaks of the
Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5. If a man be cordial and affectionate, in any thing,
surely he must be so here, in this one thing necessary: It must not be simply a
fancy in the head, but it must be a heart^ business, a soul-business; yea, not
a business in the outer court of affections, but in the flower of affections,
and in the innermost Cabinet of the soul, where Christ is forme^. Shall a man
be cordial in any thing, and not in this, which does comprize all his chief
interests, and his everlasting state within it? Shall the Lord be said to
rejoice over a man, as a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, Isa. 62. and to
rest in his love with joy, Zeph. 3. 17. and shall not the heart of man go out
and meet him here? the heart or nothing* love, or nothing: Marriage love, which
goes from heart, to heart; love of espousals, or nothing* Prove. 23. 26. 1 Cor.
13. 2. I will not say that there is in all as soon as they believe, a
prevailing sensible love, which makes sick; but there must be in believing, a
rational and kindly love, so well grounded, and deeply engaging, that many
waters cannot quench it; It is strong as death, and jealousy in it, burns as
^ire, Cant. 8. 6, 7.

The third property, or qualification of believing as it goes out after
Christ, it must be rational.

Hereby I mean, that the man should move toward God in Christ, in knowledge
and understanding, taking up Gods device of saving sinners by Christ, as the
Scripture does hold it out, no fancying a Christ to himself, otherwise than
the Gospel speaks of him, nor another way of relief by him, than the word of
God holds out. Therefore we find knowledge joined to the Covenant between God
and man as a requisite, Jer. 24. 7. and 31. 34. I mean here also, that a man be
in calmness of spirit, and as it were, in his cold blood in closing with Christ
Jesus, not in a simple fit of affection which soon vanishes: Mat. 13. 20. nor
in a distemper through some outward distress, as the people were, Psalm. 78. 34.
and proved not steadfast in the Covenant; not under a tentation of some outward
temporary interest, as Simon Magus was when be believed, Acts 8. A man must act
here rationally, as being Master of himself, in some measure able to judge of
the good or evil of the thing as it stands before him.

The fourth is, Faith as it goes out rationally, so it goes out resolutely.
The poor distressed people in the Gospel did most resolutely cast themselves upon
Christ. This resoluteness of spirit, is in order to all difficulties that lie
in the way: Violence is offered to these. The man whose heart is a shaping out
for Christ Jesus, cannot say, There is a Lion in the street, Prove. 26. 13. If
he cannot have access by the door he will break through the roof of the house,
with that man, Luk 5. 19. He often does not regard that which the World calls
discretion or prudence, like Zacheus climbing upon a tre^ to see Christ, when
faith was breeding in his bosom* Luke. 19. This resoluteness of spirit looks
toward what inconveniences may follow, and waveth all these* at least
resolving over all these, like a wise builder who reckons the expense
beforehand, Luke 14. 28. This resoluteness is also in order to all a man's
Idols, and such weights as would easily beset him, if he did not bend after
Christ over them all, like that blind man who did cast his garments from him
when Christ called him, Mark. 10. 50. This resoluteness in the soul, proceeds
from desperate self-necessity within the man, Act^ 16. 30. And from the
sovereign command of God obliging the man to move toward Christ, 1 John 3. 23*
and from the good report gone abroad of God, that he puts none away that
come unto him through Christ, John 6. 37. but does commend such as do
adventure* over the greatest difficulties, Mat. 15. ^8* But above all, this
resoluteness does proceed from the arm of Jehovah, secretly and strongly
drawing the sinner toward Christ, Joh. 6. 44. I will not say that every one,
closing with Christ in the offers of the Gospel, has all the foresaid thoughts
formally in his mind; yet, upon search, it will be found, if he be put to it,
or put in mind of these things, they are then aloft in the soul.

By what is said, it does manifestly appear that many in the visible Church had
need to do somewhat further for securing of their souls, when they come to
years of discretion, than is found to have been done by them before, in the
Covenant between God and the Church, sealed to them in Baptism. By what is said
also, there is a competent guard upon the free grace of God in the Gospel, held
out through Christ Jesus; so as ignorant, senseless, profane men, cannot with
any shadow of reason pretend to an interest in it. It is true, believing in
Christ, and closing with him as a perfect Savior, seems easy; and every
godless man says, that he believes on him: But they deceive themselves, since
their soul has never cordially, rationally, and resolutely gone out after
Christ Jesus, as we have said. It may be some wicked men have been enlightened,
Heb. 6. 4. and have found some motion in their fear, Act. 24. 25. or in their
joy; Mat. 13. 20. Man* 6. 20. But not having engaged their heart in approaching
to God, Jer. 30. 21. have either sitten down in that common work, as their
sanctuary, until the trial came, Mat. 13. 20, 21. or they return back with the
Dog to their vomit, from which they had in some measure escaped by the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. or they utterly fall
away to the hatred and malicious despising and persecuting of Christ and his
interests; from whence hardly can they be recovered, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10.
26, 29. which thing should provoke men to be serious, in this great business.

We come now to speak to the fifth thing proposed, and that is, What be the
native consequents of true believing, I shall reduce what I will speak of them
to these two, viz. Union with God, and Communion with him.

First then, I say, when a sinner closes with Christ Jesus, as is said, there
is presently an admirable union, (...) strange oneness, between God and the
man. As the Husband and wife, head and body, root and branches, are not to be
reckoned two, but one; So Christ, or God in Christ, and the sinner closing with
him by faith, are one, Ephesians. 5. 30, 32. He that is so joined unto the Lord is
one Spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 17. As the Father is in the Son, and Christ in the
Father; so believers are one in the Father and the Son. They are one, as the
Father and the Son are one: the Father in Christ, and Christ in believers, that
they may be made perfect in one. O what a strange inter-weaving, and
indissoluble knot is there! Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23, 26. Because of this union
between God and the believer, 1. They can never hate one another, henceforth
the Lord will never hate the believer: As no^ man hates his own flesh at any
time, but cherishes it and nourishes it, so does Christ his people, Ephesians. 5.
29. He may be angry, so as to correct and chastise the man that is a believer,
but all he does to him, is for his good and advantage; all the Lords paths must
be mercy and trust to him, Psalm. 35. 10. All things must work together for good
to him, Romans 8. 28. On the other side, the believer can never hate God
maliciously; for, he that is born of God sins not, 1 John 3. 9. For the Lord
has resolved and ordained things so, that his hand shall undoubtedly so be
upon all believers for good, that they shall never get leave to hate him, and
be so plucked out of his hands. 2. Because of this union, there is as a strange
sympathy and fellow-feeling between God and the believer: The Lord is afflicted
with the man's afflictions; he does tenderly, carefully, and seasonably resent
it, as if he were afflicted with it, Isa. 63. 9. He who touches the believer,
touches the apple of the Lords eye, Zech. 2. 8* He is touched with the feeling
of their infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. And precious in his sight is their blood,
Psalm. 116. 15. In a word, what is done to them, is done unto him; and what is
done unto them, is not done unto him, Mat. 10. 40. and 25. 40, 45. On the other
part, the zeal of his house sits in the heart of the believer, Psalm. 69. 9.
The Lords reproach lights on the believer, if it go well with his affairs,
that is the business of his people. So there is a strange sympathy between God
and believers, all by virtue of the union between them; because of which, men
should hate every thing which would compete with him in their love, or
affections; and should disdain to be slaves to the Creatures, since these are
the servants of their Lord and Husband, and their servants through him. What a
hateful thing is it for a Queen to whore with the servants of her Prince and
Husband? It is also a shame for a Believer to be afraid of evil tidings, since
the Lord, with whom he is one, alone rules all things, and does whatsoever
pleases him in Heaven and in Earth, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. Psalm. 112. 6, 7. and
115. 3.

The other great consequent of believing, is an admirable unpararell'd
communion: by virtue whereof, 1. The parties themselves do belong each to
other: The Lord is the God of his people, he himself, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is their God, in all his glorious Attributes: his justice, as well as
his mercy; his wisdom, power, holiness, etc. for He becomes the God of his
people, as he often speaks in the Covenant On the other part, the Believers
are his people: in their very persons they are his, as the Covenant does speak;
They shall be his people; their head, their heart, their hand, etc. whatsoever
they are, they are his. 2. By virtue of this communion, they have a mutual
interest in one another whole goods and geer, in as far as can be useful. All
the Lords Word does belong to the Believer: Threatenings as well as Promises,
for their good; all his ways, all his works of all sorts, special
communications, death, devils, even all things, in so far as can be useful 1.
Cor, 3. 21, 22, 23. On the other side, all which belongs to the Believer, is
the Lords; heritage, children, life, wife, credit, all is at his disposing; if
any of these can be useful to him, the Believer is to forego them, else he
falsifieth that communion, and declares himself in so far, unworthy of Christ,
Luke 14. 26. 3. By virtue of this communion, there should be much familiarity
between God and the Believer. The Lord may meddle with any thing which does
belong to the believer, and do to him what seems good to him, and the man is
not to mistake, or say unto God, What do thou? (but in so far as concerns
his duty) yes, he is still to say in every case, Good is the Word and Will of
the Lord, Isa. 38. 8. 2. Kings. 4. 23, 26. On the other part, the believer may
in an humble way, be free and familiar with God in Christ; he may come with
boldness to the throne of Grace, and not use a number of complements in his
addresses unto God, Heb. 4. 16. For he is no more a stranger unto God, Ephesians. 2.
19. so as that he needs not speak unto God, as one that has acquaintance to
make every hour, as many professors do, and it makes a huge inconsistency in
their Religion. The believer also may lay open all his heart unto God, 1. Sam.
1. 15. and impart all his secrets unto him, and all his tentations without fear
of a mistake. The believer also may enquire into what God does, in so far as
may concern his own duty, or in so far as may ward off mistakes of the Lords
way, and reconcile it with his Word, John 13. 15. The believer is a friend in
this respect, as knowing what the Master does, see Genesis 18. 23. etc. Jer. 12.
1. Isa. 63. 17. The believer also may be free with God, to go in daily with his
fallings, and seek repentance, pardon and peace through Christ's Advocateship,
Acts. 5. 31. 1 John 2. 1. O how often in one day may the believer plead pardon,
if he intend not to mock God, or to turn grace into wantonness! The Lord has
commanded men to forgive seventy times seven in one day, and has hinted
therein a parable, how much more the Master will forgive, Mat. 18. 22, 28. The
believer also may be free to entrust God with all his ovtward concernments, for
he does care for these things, Mat. 6. 30, 32. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Yea, the believer
may humbly put God to it, to make him forthcoming for him, in all cases, as
beseems, and to help him to suitable fruit in every season, even grace in
time of need. Heb. 4. 16. Yea, how great things may believers seek from him in
Christ Jesus, both for themselves and others, 1 John 5. 14, 15. John 14. 13.
Isa. 45. 11. It is the shame and great prejudice of his people, that they do
not improve that communion with God more than they do; Christ may justly
upbraid them, that they ask nothing in his Name, John, 16. 24.

By what is said, it does appear of how great consequence this duty of
believing is, by which a man closes with Christ Jesus, whom the Father has
sealed, and given for a Covenant to the people. It is so honorable for God,
answering his very design, and serving his interest in the whole contrivment
and manifestation of the Gospel. And it is so advantageous to men, that Satan
and an evil heart of unbelief, do mightily oppose it, by moving objections
against it. I shall hint some most ordinary.

Object. I am so base, worthless and faithless of my self, that I think it were
high presumption for me to meddle with Christ Jesus, or the salvation purchased
at the rate of his blood.

Answ. It is true, all the Children of Adam are base and vile before him who
charge his Angels with folly, Job. 4. 18. All Nations are less than nothing
and vanity before him, Isa. 40. 17. There is such a disproportion between God
and men, that unless he himself had devised that Covenant* and of his own free
will had offered so to transact with men, it had been high treason for men or
Angels to have imagined, that God should have humbled himself, and become a
servant, and have taken on our nature, and have united it by a personal union
to ^e the blessed Godhead: and that he should have sub^^cted himself to the
shameful death of the Cross; and ^^del this, that men, who were rebels, should
be reconciled unto God, and be made eternally happy, by being in his holy
company for ever. But I say, all that was his own device and free choice: Yea,
moreover, if God had not soveraignly commanded men so to close with him in and
through Christ, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 11. 28. 1 John 3. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 10. no
man durst have made use of that device of his. So then, although with Abigale ^
may say, let me be but a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 41. Yet since he has in his holy wisdom devised that way, and knows
how to be richly glorified in it, Ephesians. 1. 18. John 17. 10. and has commanded
me, as I shall be answerable, in the great day, to close with him in Christ, as
is said: I dare not disobey, nor enquire into the reasons of his contrivements
and commands, but must adventure on the business, as I would not be found to
frustrate the grace of God, and in a manner disappoint the Gospel, Gal. 2. 21.
and falsify the record which God has born of his Son, that there is Life
enough in him for Men 1 John 5. 10. 11. and so make God a liar, and add that
rebellion to all my former transgressions.

Object. I am a person singularly sinful, beyond any I know; Therefore I dare
not presume to go near unto Christ Jesus, or look after that salvation which is
through his rightousness.

Answ. Is your sin beyond the drunkenness and incest of Lot? adultery, covered
with Murder, in David? Idolatry, and horrid Apostasy in Solomon? Idolatry,
Murder, and Witchcraft in Manasseh? anger against God, and his way in Jonah?
forswearing of Christ in Peter, after he was forewarned, and had vowed the
contrary; bloody persecution in Paul, making the Saints to blaspheme? etc. (now
woe ^o him who is imboldned to si^ by these instances recorded in Scripture, and
adduce^ here to the commendation of the free and rich grace^^ God, and to
encourage poor penitent sinners to fly un^^ Christ) I say, are your sins beyond
these? Yet all the^ obtained pardon through Christ, as the Scripture does show.
Know therefore, that all sins do lie alike level before the free grace of God,
who loves freely, Hos. 14. 4. and looks not to less or more sin: If the
person have a heart to come unto him through Christ, then he is able to save to
the utmost, Heb 7. 25. Yea, it is more provoking before God, not to close with
Christ, when the offer comes to a man, than all the rest of his transgressions
are: for, He that believes not, has made God a liar, in that record he has
born of life in the Son: and he who does not believe, shall be condemned for
not believing on the Son of God; that shall be the main thing in his
indictment, John 3. 18. So that much sin cannot excuse a man, if he scare at
Christ, and shift his offer, since God has openly declared, that this is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, Christ came to save sinners
whereof I am chief. Even he who is chief of sinners in his own apprehension, is
bound to believe and accept this saying, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

Object. My sins have some aggravating circumstances beyond the same sins in
other persons, which do much terrify me.

Answ. What can the aggravations of thy sins be, which are not parllell'd in
the forecited examples* Is thy sin against Great Light? So behooved many of
these we spoke of before. Was it against singular mercies and deliverances? So
was that of Lot and Noah's drunkenness. Was thy sin done with much
^eliberation? So was David's whilst he wrote the letter against Vriah. Was it
against, or after any singular manifestation of God? So was Solomon's. Was it by
a small and despicable tentation? So was that of Jonah, and of Peter, if we
consider the hainousness of their transgression. Have thou rei^rated the sin,
and committed it over again? So did Lot, so did Peter, so did Jehosaphat in
joining with Ahab and Jehoram; 1 Kings 22. 2 Kings 3. Are there many gross sins
concurring together in thee? So were there in Manasseh. Have thou stood long
out in Rebellion? (that, as all the former, is thy shame: but) so did the thief
on the Cross, he stood it out to the last gasp, Luke 23. 42. If yet thou have
an ear to hear, thou art commanded to hear, Mat. 13. 19. Although thou have
long spent thy money for that which is not bread; Isa. 55. 1. 2. Thou have the
greater need now to haste, and to flee for refuge; and if thou do so, he shall
welcome thee, and in no ways cast thee out, John 6. 37. especially, since he
has used no prescription of time in Scripture, So that all those aggravations
of thy sin will not excuse thy shifting off the Lords offer.

Object. In all these instances given, you have not named the particulars
whereof I am guilty: Nor know I any who ever obtained mercy before God, being
guilty of such things as are in me.

Answ. It is hard to condescend upon every particular transgression which may
vex the conscience; yea, lesser sins than some of those I have mentioned, may
hugely disquiet, if the Lord blow the fire. But, for thy satisfaction, I shall
condescend upon some truths of Scripture, which do reach sins and cases more
universally, than any man can do particularly. See Exodus 34. 7. God pardons
iniquity, transgression and sin: that is, all manner of sin, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22,
30. If a man turn from all his wickedness, it shall no more be remembered, or
prove his ruin, Job. 6. 37. Him that comes, he will in (...) ways cast out;
that is, whatsoever be his sins, or aggravations of them, John 3. 16. Whosoever
believe^ shall be saved; that is, without exception of any sin, (...) any case,
Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the utmost the^^ who come to God through him:
no man can sufficiently declare what is Gods uttermost, Mat. 12. 31. (...)
manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, that is, there is no
sort of sin, whereof one instance shall not be forgiven in one person or other,
except the sin against the Holy Ghost. These, and the like Scriptures, do carry
all sorts of sin before them; so that, let thy sins be what they will, or can
be, they may be sunk in one of these two truths, so as thy sin can be no excuse
to thee for shifting the offer of peace and salvation through Christ, since any
man who will, is allowed to come and take, Rev. 22. 17. we will not multiply
words. The great God of Heaven and Earth, has soveraignly commanded all who
see their need of relief, to betake themselves unto Christ Jesus, and to close
cordially with Gods device of saving sinners by him, laying aside all
objections and excuses, as they shall be answerable unto him in the day he
shall judge the quick and the dead, and shall drive away out of his presence
all these who would dare to say, their sins and condition were such, as that
they durst not adventure upon Christ's perfect Righteousness for their relief,
notwithstanding of the Lords own command often interposed, and in a manner, his
credit engaged.

Object. I suspect I am guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, and so am
incapable of pardon, and therefore I need not think of believing on Christ
Jesus for saving of my Soul.

Answ. Although none should charge this sin on themselves, or on others, unless
they can prove the charge according to Christ's example, Matthew. 12. 25, 26, 32.
yet for satisfying of the doubt, I shall, 1. Show what is not the sin against
the Holy Ghost, properly so called, because there be some gross sins which
people do unwarrantly judge to be this unpardonable sin. 2. I shall show what
is the sin against the Holy Ghost. 3. I shall draw some conclusions in answer
directly to the objection.

As for the First, There be many gross sins, which although (as all other sins)
may be sins against the Holy Ghost, who is Gods equal and one with the Father
and the Son, and are done against some of his operations and motions, yet are
they not the sin against the Holy Ghost* which is the unpardonable sin. As,
first, blasphemin^ of God, under bodily tortures, is not that sin, for some
Saints fell into this, Acts 26. 11. much less, blaspheming of God in a fit of
distraction, or frenzy, for a man is not a free rational agent at that time;
and he that spares his people as a Father does the Son that serves him, and
does pity, so Mal. 3. 17. Psalm. 103. 13. does he spare and pity in these
rovings; For so would our Fathers according to flesh do, if we blasphemed the^
in a fit of distraction; much less are horrid blasphemies against God, darted
in upon the soul, and not allowed there, this unpardonable sin; for such things
were offered to Christ, Mat. 4. and are often cast in upon the Saints. 2. The
hating of good in others, whilst I am not convinced that it is good, but in my
light do judge it to be evil; yea, the speaking against it, yea, the
persecuting (...) it in that case, is not the sin against the Holy Ghost; for
all these will be found in Paul before he was converted* and he obtained Mercy,
because he did these things ignorantly. 3. Heart-rising at the thriving of
others in the work and way of God, whilst I love it in my self; yea, the
rising of heart against providence, which often expresses it self against the
creatures nearest our hand; yea* this rising of heart entertained, and
maintained (although they be horrid things, leading toward that unpardonable
sin, yet) are not that sin; for these may be in the Saints, proceeding from
self-love, which cannon endure to be darkened by another, and proceeding from
some cross in their Idol under a fit of tentation; the most part of all this
was in Jonah, Jonah 4. 4. N^^ only are not decays in what was once in the man,
an^ falling into gross sins against Light, after the receiving (...) the truth,
this unpardonable sin (for then many of all the Saints in Scripture were
undone) but further, Apostasy from much of the truth is not that sin; for that
was in Solomon, and in the Church of Corinth and Galatia; yea, denying, yea,
forswearing of the most fundamental truth under a great tentation, is not this
sin* for then Peter had been undone. 5. As resisting, quenching, grieving and
vexing of the Spirit of God by many sinful ways, are not this unpardonable
sin, for they are charged with these who are called to repentance in Scripture,
and not shut out, as guilty of this sin: So neither reiterating sin against
light, is the sin against the Holy Ghost, although it leads toward it, for
such was Peter's sin in denying Christ; so was Jehosaphats sin in joining with
Ahab and Jehoram. 6. Purposes and essays of self-murder, and even purposes of
murdering godly men, (the party being under a sad fit of tentation) yea,
actual self-murder, (although probably it often joyneth in the issue with this
unpardonable sin, which ought to make every soul look upon the very tentation
to it with horror and abhorrency, yet) is not the sin against the Holy Ghost;
The Jailer intended to kill himself upon a worse account than many poor people
do in the sight and sense of Gods wrath, and of their own Sin and Corruption;
yet that Jailer obtained pardon Acts. 16. 27. 34. And Paul before his effectual
calling, was accessory unto the murder of many Saints, and intended to kill
more, as himself grants, Acts 26. 9. to 13. Athough all these are dreadful
sins, each of them deserving wrath ever lasting, and not being repented of,
brings endless vengeance, especially the last cuts off hope of relief, for
ought can be expecting in an ordinary way, yet none of these is the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost; and so under any of these, There is
hope to him that has an ear to hear the joyful sound of the Covenant; All
manner of such sin and blasphemy may be forgiven, as is clear in the Scripture,
where these things are mentioned.

As for the second thing. Let us see what the sin against the Holy Ghost is. It
is not a simple act of transgression, but a complex, of many mischievous
things, involving Soul and Body ordinarily in guilt. We thus describe it; It is
a rejecting and opposing of the Chief Gospel Truth, and way of salvation, made
out singularly to a man by the Spirit of God in the truth and good thereof, and
that avowedly, freely, wilfully, maliciously and despightfully, breeding
hopeless fear. There be three places of Scripture, which do speak most of this
sin, and thence we will prove every part of this description, in so far as may
be useful to our present purpose, by which it will appear that none who have a
mind for Christ, need stumble at what is spoken of this sin in Scripture, See
Mat. 12. 24. -- 32. Heb. 6. 4, 5. 6. and 10. 25, -- 29. First then, let us
consider the Object about which this sin, or sinful acting of the man guilty
thereof, is conversant, and that is the chief Gospel Truth, and way of
Salvation: both which run to one thing. It is the way which God has contrived
for saving of sinners by Jesus Christ the promissed Messiah and Savior; by
whose death and righteousness men are to be saved, as he has held forth in the
Ordinances; confirming the same by many mighty works in Scripture tending
thereto. This way of salvation is the Object. The Pharisees oppose this, that
Christ was the Messiah, Mat. 12. 23, 24. The wrong is done against the Son of
God, Heb. 6. 6, and the blood of the Covenant, and the Spirit graciously
offering to apply these things, Heb. 10. 29. Secondly, In the description,
consider the qualification of this object. It is singularly made out to the
party by the Spirit of God, both in the truth and good thereof. This says, 1.
That there must be knowledge of the truth and way of Salvation. The Pharisees
knew that Christ was the heir, Mat. 21. 38. The party has knowledge, Heb. 10.
26. 2. That knowledge of the thing, must not swim only in the head, but there
must be some half heart-perswasion of it. Christ knew the Pharisees thoughts,
and so did judge them, Mat. 12. 25. and that the contrary of what they spoke
was made out upon their heart: There is a tasting, Heb. 6. 4, 5. which is
beyond simple enlightening; yea, there is such a persuasion ordinarily as
leads to a deal of outward sanctification, Heb. 10. 29. 3. This persuasion
must not only be of the verity of the thing, but of the good of it. The party
tastes the good Word of God, and he apprehends the thing as eligible* Heb.
6. 5. 4. This persuasion is not made out only by strength of Argument, but also
by an enlightening work of Gods Spirit, shining on the truth, and making it
conspicuous. Therefore is that sin called the sin against the Holy Ghost, Mat.
12. Mark 3. The persons are said to have received the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4.
and to do despite unto the spirit of grace, who was in the nearest step of a
gracious operation with them, Heb. 10. 29. Thirdly, In this description,
consider the acting of the party against the object so qualified, It is a
rejecting and opposing of it: which imports, 1. That men have once, some way
at least been in hands with it, or had the offer of it, as is true of the
Pharisees. 2. That they do reject, even with contempt, what they had of it, or
in their offer. The Pharisees deny it, and speak disdainfully of Christ, Mat.
12. 24. They fall away, intending to shame Christ, Heb. 6. 5, 6. 3. The men set
themselves against it by the spirit of persecution, as the Pharisees did still.
They rail against it: Therefore it is called Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 12. 24. 31. They would Crucify Christ again, if they could, Heb. 6. 6.
They are Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27. Fourthly, consider the properties of this
acting. 1. It is avouched, that is, not seeking to shelter or hide it self. The
Pharisees speak against Christ publicly, Mat. 12. 24. They would have Christ
brought to an open shame, Heb. 6. 6. They forsake the Ordinances which savor
that way, and 10. 25. and despise the danger. For, looking for indignation,
they trample that blood still, Heb. 10. 27, 29. 2. The party acts freely, it
is not from unadvisedness, nor from force or constraint, but an acting of free
choice; nothing does force the Pharisees to speak against and persecute Christ.
They Crucify to themselves, they re-act the murder of their own free accord,
and in their own bosom, none constraining them, Heb. 6. 6. They sin of free
choice, as the word is, spontaneously, Heb. 10. 27. 3. It is acted wilfully.
They are so resolute, they will not be dissuaded by any offer, or the most
precious means, as is clear in the aforesaid Scriptures. 4. It is done
maliciously, so as it proceeds not so much, if at all, from a tentation to
pleasure, profit, or honor; It proceeds not from fear, or force, or from any
good end proposed; but out of heart-malice, against God and Christ, and the
Advancement of his Glory and Kingdom. So that it is the very nature of Satan's
sin, who has an irreconcilable hatred against God, and the remedy of sin,
because his glory is thereby advanced. This is a special ingredient in this
sin. The Pharisees are found guilty of heart-malice against Christ, since they
spoke so against him, and not against their own children casting out Devils;
and this is the force of Christ's Argument, Mat. 12. 27. They do their utmost to
Crucify Christ again, and to bring him to an open shame. Heb. 6. 6. They are
adversaries like the Devil, Heb. 10. 27. 5. It is done despightfully. The
malice must bewray it self. The Pharisees must proclaim that Christ has
correspondence with Devils, Met. ^2. He must be put to an open shame, and
crucified again, Heb. 6. they must tread under foot that blood, and do despite
to the Spirit; Heb. 10. 29. so that the party had rather perish a thousand
times, than be in Christ's debt for salvation. The last thing in the
description, is, the ordinary attendant or consequence of this sin, it breeds
Desperate and Hopeless fear. They fear him, whom they hate, with a slavish,
hopeless fear, such as Devils have, Heb. 10. 27. They know that God will put
out his power against them; they tremble in the remembrance of it; and if they
could be above him, and destroy him, they covet it; and since they cannot reach
that, they hate with the utmost of heart-malice, and do persecute him, and all
that is his with despite.

As for the third thing proposed. ( viz.) The Conclusions to be drawn from what
is said, whereby we will speak directly to the Objection, 1. As I hinted
before, since the sin against the Holy Ghost is so remarkable, and may be well
known where it is, none should charge themselves with it, unless they can prove
and make good the charge; for it is a great wrong done unto God, to labor to
persuade my soul that he will never pardon me; It is the very way to make me
desperate, and to lead me unto the unpardonable sin; Therefore unless thou
can and dare say, that thou do hate the way which God has devised for
saving of sinners, and do resolve to oppose the thriving of his Kingdom, both
with thy self and others, out of malice and despite against God, thou ought
not to suspect thy self guilty of this sin. 2. Whatsoever thou have done
against God, if thou do repent it, and wish it were undone, thou can not be
guilty of this sin; for in it, heart-malice and despite against God do still
prevail. 3. If thou art content to be his debtor for pardon, and would be
infinitely obliged unto him for it, then thou can not in that case be guilty
of the sin against the Holy Ghost; for, as we showed before, they who are
guilty of it, do so despite God, that they would not be his debtors for
salvation. 4. Whatsoever thou have done, if thou have a desire after Jesus
Christ, and do look with a desiring after him, and can not think of parting
with his Blessed Company for ever: Or if thou must part with him, yet do wish
well to him, and all his, thou need not suspect thy self to be guilty of
this unpardonable sin; For there can be no such hatred of him in thy bosom, as
is necessarily required to make up that sin. 5. If thou would be above the
reach of that sin, and secure against it for ever, then go work upon thy heart
to plead salvation by Christ Jesus, and to close with God in him, acquiescing
in him as the sufficient ransom and rest, as we have been pressing before, and
yield to him to be saved in his way: Do this in good earnest, and thou shall be
for ever put out of the reach of that ugly thing wherewith Satan does affright
so many poor seekers of God.

Object. Although I be not excluded from the benefit of the New Covenant, yet
it is not in my power to believe on Christ; For Faith is the gift of God, and
above the strength of flesh and blood.

Answ. It is true, that saving Faith, by which alone a man can heartily close
with God in Christ, is above our power, and is the gift of God, as we said
before in the premises: Yet remember, 1. The Lord has left it as a Duty upon
all who hear this Gospel, cordially by faith to close with his offer of
salvation through Christ, as is clear in the Scripture; And you must know, that
although it be not in our power to perform that duty of our selves, yet the
Lord may justly condemn for not performing of it, and we are inexcusable,
because at first he made men perfectly able to do whatsoever he should command.
2. The Lord commanding this thing, which is above our power, wills us to be
sensible of our inability to do the thing, and would have us putting on him to
work it in us. He has promised to give the new heart, and he has not excluded
any from the benefit of that promise. 3. The Lord uses by these Commands and
Invitations, and men's meditation on the same, and their supplication about the
thing, to convey power unto the soul to perform the duty: Therefore, for answer
to the objection, I do beseech thee in the Lords Name, to lay to heart these
his Commandments and Promises; and meditate on them, and upon that blessed
business of the New Covenant, and pray unto God as you can, over them, (for he
will be enquired to do these things, Ezekiel. 36. 37.) and lay thy cold heart to
that device of God expressed in the Scriptures, and unto Christ Jesus, who is
given for a Covenant to the People, and look to him for life and quickening; Go
and essay to plead that salvation in the way God does offer it, and to close
with, and rest on Christ for it, as if all were in thy power, yet looking to
him for the thing, as knowing that it must come from him; And if thou do so, he
who meets these who remember him in his ways, Isa. 65. 5. will not be wanting
on his part, and thou shall not have ground to say, that thou moved toward the
thing until thou could do no more for want of strength, and so left it at Gods
door: It shall not fail on his part, if thou have a mind for the business. Yea,
I may say, if by all thou have ever heard of that matter, thy heat loves it,
and desires to be in hands with it, thou have it already performed within
thee, so that difficulty is past, before thou wast aware of it.

Object. Many who have closed with Christ Jesus, as is said, are still
complaining of their leanness and fruitlesness, which makes my heart lay the
less weight on that duty of believing.

Answ. If you be convinced that it is a duty to believe on Christ, as is said,
yo may not shift it under any pretense. As for these complaints of some who
have looked after him, not admitting every one to be judge of his own fruit. I
say, 1. Many by their jealousies of Gods love, and by their mis-belief (after
they have so closed with God) do obstruct many precious communications, which
otherwise would be let out to them, Mat. 13. 58. 2. It cannot be, that any
whose heart is gone out after Christ, have found him a wilderness 2. 31. surely
they find somewhat in their spirit, swaying them toward God in these two great
things, ( viz.) how to be found in him in that day, Phil. 3. 8, 9. and how to
be forthcoming to his praise in the Land of the Living, Psalm. 119. 17. and 56.
13. they find these two things aloft in the soul, and that is much; Moreover,
they shall after search, if they judge aright, find ever since an emptiness in
the Creatures, which abundance of the Creature cannot fill up, all is vanity;
Only God can fill the empty room in their heart, and when he but breaths a
little, there is no room for additional comfort from creatures; This says,
that God has captivated the man, and has fixed that saving principle in the
understanding and heart, who is God but the Lord? Worship him all ye Gods,
Psalm. 97. 7. Yea, further, these whose heart has closed with God in Christ, as
is said, will not deny that there have been seasonable preventings and
quickenings now and then, when the soul was like to fail, Psalm. 21. 3. and 94.
18, 19. therefore, let none say, that there is no fruit following, and let none
shift their duty upon the unjust and groundless complaints of others.

Object. Although I judge it my duty to close with Gods device in the Covenant,
I am in the dark how to manage that duty, for sometimes God does offer to be
our God without any mention of Christ, and sometimes says, that he will
betruth us unto him; And in other places of Scripture, we are called to come to
Christ, and he is the Bridegroom. Again, God sometimes speaks of himself as a
Father to men, sometimes as a Husband; Christ is sometimes called the Husband,
and sometimes a Brother, which relations seem inconsistent, and do much put me
in the dark how to apprehend God when my heart would agree with him, and close
with him.

Answ. It may be very well said, that men do come to God, or close with him,
and yet they come to Christ and close with him. They may be said to come under
a marriage relation unto God; and unto Christ also, who is Husband, Father,
Brother, etc. to them, and there is no such mystery here as some do conceive.
For the better understanding of it, consider these few things, 1. Although God
made man perfect at the beginning, and put him in some capacity of transacting
with him immediately, Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 2. 16, 17. Yet man, by his fall, did
put himself at a perfect distance from God, and in an utter incapacity to
bargain or deal any more with him immediately. 2. The Lord did, after Adams
fall, make manifest the new covenant, in which he did signify that he was
content to transact with man again, in and through a Mediator; and so did
appoint men to come to him through Christ. Heb. 7. 25. and to look for
acceptance only in him, Ephesians. 1. 6. ordaining men to hear Christ, He being
the only party, in whom God was well pleased, Mat. 17. 5. 3. This matter is so
clear, and supposed to be so notorious in Scripture, and so manifest to all who
are under the Ordinances, that the Lord does often speak of transacting with
himself, not making mention of the Mediator, because it is supposed, that every
one in the Church knows that now there is no dealing with God, except by and
through Christ Jesus the Mediator. 4. Consider, that Christ Jesus, God-man, is
not only a fit meeting place for God and men to meet into, and a fit spokes-man
to treat between the parties now at variance, 2, Cor. 5. 19. But we may say
also he is, the immediate Bridegroom, and so our closing or transacting with
God, may be justly called the marriage of the Kings Son; and the elect may be
called the Lambs Wife, Christ Jesus being, as it were the hand which God
holds out unto men, and on which they lay hold when they deal with God. And
so through and by Christ, we close with God, as our God, on whom our soul does
terminate lastly and ultimately through Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 21. 5. Consider that
the diverse relations mentioned in Scripture, are set down, to signify the
sure and indissoluble union and communion between God and his people:
whatsoever nearness is between head and members, root and branches, King and
Subject, shepherd and flock, father and children, brother and sister, Husband
and Wife, etc. all is here, John 17. 21. to 27. So that whatsoever be spoken in
the Scripture, people may be clear, that God calls them to be reconciled unto
him through Christ, and does offer himself to be their God and Husband in him
alone, and men are to accept God to be their God in Christ, pleasing that way
of relief for poor man, and to give up themselves unto God in Christ, in whom
alone they can be accepted. And they who close with Christ, they do close with
God in him, who is in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Joh. 14. 9. to 12. And we are not to dip further into the diverse relations
mentioned in Scripture, between God or Christ, and men, then as they may point
out union and communion, or nearness with God through Christ Jesus, and our
advantage thereby.

These things being clear we will not multiply words: But since to believe on
Christ is the great duty, required of all that hear this Gospel, we beseech
every one, in the Lords Name, to whom the report of this shall come, that
without delay they take to heart their lost condition in themselves, and that
they lay to heart relief which God has provided by Jesus Christ, whereof he
has made a free offer unto all who will be content of the same, and to be
saved that way. And that they lay to heart, that there is no other way of
escape from the wrath that is to come (because of which men would be glad at
the last day; to run into a lake of melted Lead to be-hid from the face of the
Lamb, whom they do here despise) we say, we beseech all in the consideration of
these things, to work up their hearts to this business, and to lay themselves
open for God, and to receive him through Christ in the offers of the Gospel,
acquiescing in him, as the only desirable and satisfying good, that so they may
secure themselves; go speedily and search for his offers of peace and salvation
in the Scripture, and work up your heart and soul to close with them, and with
Christ in them, and with God in Christ: And do it so, as you may have this to
say, that you were serious, and in earnest, and cordial here, as ever you were
in any thing to your apprehension, and for ought you know, Christ is the choice
of your heart, at least, you neither know nor allow any thing to the contrary:
Whereupon your heart does appeal unto God to search and try if there be ought
amiss, to rectify it, and lead unto the right way. Now this cleaving of the
heart unto him, and casting it self upon him, to be saved in his way, is
believing, which does indeed secure a man from the wrath that is to come,
because now he has received Christ, and believes on him, and so shall not
enter into condemnation, as says the Scripture.

Object. When I hear what it is to believe on Christ Jesus, I think sometimes I
have faith: For I dare say, to my apprehension, the invention of saving sinners
by Christ Jesus, pleases me, my heart goes out after him, and does
determinate upon him as a satisfying treasure; and I am glad to accept God to
be my God in him. But I often do question if ever I have done so, and so am for
most part kept hesitating and doubting if I do believe, or be savingly in
Covenant with God.

Answ. It is ordinary for many whose hearts are gone out after Christ in the
Gospel, Express transacting with God.
and have received him, to bring the same in question again. Therefore I shall
advise one thing as a notable help to fix the soul, in the maintaining faith
and an interest in God; and that is, that men not only close heartily with God
in Christ, as is said, but also, they expressly, explicitly, by word of mouth
and viva voce; And formally close with Christ Jesus, and accept Gods offer of
salvation through him, and so make a Covenant with God. And this, by Gods
blessing may contribute not a little for establishing them about their saving
interest in God.

Before I speak directly to this express Covenanting with God, I premise these
few things. 1. I do not here intend a covenanting with God, essentially
differing from the Covenant between God and the visible Church, as the Lord
does hold it out in his revealed Will. Neither do I intend a Covenant,
differing essentially from that transacting of the heart with God in Christ,
formerly spoken unto: It is that same Covenant, only it differs by a singular
circumstance, viz. the formal expression of the thing which the heart did
before practice. 2. I grant this express covenanting and transacting with God,
is not absolutely necessary for a man's salvation: For, if any person close
heartily and sincerely with God, offering himself in Christ in the Gospel, his
soul and state is thereby secured, according to the Scripture, although he
utter not words with his mouth: But this express verbal covenanting with God is
very expedient, for the better being of a man's state, and his more comfortable
maintaining of an interest in Christ Jesus. 3. This express covenanting with
God is very expedient, for the better being of a man's state, and his more
comfortable maintaining of an interest in Christ Jesus. 3. This express
covenanting with God by word of mouth, is of no worth, without sincere
heart-closing with God in Christ joined with it: For, without that, it is but a
profaning of the Lords Name, and a mocking of him to his face, so to draw near
unto him with the lips, whilst the heart is far away from him. 5. I grant, both
cordial and verbal transacting with God will not make out a man's gracious
estate unto him, so as to put and keep it above controversy, without joint
witness of the Spirit, by which we know what is freely given unto us of God;
yet this explicit way of transacting with God, joined with that heart-closing
with him in Christ, contributes much for clearing up unto a man, that there is
a fixed bargain between God and him, and will do much to ward off him many
groundless jealousies and objections of an unstable mind and heart, which uses
affrontedly to deny this hour, what it did really act and perform the former
hour. This explicit covenanting, is an Instrument taken of what past between
God and the soul, and so has its own vantage for strengthening of Faith.

As for this express covenant, we shall 1. Show that is a very warrantable
practice. 2. We shall show shortly what is preparatorily required of those who
do so transact with God, 3. How men shall go about that duty. 4. What should
follow thereupon.

As to the first, I say, it is a warrantable practice, and in incumbent duty,
exp^^^ly and by word to covenant with God, which appears thus.

1. In many places of Scripture (if we look to what they may bear according to
their scope and the analogy of Faith) God has commanded it, and left it on
people as a duty, Isa. 44. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords, Isa. 45. 24.
Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Jer. 31.
4. Will thou cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth, Zech. 13.
9. They shall say, The Lord is my God, Hos. 2. 16. Thou shall call me Ishi, and
in many places elsewhere. Now since God has so clearly left it on men in the
matter of the word, they may be persuaded, that it is a practice warranted and
allowed by him, and well-pleasing unto him.

2. Arg. It is the approved practice of the Saints in Scripture, thus expressly
to covenant with God, and they have found much quiet in that duty afterward.
David did often expressly say unto God, that he was his God, his portion, and
that himself was his servant. Thomas will put his interest out of question with
it, Joh. 20. 28. Yea, I say, the Saints are much quieted in remembrance of what
has past that way between God and them, Psalm. 73. 25. Psalm. 142. 5. we find it
often in the Book of the Canticles. Now shall the chief Worthies of God be so
much in a duty, breeding so much quiet and satisfaction to them in many cases,
and shall we be under the New Testament, unto whom access is ministered
abundantly and who partake of the sap of the Olive; shall we (I say) lie behind
in this approved piece of freedom with God? Since we study to imitate that
cloud of witnesses in other things (as faith, zeal, patience, etc.) let us all
imitate them in this.

3. Arg. The thing about which we move here is a matter of the greatest
concernmen (...) all the World: It is the life of our Soul, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. Oh
shall men study to be express, explicit, plain and peremptory in all their
other great businesses, because they are such, and shall they not much more be
peremptory and express in this, which does most concern them? I wonder that
many not only do not speak it with their mouth, but that they do not swear, and
subcribe it with their hand, and do not every thing for securing of God to
themselves in Christ; and themselves unto God, which the Scripture does
warrant, Isa. 44. 5.

This also may have its own weight, as an argument to press this way of
covenanting with God. The business of interest in Christ, and of real and
honest transacting with him, is a thing, which in experience of Saints, is most
frequently brought upon debate, and in question. Therefore men had need, all
the ways they can, even by thought, word, and deed, to put it to a point.

This also may have place here for pressing this as a duty, that God is so
formal, express, distinct and legal, (to say so) in all the business of man's
salvation, viz. Christ must be a near kinsman, to whom the right of redemption
does belong; he must be chosen, called, authorized and sent, Covenants formally
draw between the Father and him, the Father accepting payment and satisfaction,
giving formal discharges, all done clearly and expressly. Shall the Lord be so
express, plain and peremptory in every part of the business, and shall our part
of it rest in a confused thought, and we be as dumb beasts before him? If it
were a marriage between man and wife, it would not be judged enough, although
there were consent in heart given by the woman, and known to the man, if she
did never express so much by word, being in a capacity to do so. Now this
Covenant between God and man, is held out in Scripture as a marriage between
man and wife, Hos. 19. 20. 2 Cor. 2. The whole Song of Soloman speaks it. The
Lord uses similitudes, to signify unto us what he intends, and surely this is
a special requisite in Marriage, that the wife give an express and explicit
consent unto the business: The man says so, I take thee to be my lawful wife,
and do oblige my self to be a dutiful husband: The woman is obliged on the
other Part, to express her consent, and to say, Even so I take thee to be my
lawful husband, and do promise duty and subjection: It is so here; The Lord
says, I betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall call me Ishi, my
husband, Hosea 2. I will be for thee as a head and husband if thou will not be
for another, Hosea 3. the man ought to answer, and say, Amen, So be it, Thou
shall be my God, my head, and Lord, and I shall and will be thine, and not for
another, Cant. 6. 3. And so this making of this Covenant with God, is called, a
giving of the hand to him, as the word is, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. which does hint a
very express, formal, explicit and positive bargaining with God. So then, we
conclude it to be an incumbent duty, and a very approved practice, necessary
for the quieting of a man's mind, and his more comfortable being in Covenant
with God, and more fully answering Gods condescendence and offer in that great
and primary promise. I will be your God, and ye shall be my people.

Not only may, and should, people thus expressly close with God in Christ for
fixing their heart; but they may, upon some occasions, renew this verbal
transacting with God; especially, when through tentations they are made to
question if ever they have really and sincerely closed Covenant with God, as
they are to put out new acts of faith, embracing Christ as the desirable
portion and measure, and also upon other occasions, so were it expedient,
especially if there remain any doubt about the thing, that by viva voce and
express word, they determine that controversy, and say of the Lord and to him,
that he is their refuge and portion, Psalm 91. 2. Psalm 142. We find the Saints
doing so; and we may imitate them, especially, 1. In the time of great
backsliding, people were wont to renew the Covenant with God, and we should do
so also; Our heart should go after Christ, in the promises of reconciliation
with God, for he is our peace upon all occasions, and our Advocate, and we are
bound to apprehend him so when we transgress, 1 John 2. 1. and to express so
much by word as Saints did in their formal renewing of the Covenant. 2. When
people are in hazard, then it were good that they should send out their heart
after him, and express their adhering unto him, for securing their own heart;
We find Joshua doing so, when he was to settle in the land of Canaan, in the
midst of snares, Joshua 24. so David does in his straits, Psalm. 57. 1. 3. When
men apprehend God to be at a distance from them, and their Soul be under
withering and decay, then it is safest heartily to close with Christ, and
embrace him by faith for securing of the Soul, and it were good to put it out
of question, by the expressing of the thing; This is the ready way to draw sap
from Christ the root, for recovering of the Soul, and for establishing the
heart before him. The Spouse in the Song of Soloman does so, thus asserting her
interest in him, when in such a condition; Professing and avouching him to be
her beloved, Cant. 5. 4. At the celebration of the Lords Supper, men should
thus cordially close with God in Christ, and speak and express so much; For,
that is a feast of Love; And then, and there we come under a solemn profession
of closing with God in Christ, personally and openly, and do receive the seal
of it: it is therefore beseeming, at that time, to bring up both heart and
tongue to second and answer our profession, apprehending God to be our God, and
resigning over our selves to be his, and at his disposing. We shall not confine
the Lords people to times and season of this duty; The Lord may bind it upon
them at his pleasure; Only there is hazard, that by too frequent express
covenanting with God, men turn too formal in it; Therefore, it is not so fit
that people should cordially at full length renew that explicit transacting
with God, but rather to declare unto God, that they adhere unto the Covenant
made with him, and that they do maintain and will never revoke nor recall the
same; and withal, they may hint the sum of it, in laying claim unto God in
Christ, as their own God; and this they may do often, even in all their
addresses to God, and probably this is the thing designed by the Saints in
their so ordinary practice in the Scripture, whilst they assert their interest
in God, as their God and portion; And it is fit that men in all their walk,
hold their heart at the business, by heart-cleaving to God in Christ, The life
we live in the flesh, should be by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20.

As to the second thing, viz. what is preparatorily required of him who is
expressly to transact with God: Here besides what we spoke before as previous to
a man's closing with Christ Jesus, we only add, 1. That he that would explicitly
bargain with God, must know, that to do so, is warranted and allowed by God, as
we showed before: If this be wanting, a man cannot do it in faith, and so it
will be sin unto him, Romans 14. 23. 2. The man must labor to bring up his heart
to the thing, that it do not belie the tongue; It will be a great mocking of
God, so to draw near him with the lips, whilst the heart is far off from him,
Isa. 29. 13.

The third thing to be considered in this express verbal covenanting with God,
is the way how it is to be performed and managed; And beside what was said
before in heart-closing with Christ; I add here.

1. The man should do it confidently, not only believing that he is about his
duty when he does it; But also, that God in Christ Jesus will accept his poor
imperfect way of doing this duty, he do accept a man according to what he has,
if there be a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8. 12. a mite is accepted, since it is all
the poor woman's substance, Mat. 12. 44. yea if it can be attained, the man
should believe that the issue and consequence of this transacting shall prove
comfortable, and all shall be well, and that God, who engages for all in the
Covenant (since he has determined the man to this happy choice) will in some
measure make him forthcoming, and will perfect what concerns him; Faithful is
he who has promised, who will also do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. If this confidence
be wanting, the matter will be done with much fear and jealousy, if not worse,
and will still prove a disquieting business to the man.

2. It should be done holily: It is called the Holy Covenant, Luke 1. 72. The
holy things of David, Acts 13. 34. Here it were fitting, that what is done in
this express transacting with God, should not be done passingly, and on the by,
but in some special addresses unto God: the thing should be spoken unto the
Lord, Psalm. 142, 5. It is beseeming in so great a business that a piece of time
were set apart for confessing and supplication before God: yea, also the person
so transacting with God, should labor to have high apprehensions of Gods
greatness and sovereignty, 2. Sam. 7. 22. although he thus humble himself to
behold things in Heaven and Earth, and these high and holy thoughts of him,
will and should be attended with debasing and humbling thoughts of self,
although admitted to this high dignity, 2 Samuel 7. 18. It is no small thing to
be allied unto, and with the great God of Heaven, and his Son Christ, as David
speaks when King Saul did offer his Daughter unto him, 1 Samuel 18. 22. Yea,
further, there should be special guarding and watching, that the heart keep
spiritual transacting with God; there is great reason for this holy way of
performing the duty; For, men are ready to forget themselves, and to shape the
Lord according to their own fancy, and to turn carnal in the business, since it
is a marriage transaction held out in all the ordinary expressions of love, as
in the Song of Soloman, Isa. 62. 5. Zeph. 3. 17.

The fourth thing we shall speak a word unto, is, what should follow upon this
express verbal Covenanting with God; I say, beside that union and communion
with God in Christ, following upon believing, if a man explicitly by word
transact with God, 1. He should thenceforth be singularly careful to abide
close by God in all manner of conversations; For if a man thenceforth do any
thing unsuitable, he does falsify his word before God, which will stick much
in his Conscience, and prove a snare; If a man henceforth forget God, and take
on him to dispose of himself, since he is not his own, and has opened his
mouth unto the Lord, he makes enquiry after vows, and devoureth that which is
holy, Prove. 20. 25. 2. He who transacteth with God, should hold steadfast that
determination and conclusion; it is a shame for a man, whose heart has closed
with God; and whose mouth has ratified and confirmed it solemnly before him,
to contradict himself again, and to admit any thing to the contrary, he ought
boldly to maintain the thing against all deadly.

Then let me beseech you who desire to be established in the matter of your
interest in God, that with all convenience you set apart a piece of time for
Prayer before God, and laboring to work up your heart to seriousness,
affection, and the faith of the duty, to make a Covenant, and to transact with
God by express words after this manner:

O Lord, I am a lost and broken Creature by Nature, and by innumerable actual
transgressions which I do confess particularly before thee this day; And
although, being born within the visible Christ, I was from the womb in Covenant
with thee, and had the same sealed unto me in bapsisin; Yet for a long time I
have lived without God in the world, senseless and ignorant of my Obligation,
by virtue of that Covenant. Thou have (at length) discovered unto me, and bound
upon my heart, my miserable state in my self, and have made manifest unto my
heart the satisfying relief thou have provided by Christ Jesus, offering the
same freely unto me, upon condition that I would accept of the same, and would
close with thee as my God in Christ, warranting and commanding me upon my
utmost peril, to accept of this offer, and to flee unto Christ Jesus: Yea, to
my apprehension, now thou have Soveraignly determined my heart, and shaped it
for Christ Jesus, leading it out after him in the offer of the Gospel, causing
me to approach unto the living God, to close so with him, and to acquiesce in
his offer, without any known guile; And that I may come up to that
establishment of Spirit in this matter, which should be to my comfort, and the
praise of thy glorious Grace; Therefore, I am here this day to put this matter
out of question, by express words before thee, according to thy will: And now
I, unworthy as I am, do declare, that I believe, that Christ Jesus, who was
slain at Jerusalem, was the Son of God, and the Savior of the World; I do
believe that record, that there is life eternal for men in him, and in him
only; I do this day in my heart, plead and acquiesce in that device of saving
sinners by him, and do interest my soul unto him; I do accept of reconciliation
with God through him, and do close with thee as my God in him; I choose him in
all that he is, and all that may follow him, and do resign up my self, and what
I am, or have, unto thee, desiring to be divorced from every thing hateful unto
thee, and that without exception, or reservation of any thing (consistent with
my knowledge) or intended reversion; Here I give the hand to thee, and do take
all things about me witnesses, that I, whatever I be, or have hitherto been, do
accept so Gods offer of peace through Christ, and do make a sure Covenant with
thee this day never to be reversed, hoping that thou will make all things
forthcoming, both on thy part and mine, seriously begging (as I desire to be
saved) that my corruptions may be subdued, and my Neck brought unto thy sweet
yoke in all things, and my heart made cheerfully to acquiesce in whatsoever
thou do unto me, or with me, in order to these ends. Now, glory be unto thee,
O Father, who devised such a Salvation, and gave the Son to accomplish it;
Glory be to Christ Jesus, who at so dear a rate, did purchase the out-letting
of that love from the Fathers bosom, and through whom alone this access is
granted, and in whom I am reconciled unto God, and honorably united unto him,
and am no more an Enemy or Stranger: Glory be to the Holy Ghost, who did alarm
me when I was destroying my self: and who did not only convince me of my
hazard, but did also open my eyes to behold the relief provided in Christ;
yea, and did persuade and determine my wild heart to fall in love with Christ,
as the enriching treasure; and this day does teach me how to Covenant with God,
and how to impropriate to my self all the sure Mercies of David, and blessings
of Abraham, and to secure to my self the favor and friendship of God for ever.
Now with my soul, heart, head, and whole man; as I can, I do acquiesce in my
choice this day, henceforth resolving not to be my own, but thine; And that the
care of whatsoever concerns me shall be on thee, as my Head and Lord,
protesting humbly that failings on my part, (against which I resolve thou
know) shall not make void this Covenant; for so have thou said, which I
intend not to abuse, but so much the more to cleave close unto thee, and I must
have liberty to renew, ratify, and draw extracts of this transaction, as often
as shall be found needful. Now I know thy consent to this bargain, stands
recorded in Scripture, so as I need no new signification of it; and I, having
accepted of thy offer upon thy own terms, will henceforth wait for what is
good, and for thy salvation in the end; As thou art faithful, pardon what is
amiss in my way of doing the thing, and aceept me in my sweet Lord Jesus, in
whom I only desire pardon: And in testimony hereof, I set to my Seal, that God
is True, and in declaring him a competent Savior.

Let People Covenant with God in fewer or more words, as the Lord shall dispose
them; for we intend no Platform of words for any person; Only it were fitting
that men should, before the Lord acknowledge their lost state in themselves,
and the relief that is by Christ, and that they do declare that they accept of
the same, as it is offered in the Gospel, and do thankfully rest satisfied with
it, intrusting themselves henceforth wholly unto God to be saved in his way,
for which they according to his faithfulness. If men would heartily and
sincerely do this, it might heartily through the Lords blessing, help to
establish them against many fears and jealousies; And they might date some good
thing from this day and hour, which might prove comfortable unto them when they
fall in the dark afterward, and even when many failings do stare them in the
face perhaps at the hour of death, 2 Samuel 23. 5. It is much if a man can appeal
unto God, and say, Thou know there was a day and an hour, when in such a
place, I did accept of peace through Christ, and did deliver up my heart to
thee, to write on it thy whole Law without exception; heaven and earth are
witnesses of it: Remember thy word unto thy Servant, on which thou causedst me
to hope.

Object. I dare not adventure to speak such words unto God, because I find not
my heart coming up full length in Affection and Seriousness: So, I should but
lie unto God, in transacting so with him.

Answ. It is to be regreted that men's heart does not with much bended sail of
Desire and Affection embrace and welcome that blessed offer and portion: Yet
for answer to the objection, remember, 1. That those to whom the Lord gives
the new heart, forming Christ in them, the whole heart is not renewed; There is
Flesh and Spirit lusting against each other, the one contrary unto the other,
so as a man can neither do the good or evil he would do with full bended sail,
Gal. 5. 17. It is well if there be a good part of the heart going out after
Christ, desiring to close with him on his own terms, 2. That there is often a
rational love in the heart unto Christ Jesus, expressing it self by a respect
to his Commandments. 1. John 5. 3. when there is not a sensible prevailing love
which makes the soul sick, Cant. 2. 5. Men must not always expect to find
this. I say then, although some* what in your heart draw back, yet if you can
say, you are convinced of your broken state without him, you want a
righteousness to cover your guilt, and you want strength to stand out against
sin, or to do what is pleasing before God: You also see fullness in him in both
these respects: You dare say somewhat, within your heart, would be fain at him
upon his own terms, and would have both Righteousness for Justification, and
strength in order to Sanctification; and what is within you contradicting this;
is your burden in some measure, and your bondage. If it be so, your heart is
brought up to a tolerable length; Go on to the business, and determine the
matter by covenanting with God, and say with your mouth, that you have both
Righteousness and Strength in God, as he has sworn you shall do, Isa. 45. 24.
It is approved Divinity to say unto God, I believe, when much mis-belief is in
me, and the heart divided in the case, Mark 9. 24. Withal, show unto God, how
matters are in your heart, that so you may be without guile before him;
concealing nothing from him, and put your heart, that is, in his hand to write
his Law on it according to the Covenant; For that is the thing he seeks of
men, that they deliver up their heart to him, that he may stamp it with his
whole Will, without exception; And if you can heartily consent unto that,
judging Christ's blood a sufficient ransom and satisfaction for Man's
Trangression; You may go and expressly strike Covenant with God; for your Heart
and Affection is ready engaged.

Object. I dare not so Covenant with God, lest I break to him; Yea, I persuade
my self, if such a tentation did offer so and so circumstantiate, I should fall
before it, and succumb. Therefore to transact so with God, whilse I foresee
such a thing were but to aggvedge my condemnation.

Answ. 1. You have already entered Covenant with God, as you are a member of his
visible Church; And what is now pressed upon you, is, but that you more heartily,
sincerely, particularly, and more expressly covenant and transact with him; You
are already obliged heartily to close with God in Christ; And, if you do it in
heart, I hope the hazard is no greater by saying that you do so, or have done
so. 2. What will you do if you shift hearty transacting with God in Christ, and
do not accept his peace, as it is offered? You have not a second of it in the
World; Either you must do this, or perish for ever: And if you do it with your
heart, you may also say it with your tongue. 3. If people may scare at
Covenanting with God, because they will afterward Transgress, then not one man
should Covenant with God; for surely every one will transgress afterward, if
they live any length of time after the transaction; And we know no way like
this, to secure men from falling: For if you Covenant honestly with him,
engages, beside the new heart, to put his fear and Law therein; To give his
Spirit to cause you to walk in his way: And when you Covenant with God, you
deliver up your self unto him, to be sanctified and made conform to his will;
It is rather a giving up of your self to be led in his way in all things, and
kept from every evil way, than any formal engagement on your part, to keep his
way, and to hold off from evil. So that you need not scare at the Covenant, the
Language whereof is, Will thou not be made clean? Jer. 13. 27. And all that
shun to strike Covenant with God, do thereby declare, that they desire not to
be made clean. 4. As it is hard for any to say confidently, they will
transgress, if such a tentation did offer so and so circumstantiate; because
men may think, that either God will keep a tentation out of their way, or not
suffer them to be tempted above what they are able to bear, or give to them a
way of escape, Psalm. 46. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 13. So the question is not, What I may
do afterward, but, what I now resolve to do. If my heart charge me presently
with any deceit or resolution to transgress, I must lay aside that deceit
before I transact with God: But if my heart charge me with no such purpose*
yea, I dare say, I resolve against every transgression; And although I think I
shall fall before such and such a tentation, yet that thought flows not from
any allowed, and approved resolution to do so; But from knowledge of my own
corruption, and of what I have done to provoke God to desert me. But the Lord
knows, I resolve not to Transgress, nor do I approve any secret inclination of
my heart to such a sin, but would reckon it my singular mercy to be kept from
sin in such a case; And I judge my self a wretched man, because of such a boby
of death within me, which does threaten to make me transgress. In that case, I
say, my heart does not condemn me, therefore I may, and ought to have
confidence before God, 1 John 3. 21. If this be the case, I say to thee,
although thou should afterward fail many ways, and so perhaps draw upon
thy self sad temporal strokes thereby, And lose for a season many expressions
of his Love, yet there is an Advocate with the Father to plead thy pardon, 1
John 2. 1. Who has satisfied for our breaches, Isa. 53. 5, 6. and for his
sake, God resolves to hold fast the Covenant with men after their
transgression, Psalm. 89. 30. 37. else how could he be said to betroth us to
himself for ever, Hos. 2. 19, 20. and how could the Covenant be called
Everlasting, ordered in all things and sure, if there were not ground of
comfort in it, even when our house is not so and so with God; 2 Samuel 23. 25.
Yea, it were no better than the Covenant of Works, if those who enter it with
God, could so depart from him again, as to make it void unto themselves, and to
put themselves into a worse condition than they were in before they made it,
Jer. 32. 40. compared with Heb. 8. 6. The Lord hates putting away, Mal. 2. 16.
No honest heart will stumble on this, but will rather be strengthened thereby in
duty, Hos. 14. 9. For other ties and bonds, beside divorce, and punishment by
death, do oblige the ingenuous wife unto duty. So here men will fear the Lord
and his Goodness, Hos. 3. 5.

Object. I have at the celebration of the Lords Supper, and at some other
occasions, covenanted expressly and verbally with God, but my barrenness in his
ways, and the renewed jealousies of my gracious state, makes me question if
ever I transacted with God in sincerity, and I think I can do it no other ways
than I have done it.

Answ. 1. Men are not to expect fruitfulness according to their desire, nor
full assurance of Gods Favor, immediately after they have fled unto Christ,
and expressly transacted with God in him. These things will keep a man on work
all his days. The Saints had their failings and short-comings, yea, and
backslidings, with many fits of dangerous mis-belief, after they had very
seriously, and sincerely, and expressly closed with God, as their God in Christ.
2. Many do look for faithfulness in their walk and establishment of faith, from
their own sincerity in transacting with God, rather than from the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus. They fix their heart in their own honesty and resolutions, and not
in the Blessed Root Christ Jesus, without whom we can do nothing, and are
vanity altogether in our best estate. Men should remember, that one piece of
grace cannot produce any degree of grace; Further, nothing can work grace but
the arm of Jehovah: And if men would lean unto Christ, and covenant with him as
their duty absolutely, whatsoever may be the consequence, at least, looking
only to him for the suitable fruit, it should be far better with them: God
pleases not that men should betake themselves unto Christ, and covenant with
him for a season until they see if such and such fruit and establishment shall
follow, purposing to disclaim their interest in him, and the Covenant, if such
and such fruit does not appear within such a length of time. This is to put the
ways of God to trial, and is very displeasing unto him. Men must absolutely
close with Christ, and covenant with him, resolving to maintain these things as
their duty, and a ready way to reach fruit, whatsoever shall follow thereupon,
they having a testimony within them, that they seriously design conformity to
his revealed will in all things; And they that have closed Covenant with him
for the same end, as well as to be saved thereby. 3. Men should be sparing to
bring in question their sincerity in transacting with God, unless they can
prove the same, or have great presumptions for it. if you can prove any deceit
or guile in your transacting with him, you are obliged to disclaim and rectify
it, and to transact with God honestly, and without guile: But if you know
nothing of your deceit or guile, in the day you did transact with him; Yea, you
can say, that you did appeal unto God in that day, that you dealt honestly with
him, and intended not to deceive: and, did obtest him according to his
faithfulness, to search and try if there was any crookedness in your way, and
to discover it unto you, and heal it, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. and afterward you
came to the Light* that your deeds might be manifest, John 3. 20, 21. and you
can say, that Gods answers from his Word to you, in so far as you could
understand, were answers of peace, and confirmations of your sincerity; Yea,
further, you dare say, that if upon life and death, you were again to transact
with him, you can do it no other way, nor intending more sincerity and
seriousness than before: Then I dare say unto thee in the Lords name, thou
ought not to question thy sincerity in transacting with God, but to have
confidence before God, since thy heart does not condemn thee, 1 John 3. 21. and
thou art bound to believe that God deals uprightly with the upright man, and
with the pure does show himself pure, Psalm. 18. 25, 26. If a man intend
honestly, God will not suffer him to beguile himself, yea, the Lord suffers
no man to deceive himself, unless the man intend to deceive both God and Men.
4. Therefore, impute your unfruitfulness to your unwatchfulness, and your
mis-belief; And impute your want of full assurance, unto an evil heart of
unbelief, helped by Satan to act against the glorious free grace of God; And
charge not these things upon want of sincerity in your closing with Christ; And
resolve henceforth to abide close by the root, and you shall bring forth more
Fruit; And by much Fruit you lay your self open to the witness of Gods Spirit,
which will testify with your Spirit, that you have sincerely and honestly
closed with God, and that the rest of your works are wrought in God, and
approved of him; and so the witness of the Spirit and the Water, joining with
the blood, whereupon you are to lay the weight of your Soul and Conscience; And
where alone you are to sink the curses of the Law, due unto you for all your
sins and failings in your best things. These three do agree in one; viz. That
this is the way of life, and peace, and that you have interest therein, and so
you come to quietness and full assurance, John 15. 4, 5. and 14. 21, 23. Romans
8. 16. 1 John 5. 1.

O blessed bargain of the New Covenant, and thrice blessed Mediator of the
same! Let him ride prosperously, and subdue Nations and Languages, and gather
in all his Jewels, that honorable company of the firstborn, and stately troop
of Kings and Priests, whose glory it shall be to have washed their garments in
the blood of that spotless Lamb; and whose happiness shall continually flourish
in following him whithersoever he goes; And in being in the immediate company
of the Ancient of days, one sight of whose face shall make them in a manner
forget that ever they were on the Earth. O if I could persuade men to believe,
that these things are not yea and nay, and to make haste toward him, who
hastes to judge the World, and to call men to an account, especially about the
improvement of this Gospel! Even so, come Lord Jesus.

The whole Treatise resumed in a few Questions and Answers.
Quest.

WHat is the great business a man has to do in the World?

Answ. To make sure a Saving Interest in Christ Jesus, and to walk suitably
thereunto.

Quest. 2. Have not all the members of the visible Church a Saving Interest in
Christ?

Answ. No verily; yea, but a very few of them have it.

Quest. 3. How shall I know, if I have a Saving Interest in him?

Answ. Ordinarily the Lord prepares his own way in the Soul, by a work of
Humiliation, and discovers a man's sin and misery to him, and exercises him
so therewith, that he longs for the Physician Christ Jesus.

Quest. 4. How shall I know, if I have got a competent discovery of my sin and
misery?

Answ. A competent sight of it, makes a man take Salvation to heart above any
thing in this World: It makes him disclaim all relief in himself, even in his
best things: It makes Christ, who is the Redeemer, very precious to the soul:
It makes a man stand in awe to sin afterward; Makes him content to be saved
upon any terms God pleases.

Quest. 5. What other way may I disc^rn a Saving Interest in him?

Answ. By the going out of my heart seriously and affectionately toward him,
as he is held out in the Gospel; And this is faith, or believing.

Quest. 6. How shall I know if my heart goes out after him aright, and that my
faith is true Saving Faith?

Answ. Where the heart goes out aright after him, in true and saving Faith,
the soul pleases Christ alone above all things, and pleases him in all his
three Offices, to rule and instruct, as well as to save; And is content to
cleave unto him, whatsoever inconvenience may follow.

Quest. 7. What other mark of a Saving Interest in Christ can you give to me?

Answ. He that is in Christ savingly, is a new Creature, he is graciously
changed and renewed in some measure, in the whole man, and in all his ways;
pointing toward all the known commands of God.

Quest. 8. What if I find sin now and then prevailing over me?

Answ. Although every sin deserves everlasting vengeance; Yet if you be
afflicted for your failings, confess them with shame of face unto God,
resolving to strive against them honestly henceforth, and flee unto Christ for
pardon, you obtain mercy, and your interest stands sure.

Quest. 9. What shall the man do who cannot lay claim to Christ Jesus, nor any
of these marks spoken of?

Answ. Let him not take rest, until he make sure unto himself a Saving Interest
in Christ.

Quest. 10. What way can a man make sure an interest in Christ, who never had a
saving interest in him hitherto?

Answ. He must take his sins to heart, and his great hazard thereby, and he
must take to heart Gods offer of pardon, and peace through Christ Jesus, and
hear^ily close with Gods offer, by betaking himself unto Christ, the blessed
refuge.

Quest. 11. What if my sins be singularly heinous, and great, beyond ordinary?

Answ. Whatsoever thy sins be, if thou will close with Christ Jesus by faith,
thou shall never enter into condemnation.

Quest. 12. Is faith in Christ only required of me?

Answ. Faith is the only condition, upon which God does offer peace and pardon
unto men: But be assured, Faith, if it be true and saving, will not be alone in
the Soul, but will be attended with true repentance, and a thankful study of
conformity to Gods Image.

Quest. 13. How shall I be sure that my heart does accept of Gods Offer, and
does close with Christ Jesus?

Answ. Go make a Covenant expressly, and by word speak the thing unto God.

Quest. 14. What way shall I do that?

Answ. Set apart some bit of time, and having considered your own lost estate,
and the relief offered by Christ Jesus, work up your heart to please and close
with that offer, and say unto God expressly, that you do accept of that offer,
and of him to be your God in Christ; and do give up your self to him to be
saved in his way, without reservation or exception in any case* and that you
henceforth will wait for salvation in the way he has appointed.

Quest. 15. What if I break unto G^d afterward?

Answ. You must resolve on his strength not to break, and watch over your own
way, and put your heart in his hands to keep it: And if you break, you must
confess it unto God, and judge your self for it, and flee to the Advocate for
pardon, and resolve to do no more so: and this you must do as often as you fail.

Quest. 16. How shall I come to full assurance of my interest in Christ, so as
it may be above controversy?

Answ. Learn to lay your weight upon the blood of Christ, and study purity and
holiness in all manner of conversation, and pray for the witness of Gods Spirit
to join with the blood and the water; and his Testimony added unto these, will
establish you in the faith of, and Interest in Christ.

Quest. 17. What is the consequence of such closing with God in Christ by heart
and mouth?

Answ. Union and communion with God; All good here and his blessed fellowship
in Heaven for ever afterward.

Quest. 18. What if I slight all these things and not lay them to heart to put
them in practice?

Answ. The Lord comes with his Angels in flaming fire; to render vengeance to
them who obey not this Gospel; And thy judgment shall be greater than the
judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah; and so much the greater that thou have read
this Treatise: for, it shall be a witness against thee in that day.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for and sold by Dorman Newman, at the Sign of the
Kings Arms in the Poultry.
CHoice and Practical Expositions on the Ten Commandments preached by James
Durham late Minister in Glasgow.

A Golden Key to open hidden Treasure, or several great points, which refer to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness; With the resolution
of several Important questions, the Active, and Passive obedience of Christ,
Vindicated and Improved; two serious, and singular pleas which all sincere
Christians may safely make to all those ten Scriptures which speak of the
General, and particular Judgment that must certainly pass on all etc. The 1st.
and 2d. part by Tho. Brooks late preacher of the Gospel at St. Margaret new
Fish-street.

A Collection of Sermons preached at the Morning Lecture in Southwark and
elsewhere, By Nicholas Blakie.

The Morning seeker, showing the benefit of being good betimes, with directions
to make sure work about early Religion, by John Ryther.

The Interest of Reason in Religion with the Import and use of Scripture
Metaphors and the matter of union, between Christ and believers with
reflections on several late writings, especially, Mr. Sherlocks discourse,
concerning the knowledge of Christ modestly enquired into and stated, by James
Ferguson.

The Works of Mr. James Janeway containing these six following Treatises,
Heaven upon Earth, or the best friend in the worst of times; Death unstung, A
Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Mosely an Apothecary, with a Narrative
of his life and death, also the manner of Gods dealing with him before and
after his conversion; A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Savage:
Invisible realities demonstrated in the Holy life and Triumphant death of Mr.
John Janeway; His Legacy to his friends containing 27 famous Instances of Gods
providence in, and about Sea dangers and deliverances, with a Sermon on that
subject.

Life in Gods favor, a seasonable discourse in Death-threatning times, being
the substance of Sundry Sermons, on Psalm. 30. 5. In his favor is life, By O.
Haywood Minister of the Gospel.

A call to prayer in two Sermons on that subject lately preached to a Country
Auditory, with an account of the Principles and Practices of the Quakers in
matter of prayer subjoyned, wherein is showed that the Quaker's religion is
much wanting in prayer, and they themselves grossly guilty in not calling upon
God, and of Fathering much impiety on the Spirit of God, alleging him in
defense of their prayer-less cause.

Quakerism Subverted being a further discovery and confutation of the Gross
Errors of the Quakers, Published and maintained by Will. Penn and others of
that sect.

A warning to Souls to beware of Quakers and Quakerism, by occasion of a late
dispute at Early in Cheshire, all three written by John Cheyney Minister of the
Gospel.

Gospel remission, or a Treatise showing that true blessedness consists in
Pardon of sin, wherein is discovered the many gospel-Mysteries therein
contained, the glorious effects proceeding from it, great mistakes made about
it, the true Signs and Symptoms of it; Way and means to obtain it; by Jeremiah
Borough.

A Protestants resolution, showing his reasons why he will not be a Papist,
digested into so plain a method, of Question and answer, that an ordinaay
Capacity may be able to defend the Protestant Religion; against the most
Cunning Jesuit or popish Priest.

Mr. Wadsworth's Legacy, being his serious exhortation to an holy Life; Or a
plea for the absolute necessity of Inherent righteousness, in those that hope
to be saved.

The triumphs of Gods revenge against the crying and Execrable sin of murder,
expressed in 30. several Tragical Histories, to which is added, Gods revenge
against the abominable sin of Adultery.

A Token for children, being an exact account of the Conversion; Holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children in 2 parts; by
James Janeway minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.

