REFLECTIONS UPON THE ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE Bishop of Worcester's LETTER

By H. G.

Quis coelum terra non misceat, and mare coelo,
Clodius accuset moechos, Catilina Cethegum,
In Tabulam Scyllae si dicant discipuli tres.
LONDON, Printed by A. W. for John Martyn, James Allestry and Thomas Dicas, and
are to be sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

Reflections upon the Annimadversions upon the Bishop of Worcester's Letter by
H. G.
IF he be inexcusable that Judges another, because he condemns himself, what
excuse then shall he have that condemns another in what he himself allows? With
what face then can D. E. declame so against the Bishop of Worcester's Passion,
when as were he so guilty as D. E would have him; yet in this very thing does
D. E. so clearly outvy the Bishop that no impartial Reader but must grant this
phrensy he has antidated the Dog Days above four Months the usual season? and
indeed D. E. shall do well to glory in his Victory herein; for unless you
grant him his Arguments for propagation of Paganis^: you shall neither find
Sense nor Reason in Animadversions upon the Bishops Letter.

The second Paragraph contains a Concession of the Cause in controversy
between the Bishop and Mr. Baxter, upon supposition it to be stated as Dr.
Gunning and Dr. Pearson do attest: yet is he much unsatisfied with many things
of general concernment: as

1. First, That Kings and Bishops are of such inseparable dependence, that they
must needs stand and fall together; and all who are enemies to one, must needs
be Enemies to the other. Nor was this passionately affirmed by the Bishop: for
if men may argue a posteriori, from the effect to find out the cause, or that
men may take warning from others harms, then do I affirm that no where in the
Christian world, that ever Christian men (if they be worthy to be called so)
did ever cast off their obedience to Episcopal Government, but when they
acquired force proportionable to their will, they did, or did attempt to
subvert the State Government either in person or Specie; besides in reason if
men may arrogate to themselves a licenciousnesse of casting off their obedience
to the Church, what then can restrain them to their obedience to the State? for
it is the same Spirit which commands men to hear the Church, and to submit to
Higher powers; and if this were not to the Church governed by Bishops, I would
desire D. E. to show any Church in Christ endome before Calvin otherwise
governed; and certainly D. E. upon better consideration cannot believe our
Savior to have with his blood established a confused Church, to continue till
his next coming again, without any Order or Government, especially having the
constant custom of Christianity to the contrary; and he that is possessed, has
title good enough, until he be evicted by a better title or arguments than D.
E. can find against this. How much D. E. is in his Judgment for the Order of
Bishops, will appear by and by in his second Objection against the Bishops
assertion.

1. D. E, his first Argument against the Bishops assertion is, that, It is
clear from Story, that Kings were in all parts of the World, in their most
flourishing state, defore ever Bishops were heard of; and no reason can be
given; why what has once been, may not be with the same convenience again; a
pretty convenient argument this is: why certainly D. E. is not so very a
Heathen, as not to believe the Bishop to be a Christian, or that the Bishop did
not speak to Christians, or affirm this of a Christian State? Why let D. E.
show that ever in the Christian world, Episcopal Government was rejected, and
yet Regal continued (unless in Scotland, when King James was a child, and made
an Instrument to advance the Kirks seditious ends) and he says something;
unless D. E. by his convenient argument would utterly abolish Christianity
from us, and introduce Paganism and Heathenism again amnog, which he very
handsomely prosecutes in his next argument, viz.

2. Bishops, as they are established by Law in England, are purely the Kings
subordinate Ministers in the management of Ecclestastical affairs which his
Majesty may conferr upon whae Order of men he pleases, though they be as much
Lay persons at you or I am. It is therefore very injurious to the Kings
Authority, to aver that he could not otherwise uphold and maintain it, than by
preserving the undue, and as some think Antichristian Dignity and prelation of
his inferior Officers; So that one of these two consequences do inevitably
follow, either that Christ left no Episcopal Power and Ministers in his Church,
or else that by the Law established in England, it and they are utterly
suppressed; and the Bishops in all acts of Preaching, Baptizing, Consecrating,
Ordaining etc. are not Christ's but purely the Kings Ministers. And in truth I
do not know any thing which has rendered Christianity, and all Christian
Religion, nay, and Gods taking our Nature upon him, to redeem and save mankind,
so vile as this argument has done. I desire to be satisfied as a Christian, to
know what Christ has established, that does any way repugn my duty as a man
which I ow my King. I am sure he most certainly and positively commands all
obedience to Kings and higher Powers. I am sure the Administration of the
Sacrament, the Preaching of Christ crucified, the Burial of the Dead, and
consecrating proper places for Gods Worship and Service, and Ordaining
separated persons for such purposes, no way hinders the Kings Supremany over
all the persons of his Subjects; even in these very cases; but they are as much
his Subjects, after such Ordination as before. Nay I affirm, that in a Church
planted; the free exercise of this power in all Kings Dominions, and all
Glebes, and endowments whatsoever are Donations and Concessions from them, Nor
was the practice of Christians (when there was a Christian Church and no
Christian State, though D. E. thinks it absurd and insignificant to distinguish
them) ever better to Princes in their obedience than in the primitive times.

Having thus showed that the Bishops, nor any thing ordained by our Savior, is
any ways injurious to the King. I desire the Reader to take notice how much D.
E. has verified his Judgment for the Order of Bishops, which makes it a mere
Civil Sanction, and so has not any dependence on, or creation by Christ.

3. He says, that Bishops are of so little use to support Regal Dignity (which
is founded upon a distinct Basis of its own) that upon enquiry it will be
found, none have been greater enemies to it than some Bishops; for want of
argument to show that Bishops are no support to Regal power, D. E. here only
affirms against some Bishops to have been Enemies to it; and I can tell D. E.
of twenty times more Bishops have been active and suffered for it; and so D. E.
if he will have the personal faults of particular men to make Episcopacy
dangerous to Regality, will have above twenry to one against him, and therefore
to advance it, it is therefore absurdly done of him to charge Crimine ab uno
Disce omnes upon the Bishop here, when as he himself has nothing else to make
good his exception.

2. For want of argument against the Bishops assertion, that the Bishop is the
sole Pastor of all Congregations in his Diocese, D. E. is sure he says (but it
is only upon his own Authority, and Gratis dictum) it can be defended by those
arguments which maintain the Popes supremacy, which is all one, as if D. E.
should be sure that my going to Church, can only be maintained by those
arguments which are alleged to maintain Mass; and therefore I should never come
there; and if he had understood a little Logic, he would have found he had
proved the Bishops assertion by the practice of Paul and Peter (though no
Saints of his) which he brings against it; for to bid and command, is the
Predicament of Relation to something subject to it; and if Paul may bid the
Elders of Ephesus, and Peter command his fellow Elders, then necessarily, must
the Elders of Ephesus, and Peter's fellow Elders be subject to Paul and Peter,
which is (I believe) as much as the Bishop will desire.

3. I commend D. E. that in his 3. objection he charges the Bishop, page 3.
that such as come not in by the door, to be Thieves and Robbers ought to be
understood of such Ministers as speak to Congregations without the Bishops
License; whereas the Bishop then only charges Mr. Baxter not to come in by the
door, but to be a Thief and Robber, because he had not only robbed the
Right-full Vicar of Kidderminster of his Reputation, but of his means and
maintenance, D. E. therefore does very well to set up a man of straw this cold
weather, and get himself heat by threshing of it: but if D. E. be good at
Addition, he is no less at Substraction, and therefore takes no notice of the
Bishops instance of Saint Paul and Alexander the Copper-smith, and Demas,
Philetus, and H^meneus, for D. E. his objection against preaching without a
License after Ordination, because it cannot be dissolved, much less hindered in
the free use, except for moral and notoriously vicious misdemeanors: I grant
that power indissoluble, because a divine institution; yet does it not
therefore follow, that the exercise of it may not be suspended upon abuse of
it. However D. E. puts the cart before the horse, in affirming it impossible to
be dissolved, much less impeached, or hindered in the free use of it. For his 2.
objection of being unreasonable for one Minister of the Gospel to silence
another, and the Bishop to be no more. He himself before granted it in Paul's
bidding, and Peter's commanding the Elders, and Paul and Peter were but
Ministers of the Gospel; and if Paul and Peter might bid and command, then
might Paul and Peter forbid, and silence, for cujus est velle, ejus est nolle.
But it is well here he allows the Bishop to be a Minister of the Gospel, and
so Christ's, whereas, page 2. he makes him purely the Kings. And now let me tell
D. E. that the Judges of Assize are fellow subjects with himself, yet for ought
I know, may proceed against, and hang him, if he mends not his manners. Nor
has D. E. got so great a Goal of the Bishop in affirming our Savior to put
the Scribes and Pharisees to silence by Argument only; for the Scribes and
Pharisees were rightfully in Moses chair, and had not as Thieves and Robbers
invaded the rights and just possessions of other men, as the Presbyterians did;
nor in that formality as Presbyterians had they, or now have any right or power
to teach the people, and if it be not true (which he says, the Bishop lays to
their charge) of preaching nothing but sedition and treason, as contrary to
their principles, I am sure it is no way contrary to their Practice, and so
they are the more manifest Hypocrites in being so.

4. D. E. 4 th. objection is injurious and false: for in all ages, the Church
did, and might in point of Conscience, enjoin penance for public, or private
faults, although forgiven, or not taken notice of by Temporal Powers, without
any breach, or disturbance of the public Peace; neither do I find, or believe,
that the Bishop does affirm the Church distinct from the State, to have any
coercive power.

5. D. E. 5 th. objection is so wild and impertinent, that I am confident the
Bishop did never dream of such a consequence as he there puts, where things are
commanded by them who have no right, or Authority to do it.

6. And whereas D. E. in his sixth objection against the Bishop, would have it
an unconscionable thing to go against any pretense of Scripture, or practice of
Primitive times, and to impose in Gods worship, things confessedly needless and
trivial; and therefore what the Bishop uncompassionately tells us, that our
Laws do well to punish, even with nonadmission to the Sacrament, such as will
not or perhaps dare not kneel. I am unwilling to dispute with any man, where
the terms of the subject matter are not first defined, much less where my
Adversary, and I, it may be, mean quite contrary things by them. I say then by
Conscience, I understand always a rightful power commanding, or forbidding
any thing, and if any subordinate power to which I am subject, commands
contrary to it, then to submit to the penalty, but never to resist the power.
Now would I know what Law of God forbids me to kneel at the receiving the
Sacrament, or otherwise I cannot plead conscience against it, if I be enjoined
to do it by any Authority to which I am subject, and therefore our Laws do well
to punish those who will not conform; and that kneeling and outward gestures
are not trivial and needless (as D. E. is pleased to term them) in the worship
and service of God, is evident both by the old Law and Gospel, and consent of
all men in all ages and places, until denied by our late, and now Hypocrites
and Reformers. I say that outward gestures are commanded by our Savior
himself, in Gods worship; for when the Devil tempted our Savior, he bid him
not ask any thing of him, but fall down and worship him; which was only an
outward gesture; but our Savior told that, it was written that thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: to worship God
therefore with an outward worship, is commanded by our Savior. And I pray,
what is God jealous of in the second Commandment of falling down and worshipping
any creature, but that that should be given to it, which is only due and proper
to him? and by the Authority of all storys, men did ever, wheresoever they
apprehended a Deity, worship it with outward worship. It may be it was a
trivial and needless thing in Moses, at another time to put off his shoes, it
was not so when God bid him put them off, because the place was holy. But D. E.
has two reasons against the Bishops reason for non-admission of such as will
not kneel at receiving the Sacrament, viz. that it become not the Lawgivers to
endanger the Churches peace for their sakes; one is, it did much more become
all Lawgivers in the things of God, to observe the Law of Christ, which is a
Law of Love and Liberty. When D. E. shows that kneeling, or observing things
duly required of us in Gods service does become destructive to Christ's Law of
Love and Liberty, then he says something: in the mean time, I think D. E. to be
a wondrous proper instrument to plead for Love and Liberty in Religion; for his
love it appears by his Animadversion, and for his Liberty, sure his Religion is
yet to choose. His second is the Churches peace to be more endangered by
pressing things doubtful, than by the forbearance of them; for since by
enforcing of such things as God has no where commanded, our Christian Liberty
is enfringed, from hence it follows, if it ought not, yet we may lawfully
refuse such impositions, as our Savior did, not washing his hands before meat,
and the Apostle Paul in case of Circumcision. What, though God has not
commanded things in his worship and service, shall therefore nothing be done in
it? nothing less; for it is sufficient to me, that God commands me to hear and
obey the Church, and commands the Church to do all things decently, and in
order, in his worship and service; what things therefore the Church commands
for decency and order in Gods worship, if they be not contrary to Gods Laws,
are not things doubtful, but ought in conscience to be submitted to, upon
penalty of the breach of Gods Law, in not hearing and disobeying the Church.
For D. E. his instances of our Saviors, and the Apostles refusing to observe
the Pharisees in washing of hands, and Circumcission, it is both blasphemous and
false; for our Savior was in the power of the Pharisees, in reference to the
Ceremonial Law; and therefore D. E. cannot assume to himself like liberty with
our Savior, and Circumcission being typical was fulfilled by our Savior, and
the use of it a denial of his coming in the Flesh.

7. Nor is that a Rope of Sand, which the Bishop affirms, that from diversity
in external Forms, arises dislike, from dislike enmity, from enmity opposition;
thence Schism in the Church, and Sedition in the State: For as Socrates objects
to Eutyphro, that there must necessarily be something to which men in
difference must indifferently submit to, or their dissentions will be endless:
and if the established Rules in the Church for Gods Worship and Service, be not
that thing to which D. E. and I must indifferently submit to, then is there
nothing in the power of D. E. or my self, which can prescribe another; and so
by consequence there can be no decency nor order in the Worship and Service of
God, but all things therein left in confusion and disorder, which is expressly
against the Divine Canon.

Nor did ever D. E. or any seditious men, begin at Sedition directly, but
always pretended conscience, and made Religion a stalking horse thereunto,
according to that of the Poet, Quoties vis fallere Plebem Finge Deum.

And I challenge D. E. to instance in any Age or Place, where men invaded the
Peace of the Church, but they at least attempted the like in the State: and now
see how vain and Idle ^ll 3 of D. E. objections against the Bishops assertion
are: his first reason is, that in Diversity of external Forms, without any
dislike as to the Person, the Apostles that preached to the Circumcision, gave
the right hand of fellowship to the Apostles of the Gentiles; although their
outward Rites and public Worship were far more different than those, which by
any of the most distant persuasions, are now practiced in England. So that D.
E. grants the Bishop, that external Forms in Gods Worship is an Apostolic
practice, without any prejudice to the Bishop's assertion: for, since God in
our nature has not left in what external Form he will be worshipped, but to
every Church her liberty; and therefore diverse Apostles, and diverse Churches,
ever did, and now do use diverse external Forms in their Worship of God; And
therefore the Church of England may use one external Form, different from that
of France, and that of France, another from that of Greece etc. without any
dislike; yet does it not therefore follow, that D. E. may raise Schism in the
Church of England or France, any more than that because the Laws of England and
France are different, therefore D. E. is not obliged by them, but may make
Rebellion and raise Sedition in them. Certainly if D. E. had Logic enough to
understand his Arguments, I would not wish the Bishop a better Advocate.

But whereas D. E. in his second objection, thinks for want of reason he has
so sure a Topic in his instance of a Pagan State existing without Bishops, and
therefore in Triumph he again objects it; give me leave to speak as a man and
Christian. I say then, as I am a man I acknowedge Regality to be a sacred Order
and founded by God in Nature, and so ever continued both before and since the
Flood in all the world, where it was not invaded and violated by Seditious men:
and that by inherent birthright I ow my Sovereign Lord the King, all
Allegiance next under God; and this being founded in Nature, is an indelible
Character, and cannot be dissolved but by God alone, but is due in all places,
whether I be in the Kings Dominions or not; but since man's fall, there was
nothing in Nature left him whereby he might attain that blessedness from which
he fell; therefore God was pleased to take extraordinarily our Nature upon him,
to redeem us, that by believing on him, and observing his commands, we might
attain that happiness from which our Parents first fell, and I acknowledge it
his grace, that I am baptized into this Faith. But because parum est jus, nisi
sint qui possunt jura gerere, it had been to no purpose for our Savior to have
made a will, unless he had made Executors to execute it; he was therefore
pleased to ordain 12 Apostles, and 70 Evangelists his Executors, with power to
propagate it to others, until his next coming again. I say this power no ways
intrenches upon the Regal, for it only has reference to Christ and him
crucified, and Gods Worship and Service: And as the Power no ways intrenches
upon Regality, so is there nothing in Christ's will against it, but to advance
it. For there we are commanded to pay tribute to Caesar, and are taught that
Higher Powers are Gods Ordinance, to which men must submit for Conscience sake:
but as this Ghostly Power no ways intrenches upon the Regal, so neither does
the Regal upon Kings Conversion to Christianity, annihilate or divide this
power, but it is the same, and in the same manner propagated after as before,
and the executors of it, in their Office are immediately Christ's Ministers; and
as in the Gospel, so under the old Law, the Levites and Priests in the
Administration of their Office, were Gods immediate Ministers: and though Regal
Power over the Children of Israel were as entire and absolute as in other
places, yet was Saul rejected and Uzziah smote with Leprosy for invading it.

Nor do I see why D. E. should be so zealous for propagation of a Pagan state,
when as it may be he would have found as much occasion to quarrel therein, as
against the Bishops in a Christian; for men by the light of Nature, wheresoever
they apprehended a Deity, judged it necessary to have it worshipped by separated
persons ordained thereunto: and therefore though in Pagan States God was not
publicly worshipped and served by Bishops and Christian Priests, yet had they
every where something in Analogy thereto, viz. a High Priest, and Flamens to
serve him in their public Worship, and by consequence were not so very
Heathens as D. E. And pray what reason is there that God under the old Law sho
ld be served by separated persons ordained thereto, and that moral men by the
light of humane Nature, conform thereto, and yet only God in Christian States,
is fit to be publicly served by such Cattle as D. E. and his Fellows?

D. E. his third Objection is, that Christ's Unity is a Unity in heart and
Spirit; whereas actus interior and exterior ea^dem constituunt virtutem. And
what a Unity in heart and Spirit is, no man can tell, but as it is outwardly
expressed: and our Savior himself affirms, that he that denies him before men,
him will he deny before his Father in Heaven. And what a Unity of Heart and
Spirit D. E. is of, appears by the Annimadversions. And whereas D. E. tells the
Bishop in his ear, that our late wars did not arise from the separation of
conscientious dissentors, but from the violence and fury of unconscionable
Imposers: I must needs tell D. E. it is a loud and slanderous lie; for there
was nothing imposed upon the Dissentors, which was not legally imposed, and so
not violently, furiously, or unconscionably done, unless D. E. can show
wherein it was directly against Divine Laws.

Nor were any of these conscientious Dissentors furiously and violently
compelled to hold their Livings, but if they liked not the terms, they might
have left them: and for these men to promise Conformity, that they would daily
offer up the public service of the Church, Bury the dead, visit the sick,
baptize Infants, and uprightly instruct the cure committed to them by their
Diocesan, and do nothing of these, but instead of these, preach their own
Passions and Affections, to make factions and seditions in Church and State;
and yet in conscience desire the means of the Church, is like to a man that
stipluates with D. E. for a sum of money to do a thing, and doing nothing of
it, in conscience desires of D. E. to pay him the money; sure D. E. would think
this man to have little conscience, and yet such men must be D. E. his
Conscientious Dissentors. But sure the King and Parliament will not suffer such
an affront to pass unquestioned as to make the King governing by the Laws, to
be a violent, furious and unconscionable Imposer, and the cause of our late
war; and a company of Vermin and Hypocrites, who would be governed by no
Laws, and yet furiously and violently impose their own wills and lusts upon
their fellow Subjects, to death and utter ruin, to be the conscientious
Dissentors.

8. I will not question the French Protestants standing, nor the Duchess
kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, in D. E. his 8 th. objection, nor his
profound Learning in the Ecclesiastical Laws of those Churches: this I will
tell D. E. that by his ignorance in Divinity, he grants the Bishop, that
kneeling is essential and necessary in receiving the Sacrament; for nothing
done to a creature, can be Idolatry, if it were not before due to the Creator:
and therefore cannot the Papists abuse kneeling at the Sacrament to Idolatry,
if kneeling in the Sacrament were not due to God; and if the abuse of a thing
should take away the use of it, then must not D. E. say his prayers, because
the Papists do Mass.

And whereas D. E. in his last objection is so angry with the Bishop for
aspersing the whole order of the Presbyterians, with the faults of Mr. Baxter,
I will tell D. E. they are such an Order as are in the cards when the Kings are
out; I pray who did incorporate them so? or from whence do they derive their
order? I grant they are a factious conspiracy known by that name, and the
common Parent of all factions, and the Author of all our late calamities. I
hope D. E. will not lay the Act of Oblivion to my charge, whereas he has
incorporated the Presbyterians, notwithstanding the Act would bury all names of
difference.

I have done with his objections against the Bishops arguments, I shall not
take notice of his quarelling with the Bishops policy; yet cannot I over-slip*
D. E. his tenderness of conscience in his second particular for the lawful
part of the Covenant, and how zealous he saw the Covenanters were for
restitution of his Majesty; Contrymen in profering gifts usually object,
upon refusal, that they know not what to do with them; such was the Covenanters
case, they had lost their dominion they had usurped over their fellow Subjects
(and in the Coffeehouses we define a Presbyterian to be one, who if he may not
persecute other men, cries out he is persecuted himself) -- the Independents,
nay they were like to be undone by them; no wonder therefore, when they had
lost all other means, if they endeavored to erect their Dagon by means of his
Majesty; but since a repenting Presbyterian was scarce ever heard of, and since
it is evident to all men, that the whole gang of them retain the same temper
and metal they ever did, and since not only so many places in Church, and
almost all the places of trust in Court swarme^ so with them, It will not, I
hope, be a crime, if good Subjects pray for a prosperous Reign upon his
Majesty, lest upon any adverse fortune, those very men serve him, as they did
his Saint-like, and Martyred Father.

FINIS:

