The Bishop of LINCOLN's SERMON Preached before the House of LORDS.

Die Veneris, 13 December. 95:
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Thanks of this House be Given to the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, for his
Sermon Preached before this House, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, the 11th
instant; and he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler. Parl.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Lords, AT THE Abbey-Church of St.
Peter's Westminster. ON Wednesday, the 11th of December, 1695. Being the Day
appointed for A Solemn Fast and Humiliation.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, James, Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

LONDON: Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's. 1695.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Lords.
Psalm LXXIX, v. 9. Which is also in the Hymn for this Day.

Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name; O deliver us, and
purge away our Sins, for thy Names sake.


THIS Psalm is a Passionate Address to God, composed for the People of the
Jews, under some very great Suffering and Calamity; either upon the destruction
of Jerusalem and the holy Temple, at the Time of the last Captivity of the
People of Judah, as some Interpreters conceive; or the Slaughter and
Devastation made by Antiochus afterward, as others conjecture.

The Psalm is full of mournful and melting Expressions; and the Psalmist, who
in the Title is said to be Asaph, of which Name there were more than one that
were devout Psalmists, does in the Name of the suffering Nation, one while
expostulate with God very passionately; another while petition very earnestly
for the Jewish Nation; upon whose account this Psalm being composed, there are
some Particulars in it that relate purely or principally to them; But then
besides, that these Particulars may be applied in parallel cases, where any
such happen, to other people, there are others more general, which may suit the
ordinary Circumstances of any Nation, under common Evils and Calamities; of
which this of the Text I take to be one; Help us, O God of our Salvation, for
the Glory of thy Name; O deliver us, and purge away our Sins, for thy Names
sake. And it may serve not only our Devotion in this Nation at this time, but
our Instruction also; and for that purpose I shall now use it.

In which there may be considered these two general parts:

1. The Petition it self, in these three instances, Help us, O God, deliver us,
and purge away our Sins.

2. The Motive or Argument used, For the Glory of thy Name, and for thy Names
sake.

In the first of these two parts the Petition, there is a confession of sin
implied; Purge away our sins: So that here we might propose two Observations
upon which to discourse.

1. From the confession of sin implied, we might observe,

That it is very fit for Nations under heavy Pressures and Calamities, to
confess their sins to God publicly.

2. From the Petition it self (expressed) we might further observe,

That it is very proper for such an afflicted Nation to pray earnestly to God
for help and deliverance.

Then from the 2d General, the motive upon which the Petition is grounded, the
Glory of God's Name, we may infer,

That it is proper and acceptable to God for an afflicted People to address to
him upon this motive, the Glory of his Name, or his Names sake.

I shall not insist upon either of the two Observations inferred from the first
General, as being Topics of Discourse frequently handled upon these Occasions:
but I shall choose to treat only on the 2d General, and the Inference from
thence.

And here I shall 1. Explain these Expressions of the Name of God, and the
Glory of his Name.

2. I shall show you what particular Reasons the People of the Jews had to
petition God upon this motive.

3. I shall show you what general Reason there is that may justify and
encourage the use of this motive by other People.

4. I shall enquire, so far as we may with Reverence and Humility, upon what
Occasions, and at what Seasons it is proper for any Nation to use this motive
in their public Devotions.

And lastly, I shall make some Application to the present occasion of our
meeting.

First, By the Name of God, in Scripture, is frequently to be understood God
himself in all his Excellencies, Attributes and Perfections; and the Glory of
his Name is the rendering those Perfections conspicuous and observable: So that
to move God for his Names sake, or the Glory of his Name, is to move him, that
the Effects of his Divine Attributes may be made visible and illustrious in the
sight of men, so as that they may be had in just Esteem and Veneration.

The Attributes of God which afflicted People are prone to desire God to exert
on their behalf, are principally his Power, his Justice and his Mercy.

When a Nation is enfeebled in its strength, when it is humbled and brought
into troubles and difficulties by its Enemies, when there is no hope of
Salvation, by any Outward or Visible Assistance, then to desire God to show his
Omnipotent Power, is to desire him to glorify and signalize that Attribute.

When an Enemy is Violent and Cruel, Bloody and Insatiable, Revengeful and
Irreconcilable, then to desire God to execute his Just Indignation and
Vevgeance upon them, is to desire him to let it be seen that there is a God
that Judges in the Earth. When such afflicted People are sensible of their
Sins and Provocations, and are humbled for them, and are resolved to forsake
them, then to desire God to have mercy, is to desire him to glorify that
Attribute of his, in which he takes most delight.

Thus these Attributes of God, which are his Name, being exerted in a signal
and illustrious manner, and at a proper and seasonable time, are rendered
Glorious and Conspicuous in the eyes of Men.

2. I shall show you what particular Reasons the Jewish Nation had to petition
God, to Glorify those his Attributes on their behalf; And there are two
especially.

First, As they were a Nation Selected from the rest of the World, and made the
peculiar People of God; for he provided that People of particular Laws and
Institutions; and governed them, not in General only, like the other Nations,
as the supreme Rector of the World, but as their National King, who resided
amongst them in a particular manner, having several Illustrious Symbols of his
Presence; as the Ark, the Tabernacle, the Temple, and the Shechinah, or visible
Brightness, Termed the Glory, which was a Conspicuous and Awful Representation
of his Majesty:

By these it was known, not to the Jews only, but to the Neighboring Nations
also, that they had a peculiar Governor, who took especial care of them, and
fed them, and conducted, and fought for them, and afflicted and punished other
Nations for their sakes; they knew him by those names of Power, the Lord, and
the Lord of Hosts, by which he is frequently styled in the Records of that
People.

Now this Nation being thus Politically united to God, their Sovereign, in a
National Bond, they seemed to have one Common Interest; so that the Body could
not suffer, but the Head must suffer with it; and therefore finding themselves
under a great Pressure and Calamity, in which they thought the Honor and the
Name of God would suffer with them, they call upon him, upon that very account,
to save and deliver them; For thus they addressed to him, as concerned in their
Sufferings, and as it were a Partner with them, in the three first verses of
this Psalm. O God, the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy Holy Temple
have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps, the dead Bodies of thy
Servants have they given to be meat for the Fowls of the Air, and thy Saints
unto the Beasts of the Land; where by the mention of thine Inheritance, thy
Holy Temple, and thy Servants and Saints, It plainly appears, that they
apprehended God himself to be concerned in this Deplorable and Reproachful
Suffering, and that it was no little Reflection upon him, and upon the Honor
of his Name.

But Secondly as the People of the Jews were Politically united to God, their
Sovereign in a National Bond, or Covenant, So he expressed himself frequently to
have a particular Kindness for them, giving them many repeated Promises, of
establishing their Government, and the Succession of their Kings in the Royal
Line of David, to perpetual Generations: For when they were Impatient to have a
King like their Neighboring Nations, and desired Sovereign Princes in a
Successive Line, which they had not in the time of the Judges; these being
Authorized only upon Emergencys and for a Limited time, and at most during
their own single Life; And that God in Compliance with this Request, appointed
a King to Reign over them, who being disobedient to his Commands, he would not
establish the Succession in his Family, but found out David his Servant, who
was more obedient and more acceptable to him, to whose Posterity he Limited the
Royal Succession; promising further by Nathan the Prophet, that his House and
Kingdom should be established for ever, 2 Samuel 7. Chapter 16. v. This Promise to
David is recited by Ethau the Psalmist, in the name of God himself, in the 89
Psalm. 3.4. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, and Sworn unto David my
Servant, thy Seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy Throne to all
Generations.

This the Jews understood, only Litteraly, of a Visible Temporal Throne, and a
Lineal Succession of Princes, such as David was, to be continued to the end of
the World.

But now upon the taking and sacking of Jerusalem, and the destruction of the
Temple by Fire, and leading away their Kings and the Body of the People into
Captivity, it seemed to them as if God had been unmindful of his Promise, the
Government being subverted, and the Royal Family being in danger to be extinct
in the person of Jehojachin; all which appears by the Complaint of the same
Psalmist, in the name of the Captivated Jews, in the following part of that 89
Psalm, at the 38 verse. But thou have cast off and abhorred, thou have been
wroth with thine anointed, who was one of David's Issue and Succession: Thou
have made void the Covenant of thy servant, thou have Profaned his Throne by
casting it to the Ground.

This sad Complaint was true in the person of Jehojachin first, as also in the
person of his Brother Zedekiah who succeeded him; and whom the Chaldeans took
and brought to Babylon, killing his Sons before his eyes, and then putting them
out, and carrying him away in Fetters of Brass.

Here now the Psalmist, and the suffering Captives thought they had a just
Ground to Expostulate with God, as we read they did in the 49 v. of that Psalm:
Lord where are thy former Loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto David in
thy Truth? As if they had said, is this the Stability and Duration of the
Kingdom and Family of David, so frequently Promised, and so highly Celebrated?
Then he adds in the next verse: Remember Lord the Reproach of thy Servants. And
not of us only, but of thy self also; Wherewith they have Blasphemed Thee, as
well as slandered the Footsteps of thine Anointed.

By all that has been said out of this Psalm, it appears plainly that the
Psalmist and the poor Captives in whose name it is Composed, thought they had
some Reason to Expostulate with God, as to the Promise he had made to the House
and Kingdom of David; In which the Honor of his Name was not a little
Concerned. And so much for the second Inquiry, what particular Reasons the
Nation of the Jews had, to petition God in their Extremities, for the Honor of
his Name.

Now 3dly, we are to enquire, what general Encouragement there is, for other
Nations to Address to God upon the same motive; I said, for other Nations,
because I conceive it to be a motive more proper for whole Nations, and Public
Societies, to use, than for particular and private Persons.

And the Encouragement is Sufficient, in that God has upon occasions declared
by his Holy Prophets, that he is not a little concerned for his own Honor, He
would have his Name known and published in all the World, He would have that
Honor given to Him, which is due unto his Name, to all his Names; for he is
styled in Scripture by many Names, not only with respect to his Essence, and
Existence, but also to his supereminent Attributes and Properties; and he has
declared that he will not suffer the Honor that is due to these, or any of
these, to be given to an Other, for which reason, amongst his other Names, he
styles himself, a Jealous God, and tho he has honored some of his Creatures,
Angels, and Men, with one or other of his Names, or some one Letter or Syllable
of his Names, yet he did not therefore allow that they should receive such
Honor, or such a degree of Honor as He Himself requires. There are certain
Honors, and certain measures of Honor which he has Appropriated to Himself;
and as he is very Jealous lest any of these should be ascribed to any Other, so
he is willing, nay, He requires that they should be performed to Him at all
seasonable Times, and upon all proper Occasions. And we then honor God, or his
Attributes and Properties, when we justly esteem the visible Effects produced
by them; When we publicly divulge and declare them to others; When we take
Care to have the Knowledge and Memory of them preserved to future Ages; When we
improve in our Obedience under them, And trust and hope in God more confidently
for the Experience of them.

By these means the Name of God is Hallowed, as our Savior directs his
Disciples to pray, which He accepts, and with which He is well pleased: I will
get me Honor, says God to Moses, upon Pharaoh and upon all his Host. This He
did when He overthrew them in the Red Sea, in so surprising and observable a
manner; and therefore He often put the people of Israel in mind of not only
those that were personally preserved, but their Posterity and Succession,
because his Power and his Goodness was thereby known to all the Neighboring
Nations.

I shall now proceed to the 4th thing proposed; To enquire, as far as it is fit
for us, upon what Occasions; and at what Seasons it may be proper for a Nation
to use this Motive in their addresses to God.

We ought indeed to Honor God daily, and as much as we can to promote his
Honor, and to pray that the Name of God may be more and more known and
exalted, in the repetitions of his Praises here on Earth, as they are repeated
in Heaven by Saints and Angels; This, as I told you, our Savior has taught us
to pray for, and in the first place, before we petition for our daily Bread.
But besides, that this ought to be our daily prayer and endeavor, there are
some especial Seasons and Opportunities in which good men ought to be more
earnest in their Prayers, and more Industrious in their Endeavors, for the
Promoting and Vindicating the Honor of God; and I think I may name these two.

First, when the Existence and Providence of God is called in question, denied
by some, and exposed and profaned by others. In this case they that believe in
him and worship him, ought to be concerned, and humbly to pray that he would
appear signally for the Vindication of himself and his own Honor. Of this the
Psalmist seems sensible in the 119 Psalm. and at the 126 ver. It is time for
thee Lord to work, says he, for they have made void thy Law; To work, that is,
to work some extraordinary thing, to lay to his hand, as it is in the other
English Translation; as if there was need to put to more strength than ordinary
at such a time, when men did not only neglect the Law of God (for that has been
usual in all Ages) but made it null and void, as far as in them lay, by denying
its Authority and Obligation.

Now besides, that the Works of Creation which we see daily with our Eyes, are
a sufficient evidence of the Almighty Power and Wisdom of God. There are some
surprising Acts of his Providence, that many times make a more sensible
Impression upon the minds of men, than the common and standing effects of his
ominipotent Power.

There are various instances by which the Providence of God is rendered signal
and observable in the World, but in none so much as in the Events of War. In
this God is as it were the Arbiter, it being an Appeal to him, who alone has
Right and Power to decide the Contest; He being King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, from whom all Right and all Authority is derived; And therefore he
oftentimes thinks fit to Interpose, in an extraordinary manner, upon this
Occasion. All history, both Sacred and Profane inform us, that there is
nothing more uncertain in the view of Man, than the Issue and Success of
Battles; a great deal depends upon sudden, and unforeseen, and unavoidable
Accidents; occasioned many times, by Meteors and Exhalations of the Earth,
which arise suddenly and spend themselves vehemently; But now all these are
entirely in the hand of God, and they are ordered and conducted by his
Providence. Who brings forth the Clouds from the ends of the World, and
sends forth Lightning with the Rain, and brings the Winds out of his
Treasures, as the Psalmist expresses it; and this he does to show that he is
the only supreme Potentate, and that he is Wonderful amongst the Kings of the
Earth.

So then if the Battle be not always to the strong, but as it seems good to him
who takes upon him to decide this great Controversy, what a bold Presumption is
it to Question the Providence of God in this Event? and all that are Good and
Wise ought to stand up, and Vindicate the Honor of God, and the Glory of his
Name, in this and all other Human Affairs, in which the Wisdom and the Strength
of Man is but Folly and Weakness.

Thus the Pious King Hezekiah and the Nobles of Judah were not a little
concerned when they heard Rabshecah Blaspheme the God of Israel, as if he was
not able to resist the Assyrian Monarch; That haughty General, who seemed to be
a Renegado Jew, by his speaking to the Jews in their own Language, was not
afraid, in the Name of his New Master Sennacharib, according to the custom of
Renegadoes, to defy that God whom he had once worshipped. Thus says the great
King, says he, the King of Assyria, where are the Gods of the Nations round
about us? not the Nations only, but their Gods: And then he goes on
Blaspheaming the God of Israel, as if he was no better than the Gods of Wood
and Stone, which he had burnt, and trampled upon; well then might Hezekiah, and
the Heads of the Tribes of Judah complain, that that was a day of Trouble and
Rebuke and Blasphemy: And well might they Assemble themselves solemnly in the
House of the Lord, and move him for the Honor of his Name, which the Enemy had
so Blasphemed, to Rescue and Deliver them; for so it is said, That Hezekiah
Prayed thus before the Lord, 2 Kings 19.15, 16. O Lord God of Israel, thou art
the God, thou alone; bow down thy Ear, and hear the words of Sennacharib, which
he has sent to reproach the living God, and save us out of his hand, that all
the Kings of the Earth may know, that thou art the Lord God, even thou only.

2dly. Another Season, when it is proper for a People to use this motive to
God, is either when they themselves or others, whom common Humanity and
Christian Charity oblige to commiserate, lie under great and heavy Opressions;
in this case Men may confidently apply themselves to God, for the sake of his
Honor and for his Holy Name.

For as he is the common Father of Mankind, it is agreeable to his Will, and to
his Attributes of Justice and Compassion, either to prevent Violence and
Oppression, or to Restrain and Punish it; He has made all Mankind of the same
Materials, and in the same Mould, by which there lies an Obligation upon them
to mutual Tenderness and Assistance; and he has Planted in Men an Appetite to
Union and Confederacy, by which they are free and ready to be combined in
Government for their own common Safety and Preservation; for the design and end
of Government is Security and Peace, which is consonant to the Will of God, and
to the Wisdom of his Providence.

If we allow the Notion of those Men who make Government to proceed only from
Necessity, and from Mutual Compact and Agreement, and allowing also Appetites
and Inclinations in Men to that purpose, we may reasonably thence infer, That
it is very disagreeable to the Ends of Government, that they who are united for
the sake of Preservation, should be devoured and consumed by one another; that
Government should be made an Instrument of Oppression, and that one Man should
ruin Millions Arbitrarily and wantonly against the stated measures of Justice,
and the Bounds of Common Humanity: We cannot therefore but conceive thus
Worthily of God, that He who has planted in Men such Appetites of Preservation,
and allows such Union and Confederacy, will have Compassion upon the Oppressed;
and that He will in His own Way, and in His own Time, punish the Oppressors,
who do not Rule, but Ravage; who do not feed, but worry and devour.

Or if we rather approve the Notion of others, who found Government upon Divine
Institution and Paternal Authority; our common Consanguinity and natural
Relation will teach us, that it is unreasonable, and unnatural to destroy and
prey upon one another; for tho Parents have a Superiority, not only by Nature
but by Divine Appointment, and so likewise the Fathers of many Families, and
great Collections and Societies of Men, it is only a Superiority in order to
the Education and Discipline, and good Government of Inferiors; they have no
Authority to destroy and oppress at Pleasure; for Paternal Authority Implies
Care and Tenderness, and Love and Provision, which are inconstent with Tyranny
and Cruelty, so that we may infer from this Notion of Government, that God is
much displeased with those who mis-use this Fatherly Power; if it overflow its
Banks, it is not a River that fructifies and Cherishes, as it slides Smoothly
and Gently, but a Torrent and Inundation that Spoils and Consumes all where it
takes its Course. In this case God is Concerned for his own Honor, to
Interpose and to Rebuke these swelling Waves; and the oppressed may very
Properly apply themselves to him as their Common Father, and humbly beg of him
to deliver them from the hands of such men, who are his Ministers Indeed, but
misuse their Ministry, and Emply it not to help and defend, but to ruin and
devour.

But besides, that this Idea of God, and these Notions of his Government of the
World, may convince us that it is agreeable to his Will, and for the Honor of
his Justice, and his Fatherly Love and Compassion, to relieve the Injured and
Oppressed. He has also declared the same by his Messengers and Prophets in his
holy Word and Revelation. He often makes known Himself under the Style and
Character of a Deliverer, a Savior and Helper, and particularly of the
Oppressed; a Refuge and Defense in time of Trouble. These are the Names of God
in Scripture, and He Delights to be Invocated and Honored by these Names.

When He delivered the Children of Israel out of the Iron Furnace, as the
Prophet Jeremiah terms the Egyptian Bondage, He is said to get him a Name, as
the same Prophet expresses it; The Lord that brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; by which Name He was pleased to be styled,
and styled Himself when He Dictated the Ten Commandments to His Servant Moses.

And when He delivered them from that other Captivity in Babylon, then He got
Him a New Name as the same Prophet describes Him, saying of Himself in Jer.
16.14, 15. But the day is come, says the Lord, that it shall no more be said,
the Lord lives who brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt,
but the Lord lives who brought up the Children of Israel from the Land of the
North, and from all the Lands whither he had driven them.

So agreeable is it to God to be styled, and to style Himself by Names of
Deliverance, and with respect to Oppression particularly; And so the Psalmist
frequently describes Him, Ps. 103. The Lord executes Righteousness and
Judgment for all that are Oppressed. And in Ps. 68.5. He is a Father of the
Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widow; who sets the solitary in Families, and
brings the Prisoners out of Captivity. And in Ps. 12.5. he introduces God
thus speaking; For the Oppression of the Poor, and for the sighing of the
Needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, and will set him in safety from him
that Puffs at him. Well then may the oppressed and the afflicted call upon
God by these Names, and move him for the Honor and Glory of his Name, of this
particular Name of Deliverer especially, to help and save them in the time of
trouble.

I shall now in the last place take leave to make some Application of the whole
to our selves, upon occasion of our Present Meeting.

1. Then, If Almighty God have such a Respect to the Honor of his Name, as to
accept the Addresses that are made to him upon that motive, it is a great
Encouragement to us to make use of it upon all occasions; especially upon
occasion of using some extraordinary Offices of Devotion.

The Church of England was so sensible of this, that she prescribes it in the
Litany Office, which is appointed to be performed Three Times in every Week: O
Lord, Arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake. And again, Help us,
and deliver us for thy Honor: And soon after, For the Glory of thy Name, turn
from us all those Evils, that we most righteously have deserved,

But this is most especially proper to be used upon Emergent and Extraordinary
Occasions; When a whole Nation is assembled, to humble themselves before God,
to confess their sins, to implore Pardon and Forgiveness, to deprecate the
Wrath and Vengeance of God, and to desire His Direction and Blessing upon great
Occasions, and in great Straits and Difficulties; then to use this Motive, is
very seasonable; for the Honors and Dishonours that are reflected upon God by
Public Persons, and Public Bodies, affect Him most; for a whole Nation
therefore, the Prince, the Nobles, and the great Body of the People, to apply
themselves to him unanimously by Prayer and Suplication, for the Honor of his
Great Name, must needs be acceptable to Him, and prevail with Him to hear and
to help them.

But then while they thus affectionately implore His Mercy, for the sake of his
Honor, they must,

In the 2d Place, Be careful, that they do not as publicly Dishonor him by
their Sins, as they pretend publicly to Honor him by their Devotions.

All Sin, which is the Transgression of God's Law; tends to his Dishonor. It
is an Affront to his Authority, and to the Justice, Equity and Reasonableness
of his Laws and Government; But the Contempt of the Law of God is a greater
Wickedness than the bare Violation of it; and the Dishonor done to God by it,
is of greater Aggravation.

If a Nation, or a considerable part of it (for it may be, no Nation was ever
so Universally Depraved) but if the greater, and the most conspicuous part of
it offend notoriously in these two Instances, of open Transgression and bold
Contempt of the Law of God, the Honor they do to God by public Fasting and
Confession, is not so acceptable to Him, as the Dishonor they do to his holy
Name, by Profanation and Defiance, is displeasing and provoking.

But if, like the Inhabitants of the Great City Nineveh, they would entirely
believe the Revelation of God, and sincerely and universally humble themselves
and repent, as they did at the Preaching of the Prophet Jonas, no doubt but God
would have Compassion upon them, and prevent or Revoke the Sentence of
Judgment, as He did from that City.

But when one part of a Nation are unconcerned and Idle, and Negligently omit
the time appointed for Solemn and Public Humiliation; and another part Expose
and Ridicule it; and a third, that resort indeed to the place of Solemnity, yet
neither Pray Affectionately, nor Hear Attentively, nor Repent Seriously, nor
break off any Evil Custom, nor forsake any one Sin, nor resist any one
Temptation, nor show the least Effect of Sorrow in the following part of their
Lives; how can such a Nation expect that God should be favorable to them?
Especially if such as these make up the greater Number; although in an other Rank
there may be a better sort amongst them, who attend the Offices and Ministeries
of Repentance with afflicted and broken Hearts, and sincere Resolutions of
Amendment of Life: The devout and serious Addresses of this little Flock,
(although God will undoubtedly accept and reward them for it), cannot atone for
the Negligencies, the Hyprocrisies, the Affronts and Contempts of a far greater
Number; And if the Performance of the Methods of Reconciliation cannot avail to
reconcile them, what can become of such a Nation?

If this be the Case of our own Nation, it is very sad and deplorable: I do not
say it is; but rather hope otherwise; but it must needs be confessed, that we
labor under this ill Indication, That our Public Fasts and Humiliations,
repeated Yearly, for several Years together, are not accompanied, and
completed with a Visible Amendment and Reformation.

Shall I instance to you in our Vanity and Luxury, in our Intemperance and
Uncleanness, in our profane use of the Holy Name of God by Oaths and
Imprecations, in our Perjuries and Blasphemies, in our Injustice and
Partiality, in our Frauds and uncharitable Circumventions, in our Divisions,
Factions and Animosities? Have we not been so far from Reforming these
notorious Wickednesses, notwithstanding our Fastings, Confessions and
Humiliations, that we have Proceeded to a greater degree of Boldness and
Confidence in committing them?

Nay further, upon these Licentious Practices some Men have built Pernicious
Doctrines, and from denying God in their Works, are arrived to that Degree of
Folly, not only to deny Him in their Hearts, but with their Tongues.

I might here, not improperly, mention the Dishonours that are done to the
Eternal Son of God in his Essence, in his Doctrine, in his Laws and Government,
in the Ministers and Officers of his Kingdom, and the whole Christian
Revelation. These Practices and these Doctrines grow upon us Daily; They are
entertained, encouraged and propagated more and more, to common Observation:
And if this be our Case, that the Means and Ministries of Repentance have no
better Effect upon us, but that we rather grow worse under the use of them, by
what other means can we expect to be reconciled to God, and procure his Favor
and Protection?

We have nothing to move upon our own account: If God be pleased to Save and
Prosper us, it can be from no other Motive but the Honor of his Name: The best
that we can say for our selves, is, that in our puhlick Worship we do not
ascribe that Honor to any other which is due to him only; we Pray neither to
Saint nor Angel; we make them neither the Objects of our Worship, nor use them
as Intercessors on our behalf; this may give us some ground of Hope.

Besides, it is usual with God to concern Himself in Opposing and Humbling
Bloody, Deceitful and Oppressing Men: He delights to Defeat Proud and
Presumptuous Undertakings; to Baffle Haughty and Insolent Names and Titles, and
Disappoint High and Swelling Expectations: This he Does when he Pleases, and
when it is for the Honor of his Name: But the Time and Method of doing it,
must be left to His All-Wise Providence.

The only thing that might encourage us to hope for it speedily, Would be not a
National Fast only, but a National Reformation. This Humbling our selves, and
Bowing our Heads like a Bullrush for a Day, will not Prevail with God, who
knows the Secrets of all Hearts: But if we would Heartily, and Thoroughly, and
Universally Amend our Ways and our Doings, then we might expect the Light of
God's Countenance, and the Blessings of Victory, and Peace, and Safety, and
Wealth, and Good Success in all our Just and Honorable Enterprises; Which God
of his. Mercy Grant, for the Sake of Jesus Christ: To whom be ascribed all
Honor, and Glory, and Praise, now, hence forward, and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

