A LETTER Concerning some OBSERVATIONS Lately made at BATHE.

Written to his much honored Friend Sir E. G. Knight and Baronet, M. D. in
London.

By THOMAS GUIDOTT, M. B.

Facilius ducimur, quam trahimur. Senec.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for Henry. Brom at the Sign of the Gun at the West
end of Saint Paul's. 1674.

A LETTER Concerning some OBSERVATIONS Lately made at BATHE.
Honored Sir,
I Know you (as well as other Ingenious and Inquisitive Persons) are somewhat
concerned, and desirous to understand what Success my late Enquiries have had
into one of the Grand Mysteries of Nature, I mean the BATHES of this City:
considering especially that You were pleased the last Summer to afford me the
Honor of your Company and particular Acquaintance, and to express a more than
ordinary desire of my proceeding in this Thing. Concerning which I must tell
you, that as I have not been wanting, either to Pains or Pay, in my Proceedings
hitherto; so I have had the good Hap (which has been my Encouragement) to meet
with many considerable Discoveries. And though the main Body of the Matter,
collected touching this Affair, be not yet ripe for the Launcet, but will
require a longer time to digest; yet some Observations I shall now communicate
which will give a little satisfaction to an earnest desire, and make, in some
measure, appear that we have been lame and defective hitherto in a rational
Account and true Understanding of the Nature of these Waters.

It has been indeed the ill fortune of these Bathes (which I may truly say are
as good if not better than any Bathes in the world) to lie a long time in
obscurity, and not so much as to be mentioned among the Bathes of Europe by any
foreign Writer, till about the year 1570. when that Excellent Person Sir
Edward Carne, sent Ambassador by Queen Elizabeth to Pope Julius the Third, and
Paul the Fourth, made some Relation of them to that famous Writer Andreas
Baccius, then at Rome; and writing his elaborate Book de Thermis, into which he
has inserted them, upon his Relation, Lib. 4. Cap. 13. though somewhat
improperly; among Sulphurous Bathes.

About the same time also one John Jones, an honest Cambro-Britain, frequenting
the Bathes for Practice, composed a little Treatise of them, which he calls
Bathes Aid, in which are some things not contemptible, though in a plain
Country dress, and which might satisfy and gratify the Appetite of those
times, which fed more heartily and healthily too then, upon Parsons Fare, good
Beef and Bag-Pudding, than we do now upon Kickshaws and Haut-gusts; yet nothing
of the true Nature is there discovered, only, as almost in all former Writers
of Bathes, chiefly Catholic, a strong Stanch of Sulphur, and a great ado about
a Subterranean Fire, a fit resemblance of Hell, at least of Purgatory.

Our Countryman Doctor William Turner I confess was more particularly
concerned to give a better account, then I find is done in his Discourse of
English, German, and Italian Bathes. But whether want of opportunity, or any
other impediment was in cause, I know not; But I find that at this stay they
stood till the Famous Doctor Jorden took Pen in Hand, about the Year 1630. To
whom I thought fit to make some Additions, at my first entrance on this Place,
some five Years since, and although that Learned and Candid Physician had
chiefly and more especially an intent to enlarge the Knowledge of our Bathes in
Somersetshire, as he declares to my Lord Cottington, in his Dedicatory
Epistle; and has performed more then any Man before him; yet what was first in
Intention, was last in Execution, and how small a part of that Treatise is
spent upon this Subject, how short he is in some Material Points, and what
Objections may be framed against his Opinion, I may sometime or other, with due
Respect, more largely treat off, and for the present shall here, with good Sem
and Japhet cast a Garment over the Nakedness of this my Father.

What has been done since (except in some particular pieces of other Tracts,
to the Authors of which the Bathes are also indebted for their kindness and
good will) is not worth the mentioning. The old saying's true, little Dogs must
piss, and what is writ upon an Ale-bench claims the greater affinity to the
Pipe and the Candle; especially if the best Wine at the Feast (which is usually
kept till last) be but a silly story of Tom Coriat, and an old Taunton Ballad
new vampt (The Creatur's parts lying that way) abusing the dead Ghosts of
Ludhudibras and Bladud, with a Nonsensico-Pragmatical,
Anticruzado-Orientado-Rhodomontado. Untruth-Le Grand, which we Westerly
Moderns, call a grote Lie, in to the Bargain. A pretty Artifice in Rhetoric,
to cry a thing up, and besmere, and shed plentifully on the Founder Ordure,
both Humane and Belluine.

Rode Caper, vitem, tamen hic cum stabis ad aras N. B.

In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.
Goat, Bark the Vine; yet juice enough will rise
To dreanch thy Head, when made a Sacrifice.
I have Industriously omitted Doctor Johnson, Doctor Venner and some others, in
regard it would be improper here to Write more Historically which I resolve to
do if my leisure permit, on another occasion. I shall therefore now let you
know not so much what has been done by others, as what further discoveries
have been made by my endeavors, assisted by the careful Pains of Mr. Henry
Moor an expert Apothecary and Chemist of this City.

And here at first I cannot but take notice how that opinion has so much
prevailed as to be accounted Orthodox, and not only received by Tradition as
certain but Printed as such, that the Body of the Waters is so Jejune and
empty, as to afford little or nothing at all whereby to make a discovery of its
Nature, and that what impregnates the Bathes is not Substantially, Materially
or Corporally there, but potentially, virtually and formally, or to use the
Authors own words, (...) with much more canting after this Car. Claromont. de
Aer. Aq: and Loc: T. A. page 32.
manner in a small discourse in Latin written by an Itinerant Exotic; when as
a slight operation will soon evince it, though white and transparent of it
self, being taken immediately from the Pump, to contain a considerable quantity
of a Dusky, Gritty, and Saline Matter, with many transparent Particles
intermixed with it, to the proportion, (as near as I can calculate, sometimes
more and sometimes less) of two drams to a gallon of the Water. And this I can
ascertain, having had several ounces of it done in Earth, Iron, Bell-mettle,
and Glass, and have at this time three or four ounces by me, untoucht, beside
what I have made use of in other experiments.

But the thing I shall more Peculiarly insist on, at this present, is, That by
Gods blessing, on my Industrious Search, I suppose I have lighted on the main
Constituent, of the Virtues of the Bath, in which alone resides what benefit
can be expected from the use of these Waters, and lodges in a Saline
substance, in a very small proportion to the Body of the Waters, so that as
they are now, not much more then forty grains is contained in a Gallon, in so
much that this little Soul, as I may so term it, is almost lost in so Gigantick
a Body, and cannot animate it with that vigor, and activity as may be
rationally expected, were a greater quantity of the Salt contained in a less
proportion of the Water. The Remainder, which is not Saline, being as I judge,
two Parts of Three of the Bulk of the contents, is partly Whitish, Gritty, and
of a Lapideous Nature, concreting of it self, into a stony consistence not
easily dissolvable; partly more Light, and Dirty, resembling Clay, or Marle,
and discovers it self by an apparent separation from the Saline and Gritty part
mentioned before.

Now the chief Virtue of the Bath as I conceive consisting in the Salts, which
appear by undeniable Experiments, to be Nitrous, and I believe Vitrioline
(Bitumen and Sulphur being not Primarily, as these Salts, but Secondarily
concerned, which consisting of Unctuous Particles, cannot be supposed capable
of mixing with the Body of the Waters, and therefore no way observable in the
Contents) and no small proportion of other things blended with it, the best way
to make it most serviceable I conceived to be; to free it from those
encumbrances and allays it has from the other Ingredients, and prepare it as
exactly as may be performed by Art, for the benefit of those especially who are
willing to Drink the Waters with greater success in a lesser quantity; which
they may now do, and have more of the virtue of the Waters, in a quart, three
pints, or a pottle, then they formerly had in two or three Gallons, did they
drink as much; which will be besides other Conveniences, a great relief to the
Stomach, which certainly must be relaxed, and the Tone of it injured by that
vast quantity of Water which is usually taken diluting its ferment overmuch,
and distending its Membranes beyond all the bounds of a reasonable Capacity.

Besides, what is separated only by an artificial Extraction will better unite
again, and mix with the Waters, as much more familiar, than the extraneous
Salts of Sal Prunella, Cream of Tartar, etc. which are usually dissolved and
drunk with the Waters; so that a great part of the Operation may be ascribed to
that; and the Waters being, as we say, between two Stools, that of it self, and
the dissolvent in it, has not attained to that degree of Reputation as they
have deserved, and may be procured with much more advantage, if nothing but the
same be spent upon the same, a way of Improvement altogether equally beneficial
to Fluids and Solids, to the wet as to the dry.

Again, whereas it is a custom here as in all other places of the like Nature,
when Persons are not willing, or have not conveniences to come to the Fountain
Head, to send for the Waters to the places of their Residence, not thinking
much material whether Mahomet go to the Mountain, or the Mountain come to him,
whereby the Virtue of the Waters is much impaired, though stopped and sealed up
with never so much care; this defect may be supplied by the addition of a
Quantity of the same Ingredients, which may repair the loss that has been
sustained by Evaporation in the Carriage, or other way of damage, and restore
it again, as near as may be, to its pristine Virtue, and genuine advantage. Not
to mention that if need require, and the poorer sort cannot procure or pay the
Freight for the Waters, they may take a shorter course, by mixing the Salt,
which they may have at reasonable Rates, with Spring Water, brought to a
proportionable degree of heat at home, and expect more advantage, for ought I
know, than those that drink the Waters themselves at so great a distance; I
have therefore ordered convenient Doses of the Salt to be prepared and kept, by
Mr. William Child Alderman, and Mr. Henry Moore, two Apothecaries in Bathe, to
whom any one may resort that shall have occasion.

And because I am now fallen on this Subject I shall crave leave to remind you
of what you well enough understand already, that not only Dulcius but Vtilius
ex ipso Font, etc. and Waters especially impregnated with volatile Spirits,
such as most acid are, and peculiarly Vitrioline, to avoid the inconvenience
and expense, not so much of Money as Virtue, in the Carriage, must be drunk on
the place where they are, which in some kind resembling Children, that must
live by sucking, if once removed from their Mother, or Nurse, by degrees
dwindle away, and at last die.

It is observable in these Waters, that with four Grains of Galls injected
into a Pint Glass of Water, or the Water poured on it, immediately turns of a
purple Color, which in short time after, as the Water cools, abates much of
its vividity, and becomes more faint: if the Waters be suffered to cool, and
be quite cold before the Galls are injected, no alteration happens upon a much
greater proportion of Galls superadded, and what is more remarkable: if the
Water, which is permitted to cool, be recruited by the Fire, and the same
Trial reiterated, it offers no greater satisfaction in change of Color, than
the second Experiment. Consonant to what Andreas Baccius, a Veterane and
experienced Soldier in this Militia, has formerly observed, who in his second
Book de Thermis, Cap. 10. Page 69, has these words, Nulla Balnei Aqua, eodem
cum successu, ac laud bibitur, long exportata, quod ad fontem proprium maxima
enim pars ex ipso font haustae ac delatae, amittunt omnem virtutem, multae non
servantur per hyemem: dilutae pluviis, and quae utcunque servantur delatae a
propriis fonticulis, fieri non potest, quin amittunt, cum calore suo Minerali,
vivificos illos Spiritus, in quibus omnis Juramenti vis consistit, quae semel
amissa, nullo postea extrinseco calore restituitur. Quod est valde notandum.

I have been the more particular in this, in regard it is a very useful and
practical Discovery, and may procure more real advantage to mankind, than the
vain and unattainable attempts of the Philosophers Stone, making Glass
malleable, and the Quadrature of a Circle.

Some other Observations I shall also mention, of a less magnitude, and more
contracted Circumference, as the dying of the Bath-guides Skins, the Bathers
Linen, and the Stones in the bottom of the Bath, of a yellow color, and the
eating out of the Iron Rings of the Bath, the Iron Bars of the Windows about
the Bath, and any Iron infused in it; in so much as I have now by me a Gad of
Iron by accident taken up among the Stones of the Kings Bath, so much eaten
out, and digested by the Ostrich Stomach of these Waters, that the sweetness
extracted what remains resembles very much a Honeycomb, a deep perforation in
many places being attempted, and the whole Gad it self reduced to a thing very
much like a Sponge.

The first, viz. the Tincture I have discovered to arise from an Ochre, with
which the Bath abounds, and has aforded me a considerable quantity, so that
now I have near a Pound by me, and with an infusion of that in warm water,
tinge Stones as exactly of the Bathe color, that they are not discernable one
from another. It is further observable that the nearer the place of Ebullition,
where the Springs arise, the deeper and finer is the Yellow color, so that in
some places, about the Cross in the Kings Bath, and at the Head of the great
Spring, at the Southwest Corner thereof, it is almost made a natural Paint,
being labored together by the working of the Springs, and a continual
succession of new Matter coming on, free from those impurities it contracts in
other places, which makes it distinguishable into two or three sorts according
to its mixture with, or freedom from, more adulterating Matter. The Clouts also
and Woollen Rags, which the Guides use to stop the Gouts withal, besides the
Walls, Slip-doors and Posts, when the Bath is kept in a considerable time, as
in the Winter season it uses to be, are all very much tinged with this yellow
substance, and if at any time they chance to lie unwash'd or not thrown away,
they send out so ungrateful a sent, that a Man had rather smell to a Carnation,
Rose, Violet, or a Pomander, then be within the wind of so unwelcome a smell,
it being the greatest policy to get the Weather-gage in this encounter. The
same thing I have experienced in Vessels at home, where after it had stood some
time, in a common infusion of warm water, I have the same Reverence for that as
Pictures, and do aver it to be true, E Longinquo reverentia major.

One thing more is to be noted before I leave this particular, that although so
much of this yellow Matter is continually bred, with which the Neighboring
Ground is sufficiently replenisht, as I have found by digging in some places
not far distant, yet nothing of that color is discovered in the Contents, a
probable argument it either evaporates, to which I am more inclined, in regard
I find it much more copious where the Steam of the Bath meets with any
resistance, or else perhaps which is less probable, turns color by the fire in
evaporation that way; less probable, I say, because for further satisfaction, I
have decocted the Ochre more then once, and find that it rather gets then loses
in its color.

The greenish color arises from another cause.

The eating out of the Iron I conceive must proceed from something Corrosive,
and till any one can assure me it is something else, I shall judge it to be
vitriol, and that it may appear not to be caused by the bare steam, as Rust is
bred upon Pot-hooks and Cotterels (as some imagine) besides the difficulty to
conceive how the steam should operate under Water, as in the Case of the Gad
before mentioned, I made a Lixivium of the contents of the Water, and in it
infused Iron, but a very small time, and found it do the same as in the Bath it
self, considering the time of infusion; and the very Knives, and Spatules, I
put in to stir some Residence in the Bottom, were almost as soon as dry,
crusted over and defended with a rusty coat.

I have other Arguments I suppose will contribute something more to the
confirmation of this opinion; as that with the help of the Sand of the Bath
with Water, and Galls, I make good writing Ink, which in a short time comes to
be very legible; but the infusion of the Contents in common water, or the
Lexivium thereof; with an addition of an inconsiderable proportion of the
decoction of Galls makes it tolerably legible, on the first commixture, only
the first viz. that made with Sand, casting an eye of decayed red from a
mixture of Ochre contained in the same. Neither is it altogether to be
slighted, that the Water it self has been heretofore used by the best writing
Masters for the making of Ink, who observing by their experience, that Ink made
with Bath water, and the other usual Ingredients had a better Color, and was
more lasting then any other, preferred this water before any other for this
use, as I have been informed by some credible persons. Also having not long
since occasion to pour warm water on the Contents of the Bath, in order to the
making a Lixivium, some of the water happened by an accident, to fall on a
Bazil skin I sometimes use, and immediately turned the Red into Black more then
the breadth of an ordinary hand, with as much facility as any Curriers Liquor,
Alum I know will do the like, but I find no necessity to assert, that, which
had it any thing to do here, must make the Water much rougher, whiter and
sourer, then I find it to be. To which I may add that many judicious persons,
my Patients, and some intelligent and eminent Physicians also have assured me
that they have perfectly discerned by the Taste a mixture of Vitriol, and that I
need not doubt, but that was one principal Ingredient. It Is also not very
inconsiderable, that the Bath water alone will coagulate Milk, though not after
the usual way of making a Posset; for after the Milk and Water are put
together, it must boil pretty smartly, else the Curd will not rise. I may
likewise subjoyn as a further probability, that on the relenting of the Salt
extracted into an Oil per deliquium, there is a very sharp Stiptick and
Vitrioline taste perceived in the gross deliquium, as also in the clear Oil, and
the Salt it self; not to mention its shooting into glebes, of which I have some
small assurances by some trials I have made, not yet sufficiently satisfactory,
and therefore I dismiss this part for the present, with the greatest
probability, till a further inquiry shall make me positive.

But as to Nitre, there can be no question made about that I suppose; for
besides the quick acrimonious cooling, and nauseous taste, most apparently
discoverable both in the infused contents, the Salt and the Oil (the latter of
which, viz. the nauseous Taste, I take more particular notice of, in regard it
is most predominant, and assigned by Fallopius to Nitre, and the Waters
impregnated with it, which, he says, sometimes do subvertere stomachum, and
facere nauseam, de Therm. Aq. and Met. cap. 9. besides, I say, these probable
conjectures) what will set it beyond all contradiction is that it has the true
Characteristick of Nitre, and shoots in Needles, as long and firm, to the
quantity I have, as any I have seen in the Shops, of which I have now lately
shot above twenty Stiriae, some near an inch in length, which I keep in a Glass
ready by me to give any one satisfaction that desires to see it, besides what I
have parted with to some friends abroad.

I the rather mention this, in regard it has been my good hap to bring this
thing to perfection and autoptical Demonstration which has been in vain
attempted by some industrious persons; not that I am, in the least, willing to
arrogate to my self, or derogate from them, more than what is fitting, but to
confirm this Truth, that there are some Mollia tempora fandi; some
opportunities, when Nature will give willing audience, without much ceremony or
ado, confessing more by fair persuasions, than racks and torments, and greater
importunity. And that we ought to be very cautious how we affirm a thing not to
be upon the failure of a single or some repeated Experiments.

In fine, lest I should too much exceed the bounds of a Letter, what concerns
the cause of the Heat of the Waters, I say little of here, only tell you that
when I shall come to discourse of that Subject, of which I intend, God willing,
a large Disquisition in another Language, I believe I shall find my self
obliged not so much to depend on a subterrean Fire, as to expect greater
satisfaction from another Hypothesis.

Many more Experiments I have made upon the Sand, Scum and Mud of the Bath,
with some Observations drawn from the Natura Loci, or Ground hereabouts; but, I
fear, I have been too tedious already, and therefore, without further ceremony,
shall release you out of this Purgatory, with the Subscription of,

SIR, Your most Faithful and much Obliged Servant THO. GVIDOTT.


FINIS.

