Imprimatur.

Jo. Battely RRmo. P. Dno. Will. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

Ex Aedibus Lamb. Aug. 20. 1685.
THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF PETERBURGH: WHEREIN The most remarkable Things
concerning that Place, from the First FOUNDATION thereof: With other Passages
of HISTORY, not unworthy Public View, are represented.

BY SIMON GUNTON, late Prebendary of that CHURCH.

Illustrated with Sculptures.

And set forth By Simon Patricl, D. D. now Dean of the same.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
THe Author of this History, was the better fitted for the Work he undertook,
because he was born at Peterburgh; and there lived all his days (a few years
excepted) whereby he had the advantage of being perfectly acquainted with many
things, about which he writes. Particularly, the Monuments in the Church,
broken down in the late Sacrilegious times: whose Inscriptions when he was but
a Boy (as he himself writes in a Letter to Dr. Henshaw, late Bishop of
Peterburgh) he both often read and also transcribed.

These he has preserved and transmitted to Posterity; as that learned
Antiquary Sir William Dugdale has also done: Who in the Year 1641. fearing
what shortly followed, was at the pains and charge to take the Draughts, as
well as the Inscriptions, of the Monuments in sundry Cathedral Churches of this
Realm (which soon after were demolished) and of this Church among the rest. By
whose kindness they would have been communicated to the World, if the
Undertaker had come to the knowledge of them, before he had received
Subscriptions to his Proposals: which were not high enough, to bear the charge
of them.

But the best Monuments, the Records of the Church, out of which a more
complete History might have been gathered, are never to be recovered: being
torn in pieces, or burnt, by the more than Gothish Barbarity of those ignorant
people; who took upon them the glorious name of Reformers. An account of which
is given, by a faithful hand, in the conclusion of the Supplement to this Work.

One Book indeed, and but one, still remains, which was happily redeemed from
the fire, by the then Chaunter of the Church, Mr. Humfry Austin. Who, knowing
the great value of it, first hid it (in February 1642.) under a Seat in the
Quire; and when it was found by a Soldier on the 22 April 1643. (when all the
seats there were pulled down) rescued it again, by the offer of ten Shillings
for that old Latin Bible, as he called it; after which he pretended to
enquire. The name of the Bible, by the help of the ten Shillings, preserved
this precious Treasure from the Flames, whither it was going: as Mr. Austin
has left upon Record in the beginning of the Book; with a Copy of the
Soldiers acknowledgment, that he had given him satisfaction for it, in these
words.

I pray let this Scripture Book alone, for he has paid me for it, and
therefore I would desire you to let it alone. By me Henry Topclyffe Soldier
under Captain Cromwell Colonel Cromwell 's Son; therefore I pray let it alone.
Unto which goodly Warrant for its security, the Fellow subscribed his name.

The Book, I speak of, is commonly called by the Name of SWAPHAM; it being
vulgarly believed to have been composed by Robert Swapham, a Monk of this
Church of Peterburgh: But in truth is for the greatest and most ancient part of
its History, the work of HUGO, surnamed CANDIDUS, or White, an eminent Monk
also of the same Church; who himself, in the very body of the Book, gives an
account both when he lived, and that he was the Author of the History, which
now all passes under the Name of Swapham. For speaking of the Relics of the
Church, the principal of which, was St. Oswald's right Arm (super omne aurum
pretiosum, as his words are) he says that he himself saw it, and kissed, and
handled it with his own hands, when it was shown, entire both in the flesh and
skin, to Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and to the whole Convent with many
others, 487 Years after the death of St. Oswald. Now he was slain in the year
643, and therefore this was in the year 1130.

From whence it appears that Mr. Seldom is out in his account, when he says
(in his Preface to the December Scriptores fol. XLVI.) that this History of our
Church, vulgarly thought to be Robert Swapham's, was written in the Reign of
Henry the Third, or thereabouts. He should have said, that then Robert Swapham
lived (as I shall show by and by he did) but he who wrote the greatest and best
part of the History, lived in the Reign of Henry the First, King Stephen, and
his Successor, And therefore it might more truly have been said to have been
written in the Reign of Henry the Second, or thereabout: unless his words be
restrained to that particular part of the History, which he has occasion to
mention, which followed immediately upon the death of HUGO.

This is declared more plainly and fully in another place of the History, viz.
in the life of Abbot ERNULPHUS: Where mention is made of two famous Sacrists of
this Church Victricus and Remaldus. The latter of which is said to have made a
Brother of his a Monk, when as yet he was but a child, whose name was Hugo: who
always attended upon Remaldus and served him, qui etiam hunc libellum collegit,
collectumque scripsit, who also collected this little Book, and having
collected it, put it in writing. And then follows a description of him; that in
his childhood he fell into a disease, which made him very weak. For every Year,
and that often, he vomited abundance of blood; and once was brought so low, by
vomiting fifteen Basins full in one week, that they utterly despaired of his
life; gave him extreme Unction, and were called out of the Chapterhouse, by
Nicolaus then Keeper of the Infirmary, to come and commend his Soul to God, he
being upon the point of departure. But Egelbrithus, a most holy man, persuading
them to go into the Church and beg his life of God (who would not deny them one
man, as his words were) they did so; and he was miraculously restored: as there
is at large related. And he lived a long time, beloved by all the succeeding
Abbots, John, Henry, Martin, William: under whom he served the Church, having
all the business of the Monastery, both withindoors and without, committed to
him: till he came at last to the degree of Supprior; first under Martin, then
under William de Watervile; in whose time he dyed, Remaldus his brother being
then Prior.

I have given the larger account of this man, because he is mentioned in many
Authors, as an excellent person: being known (as our History adds) in the
neighboring Monasteries; nay famed far and near: and no less loved, than
praised, by all that were acquainted with him. And had the name of Candidus or
Albus in all likelihood, from his pale Complexion; caused by his frequent
vomitings of blood: as his Brother Remaldus, was called Spiritualis (our Book
says) because he was a very little Man; and ministered with much affection to
the Elder Sacrist. He is mentioned also by those Authors as a noble Writer; and
said to have left an accurate History of this Church of Peterburgh, and praised
by Leland, (as Vossius observes L. 2. de Histor. Lat. C. 56.) who calls him
luculentus scriptor rerum gestarum: and yet it is not agreed when he lived, nor
whether his History be any where remaining; because few or none, have read this
Book called SWAPHAM with due care and observation.

Vossius says, HUGO flourished in the later end of the Reign of King John. In
which, I have shown, he was mistaken. And Mr. Gunton himself, the Writer of
this present History, makes a question (in the end of Robert de Lyndsay's life)
whether Hugo's Book be not now lost; though Leland, he observes, had seen and
read it. Which inclines me to think he principally relied upon what Walter of
Witlesea has written about this Church; and did not think it necessary to read
all the Book called Swapham: for that would have informed him, he was reading
the very same HUGO, whom Leland read. Especially if he had compared Leland's
Collections concerning this Monastery, with the Book called Swapham, as I have
done: whereby he would have found that they are word for word the same; only
abbreviated by Leland. Who ends his Collectanea just where Hugo's life ended,
with the Deposition of William de Watervile; and goes not one step further: and
therefore might well call them, in the Title of them, Collectanea ex libro
Hugonis Monarchi Petroburgensis.

Our Book indeed, now called Swapham, proceeds further, and carries on the
History, as far as to William de Hotot; the Predecessor of John de Caleto: In
whose time, or in Robert Sutton's, not long after, or in the Year 1271 (which
was the last of Henry 3.) I suppose Robert Swapham dyed. For in that year I
find a Deed made by Henry Passenger de Quadering, unto that Abbot and the
Convent: which is said to be done tempore Rob. de Swapham: Who was then
Celerarius of this Church: and made a purchase of Robert the Father of that
Henry for the benefit of the Celeraria, of which he had the management.

Whom I take to have been only a Continuator of Hugo; and but a little way
neither: having wrote no more than the History of Seven Abbots. For it does not
appear that he was the Transcriber of all the Records, which are, in no good
order, put together at the end of the History: unto which both Mr. Gunton, and
my self have had recourse, for the perfecting of these Labors.

I have perused also a MS. Chronicle, which that eminent lover of Learning, Sir
John Cotton, did me the favor to lend me, out of his renowned Library:
written, as the Title bears, per Johannem Abbatem Burgi Sancti Petri.

What John this was, is the doubt; there being two of that name who may pretend
unto it: John de Says, and John de Caleto. The first of them it cannot be; for
ad An. 975. this Chronicle referrs the Reader to William of Malmsbury, and to
Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon; whom he mentions also both ad An. 1135. and
1153, where are these words Hic finit Chronica Henrici Huntingdon; as ad An.
1153 there are these, his finit Chron. Alredi. Who all three lived about the
same time; the first of them in 1142, the second 1158, the third 1145: all of
them after the death of John de Says. And therefore I conclude it was written
by John de Caleto: who lived in the time of Henry 3. an hundred Year after
them. Vossius indeed makes this Johannes Burgensis, to have lived in the time
of Edward 3. about 1340: when there was no Abbot here of that name. But he
calls him Vir eruditus and disertus; and says he is commended by Leland, as
one that had digested the Annals of England in good order.

Besides these two John's there is no Abbot of that name, but John of Deeping;
who died almost an hundred Year after that 1439: long after this Chronicon
ends. Which is the more likely to be John de Caleto's; because there is no
mention at all made when he died, nor who was his Successor: but only of the
time when he was made Abbot. After which the Annals were carried on, in all
probability, by another hand: who was better acquainted with the affairs of the
Church of Spalding, than with those of Peterburgh. For he says little of
Peterburgh; but gives a very large account, from the forementioned period, of
all the Priors of Spalding: who are spoken of, in the preceding Part of the
Annals very sparingly.

I might have been furnished with other Records out of the same Library; which
I sought after, but could not find till it was too late: that is, till the
Supplement to this History was grown so bigg, that it could bear no further
enlargement, without great loss to the Undertaker.

June 20. 85. S. P.

blazon or coat of arms Beneuolo froute Ilumfridae Orme Petriburg' Armig.
Notitia frontis Lectiae Cath. ibid. posteritat conseruatur.



Ecclesiae Cathedralis Petroburgensis facies Occidentalis. The West Prospect of
the Cathedral Church of Peterborough.


The East-Prospect of the Cathedral Church of Peterborough


The Old Altar-peice, beaten down by the Soldiers in the great Rebellion.
depiction of abbot's chair and former altarpiece at Peterborough cathedral

THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF PETERBURGH.
WHEN this Realm of England was divided into an Heptarchy, the Mercian Kingdom
being one, and the greatest of them all, had the County of Northampton within
its Dominion: the Eastern part of which County being Moorish and Fenny, was
anciently inhabited by a People called the Gyrvii, of the old Word Gyr, which
signified a Fen; and for the convenience, and fertility of this place, for its
nearness both to the high and upland Country, and the Fens, it was thought
meet for habitation.

The Village was at the first called by the name of Medeshamsted, from a deep
Pit or Gulf, in the River of Nen called Medeswell; which ancient Writers of the
place affirm to have been of wonderful depth, and so cold in the heat of
Summer, that no Swimmer was able to abide the cold thereof; and yet in the
Winter it was never known to be frozen: Which Properties are now lost with the
Well it self; only Tradition has preserved a dark memory thereof, adventuring
to say, It is a little beneath the Bridge that is now standing. But if this
Well be lost, there is another sunk with it into the Pit of Oblivion, namely S.
Laurence-Well, of great fame in ancient days, Dr. Hamm. Annot. in fol. 695.
whither disposed people, according to the Devotion of those times, resorted
(happily for cure of Diseases): which kind of Devotion was restrained by Oliver
Sutton Bishop of Lincoln. In what part Oliver Sutton was B. of Lincoln 1280.
of the Monastery this Well was, I find not; it is probable it was near the
Chapel of S. Laurence, which was at the East end of the Infirmary, now
demolished, only the Chancel of that Chapel is yet remaining, and made the
Hall of a dwelling House, belonging to one of the Prebendaries.

But to return to our Story, Penda King of the Mercians at that time reigned,
who had five Children, Peada, Wulfere, and Ethelred, being his Sons, Kyneburga,
and Kyneswitha, his Daughters. Penda being dead, Peada his eldest Son
succeeded, who in the year 656, or as some say 655, founded the Monastery of
Medeshamsted, in the Foundation whereof he laid such Stones as that eight Yoke
of Oxen could scarce draw one of them. But King Peada lived not to finish his
Work, for his Wife Alfleda (forgetting the glorious Memory of her Ancestors,
Oswald the martyred King of Northumberland, her Grandfather, King Oswine her
Father, and King Alfred her Brother) betrayed him to Death at the Paschal
Feast, when he had reigned four Years: Then did his Crown and Kingdom descend
upon Wolfere his next Brother.

This Wolfere was made a Christian by Finanus a Bishop, who came out of
Scotland, (for that Kingdom had Bishops then, and long before) and being
baptized by Finanus, Wolfere vowed to purge his Kingdom from Idolatry, to
demolish all idolatrous places, and to the utmost of his power to promote
Christian Religion; which Vow he likewise made the second time, when he was
married to S. Ermenilda, daughter of Egbert King of Kent: Malmsbury calls him
Erconbert.
but within a while, giving too much ear to Werbode his Steward, he neglected
his Vow, taking no care of Christian Religion; The life of Ermenild is related
in an ancient M S. of Ely now in the hand of Geo. Glapthorn, Esquire p.
nor of erecting Temples, but committed many Impieties, so that the Chaos of
Heathenism began to overspread all again. He had by his Wife S. Ermenilda two
Sons, the elder Wulfade, the other Rufine; Wulfade was much addicted to
Hunting, and one day pursuing a goodly Heart, which being hotly pursued, took
Soil in a Fountain near unto the Cell of S. Chad, who espying the Heart weary,
and almost spent, was so compassionate toward him, that he covered him with
Boughs and Leaves, conjecturing, as if Heaven had some design in the access,
and deportment of that Beast. Presently comes Prince Wulfade, and enquired of
S. Chad concerning the Heart, who answered, That he was not a Keeper of Beasts,
but of the Souls of Men, and that Wulfade was then, as an Heart to the Water
Brooks, sent by God to the Fountain of Living Water; which Wulfade hearing with
astonishment, entered into further conference with S. Chad in his Cell, and was
by him baptized; And returning with joy to his Father's Court, he secretly told
his Brother Rufine of all that had passed, persuading him to be baptized also;
to which Rufine consenting, Wulfade brought him to S. Chad, who likewise
baptized this other Brother.

This Christian pair of Brothers did often resort to a private Oratory, where
they performed their Devotions; but at length being discovered to their Father
by the Steward Werbode, who instigated, and inflamed the fire of paternal fury
against the Sons, King Wolfere the Father, watching the time when his Sons were
gone to pray, followed them, and entering the Oratory, slew both his Sons with
his own hand; and he, and Werbode demolishing the place, left the bodies of his
Sons buried in the rubbish. Shortly after this unnatural and bloody act,
Werbode the Steward was strangled by the Devil before the Kings house, and King
Wolfere being deeply wounded in conscience, (the distraction whereof deprived
him of all rest and quietness, what through the worm tormenting him within, and
S. Ermenild his Wife without counselling him thereto) repaired to S. Chad, to
whom he confessed his great offense, and professed an hearty contrition for the
same, which he was resolved to expiate with what ever Penance S. Chad should
impose upon him, which was no more, but to restore the Christian Religion, and
the ruinated Temples thereof, and likewise to found new ones.

Walter of Wittlesey an ancient Monk of Peterburgh writing this Story, relates
what I will not press upon the Readers faith, That S. Chad, having prayed with
King Wolfere in his Oratory, prayers being ended, S. Chad put off his Vestment,
and hanged it upon a Sunbeam, which supported it, that it fell not to the
ground; which King Wolfere seeing, put off his Gloves, and Belt, and assayed to
hang them there also, but they presently fell to the ground, whereat King
Wolfere was the more confirmed in the Christian Faith.

In the Western Cloister of the Church of Peterburgh (as shall hereafter be
more largely related) was the story of this King Wolfere curiously painted in
the Windows, and in the midst of the quadrangle of the whole Cloister, commonly
called The Laurel Yard, was there a Well, which common Tradition would have to
be that wherein S. Chad concealed Prince Wulfades heart: And if it shall be
considered, that King Wolfere the Father did sometime Speed in his description
of Northamptonshire.
keep his Court at Wedon in the Street, in the Western parts of this County of
Northampton, it may make way for a probable conjecture, that these things
happened at Peterburgh: But the scene must not be laid in a wrong place, for S.
Chad had his Cell in the County of Stafford, was the first Bishop of
Litchfield, where Beda Hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 3.
he founded the Cathedral Church, and there lies buried: And Queen Ermenild,
having searched for the bodies of her Sons, found them out, and giving them
burial, built in the same place where they were slain, a Church of Stone, and
called the place Stanes or Stones, which is known by this name in
Staffordshire unto this day. There also King Wolfere founded a College of
Regular Canons.

And now the building of the Monastery of Medeshamsted begun by King Peada,
went on a-main through the zealous endeavors of King Wolfere; his Brother
Etheldred, and his Sisters Kyneburga, and Kyneswitha assisting him therein,
until the same was perfected, which he dedicated to the memory of the Apostle
S. Peter, bestowed many large privileges and immunities upon it, gave many
fair possessions, and established the bounds of its jurisdiction Vid. Char. in
App.
from Croyland on the East, to Walmisford Bridge on the West, and so Northward
to Eston and Stamford, and all along by the River of Wiland to Croyland again,
as is more at large set down in his Charter which he Sealed and Confirmed in
the presence of Kings, Nobles, and Bishops, in the Year of our Lord 664. and
the seventh of his Reign.

The Quarry from whence King Wolfere fetched Stone for this Royal Structure,
was undoubtedly that of Bernack near unto Stamford, where the Pitts from their
hollow vacuities speak Antiquity, and contribution to some such great design;
and I find in the Charter of K. Edward the Confessor, Anno -- -- which he
granted to the Abbey of Ramsey, that the Abbot of Ramsey should give to the
Abbot and Covent of Peterburgh 4000 Eeles in the time of Lent, and in
consideration thereof, the Abbot of Peterburgh should give to the Abbot of
Ramsey as much Freestone from his Pitts in Bernack, and as much Rag-stone from
his Pitts in Peterburgh as he should need. Nor did the Abbot of Peterburgh from
these Pitts furnish only that, but other Abbeys also, as that of S.
Edmunds-Bury: In memory whereof, there are two long stones yet standing upon a
balk in Castor-field near unto Gunwade-Ferry; which erroneous tradition has
given out to be two draughts of Arrows from Alwalton Churchyard thither; the
one of Robin Hood, and the other of Little John; but the truth is, they were
set up for witnesses, that the carriages of Stone from Bernack to
Gunwade-Ferry, to be conveyed to S. Edmunds-Bury, might pass that way without
paying Toll: And in some old Terrars they are called S. Edmunds Stones. These
Stones are nicked in their tops after the manner of Arrows, probably enough in
memory of S. Edmund who was shot to death with arrows by the Danes.

King Wolfere dying without issue, his Brother Etheldred succeeded him, and
continued his good affection to the Monastery of Speed speaks as if K. Wolfere
was buried at Peterburgh.
Medeshamsted; the Royal Founder whereof built also an house for the Abbot,
which upon the dissolution by Henry the Eighth, became the Bishops-Palace: A
building very large and stately, as this present age can testify; all the
rooms of common habitation being built above stairs, and underneath were very
fair Vaults and goodly Cellars for several uses. The great Hall, a magnificent
room, had, at the upper end, in the Wall, very high above the ground, three
stately Thrones, wherein were placed sitting, the three Royal Founders carved
curiously of Wood, painted and gilt, which in the Year 1644. were pulled down,
and broken to pieces. Under them were written in ancient Characters, lately
renewed, these three Verses. Per Peadam primo domus haec fundatur ab imo.
Post per Wolferum stabat possessio rerum.
Favit Ethelredus fraternum ponere foedus.


To which there was added a fourth when the three old ones were renewed.
Praebeat exemplum, rara est concordia fratrum.

Johannes Brampton. page 773.
King Ethelred having reigned thirty years, laid down his Crown and Scepter; and
shaving himself became first a Monk, and afterward Abbot of Bardney, as
Malmsbury writes, Anno 704. And Konredus succeeded him, as in the
Chronological Table annexed to Ingulphus.

The nest being thus fitted and prepared, care was taken to furnish it with
birds: And first with an Abbot, who should procreate, and nourish a brood of
religious underling Monks; and the first of all that was made Abbot was

1. SAXVLFVS,
A pious and prudent man. He being an Earl, thought it no shame to assume a
Religious presidency in this place; and arriving at a great height of fame, and
reputation by his piety, and holy life, he quickly gathered a Covent of Monks,
who flocked to him from several places; so that in a short time this nest
produced many birds by whom other Monasteries were also founded, and
replenished, especially that of Thorney was founded by this Abbot Saxulf, which
place was so called from the woody, or thornie nature thereof (whence others of
like nature so called also, as that of Westminster) though it was otherwise
known, and recorded in ancient Writings by the name of Ancarig. There did
Saxulf build a place for Anchorites, and having been Abbot of Medeshamsted the
space of thirteen years, he was translated to the Bishopric of Durham, or, as
some say, to the Archbishopric of the Midland English, or Mercians (Bishop
Godwin reckons him amongst the Bishops of Coventry and Litchfield) whom there
succeeded in the Monastery of Medeshamsted

2. CVTHBALDVS.
He being a Monk of this place, was, by reason of his holy and devout life,
thought the fittest to succeed Saxulf: So observant he was in the practice of
devotion, and withal, so prudent in Ecclesiastical affairs, that many other
places were desirous of him for their Governor, which, because they could not
obtain, they desired some of his appointing, whence Thorney, Bricclesworth,
Bredune, Wermondsey, Repingas, Wochingas, and many other places were furnished
with Abbots of his commending. It was in the time of this Cuthbaldus that King
Wolfere died, and his Brother Ethelred succeeded, who also was very liberal to
this Monastery, confirming to it what his Brethren had granted, and likewise
added more donations, and privileges of his own gift. Amongst the rest, that
the Abbot of Medeshamsted should be chiefest of all the Abbots on that side of
the River Thames, and should have the first place in all Conventions, and
Ecclesiastical Assemblies. And according to the present reputation of the
Church, and City of Rome, (for Rome it self had but lately, some 73 years
before this, at the request of Pope Boniface the fourth, to the Emperor Phocas,
Sigebert Gembl. ad an. 607. Lanquet. Platina says Boniface 3.
obtained the Primacy over all the Churches of the world, which from the
beginning was not so) if at any time the people of whole Britain, or any of the
neighboring Nations, should have a desire to visit the City of Rome, and
either by the length of the journey, or by any other impediment should be
hindered from such a purpose, it should then suffice, if they visited S. Peter
in this Monastery. Here they might pay their vows, be absolved from their sins,
and receive the Apostolical blessing; which, with other privileges, was
confirmed by Pope Agatho in a public See the Appendix.
Council of an hundred and twenty five Bishops then assembled at Rome, in the
Year 680. I find not how long this Cuthbaldus continued in this place, but
there succeeded

3. EGBALDVS,
Whose life and actions are wholly buried in oblivion, that I have nothing to
say of him, what he was, how, or how long he governed this Monastery: only
that he was Abbot when Ethelbaldus, the then King of Mercia, granted his
Charter for the founding of the Monastery of Croyland, making Kenulphus a Monk
of Evesham the first Abbot thereof, which Charter was signed Anno 716. And this
Abbot Egbaldus was one of the witnesses to it, as Ingulphus writes.

4. PVSA.
5. BENNA, or BEONNA.
He was a witness to the Charter of King Offa, granted to the Monastery of
Croyland, Anno 793. Ingulphus.

6. SELREDVS, or CELREDVS.
He was a witness to the Charter which Kenulphus King of Mercia granted to
Croyland, Anno 806. Ingulphus.

7. HEDDA.
He was a witness to the Charter of Witlafius King of Mercia, granted to
Siwardus Abbot of Croyland, for that the said Siwardus concealed King Witlafius
in a time of danger, in his Monastery. The Charter bears date, Anno 833. As
also to another Charter granted by King Bertulphus, Anno 851. To another of
King Beorredus, Anno 860. as Ingulphus tells us. He was also present at a
general Council holden at London, Anno 833. At another Council at Kingsbury,
Anno 851. as S. H. Spelman writes.

The Writers of this Monastery of Peterburgh, are silent concerning There was,
says Vossius, one Elias Trikingham a Monk of this Church who wrote Annals from
An. 626. to 770. wherein he lived, but what mention he makes of his own
Monastery, non conslat. See in Robert Sutton.
the times, lives, and actions of these Abbots; their Records having been
either none, or perished; therefore we shall be beholding to Ingulphus the
Abbot of Croyland for a memorable History concerning this Abbot Hedda.

In his time, the glory of the Monastery of Medeshamsted suffered a great
Eclipse, through the invasion of the Danes, destroying all before them with
fire, and sword. In which bloody tempest, the Monastery of Croyland was first
overwhelmed, the Danes killing there all the Monks they met with, and
Osketulus, the barbarous King, slaying the Abbot Theodorus upon the Altar, with
his own hand, and having plundered the Monastery, they set it on fire.
Britanuus a Monk of this Abbey, having escaped the slaughter, wrote lamentations
upon the destruction of his Monastery in Verse, An. 807. Pitfeus.


On the fourth day after, the Danes departed with a great booty of goods and
cattle toward Medeshamsted, where they found many of the Country people
retired within the Monastery, who with the Monks stood upon their guard: The
Danes making several assaults, Tulba brother of Earl Hulba, was by the
defendants, mortally bruised on the head, with a stone cast from that Tower
which he assaulted; whereat Hulba was so enraged, that having entered the
Monastery, he slew all the Monks with his own hand, Our Peterburgh writers call
them Hubba and Lubba.
the rest of the people were slaughtered by the Soldiers. The aged Abbot Hedda
escaped not the hands of Hulba, but was slain with his Monks. Then were the
Altars broken down, Monuments demolished, a goodly Library set on fire,
Charters, Evidences, and Writings (to a great number) all torn in pieces: The
Church it self, with all the appendent buildings, was set on fire, which
continued for fifteen days together. The Danes (as I find in a Continuator of
Ingulphus) with the riches of the Monastery, and the cattle of the Country,
departing on the fourth day, there were two Earls among them, both called by
one name Sidroc, the one the elder, the other the younger, who marched in the
rear of this devouring multitude, to guard them in their passage over streams
and rivers; And when the multitude had passed over the River Nen, these two
Sidrocs being to pass over with their booty, two Waines, laden with their
choicest riches, were overthrown, and together with their horses sunk into a
deep pit, a little beneath the Bridge (which happily was the Medeswell before
mentioned.) Now to Ingulphus again who proceeds in his own story, That certain
Monks of Croyland, who had secured themselves by flight into the Fens, the
Danes being gone, they returned to their Monastery, cleansed it from ashes, and
other pollutions as they could, and consulted to choose another Abbot, which
they did; Godricus a reverend and religious man being he upon whom the election
passed; to whom there came Toretus Prior of Ancarig, with his sub-prior Tisa,
desiring Godricus that he would take some brethren with him, and go over to
Medeshamsted, to give Christian burial to the bodies of those Monks which were
there exposed to beasts, and birds: Godricus embracing the motion, took some of
his Monks with him, amongst the rest, one Turgarus of twelve years of age, who
being by the younger Sidroc saved, was by him taken to Medeshamsted, and seeing
the Danes busy in getting their carriages out of the River Nen, he stole away
from them, and returned to his Monastery of Croyland. Abbot Godricus coming to
Medeshamsted, with much toil and pains, gathered together the bodies of the
slaughtered Monks, to the number of 84. and laid them all in one large grave,
in the middle of the Churchyard by the East front of the Monastery, upon the
Feast of S. Cecilia, (November 22.) setting up over the body of the Abbot
resting in the midst of his sons, a pyramidal stone, three foot in height,
three in length, and one in thickness, engraven with the So Ingulphus calls it.
pictures of the Abbot, and his Monks about him; which stone, in memory of the
destroyed Monastery, he named Medeshamsted; and every year after so long as he
lived, he visited that place, pitching his Tent over the said stone, saying
Mass two several days, for the souls of Abbot Hedda, and his Monks. The high
way then into Holland, was through the same Churchyard, having that monumental
stone on the right hand, and a cross of stone over against it, erected also by
Abbot Godricus, on the left, that passers by, in memory of the ruined
Monastery, might remember to pray for the souls of those there buried; and
abstain from sacrilegious rapines, and demolitions of that place, for his sake
who was crucified. Thus far Ingulphus.

The Cross is long since demolished, and the place where it stood, not known,
but the stone is still remaining, agreeable to Ingulphus his description;
which, as it was at first, called by the name of the place, Medeshamsted; so it
is now amongst some, known by the name of Peterburgh: and there being certain
little holes in the sides of the stone, it was lately a merry custom for
strangers, to put their fingers into one of those holes, that they might say,
they had been at Peterburgh.

There was within these few years a door in the Church having the Picture of
Abbot Hedda, and the King or Captain of the Danes, as it were expostulating the
business, and underneath were these four Verses written in ancient Saxon
Letters, as if they had been spoken by the Abbot: Fers mala, pejora timeas,
cedasque rigori,
Nec teneare mora, ne teneare mori.
Hoc ne dabo domitus quod Barbarus advena quaerit?
Da, necer immeritus, mors mihi munus erit.


The Monastery of Medeshamsted thus destroyed by the Danes, Ingulphus fol. 494.
lay buried in its own ruins the space of ninety and six years, no Abbot,
Monk, Government, or Religion there professed in all that time, that is to be
found in story; only King Beorredus seized the Lands of the Monastery, giving
them to his Soldiers, until Adelwoldus, or Athelwoldus Bishop of Winchester (a
man very zealous in the building and restoring of Churches) laid his hand to
the restoration of it; for as Writers say, he was warned of God in the night,
that he should go to the midland English, and repair the Monastery of S. Peter;
so that taking his journey into these parts, he came to Oundle, supposing that
to be the place, but being warned the second time that he should follow the
course of the River; he came at length to Medeshamsted, which he found desolate
and forsaken, but presently with such help as he could get, he fell to
cleansing of it. But seeing what a great business this restoration was like to
prove, he returned to Winchester to make preparation for so great a design. And
first he made his address to God by fervent prayers, to incline the hearts of
King Edgar, and his Queen and Nobles, that he might have them so propitious, as
to contribute their assistances to this work. And being one time at his
prayers, the Queen had secretly gotten behind the door, to listen what it was
that Athelwold prayed, and suddenly she came forth upon him, telling him, that
God and her self had heard his prayers, and from thenceforth she began to
solicit the King for the reparation of this Monastery, to which the King
assenting, applied himself thereunto, until he had finished the same; which was
in the year 970.

The Monastery thus re-edified, King Edgar desirous to see it, went thither,
with Dunstane then Archbishop of Canterbury, and Oswald Archbishop of York,
attended also with most of the Nobility and Clergy of England, who all
approved, and applauded both the place, and work. But when King Edgar heard
that some Charters, and Writings, which some Monks had secured from the fury of
the Danes were found; he desired to see them, and having read the privileges
of this place, that he had a second Rome within his own Kingdom, he wept for
joy: And in the presence of that Assembly, he confirmed their former
privileges and possessions; the King, Nobles, and Clergy, offering large
oblations, some of lands, some of gold, and silver. At this glorious assembly
the name of the place was changed from Medeshamsted to Burgh, and by reason of
the fair building, pleasant situation, large privileges, rich possessions,
plenty of gold, and silver, which this Monastery was endowed withal, there was
an addition to the name, as to be called Gildenburgh, though in reference to
the dedication, it has ever since been known by the name of Peterburgh.
Malmsbury would have the nomination of the place Burgh to be from Abbot De
gestis Pont. lib. 4.
Kenulphus, his enclosing the Monastery with a Wall, as shall be noted
hereafter; but our Peterburgh Writers are not of his mind, but place it here.
Writers say that in those days this Monastery was of so high account, that what
person soever came thither to pray, whether King, Lord, Bishop, or Abbot, he
put off his shoes at the gate of the Monastery, and entered barefoot: And the
Covent there was very much had in esteem, that if any of them traveled into
any of the neighboring parts they were received with the greatest respect, and
reverence that could be.

The Monastery thus restored, King Edgar was mindful of the government also, by
Abbots, as it had anciently been, and there was appointed

8. ADVLPHVS.
He being Chancellor to King Edgar, changed his Court life for a Monastical in
this place; the reason of which change, was this: He had one only Son, whom he
and his Wife dearly loved, and they used to have him lie in bed betwixt them,
but the Parents having over night drunk more wine than was convenient, their
Son betwixt them was smothered to death. Adulphus the father being sadly
affected with this horrid mischance, was resolved to visit S. Peter at Rome,
after the manner of a penitentiary for absolution, imparting his intent to
Bishop Athelwoldus, who dissuaded him from it, telling him it would be better
if he would labor in the restoration of S. Peter's Church in this place, and
here visit him: Adulphus approving this advice, came with King Edgar to Burgh,
where in the presence of the King, and the rest of that Convention, he offered
all his wealth, put off his Courtly Robes, and put on the habit of a Monk, and
ascended to the degree of Abbot in the year 972.

In those days the whole Nasee, or Country adjoining, and which is now known by
the name of Burgh-soke, was all a woody and solitary place, until this Abbot
Adulphus cut down woods, built Manors, and Granges, and let the Lands to farm
for certain Rents; so that the people increasing, and as yet no Churches built
amongst them, they came to Peterburgh to receive the Sacraments, and to pay
their Church-duties, which continued for many years after. And although in the
days of Turoldus Abbot, Churches and Chapels began to be built, (the said
Turoldus distributing the Lands of the Monastery to those Knights who desired
to serve God at home) yet still the Church of Peterburgh received the whole
revenue until the time of Abbot Ernulfus, Anno 1112. when there were assigned
to the respective Ministers of Churches and Chapels, certain revenues for
their maintenance, as due to their service; saving to the Church of Burgh two
parts of the predial Tithes of those Knights, and saving the burial of See in
Ernulphus.
the said Knights, their wives and children in the Church of Burgh, and also a
certain portion of the Knights estates, for the maintenance of their wives and
children: Saving also to the Church of Burgh from the Churches so built,
certain pensions, which being imposed upon them in their first endowments, or
collations by this Church, many of them have continued unto, and been paid in
these our days to the Bishop, or Dean, and Chapter, as they were assigned by
King Henry the Eighth, as shall be declared hereafter. Adulphus was present at
the dedication of the Church of Ramsey, in the year 974.

After that this Abbot Adulphus had happily governed this Monastery about the
space of twenty years (Henry of Pightly says Codex Ramis. in manu H. Cromwell
Armig. fol. 58.
thirty one) he was translated to the Archbishopric of York, there to succeed
Oswaldus then deceased: Some say he was translated to the Bishop of Worcester.
And in the place of Adulphus there came

9. KENVLPHVS,
Who was made Abbot in the year of our Lord, 992. and was highly honored far
and near for his wisdom and piety, many coming to him from several parts,
Bishops, Abbots, Priests, and Monks, as to another Solomon to hear his wisdom.
And by reason of his great fame for his learning, he is supposed to have been a
Writer; and is therefore by Pitseus inserted into his Catalogue of English
Writers, though what he wrote is not extant, or evident by his, or any other
testimony that I have met with. This Abbot Kenulphus enclosed the Monastery of
Burgh with a Wall, a great part whereof is yet standing. Having continued B.
Godwyn.
Abbot here about thirteen years, he was translated to the Bishopric of
Winchester, Anno 1006. for the procurement whereof he is charged with Simony.
His successor in this Monastery was

10. ELSINVS,
Or Elsius: Of whom I find no glorious Character recorded by Writers, save this
(if it may be so accounted) that he was very inquisitive after Relics, with
which he was very industrious to enrich his Monastery. And because Swapham and
Wittlesey, (the compleatest Historians of this place) have punctually set down
a bedrole of his Relics, the Reader I hope will not take it ill, if I give a
relation of them. Amongst the Relics of this place, that which was most
famous, and bare the bell away from all the rest, was S. Oswalds arm, which
continued uncorrupted for many years, and that in the time of Abbot Martin, it
was shown to Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, 487 years after its cutting off. And
of it some of the Monks in those times wrote these Verses. Cum digitis dextram,
cute, sanguine carneque tectam
Oswaldi Regis Burgensis continet aedis.
Vngues sunt tales fuerant vivo sibi quales
Intus in hac dextra paret cernentibus extra
Nervus, and hinc vena dextra junctura serena
In cubiti veluti nova paret fossa veruti
Quo fuit appensum pretiosum martyris armum.


The story of this arm I suppose to be taken out of Beda his History of
England, lib. 3. cap. 6. who relates that this Oswald King of Northumberland
was very free and liberal in giving of alms to the poor; and one day whilst he
sat at meat, one of his servants told him of a great number of poor people
come to his gate for relief; whereupon King Oswald sent them meat from his own
table, and there not being enough to serve them all, he caused one of his
silver dishes to be cut in pieces, and to be distributed amongst the rest;
which Aydanus a Bishop, (who came out of Scotland to convert, and instruct
those Northern parts of England) beholding, took the King by the right hand,
saying, nunquam inveterascat haec manus, let this hand never wax old, or be
corrupted: which came to pass. This arm was first deposited at Bamburgh, a
religious place in Yorkshire. Walter of Wettlesey writing the story thereof,
tells that it was brought to the Monastary of Burgh by Winegotus of Bebeberch,
but says not when, therefore I cannot conjecture better than that it was by
the procurement of this Abbot Elsinus. It is said that this arm wrought many
cures upon several diseased folk; and that it was of such fame in the days of
King Stephen, as that he himself came to Peterburgh purposely to see it; and
offered his Ring to S. Oswald, and also remitted King Stephen at Peterburgh.
to the Monastery the sum of forty marks wherein it was indebted unto him.

But that the Reader may know more fully the story of S. Oswald and his arm, it
is to be remembered, that Penda King of the Camden.
Mercians being of a fierce nature, and withal ambitious, made war upon his
neighbor Kings, and particularly upon Oswald King of Northumberland, who was a
Christian, him Penda encountered at Oswaldstreet, now Oswestre in Shropshire
(though Wittlesey says, this battle was fought at a place called Burn) and
there overthrew him, and caused him to be torn in pieces; whom some in
remembrance of Bishop Aydan's blessing might preserve his arm, which at length
was here at Peterburgh treasured up. If the Reader be still at a stand when he
shall read in Authors that King Oswald was buried at several places, I cannot
help him.

And now that we are upon this subject of Relics, we may (I hope without
offense to the Reader) extend the Legend to the full. Besides S. Oswalds arm,
there were some of his ribs, and some of the earth where he was slain. There
were two pieces of our Saviors swaddling clothes. Of the Manger wherein he was
laid, in two places. Two pieces of the Cross which would not be burnt. More of
the Cross in four places. Of the Sepulcher of our Lord, in four places. Of the
five loaves with which he fed the five thousand men. Of the garment of S. Mary,
in two places. Of her vail, in two places. Of Aarons rod. Relics of S. John
the Baptist. Of old Symeon. Of the Sepulcher of Lazarus, in two places. Of the
stone-patin of S. John the Evangelist. Relics of S. Peter the Apostle. Of S.
Paul. Of S. Andrew. Of S. Bartholomew. Of S. Philip and Jacob. A shoulder blade
of one of the Innocents, whom Herod slew. Relics of S. Stephen. S. Dionysius,
Rusticus and Elutherius. Of the sackcloath, and shirt of S. Wenceslaus. Of the
hand of S. Magnus, Martyr. Of S. Laurence. The jaw, and tooth, and arm of S.
George, Martyr. Relics of S. Hippolytus, and of S. Gervase. The jaw, and
tooth of S. Christopher. Relics of S. Cyriacus, of S. Potitus, of S.
Quirinus. Two teeth of S. Edward, King, and Martyr. Relics of S. Trudon, of
S. Maximus, of S. Salinus, of S. Theodorus, of S. Innocentius, of S. Mauritius,
of S. Apollinaris, of S. Gorgon, of S. S. Cosmus, and Damianus, of S. S.
Sergius, and Bachius. The finger of S. Leofridus Abbot. Relics of S. Hugo, S.
Wulgarus, S. Adelwold, S. Cuthbald, S. Vindemianus, S. Lotharius. Three sinews
of the hand of S. Athelard Abbot of Corbey. Relics of S. Acca Bishop: of S.
Machutus, of S. Egwinus Abbot; of S. Kenulphus. The arm of S. Swithune, Bishop.
A relic of S. Medard. The shoulderblade of S. Ambrose. The tooth of S.
Aydanus, of S. Grimbaldus, of S. Adelmus. Two pieces of S. Cecilia, of S.
Lucia, of S. Christina. Of the bones, and blood, and garment of S. Eutopia. Of
S. Mary the Egyptian. Of S. Mary Magdalen. Of the head, and arms of S.
Rogelida. Of See the Matriculatory at the end. O.
S. Anstroberta. Of S. Edburga. Of S. Emerentiana. Of S. Juliana Virgin. Of the
hairs of S. Athelwold Bishop. The tooth of S. Sexburga Virgin.

Relics deposited under the great Altar. Of the wood, and Sepulcher of our
Lord. Of the head of S. George. Of the arm of S. Sebastian. Of S. Pancratius.
Of S. Procopius. S. Wilfridus. S. Botwinus. S. Albertus. S. Suffredus. S.
Tadbertus. S. Wildegelus, Abbots.

Page 91.
Relics in the silver Tower. Of the Sepulcher of our Lord. Of the garment, and
Sepulcher of S. Mary. Of S. Andrew, and S. Philip, and S. James. Of S.
Dionysius, S. Rusticus, and Eleutherius: Of S. Oswaldus, S. Laurentius, S.
Vincentius, S. Potitus, S. S. Cosmus, and Damianus, S. Adelwoldus, S. Adelinus,
S. Cecilia, S. Edburga. What became of these, or some of these relics in
after times, some small mention will be made hereafter: but whether any of them
were extant in the Monastery at the dissolution by King Henry the Eighth, I
find nothing amongst Writers, no not of great S. Oswalds arm, though Nicolas
Harpsfield a late Historical Romanist would make us believe, that the prayer of
Aydanus was still in force, as if that arm was somewhere extant.

But to return to Abbot Elsinus. He was three years in Normandy with Queen
Emma, where he also collected many other relics, and like a laborious Be,
stored his Abbey with them: It happened at that time, that there was a great
dearth in that Country of Normandy, insomuch, that many of the inhabitants
forsook the Country and planted themselves in other places. The Abbey of S.
Florentinus having spent their treasures in buying of food, and nothing left
them but the shrine of their Saint, and Patron; at length they sold him also,
all but his head, which they still reserved to themselves: Elsinus having
bought the body, sent it to Peterburgh, whither the Monks of that Abbey in
Normandy did often repair, to do their devotions to their Saint.

But whilst Elsinus was careful abroad for profitable relics, his Abbey at
home sustained loss in more real endowments, for Hoveden in Yorkshire, with
many other lands were wrested from the Monastery of Peterburgh. Yet Elsinus
added something of his own, purchasing a fourth part of Wittleseymere, and
giving it to his Monastery, which had a part thereof before purchased by
Adelwoldus Bishop of Winchester in the time of King Edgar.

Wittlesey.
In those days was the Monastery of Ramsey accused to the King, who threatened
the dissolution thereof, but by the mediation of this Elsinus, it was
reprieved, upon condition that Elsinus should undertake the charge of it, which
Elsinus afterward, remitted to the Ramisians. About this time Leofricus, who
was Secretary of Burgh, translated the bodies of S. Kyneburga, and Kyneswitha
from their Church of Castre, and the body of S. Tibba from Rihale, to
Peterburgh. Others place this translation in the Harpsfield from Capgra. page
85.
time of King Henry the first, and that they had a yearly memorial celebrated
here. In the time of this Abbot Elsinus, Anno 1051. Elfricus Archbishop of York
died at Southwell, and was buried at Peterburgh, where he had been a Monk: of
whom more hereafter.

Elsinus having been Abbot here the space of fifty years, died Anno 1055. and
there succeeded.

11. ARWINVS, or ERNWINVS.
Ingulphus.
He was made Abbot by Election which deservedly passed upon him, being a man of
great holiness, and simplicity; but he liking better a private, and solitary
life, freely surrendered his government, after eight years continuance therein.
In his time, Anno 1059. or as some say 1060. died Kinsius Archbishop of York,
who formerly had been Chaplain to King Edward the Confessor, and was buried in
the Church of Peterburgh, where he had been a Monk. Radulphus de Diceto calls
him Kinsigius, and commends him highly for his austere way of living, his
humility, and other virtues. Of whom again hereafter. About this time, S.
Wulstan, formerly Monk of Peterburgh, was made Bishop of Worcester, Bishop
Godwyn.
Anno 1062.

12. LEOFRICVS, or LEVRICVS
Vid. appendiam Chartarum.
Having by his birth relation to the Royal blood, was first made a Monk of
Burgh, and afterward Abbot, upon the retirement of Arwinus. He being dear to
King Edward, and Edgith his wife, held by extraordinary benevolence, five
Abbeys in his hand at once, viz. Burton, Coventry, Croyland, Thorney, and
Peterburgh. He redeemed of King Edward certain lands belonging to his
Monastery, as Fiskerton for twenty marks, Fleton for eight marks; and Burleigh
for eight marks; which being demised by lease to Elfgarus the Queens Chaplain
for the term of his life; he being dead, the Queen would have taken it from the
Church of Peterburgh, had it not been for Abbot Leofricus.

In the third year of this Abbot, Anno 1066. William Duke of Normandy entered
England with an army, and subdued it to his Norman power. Of which I find these
old Monkish Verses in some of our Writers. Anno Milleno, Sexageno quoque seno,
Agenito verbo, Duce jam regnante superbo,
Anglorum metae crinem sensere cometae
Belli transacti sunt hic anni numerati
Quod fuit hic factum, quod and est nunc usque vocatum
Dilecti Christi fuerant tunc festa Calixti.


Abbot Leofricus was then in the English army, where sickning, he returned to
his Monastery of Peterburgh, and died the night after All Saints day.

Deeping Bank.
In the time of this Abbot Leofricus, one Egelricus a Monk of Burgh was made
Archbishop of York, but the Canons there, envying that a Monk should be set
over them (though but lately it had been so) refused to receive him, wherefore
he was made Bishop of Durham, where he was received with general approbation.
Whilst he was Bishop there he gathered great store of wealth, yet not to
himself, but that he might be rich in good works, amongst which, there is one
that continues his memory to this very day, the bank from Deeping to Spalding;
for in those days the passage being very difficult by reason of Woods, and deep
Marshes, he raised that Causey for the benefit of Travelers, which for many
years after was called by his name Egelric Rode, though now it be known only by
the name of Deeping Bank.

But some affirm that Egelricus found his wealth, for intending to build a
Church at Coneester (now Chester upon the street) in laying the foundation
thereof he chanced to light upon a great mass of treasure, wherewith he
finished that work and many others. Such a new found treasure might be an
additional to what he had before, which surely was not small, else he would
scarce have undertaken to build Churches. When Egelricus had held his
Bishopric of Durham long enough to weary himself with public employments, he
returned to his Monastery of Peterburgh, having resigned his Bishopric to his
brother Egelwinus. But it happened that these two brethren were accused to King
William the Conqueror, who laid up Egelricus in Chains at Westminster during
his life, and when he was near his end, he refused to have his Fetters taken
off, and desired that he might be buried with them, and so was he buried in S.
Nicolas Porch in Westminster: the other Brother Egelwinus was deposed from his
Bishopric by King William, and sent to Abendone, where he died.

The Writers of Peterburgh, Swapham, and Wittlesey say, That in the time of
Abbot Leofricus his sickness, this Egelricus being at his accustomed Evening
devotions, the Devil appeared to him, in the shape of a boy of terrible
countenance, and told him, that ere long he should triumph over the chiefest of
them (which perhaps was in the death of Leofricus Abbot) and that three several
times he would revenge himself upon the Monks, and Monastery, telling him also
the manner. First, that he would cause all the Monks to be expelled, and the
goods of the Monastery to be taken away. Secondly, he would cause the Monastery
to be set on fire. Thirdly, he would set the Monks so at strife, that they
should cut one another throats. But Egelricus replying, The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan; the Devil vanished, and left a horrible stink behind him.

13. BRANDO
Having been Coadjutor to Leofricus, was thought the fittest to succeed him;
and being elected, he made his address to Edgar Atheling for his confirmation,
supposing him to be lawful heir to the Crown of England, notwithstanding the
late Conquest by K. William: but William hearing thereof, was much incensed
against Abbot Brando, that he was forced to give him forty marks for his favor
to confirm him in his Monastery, and the Lands to his Church. Whilst he was a
Monk, he gave to the Monastery many Lands, as in Muscham, Schotter, Scalthorp,
Yolthorp, Messingham, Malmeton, Cletham, Hibaldstow, Rachevildthorp, Holme,
Riseby, Walcot, Normanby, Alethorp, there joining with him, Askylus, Syricus,
and Sivortus, who procured from King Edward a confirmation of these Lands to
the Church.

Brando when he was Abbot, created his Nephew Herewardus le Wake Lord of
Brunne, (now Bourn) Knight, which Herewardus was a valiant man, and stoutly
opposed the Normans in those parts.

Brando enjoyed not long his Government, but in November, Anno 1069. which was
the third of King William, he died.

14. TVROLDVS, or THOROLDVS
A Norman, was placed by King William in the vacant Abbey of Peterburgh: He
being a stranger, neither loved his Monastery, nor his Convent him; He began to
make a strange dispersion of the Lands belonging to his Church, conferring
sixty and two Hides of Land upon certain stipendiary Knights, that they might
defend him against Herewardus le Wake: This Herewardus was son of Leofricus
Lord of Brunne, and having had a Military education beyond Seas, repaired home
to employ his valor in defense of his native Country, against the Normans. It
happened at that time, that the Danes under Sweyn their King, son of Canutus,
invaded this Land, amongst whom, Osbernus an Earl, and Bishop, entered into the
Isle of Ely, with whom Herewardus joined, and incited him to set upon the
Monastery of Peterburgh, for that the King had given it to a Norman.
Herewardus, and the Danes coming hither, the Monks and others with them
defended themselves for a time, with much valor, in a hot dispute at
Bolehith-gate, now commonly called Bulldyke-gate, being on the South of the
Monastery, and yet standing: where, when Herewardus, and the Danes perceived
their entrance doubtful, and that they could not cut their way with their
Swords, and Weapons, they assayed to do it by fire upon the adjoining
buildings, and so entered through flame and smoke. Being entered, they seized
upon all the good things they found, carrying them away to Ely, leaving much of
the buildings (the Monastery only excepted) destroyed by fire, and taking
Adelwoldus the Prior, with many of the more ancient Monks thither also. But
Adelwoldus watching for an opportunity to get away, and return home, the Danes
being jovial, and merry at a triumphal feast for this their booty, Adelwoldus
got privately to himself some gold and silver with some Relics, amongst which
was S. Oswald's arm which he hid in his bedstraw, till he could make his
escape. But an agreement being made between King William and Sweyn the Danish
King, that the Danes should depart with all their spoil, most of the good
things of this Monastery were carried away toward Denmark, and a great part of
them lost in the Sea by tempest: those which arrived there were afterward
recovered by Iwarus the Secretary of the Monastery, who took a journey thither,
for that purpose. And now had Adelwoldus the Prior, with the other Monks, a
time of returning without stealth to his Monastery of Peterburgh, and taking
the Abbey of Ramsey in their way; the Ramisians entertained them kindly for
awhile, but at their departure, they detained their Relics, which afterward
upon the threats of Abbot Thorold, they yielded up; yet did not the Monks enjoy
their newly recovered Treasures long, for they being careless and drunken, and
their Abbot absent, a fire seized upon the Church, and other remaining
buildings, from which they rescued some few Relics, but little of other
things. All this while Turoldus Abbot absented himself from his Monastery, and
made his abode at Stamford, but Herewardus being withdrawn he returned to his
Monastery, where he found all things in a desolate condition. He brought along
with him 140 Normans well armed to secure him against Herewardus, and also
built a Fort or Castle within his Monastery, which for many years retained the
name of Mount Thorold: so that now the Monastery of Peterburgh seemed rather a
warlike than religious place. Yet for all that Turoldus could do for his own
security, he was at length taken by Herewardus, and constrained to ransom
himself with the payment of thirty marks in silver. So profuse was this
Turoldus of the goods of his Monastery, that at his entrance an estimate of the
goods thereof amounting to fifteen hundred pounds, ere Turoldus had done, there
remained scarce five hundred.

But his disposing of the Lands (as has been said) to certain Knights, for
their service in these Military times, was remarkable, and valid in after ages;
where I could give a large declaration of the persons thus invested with the
Church Lands, and what Lands those were, but it shall suffice to say, that
there were in all forty one men of note, who received those Lands from Turoldus
to hold upon that condition: but they did not all receive in equal proportion,
but some more, and some less; some to find and afford the service of six
Knights, some of four, some of one, and some less, as their portions of Land
were; yet in all, the number of Knights for which they were to be answerable,
amounted to sixty eight, and from whence there began a new addition to be
annexed unto the name of the place, as to be called, The Honor of Peterburgh.
But there happened another Act of Turoldus, which raised his discontents higher
in himself, and brought him lower in the good affection of his Convent, for he
received into his Monastery two Monks from beyond Sea, who secretly stole away,
and carried many of the Church Goods with them. At length Turoldus, weary of
his Government here, procured for himself the Bishopric of Beavois in France,
whither he transported many of the goods of the Monastery: but he was not so
welcome to his new Bishopric as to make any long continuance there, for on the
fourth day he was expelled thence, and returning again into England, he gave
the King a great sum of Money that he might be seated again in his Monastery
of Peterburgh, whither he returned, and in all, continued his Government there
the space of 28 years, and died Anno 1100, or as some say 1098. being the 10,
or 11 year of William the Second.

15. GODRIC US.
The Monks now began to be provident for themselves; for considering the
inconveniences they suffered by Turoldus being imposed upon them, they gave the
King three hundred Marks in Silver that they might have the power of Electing
their own Abbot; which having procured from the King, they chose Godricus, who
was Brother to Abbot Brando. Whether or no Godricus might incurr the guilt of
Simony by what the Church had done, Bishop Godwin calls him Geffrey. page 34.
I will not determine, yet was he, with Richard Abbot of Ely, and Adelwinus
Abbot of Ramsey, deposed from their Governments by a Council held under
Anselmus then Archbishop of Canterbury, for that (as Peterburgh Writers say)
they had entered by Simony. Yet Matthew. Paris renders another reason, that it In
vita W. Rufi.
was, because they had received investiture into their Abbeys, from the King,
and not from Anselme. So Godricus held his Abbey of Peterburgh but one year,
which was an unhappy year too; for in that year, Foreign Thieves from Almain,
France and Flanders broke in through a window into the Church, and stole away a
Cross of beaten Gold, with many Jewels, two Chalices and Patins, two golden
Candlesticks, which Elfricus Archbishop of York had given to this Church.
Although the Thieves were pursued and taken, yet the goods were not recovered,
but came into the Kings hand, who held them so fast that the Abbey could not
retrieve them.

Godricus being deposed, the Abbey was destitute of an Abbot about the space of
four years, all which time it continued in the Kings hand, at length King Henry
1. in the year 1103. and the 3 or 4. of his Reign, sent an Abbot unto them.
Until these days of King Henry all the Charters, and Grants of former Kings,
and other Benefactors to the Church, were without Seals, and signed only with
their Names, and Figures of a Cross, but now they began to affix Seals to their
Deeds.

16. MATTHIAS
Was the man whom King Henry sent to the Abbey of Burgh, after that Godricus
was deposed. One may almost smell the wind that blew Matthias hither; for he
was Brother to Galfridus Ridel the Kings Chief Justice, to whom Matthias gave
the Manor of Pightesly, belonging then to his Church; What conveyance Abbot
Matthias made to his brother Galfridus, I cannot determine, but Galfridus
resolved to hold the Manor of Pightesly, as his own, and not of the Monastery
of Peterburgh, which caused a long suit betwixt them, until at length an
agree-ment was made betwixt the Abbot (not this Matthias, but one of his
Successors) and Galfridus, that he should hold the said Manor for his life,
paying to the Abbot the yearly rent of four Marks, and that after his decease,
the Manor should return again to the Church of Peterburgh, which it did, not
long after: for Galfridus was drowned at Sea, with William Son of King Henry.
Not long after, Abbot John de Sais gave the King 60 Marks in Silver, to confirm
again the Manor of Pightesly to his Monastery. Matthias held his Monastery of
Peterburgh but one year, for on the same day he entered thereon, on the same day
twelve month he died at Gloucester about the year 1105. and the King again kept
the Monastery in his hand three years, till the coming of

17. ERNVLFVS:
He was Prior of Canterbury, and there being then a Council holden at London
wherein many were promoted to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Ernulfus was offered to
the Monks of Peterburgh for their Abbot, and they willingly accepted of him,
knowing him to be both a pious, and prudent man. Whilst he was Prior of
Canterbury, the business concerning the marriage of Priests was hastily
agitated, and Anselme the then Archbishop was strongly for the negative,
writing Letters to this Ernulfus, which are to be seen in Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments. Whilst Ernulfus was Abbot here, all things went happily with the
Monastery, Ernulfus promoting the good thereof by the Kings favor, which he
had in a plentiful measure. He built the new Dormitory, the Necessary, and
finished the Chapter House which was began before he made an agreement betwixt
his Convent, and those Knights who held Lands of his Abbey, that every Knight
See in Adulphus.
should pay yearly to the Sacristary two parts of his Tithes, and at his death,
the third part of his whole Estate, for his burial in the Church, all his
Knightly endowments, as well Horses, as Arms, being to be brought with his
body, and offered up to S. Peter: the Convent were to receive the Corpse with
procession, and to perform the office for the dead. In the time of this
Ernulfus Anno 1112. was the Church of Thirlby, near Bourn in Lincolnshire,
dedicated by Robert Bloet then Bishop of Lincoln; Thirlby Church dedicated.
Swapham fol. 115. page 1.
which Church, with the Manor belonged then to this Monastery of Peterburgh.
Abbot Ernulfus was translated from this his government in his seventh year Anno
1114. For King Henry being to pass over the Sea, and waiting for a wind at
Bourn, he sent to Peterburgh for Ernulfus to come unto him to consult about
weighty Affairs, he being the Kings Confessor; but being come, the King with
Raulfus (so our Peterburgh writers call him, but Bishop Godwin Rodolphus) the
Archbishop of Canterbury importuned him to take upon him the Bishopric of
Rochester, which Ernulfus did, though much against his will, the Monks also
taking it very heavily, wept for the loss of their Abbot. Ernulfus being Bishop
of Rochester wrote a Book in answer to certain questions propounded See the
Catalogue at the end. O. and B.
by Lambertus Abbot of S. Bertine, as also another book of incestuous
Marriages, although Pitseus makes no mention of him. Ernulfus being thus
removed, the King gave his Monastery to Johannes de Sais, or

18. JOHN of Salisbury.
He being appointed Abbot, was honorably received of the Monks. He took a
journey to Rome (but I find not to what end) and returned the year following.
In his time the Monastery was burnt again, only the Chapter House, Dormitory,
Necessary, and the new Refectory escaped the flames, which took hold of the
Village, and wholly consumed it. Wittlesey writes, that one in the Bakehouse
being to kindle a fire, with much pains could not make it burn, which, John the
Abbot, being present, seeing, in a choleric mood, cried, The Devil kindle it,
and presently the fire flamed to the top of the house, ran through all the
Abbots Offices, and thence to the Town: The life burning in one of the Towers
for nine days together, a violent wind drove the Coals upon the Abbots house,
and fired that also. Afterward Abbot John began to build the Church anew Anno
1118. which he industriously prosecuted, but lived not to finish it, for he
held his Abbey but eleven years, and died of a Dropsy Anno 1125. being the 25,
or 26 of King Henry I. A year before this, was the Church of Castri dedicated,
as may be seen by an Inscription yet continuing over the Chancel door, XV KL
MAII DEDICATIO HUJUS ECCLESIAE MCXXIIII.

Abbot John being dead, the King again kept the Monastery in his hand two
years. And although (as has been said) this John gave the King 60 Marks for
the confirmation of the Manor of Pightesly, yet upon the death of John the
Abbot of Peterburgh, the King, having all at his disposing, for 60 Marks more,
sold Pightesly to Richard Basset, and for Abbot of this Monastery appointed

19. HENRICUS de Angeli
Or Henry of Anjou, who was made Abbot Anno 1128. He being ambitious, sought
after many preferments, but held them not long; for besides, he was unstable,
and voluntarily deserted his present Governments, or else found opposition in
new ones, that he was compelled to withdraw. Having an Abbey beyond Sea, he got
a Commission to come over into England to gather up Peter pence, which gave him
opportunity to espy out some preferment or other here: therefore coming to the
King, and much complaining of the troubles in his own Country, whose Wars, by
reason of his age, he could not endure, he besought the King to conferr upon
him the Abbey of Peterburgh, which was then vacant, which he (being allied to
the King) obtained, notwithstanding that both Archbishops and Bishops opposed
it, telling the King it was not lawful for him to hold two Abbeys. But the King
afterward perceiving his fraud, and covetousness, commanded him to depart the
Realm, when he had held the Abbey of Peterburgh 5 years, and so Anno 1133. he
returned to his Abbey De Angeli. In the first year that this John came to be
Abbot here (as Wittlesey writes) there were heard and seen in the night time
throughout Lent, in the Woods betwixt Stamford and Peterburgh, Hunters, with
their Horns, and Dogs, all of them of black, and ugly complexion, some riding
upon black Horses, and some upon Goats, they had great staring eyes, and were
seen sometimes twenty, and sometimes thirty in a company.

20. MARTINUS de Vecti,
So called of the Isle of Wight from whence he came: some call him Martin Cook.
He was first Prior of S. Neots, and the King gave him the Monastery of
Peterburgh, into which he was honorably received by the Monks upon S. Peter's
day, Anno 1133. being the 33 of King Henry 1. He was very industrious in
repairing, and perfecting the buildings of the Monastery, and especially the
Church, to the dedication whereof anew, there came thither Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln, the Abbots of Thorney, Croyland, Ramsey, and others to whom Abbot
Martin showed the Holy Relics, and S. Oswalds arm, Anno 1123. 23 years after
its burning. The tokens of which conflagration are yet to be seen (or of some
other) in the inside of the West Porch above. This Martin built a Gate of the
Monastery, but which I cannot say. He likewise changed the situation of the
Village to the Western side of the Monastery, for before, it was on the East;
he appointed the market place as now it is, and built many houses about it. He
changed also the place of Wharfage for Boats coming to the Town, to that place
which is now commonly used. He removed the Church of S. John Baptist, (which
before stood in a Close still known by the name of S. John's Close) to the
place where now the said Church stands. And as he was a great builder, so was
he also in some sort a demolisher, for he pulled down a Castle standing near
the Church, which perhaps was Mount Thorold formerly mentioned. He planted the
Vineyard, and added many buildings to his own dwellings. He entertained King
Stephen who came hither, to see the Arm of S. Oswald, to whom he offered his
Ring, and forgave the Church 40 Marks which it ought him, and confirmed many
other Privileges. Abbot Martin, in the time of his Government, took a journey
to Rome, and along with him the Charter of King Ethelred, that the then Pope
Eugenius the Third might grant his Confirmation: But in Wittlesey.
the Consistory there arose a debate about the form of the Charter, which
hitherto had gone current for the space of almost 500 years: for one of the
Cardinals present besought the Pope, that he would not give the honor of his
name to another; whereupon a new Charter was granted to Abbot Martin in the
name of Eugenius, and the name of King Ethelred, Founder, and Benefactor, was
put out. Martin, having sitten in his Abbattical See the Appendix.
Chair here about the term of 22 years, died Anno 1155. which was the second
year of King Henry 2. And there succeeded

21. WILLIHELMVS de Watervile,
Vid. Chartam in App.
Who being Elected Abbot by the Monks, the Election easily obtained the Kings
ratification, in regard this William was one of his Clerks, or Chaplains. The
King also confirmed unto him and his Abbey the eight Hundreds of that part of
the County, which had formerly been granted by the Kings Predecessors. This
Abbot erected a Priory in Stamford, and the Church of S. Michael there. He
settled a yearly maintenance upon the Church of S. John Baptist in Peterburgh,
enacting that the Chaplain should yearly upon Michaelmas day bring his
Church-Key to the Sacrist of the Monastery, as an acknowledgment of his
dependence upon it. He was very industrious in perfecting the buildings of his
Monastery, and adding new ones. He built the Cloister, and covered it with
Lead. He ordered, Cloister.
and disposed the Quire of the Church, in that manner as it lately stood, and
in some sort continues still. He founded Quire.
the Chapel of Thomas Becket, which was finished by his Successor, and is now
standing in the middle of the Arch of the Church Porch, as you enter into the
Church. He built a Chapel also in his own House, and other necessary Offices.
At length he was accused by his Monks to the Archbishop, so that he was deposed
without conviction, or his own confession (as our Writers say) of any crime
deserving that censure, when he had held his Abbey twenty years, Anno 1175.
being the 21 or 22 year of King Henry the Second. And although our Peterburgh
Writers are silent in the cause of his deposition, yet others have taken notice
of it. Johannes Brompton Jornallensis relates it thus, that Richard Archbishop
of Canterbury came to the Abbey Page 1107, 1108.
of Peterburgh, and deposed William of Watervile the Abbot there; for that he
against the will of the Monks, entered with a band of armed men into the Church,
and took from thence some Relics, and the arm of S. Oswald, pro denariis ad
Judaeos invadendos: the Monks standing in defense of their Relics, many of
them were grievously wounded. Roger Hoveden relates another reason as the most
principal, which he adds to that of Jornallensis, Page 313.
that this Abbot William was fallen into the Kings disfavour for his brothers
sake, one Walter of Watervile (in the Parish of Achrich in the County of
Northampton; where anciently was his Castle) whom Abbot William received with
others of that party being then in Arms against the King, which showed that
Abbot William was not so Loyal to his Master the King as he should have been,
but abetting with his brother, it might cause his own deposition.

22. BENEDICTVS.
William being deposed, the King held the Abbey in his hand two years, and then
Benedict Prior of Canterbury was thought the fittest for it, and made Abbot
Anno 1177. in the Twenty fourth of King Henry the Second. He was a very Learned
man, and, as Pitseus (who gives him very high commendations) does certify,
wrote two Books: Vitam S. Thomae Cantuariensis. De ejusdem post mortem
miraculis, and certain others, says he: yet because I find these Books
mentioned in the Catalogue of this Abbots Library, it may be doubted whether he
wrote them himself more than he did the rest. I shall therefore set down his
Books, as also some of the succeeding Abbots, that the Reader may conjecture
what Scholars those Abbots might be, and see what Books were most in request
amongst them. Abbot Benedicts Library was furnished with these Books. Quinque
libri Moysis glossati in uno Volumine. Sexdecim Prophetae glossati in uno
Volumine. Duodecim Minores glossati in uno Volumine. Liber Regum glossatus.
Paralipomenon glossatus. Job, Parabolae Salomonis, and Ecclesiastes, Cantica
Canticorum, glossati, in uno Volumine. Liber Ecclesiasticus, and Liber
Sapientiae glossati in uno Volumine. Tobias, Judith, Esther, and Esdras
glossati, in uno Volumine. Liber Judicumglossatus. Scholastica Historia.
Psalterium glossatum. Item non glossatum. Item Psalterium. Quatuor Evangelia
glossata in uno Volumine. Item Matthaeus, and Marcus in uno Volumine. Johannes
and Lucas in uno Volumine. Epistolae Pauli glossatae. Apocalypsis, and
Epistolae Canonicae glossatae in uno Volumine. Sententiae Petri Lombardi, Item
Sententiae ejusdem. Sermones Bernardi Abbatis Clarevallensis. Decreta Gratiani.
Item Decreta Gratiani. Summa Ruffini de Decretis. Summa Johannis Faguntini de
Decretis. Decretales Epistolae. Item Decretales Epistolae. Item Decretales
Epistolae cum Summa sic incipiente, Olim. Institutiones Justiniani cum
Autenticis, and Infortiato. Digestum vetus. Tres parts cum Digesto novo. Summa
Placentorum. Totum corpus juris in duobus Voluminibus. Arisimetica. Epistolae
Senecae cum aliis Senecis in uno Volumine. Martialis, and Terentius in uno
Volumine. Morale dogma Philosophorum. Gesta Alexandri, and Liber Claudii, and
Claudiani. Summae Petri Helyae de Grammatica cum multis aliis rebus in uno
Volumine. Gesta Regis Henrici Secundi, and genealogia ejus, Interpretationes
Hebraicorum nominum. Libellus de Incarnatione Verbi. Liber Bernardi Abbatis ad
Eugenium Papam. Missale, Vita Sancti Thomae Martyris. Miracula ejusdem in
quinque Voluminibus. Liber R. Plutonis qui dicitur Vnde malum. Meditationes
Anselmi. Practica Bartholomaei cum pluribus aliis rebus in uno Volumine: Ars
Physicae. Pantegm. and practica ipsius in uno Volumine. Almasor, and
Dioscorides de virtutibus herbarum. Liber dinamidiorum and aliorum multorum in
uno Volumine. Libellus de compoto. This was the stock of his Literature, as
Wittlesey has set it down, though another ancient Copy in some few things
differs from it.

There is some clashing betwixt Vossius and Possevine about the time of this
Benedict, but it is not worth the trouble of reciting. It seems Benedict was a
man of good note, that his preferment to this Abbey should sound in foreign
parts, Sigebertus Gemblacensis making mention thereof, Benedictus Prior
Cantuariensis factus est Ad an. 1177.
Abbas de Burc. The Abbey was at his entrance, 1500 marks deep in debt, from
which Benedict freed it. He labored much in recovering of his Abbey Lands, some
by suits in Law, and some by force; for, as if he were Tam Marti quam Mercurio,
as well for the Sword, as the Book; he went sometimes in person armed upon such
adventures. His actions at home toward his Monastery, were great, and many: It
seems the Nave, or body of the Church did not please him, therefore he built it
after a better manner from the Lantern to the Porch as now it is, so that the
painted Ceiling at the top, which is still remaining, was probably of his
doing. He set up also the Pulpit in the body of the Church, which was but
lately taken away. He finished the Chapel of Thomas Becket, which his
Predecessor had begun. He built a large and goodly House of stone for several
Offices which was standing in our age. He built the great gate leading to the
Monastery, and over it the Chapel of S. Nicolas, both which are yet standing.
He was much in the Kings favor, that the King, King Richard, for his piety,
gravity and wisdom, was wont to call him Father: And when King Richard, in his
return from the Holy Land, was taken prisoner by Archduke Leopold, who
detained him, this Abbot Benedict (being, in the Kings absence, made Coadjutor,
and Councellor with William Bishop of Ely Chancellor of the Realm) Councelled
that the Chalices of the Church should be sold to pay the Kings ransom, which
was done, and the King returned home. Then did King Richard confirm to Abbot
Benedict, and his Monastery the Marsh of Pekirk, now commonly called
North-Fenne, about which there fell out some difference betwixt Radulphus le
Wake, and the Monastery; for Radulphus being Lord of Deeping, claimed Common in
the Marsh, as being but on the other side of the River, but Abbot Benedict
impounded his Cattle, alleging that the Marsh belonged only to his Tenants of
Pekirk, Glinton, Makeshye, and Northburgh, and desired Radulphus to enquire
into the truth thereof: So Radulphus came to Peterburgh with some others, where
being fully informed of the Abbots right, he forbear to trespass any more;
Benedict also recovered the Marsh of Eye, and the Hermitage of Singlesholt.
King Richard also granted unto Benedict his confirmation of the eight Hundreds,
as his predecessors had done: And withal his Charter for the holding of a Fair
in Peterburgh, upon the Feast of S. Peter, S. Peter's Fair.
to continue for 8 days; although now it be contracted into one. He also
granted a weekly Market every Thursday, and a Fair for three days at the Feast
of S. Peter, to be holden at the Manor of Scotter in Lincolnshire, then
belonging to this Monastery. Vid. Chartam in App.


Page 252.
John the Kings brother, who was Earl of Moriton, and afterward King of
England, was also kind to Abbot Benedict and his Monastery, giving them by his
Charter yearly, three Staggs, and six Bucks, out of his Forest of Sheerwood,
without contradiction. In his time there flourished one William of Peterburgh a
Monk of Ramsey, a very Learned man, upon whom Pitseus bestows a large
Character, whither the Reader, that would see his works, may resort. Benedict
having been Abbot the space of seventeen years, died Anno 1194. being the sixth
Year of King Richard the first, and had for his Successor

23. ANDREAS.
He was first a Monk here, then Prior, and afterward for his many virtues was
chosen Abbot. The Villages of Alwalton, and Fletton, which then belonged to
him, he gave to the Monks Kitchen for the augmentation of their Commons. Having
been Abbot about five years, he died the same year with King Richard, which was
Anno 1199. He was buried in the South Isle of the Church at the back of the
Quire, in the same Grave where two of his Predecessors had been buried before,
as the Epitaph on the Wall over his Monument will testify* which was lately in
ancient Saxon Letters, but now in the ordinary, renewed. Hos tres Abbates
quibus est Prior Abba Johannes,
Alter Martinus, Andreas ultimus, unus
Hic claudit tumulus, Pro clausis ergo rogemus.


24 ACHARIVS,
Fol. 456.
Whom Hoveden calls Zacharias, was Prior of S. Albanes, and elected thence to be
Abbot here, Anno 1200. He by his care and providence much enriched his Church,
and built many buildings in several Manors belonging to it. He maintained suit
with the Abbot of Croyland for the Marsh of Singlesholt, and recovered it,
letting it again to the Abbot of Croyland for a yearly acknowledgement of four
stone (Petras) of Wax. He added to the number of Monks that then were, two and
twenty more. And when he had happily governed this Abbey the space of ten years,
he died Anno 1210. being the 11 year of King John. And there succeeded

25. ROBERTUS de Lindesey,
Glass-windows.
Who was Monk, and Sacristary of Burgh, and now Abbot, unto which he paved the
way by his good deeds toward the Church: for whereas the windows were before
only stuffed with straw to keep out the weather, he beautified above thirty of
them with glasses; and his example brought the rest, by degrees, to the like
perfection. He built also the Chancel at Oxney; being chosen Abbot, he was
presented to the King at Winchester, and had his election confirmed: And at
Northampton he received Episcopal benediction from Hugo the second, then Bishop
of Lincoln, in the year 1214. for after the death of Acharius, the King held
the Abbey in his own hand three years. He settled the Hundred of Nassaburgh in
peace, and quietness: for in those days the Foresters with their Cattle
overran all, so that the inhabitants of the Towns therein were much endammaged
by them, and their domineering in these parts by virtue of Forest Lands;
therefore Abbot Robert made a composition with the King, giving him Vid.
Chartam in App.
1320 Marks for the dis-foresting that part of the Country. He covered the
Abbots Hall with Lead. He made in the South Cloister a Lavatory of Marble for
the Monks to wash their hands in when they went to Meals, their Hall being
near, on the other The Lavatory.
side of the wall, the door leading into it being yet standing, though the Hall
be long since demolished, only some small remains on the wall side, are yet to
be seen; but the Lavatory continued entire until the year 1651. and then, with
the whole Cloister, it was also pulled down. Abbot Robert at his entrance into
his place found but seventy two Monks, to which number he added eight more,
assigning the Manor of Bellasise for their maintenance, having built a fair
Mannor-house there, which Bellasise builded.
partly is now standing. He built also the Hall at his Manor of Collingham.

In the time of this Robert, the fourth Laterane Council was held under
Innocent the fourth, Pope of that name, Anno 1215. Abbot Robert was cited, and
went thither, and received injunctions for his Convent concerning several times
of fasting, and other duties, which at his coming home, he put into execution.

Fol. 287.
In his time there arose great discords betwixt the Civil, and Ecclesiastical
States, that the Land stood interdicted by the space of six years. Then
followed bitter Wars betwixt King John, and his Barons, wherein, how the
Monastery of Peterburgh behaved themselves, I find but little in any of our
Writers: Only by what Matthew Paris relates, it may be conjectured they were
none of the Kings friends, though their Patron. Ludovicus (says he) besieging
the Castle of Dover a long time in vain, at length the King passed over into
Suffolk, and Norfolk, and miserably wasted those Countries: And coming to
Peterburgh, and Croyland, he plundered the Churches there, his Officer
Savaricus de Mallo Leone with his accomplices committing many outrages in the
Country thereabout. At Croyland he fired all their stacks which the inhabitants
had newly gathered in, and so returned to the Town of Lynn with great spoils:
But afterward the King taking his journey from Lynn Northward, all his
Carriages, and Treasures were cast away, and perished, as he passed the River
Wellestre. Yet afterward the Abbot of Peterburgh was summoned to assist King
Henry the third, in the siege of Rokingham Castle (which was then the Abbots)
and the Abbot himself went in person in that expedition, till at length that
Castle was reduced to the Kings obedience: but whether it was this Abbot
Robert, or some Hon. de Pightesly.
of his Successors, mine Author tells me not.

Page 288.
In the time of this Abbot Robert about the year 1217 according to Pitseus there
was one Hugo Candidus, or Hugh White, a Monk of this Monastery, of whom the
said Author in his Book De Scriptoribus, makes mention, who wrote the whole
History of his Monastery, whose works were extant in later times, for John
Leland, who lived in the days of King Henry 8, collected many things out of
him, but whether, or where the said Author be now extant, I know not. Pitseus
tells us also of another Hugh In Appendice Page 865.
a Monk of this Church, whom he calls an English Historian, but professes his
ignorance of what he wrote, or when he lived: Perhaps, both might be but one,
and the same Hugh. But, perhaps, Wittlesey an ancient Writer of this Church may
make it clearer, by telling us that there was one Hugo Albus (so called from
his white complexion, as being subject to bleed) a Monk here, who was famous in
the time of Abbot Ernulfus and of John, Henry, Martin and William his
Successors, who wrote the History of this Monastery, and so was before Pitseus
his account.

Robert having been Abbot here the space of seven years, died October 25. 1222.
being the seventh year of King Henry 3. He was not very rich in Books, his
Library consisting only of these few. Numerale Magistri W. de Montibus cum
aliis rebus. Tropi Magistri Petri cum diversis summis. Sententiae Petri
Pretanensis. Psalterium Glossatum. Aurora. Psalterium non glossatum. Historiale.

26. ALEXANDER de Holdernesse
Who was first a Monk, then Prior, and lastly Abbot of this place after the
death of Robert. A great builder he was, and built the Hall at his Manor of
Oundle, that also at Castre Eyebury and other places. Having been Abbot here
only four years, he died on the day of his entrance, November 20. 1226. and of
King Henry 3. the Eleventh. These were his Books. Psalterium. Concordantiae
utriusque Test. Claustrum animae. Opus alterum quod perfecit Rogerus de
Helpston. Aurora. Poenitentiale. Tria Breviaria. Concilium Lateranense cum
aliis rebus. Corrogationes Promethei. Missale. The first day of May before the
death of this Alexander, there died at Peterburgh Richardus de Mansco, Mr.
Philipot Catal. Canc. Angl. page 10.
Bishop of Durham, and Chancellor of England.

27. MARTINUS de Ramsey
Being a Monk of Peterburgh, was elected Abbot after the death of Alexander:
And on S. Andrew's Eve the King ratified his Election, which was also confirmed
by Hugo then Bishop of Lincoln in the Chapel of S. Katharine at Westminster.
On the Feast of S. John the Evangelist following he received the said Bishops
blessing at Tinghurst, and on the Eve of Epiphany following he was received at
Peterburgh. In his first year he paid to the Kings Exchequer 5 Marks for the
disforesting of Nassaburgh, and 28 more to the Chancellor. In that year died
one Brianus de la Marc the Kings Forester in the Marsh of Kesteven, and
Holland, and the King passing by that way toward York, seized upon all the
goods of the said Brian: But Abbot Martin procured the Kings Writ to Hugo de
Nevile then Justice of the Forest, to enquire, if the said Brian was not
enfeoffed in certain Lands belonging to the Monastery of Peterburgh, which
being examined at a Commission holden at Bernat, and found to be so, the Heir
of the said Brian was awarded (as Ward) to the Abbot of Peterburgh: But Abbot
Martin gave the said ward to Radulfus de Nevile, then Bishop of Chichester, and
the Kings Chancellor. This Abbot Martin in the year 1228. received a grand
privilege from Gregory the Ninth, Pope of that name, wherein this particular,
that, whenever there should be a general interdiction of the Land, the Monks
of Peterburgh, when they said their Service, might shut the Church doors, ring
no bell, nor say their Service aloud but with a low voice to themselves, that
the people might not participate thereof. But I have not found that ever this
was put in practice. In the year 1231, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln visited this
Monastery, and gave Articles to be observed, both by the Abbot, as also by the
Convent.

Martin having been Abbot the space of six years, died; His Library was but
thin. Missale. Item Missale ad Altar S. Katharinae. Capitula collecta
Evangelica in 2 Voluminibus ad magnum Altar.

28. WALTERVS de S. Edmundo.
Who was first Monk, then Sacristary, and at length, Abbot of this Church,
being void by the death of Martin, Anno 1233. the 17 of King Henry 3. Here
Robert Swapham ends his story of the succession of Abbots, whom hitherto we
have been much guided by: but now we must follow Wittlesey, and a few other
Records, which (like Absirtus his limbs being scattered about in the late
dispersion) have come to our hands.

This Abbot Walter was a man generally good, pious, honest, Loyal, free, and
liberal in the dispensation of the demesnes belonging to his Church. In those
days King Henry was straightly put to it for maintenance, and was constrained to
live upon Ecclesiastical benevolence, going from one Monastery to another to be
entertained: And he found Abbot Walter very free toward K. Henry at Peterburgh.
him, who at two several times gave him the best entertainment his Monastery
could afford: At one of which times, the Queen, and Prince Edward, came with
the King. This Abbot gave the King, the sum of 60 Marks toward the marriage
of Margaret his Daughter with Alexander 3. King of Scotland: He added 30 more
Monks to the number, erected many buildings to those which were before. Having
been Abbot the space of 13 years, he died Anno 1245, being the 30 of King Henry
3. What that dedication of this Church was which Matthew. Paris mentions Anno
1238. I could never yet fully understand. Page 481.
But we must not leave Abbot Walter thus, for the time of his Government is
remarkable. Three times (says Wittlesey) with great costs, and charges, he
journeyed to Rome. The first was, to have redress concerning the Church of
Castre against R. de Somercot, who was a Cardinal: this journey he took when he
was but Sacristary. The second journey was being Abbot, not to, but toward
Rome, when he was summoned to be at a Council there with the rest of the
English Clergy (which Council was held there Anno 1234. under Pope Gregory 9.
says Franciscus Longus, though Gabriel Pratiolus will have Innocent 4. to be
then Pope, and Gregory 9. to be some time after) But Walter being on the way
thither as far as Burgundy, and hearing that the Emperor Frederick had
imprisoned Otto, the English Legate, with many others, he durst not proceed on
his journey, but staid in the City of Anvers 6 months, and then returned home
to the Monastery of Peterburgh. But his retreat was so ill taken, that
presently the Pope sends a Mandate to him for the finding of five men, with
Horses and Arms, which at length he took off at the charge of 174 Marks, by the
dispensation of Martin the Popes Nuntio. The third journey to Rome was after
the Council of Lions, for thither also was he summoned, and appeared there, but
rather as an offender, than an Assessor; for he was called to answer his
contempt, in giving the Church of Castre according to the Kings order, and
against the Popes, yet did he regain the Popes favor by obliging himself to
give to a Nephew of the Popes ten pounds a year. Our Writers of Peterburgh say
no more, but Matthew Paris is more copious in Page 554.
the story, or another like it. In the year (says he) 1241. Pope Gregory
desirous to promote some of his Favorites, sends his Letters into England to
cast the burden of that care upon some Churches. There was then sent to the
Abbot, and Convent of Burgh, an Apostolic Mandate, fraught with entreaties,
and threatenings, that they would conferr the Rent of any Church under their
patronage, which should yearly be worth one hundred Marks, and if it were
double the value, it would please him the more: and the Pope would again demise
unto the Church the same Living for the yearly rent of one hundred Marks, and
the surplusage should redound to the proper use of the Church. And that the
Abbot and Convent might consent to this provision (or rather pernicious
compact, Simony and secret Fraud) demanded by the Pope, the Pope wrote Letters
to certain Foreign Monks then well Beneficed in England, that they should
effectually admonish the Abbot and Convent therein, and to compel them, if need
were. These Monks coming to Peterburgh, called the Monks together, and bespake
them after this manner, Behold, Friends and Brethren, a great Pontifical
kindness is offered to your hand, for the Pope requires that of you, which,
with bended knees, and joined hands, ye ought to request of him: And when they
had explained the business, they promised to accomplish the business on the
Popes part, so that the business might be secretly carried without scandal. But
the Monks of Peterburgh answered, that they could do nothing without the Kings
permission, who was their Patron, and Founder. The Popes Messengers insisted,
that the business might be done privately, hoping also that other Churches
would follow their example, and do the like. The Monks of Peterburgh would not
be circumvented by their Speeches, but desired respite of the business until
their Abbot came home (being then absent) that they might have his assent: In
the mean time they sent to their Abbot, acquainting him with the whole
business: The Abbot sends a messenger to the King, intimating the danger of
such a donation. The King resenting the business, and how it would redound to
the damage of that and other Churches whereof he was Patron, and Defender, and
detesting the secret snares, and covetousness of the Roman Court, strictly
forbade such an horrid donation. Thus far Matthew Paris.

Page 657.
How this refusal of the Popes demand by the Abbot of Peterburgh was resented at
Rome, may appear by the same Author in another place, where he writes thus. But
the Abbot of Peterburgh, a man without exception, who had more especially
resisted the Pope's Mandate, being arrived at the Roman Court, was accused by
Martin the Popes Agent then resident in England, for that he would not conferr
a Church upon a man fitting for the place, to the use of the Popes kinsman: So
that the Abbot appearing in the Popes Court, the Pope rebuked him in very
opprobrious terms, and commanded that he should be expelled the Court, which
was done so shamefully, and irreverently, that the poor Abbot taking it to
heart, fell into an incurable disease, and the same year died, to the great
detriment of his Church, which he had prudently governed. And in another place
the same Author recites it again, telling us the name of the Abbot. The same
year on the eleventh of the Calends of Page 690.
January, after many vexations, and tribulations, which he suffered by the
Court of Rome, and an infirmity which himself had contracted, to the great loss
of his Church, died Walter Abbot of Burgh.

This story makes good the Etymology that some of the Romanists themselves give
of Rome; Roma, quasi Rodens Manus. Johan. Bononiensis in Decretab. Bonif. 8.
Fol. 32. Col. 4. One like it is given by another, Radix
Omnium
Malorum
Avaritia.
Waldens. cit. per Alexandrum Theologum in Destr. vit. part. 6. cap. 33.
Roma manus rodit, quos rodere non valet, odit,
Rome gnaweth hands, as dainty Cates,
And whom it cannot gnaw, it hates.


This by the way. Walters Library was copious in comparison of his
Predecessors, consisting of these Books. Decretale. Aurora. Claustrum animae.
Biblia. Hexaemeron S. Cantuariae versifice. Rabanas de naturis rerum, and
interpretationes Hebraicorum nominum in uno volumine. Versus M. W. de Montibus.
Psalterium gloss. Summa Magistri J. de Cantia de poenitentia. Templum Domini
cum art confessionum. Regula S. Benedicti. Psalterium cum hympnario. Item duo
Psalteria. Duo Missalia. Duo Gradualia. Liber Evangeliorum. Liber orationum ad
magnum altar.

29. WILLIELMVS de Hotot.
William of Hotot, or Hotoft (why so called I know not, for Wittlesey says he
was born at Carlton, near Cottingham in the County of Northampton) being a Monk
of this place was chosen Abbot, the sixth of February, Anno 1246. the 31. of
King Henry Fair at Oxeney.
3. He procured from the King a Charter for a Fair to be kept at Oxeney to
begin on the Eve of the Nativity of Mary, and to continue for the space of
eight days. He made many orders in favor of his Monks, as that he would not
let any of his Abbey Lands, or do any thing of himself as Abbot, without their
consent. When he had held his Abbey about the space of three years, he
voluntarily gave it up, on S. Nicolas day, Anno 1249. And there was assigned
unto him the Manor of Collingham, where he abode for a time, until he was
called thence by John his Successor, who appointed him his abode at Oxeney,
allowing him the portion of four Monks: Then William died, and was brought to
the Church of Peterburgh, and buried before the Altar of S. Benedict. Thus
writes Wittlesey, not naming the occasion of his reoess, which Matthew Paris
supplies. In the year (says he) 1249. there arose great dissension betwixt
William Abbot of Page 769.
Peterburgh and his Convent concerning dilapidations, for that the Abbot had
enriched his Kindred (whereof he had great multitudes swarming about him) to
the great detriment of his Church; but William being reproved, would not reform
this error: whereupon the Monks appealed to the Bishop of Lincoln, and
complained of the Abbots extravagancies, who being convicted thereof, and
foreseeing the danger of his being deposed, of his own accord resigned his
place into the Bishops hand, and there was assigned unto him a Manor for his
livelihood. So that having been Abbot only three years, he surceased. Perhaps
he had not time enough to gather more Books than these into his Library.
Antissiodorensis abbreviatus. Tractatus super Canonem Missae. Templum Domini
cum aliis rebus. Libellus de diversis rebus. Missale ad altar Michaelis. As to
the first book he wrote certain Collations, which is in the Catalogue at the
End, T. XI. but I find no mention of him any where else, as a Writer. See the
Catalogue T. XI.


30. JOHANNES de Caleto,
Page 895.
So called from the place of his birth in Normandy. He was of noble extraction,
and being made a Monk at the age of sevenyears, was brought into England, and
placed in the Church of S. Swithune in Winchester for his education, where
growing in piety and wisdom as he did in years, he was made Prior of
Winchester, and, upon the recess of Abbot Will. elected Abbot of Peterburgh,
Anno 1249. which was the 33 of K. Henry 3. He was allied to Q. Elianor wife of
K. Henry, and such a ray of favor shined upon him through that relation, that
he was made one of the Kings Chief Justices, and rode in the Circuit to execute
Justice in the Kingdom. At which, though Matthew Paris seems to be much
aggrieved, as that which was not allowed by the rule of S. Benedict (the first
mention that I find of this Order in this Monastery, whereof more hereafter in
Richard Ashton) and besides was prejudicial to his Church by reason of his
absence: yet Wittlesey says, that the Church suffered no damage thereby, for
he no ways neglected that, but appointed Robert Sutton his Deputy, by whom all
things were as well managed as if Abbot John had himself been present: And
moreover Abbot John did often visit the Church himself to see how things were
ordered, how the Lands and Rents were bestowed, how the Monks were governed,
and how the poor were relieved, to whom he gave Alms with his own hand, as often
as he came thither. He was careful in adding to the buildings of the Monastery,
and built that goodly building called the Infirmary (commonly the Farmary)
lately pulled down, and at the The Farmary.
West end of the Chapel of S. Laurence: This he appointed for sick and
impotent Folk, providing for them out of the Church demesns. He was also
liberal to his Convent, giving for every day to the Monk that should sit
President in the Refectory, a gallon of Wine, and half a gallon to the rest of
the Society, and to the Monk that celebrated high Mass a gallon of Wine: for
which he assigned ten pounds yearly to be paid from his own Chamber out of the
Lands of his Manor of Polebrook. He gave also a great Bell to the Church,
whereon was written, Jon de Caux Abbas Oswaldo consecrat hoc vas.

In his time, Anno 1250. the Pope, then Innocent the fourth, Vid. Privileg. in
App.
granted leave to the Monks, that, in consideration of the coldness of Winter
in these parts, the Monks should perform their service in the Church, with
their Hoods on their heads.

Abbot John having held the government of this Church the space of thirteen
years, died at London, Anno 1262. the 46 of King Henry the third, and was
brought to his Church at Peterburgh, and buried in the Isle on the South side
of the Quire. The King after his death challenged his Palfrey, and his Cup, but
upon what grounds I know not, unless it was because John had been his Officer:
the Cup he had, after some urgent demands, but the Palfrey he had not.

Some write that this Abbot John was also made Lord Treasurer Mr. Filpot.
by the Barons in the 44. year of King Henry the third, and according to this
account he held that Office to his death, which was two years after. His
Secular employments might take off his mind from Books, and plead for the
poorness of his Library. Flores Evangeliorum. Tractatus de Theologia. Concilium
Lateranense. Templum Domini. Testamentum 12 Patriarcharum: This was his stock
of Books as I find in an ancient Manuscript.

31. ROBERTUS de Sutton,
So called from the place of his birth, being a little Village in the Parish of
Castre. He was a Monk of Peterburgh, Deputy to his Predecessor, and upon his
death, chosen Abbot, in April 1262. He received benediction from Richard Bishop
of Lincoln, and gave him his Cope, which some demanded as a fee: the Archdeacon
of Northampton demanding also his Palfrey, as his vale, Abbot Robert made him
go without it. The Earl Marshal received five Marks for his Palfrey, when he
took the Oath of Allegiance to the King. But it was not long ere Abbot Robert
falsified his Oath, for in the Wars of those times the Town of Northampton
being fortified against the King, Robert Abbot of Peterburgh took part with
them in defense of that Town. The King coming thither to assault the Town,
espied amongst his enemies Ensigns on the wall, the Ensign of the Abbey of
Peterburgh, whereat he was so angry that he vowed to destroy the nest of such
ill birds. But the Town of Northampton being reduced, Abbot Robert by mediation
of friends to the King, saved both himself and Church, but was forced to pay
for his delinquency, To the King 300 Marks, to the Queen 20 pounds, to Prince
Edward 60 pounds, to the Lord Souch 6l. 13s. 4d. After this happened the Battle
of Jews, wherein King Henry, with Prince Edward, was taken Prisoner; then did
the other side fleece the Abbot of Peterburgh for his contribution to the King;
the General, and several Barons, and Commanders forcing the Abbot to
composition, by several sums of money. Afterward at the Battle of Evesham,
Prince Edward overthrew the Earl of Leicester with his whole Army, and the King
having recovered himself, called a Parliament at Winchester, wherein he
required large benevolence from the Church: Particularly, the Abbot of
Peterburgh, because he had held with the Barons, was again constrained to
purchase his peace at these rates: The King had of him, 333l. 6s. 8d. The Queen
33l. 6s. 8d. The Prince, Prince Edward 200l. He paid also to the Earl of
Gloucester 133l. 6s. 8d. Earl Warren had of Abbot Robert for his Manors of
Castre, Tinwell, and Thirlby 100l. Warin Lord of Bassingburn 42l. The Commander
of Fotheringay Castle 100l. 6s. 8d. Lord Thomas Typtot for the Manors of
Fiskerton and Scotter 65l. 13s. 4d. The Lord of Fanecourt for the Manor of
Collingham 12l. Lord Robert Picot for several Manors 14l. 6s. 8d. Thomas of
Bulton 6l. 13s. 4d. All which sums of money he carried to Winchester and there
paid them. These, and other payments which he made at other times, exhausted
from him, amounted to the sum of 4323l. 18s. 5d. Having paid thus dear for his
disloyalty, he became more obedient to his right Master, and when King Henry
sent to him for aid against the Castle of Kenilworth, Abbot Robert did what the
King required for that siege.

Vid. Chartam in App.
In these times Prince Edward having occasion for money, he borrowed a great sum
of certain Merchants; for which the Abbot of Peterburgh, and his Convent became
Sureties: And the Prince granted unto them his Manor of Graham, until he
should repay that money unto them. Edward was no sooner King, but in the first
year of his Reign, he came to Peterburgh, where he was entertained by this
Abbot Robert. And from hence he dated a Charter which he granted to the Church
of Ely, as the close Ms. Eliens. in manu Geo. Glapthorn Armig. page 135.
thereof testifies, Test meipso apud Burgum Sancti Petri 13 die Aprilis, Anno
regni nostri primo. This was in the year of our Lord 1273.

And perhaps this is that entertainment which Wittlesey makes mention of, the
Queen being then with the King, and Abbot Robert expended in the entertainment,
the sum of six hundred pounds.

In the 11 Year of his Government he was called to the Council of Lions,
Gregory 10 being then Pope, which Council being ended, in his return homewards,
he sickned, and died, and was buried in a Monastery near Bononia, the Abbot of
Croyland celebrating his Funeral rites. His heart was brought in a Cup to his
Monastery of Peterburgh, and there buried before the Altar of S. Oswald Anno
1274. being the second year of King Edward the first.

In his Library were these Books, Psalterium glossatum. Summa Raimundi cum
apparatu. Summa fratris R. de Fissacre super Sententias in 4 voluminibus. Summa
Qui been praesunt, Templum domini cum tractatu de professione in 1 volumine.
Summa M. J. de Cantia cum aliis rebus. Secunda pars Hugucionis super Decreta.
Summa Gaufridi. Liber naturalium Aristot. Raimundus abbreviatus cum
meditationibus Bernardi. Manuale. Liber de miseria humanae conditionis.
Psalterium B. Virginis. Vita S. Thomae, and S. Oswaldi versifics. Psalterium
parvum. In his time Anno 1270. lived Elias Trickingham a Monk of Peterburgh,
who wrote certain Annals from the year of our Lord 626 to 1270. Pitseus.

32. RICHARDVS de London,
Steeple.
Born there in the Parish of S. Pancratius; He, having run through many Offices
in this Monastery, at length arrived at the Abbot's, when he was aged sixty
years: And so being of much experience he governed his Monastery carefully, and
happily. He contended in Law with Gilbert Earl of Clare for the Manor of
Biggins near Oundle, wherein he had good success through the wisdom and
diligence of William Woodford one of his Monks, who being a man of great
judgment, and good elocution, when he came to plead at Northampton before the
Judge of Assize, when his time was to speak, he craved his Abbots blessing, and
spoke so to the purpose, that the Earl went, as Wittleseys phrase is, Sine die,
without the day: and although the Earl brought the business to the Kings
hearing, yet there William Woodford worsted him also. When this Richard was
Sacrist he erected the great Steeple wherein the Bells hang, (but which I
cannot say, there being two such Steeples) and gave two Bells which were called
Les Londres.

Ladies Chapel.
In the time of Abbot Richard there was one William Paris Prior, who built that
goodly Chapel commonly called the Ladies Chapel, which in the late times of
violence was levelled with the ground. William Paris himself laid the first
stone, and under it, many sentences of Scripture written, but whether in Brass
or Lead, Wittlesey tells not. And he not only laid the foundation, but
perfected the whole work, and adorned it with windows, and paintings on the
walls, and settled five pound per annum upon it, for service therein:
Afterward dying, he was buried in the North part of the Church, near unto the
said Chapel, and the Inscription upon his Gravestone is yet to be seen. Hic
jacet Willielmus Paris quondam Prior Burgi, cujus animae misereatur Deus, Amen.
Pater noster. Ave Maria.

The Books in Abbot Richards Library I find thus recorded. Quatuor Evangelia
Glos. Psalterium. Regula Sancti Augustini cum speculo caritatis edita a Beato
Bernardo. Nova Logica in 2. Vol. Priscianus de constructione cum aliis rebus.
Boethius de Consolatione, and libellus diversarum rerum in uno Vol. Parabola
Salomonis, and Ecclesiastes. Processionarium cum hympnario. Psalterium cum
Gradale in choro.

Richard having been Abbot here the space of twenty two years and an half, died
Anno 1295. being the twenty third of King Edward the first, and was buried in
the South side of the Church near the Quire, the Abbot of Croyland performing
the Funeral service; which being ended, the company consisting of many Nobles
and Abbots, went to the Abbots house where they dined: And dinner being ended,
there came one in the Kings name, and seized on the whole Abbey, taking homage
of the Tenants, as had formerly been accustomed. Afterward two of the Monks
went to the King to procure License for the election of an Abbot, and the
person elected was

33. WILLIHELMVS de Woodford,
Who for two years before had been Coadjutor with Abbot Richard in the time of
his infirmity. Writers commend him for a man of excellent parts, and diligence
in his government. Being but Sacristary he purchased the Manor of Southorp
which, when Southorp Manor.
he came to be Abbot, he assigned to the Monks: He settled a daily proportion
of bread upon some inferior Officers; added much to the buildings of his
Monastery, and was careful that dependant Eleemosynaries might receive their
dues: particularly he inquired into the Hospital of S. Leonard, now commonly
called by the name of The Spittle, the original of which I must let alone till
I can be informed, and content my self with the allowance which The Spittle.
it received from the Abbot, viz. Per annum quadraginta ulnas panni de panno
Eleemosynae sicut Prebendarii: Item ad festum Sancti Martini 1 petram uncti,
and 1 petram sepi: Item 3. bacon. viz. 1 ad festum Natalis Domini, and 1 ad
capiend. quadrag. and 1 ad pasch. de carnibus supersanatis. Item totum ex....
porcorum fr. sanatorum. Item 4 tuniatas servis, viz. 1 tuniatam ad natal.
Domini; and aliam ad capiend. quadrag. and tertiam ad pasch. and quartam ad
festum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli de Celario Abbatis. Item quolibet mense 1
esk. sol. cujus summa per annum est, 1 quar. 5 esk. Item servens dictorum
infirmorum comedit cum familia Abbatis quater per annum, viz. ad natal. Domini
and ad Pasch. and ad festum S. Petri, and ad festum omnium Sanctorum. The Monks
having the Manors of Alwalton and Fletton assigned them (as has been said)
they customarily paid out of them unto the Abbot 16s. 6d. yearly, which Abbot
William remitted unto them. He died in the fourth year of his government, and
lies buried in the South Isle of the Church near the Quire.

In his Library were these Books. Instituta apparitata. Decreta apparitata.
Apparatus Decret alium cum casibus. Summa de vitiis. Summa de virtutibus. Summa
Reynfridi. Psalterium cum exequiis majorum. Statuta Westmonasterii. Statuta
Capituli General. Constitutiones extravagantes. Regula Sanctor. Basil. and
Bened. Cartae Regum cum libertatibus. Liber de art praedicandi.
Processionarium. Missale in duobus Voluminibus. Duo Gradalia. Breviarium.

34. GODEFRIDVS de Croyland
Was a Monk, and the Celerarius of this Monastery, and upon the death of
William elected Abbot, Anno 1299. which was the 27 of K. Edw. 1. It seems this
Godfrey was much in King Edwards favor, for at his entrance into his Abbatical
government, the King sent him a fair silver Cup, gilt: And when the Treasurer
Walter de Langton demanded of Godfrey a thousand Marks for his Confirmation,
the King remitted it, and would not suffer any more than his Exchequer fees to
be taken. In the first year it happened that certain persons were fled for
sanctuary into the Chapel of Thomas Becket, whither they were pursued, and,
against the privilege of the place, haled out from thence, and some blood was
shed, so that the Chapel for some time stood suspended, and no service therein
to be performed: The Bishop of Lincoln passing that censure upon it, until the
persons so taken away should again be restored to the liberty of the place. At
length the Bishop sends his absolution, appointing that the Abbot, and some
others with him should with the sprinkling of holy water, and singing of the
Penitential Psalms purge the said Chapel, and so it should return to its
former use.

The same year being 1300. A marriage being intended betwixt the heirs of
Vfford, and Southorp, King Edward supposing himself to be concerned therein,
appointed Inquisition to be made; whether the disposal of that marriage
belonged to him or the Abbot of Peterburgh, his Letters bearing date February
23. and the twenty ninth of his Reign: And it being upon the Inquisition
certified, that those heirs, and their progenitors held their Lands of the Abbey
of Peterburgh, the right of disposal of those heirs did therefore belong to the
Abbot, which the King understanding, desisted.

I find this Abbot Godfrey famous for worthy actions, that there was scarce his
like, either before him, or after. In his third year, says Wittlesey (who
recounts the actions of every year, but I shall name only the principal) he
entertained King Edward with his Queen, and their several retinues. Not long
after came Prince Edward with his favorite Peter Gaveston to Peterburgh, where
Abbot Godfrey entertained them very nobly: the Abbot presented the Prince with
a rich Robe, and the Prince asked the Messenger if the Abbot had sent one to
his friend Peter; the Messenger answering, No, the Prince then would not accept
his: the Messenger returning to the Abbot, certified him of the Princes
refusal, and the reason: whereupon another rich Robe was sent to Peter, whose
mediation the Messenger solicited for the Prince's acceptance of his Robe also:
whereupon Peter sends to the Prince and bids the Messenger say, Volo, I will
that thou receive the Abbots gift; which was done accordingly, and the Abbot
had thanks returned to him.

In his fourth year, the 32 of King Edward, Galfridus de la A Market and Fair
at Northburgh.
Mare then Lord of Northburgh, had procured from King Edward a Charter to hold
a Market and Fair at Northburgh, but Abbot Godfrey considering how prejudicial
the same would be to his Town of Peterburgh, compounded with Galfridus, who
quitted his Charter to the Abbot of Peterburgh, and his Successors for ever.

In his fifth year the Church of Wermington was made an Appropriation.
Wermington Church.


Gate House.
Godfrey was also a great builder, adding much to his Monastery, but we cannot
say which, for they are long since demolished, only the great Gate House over
which was the Chamber called The Knights Chamber, is yet standing, the Chamber
only being lately translated into another fashion; about it were the Pictures
of Knights upon the walls who held Lands of the Abbey, and the very Rafters were
adorned with Coats of Arms. Godfrey also purchased the Manor of Lullington, or
Luddington for 113l. 6s. 8d. of Luddington Manor.
Gregory then Lord thereof, allowing him, above this sum, a Corrody in his
Monastery, that is, maintenance during his life, for himself, two servants, and
their horses. He settled a yearly stipend of five pound upon the Chaplain of
Northolme: And upon a certain number of Monks then residing at Oxney, he settled
a weekly portion of Victuals, thirteen stone of Chief, which they were to
receive out of the Manor of Eye, and every week from May 3. to September 13.
three pounds and an half of Butter. He procured a Fair to be held at Northolme
yearly on S. Matthews day, and a Weekly Market every Thursday. He built the
dwelling A Fair and Market at Northolme. Vid. Chart. in App. Mill-dam.
House at Burghberry, and made the Dam commonly called Mill-Dam with a
Water-Mill at the end thereof, which has been in use in our memory. He built
also, of his own free will, the Bridge now standing over the River, and leading
into the City, of The Bridge.
which more in the next.

King Edward preparing for War with Scotland, sent to Abbot Godfrey for
contribution toward it, and the Abbot sent him an hundred Marks. The King sent
the second time to the Abbot for his Knights service in horse and arms, and the
Abbot sent the King sixty Marks more. The King sent the third time, and the
Abbot sent him 220l. The King sent the fourth time for a supply of Carriages,
and the Abbot satisfied that with 30l. The King sent the fifth time to borrow
four hundred Marks, which the Abbot also satisfied with the free gift of an
hundred pounds.

About that time the King seized upon all the Lands of Walter de Langton his
Treasurer, and amongst the rest upon Thorp Watervile belonging to the Abbey of
Peterburgh, which, by advice, and assistance of John of Milton the Abbots
Seneschal or Steward, was recovered by the Abbots paying to the Kings Exchequer
for the same 50 l. But John of Milton having taken the said Manor of the
Abbot, and shortly after dying, the King gave that Manor to Earl Warren, so
that the Abbot was brought to a new composition of 120 Marks.

The King at that time imposed 40 s. upon every Knights-fee throughout the
Realm, toward the marriage of Elianor his eldest daughter, and then Abbot
Godfrey sent the King 127 l. Howbeit Wittlesey. Registrum Adae fol. 76.
I find in another Register, that the King sent his Breves to the Sheriffs of
Northampton, Lincoln, Nottingham, Leicester, Warwick, Huntingdon, and Bedford,
that they should not levy any such moneys upon the Lands of the Abbot of
Peterburgh: whereby it may seem that this 127 l. was rather the Abbots free
gift, than a tribute of duty; the Abbot standing upon his exemption from such
demands, by the Charters of the Kings predecessors from the first foundation of
his Abbey.

Abbot Godfrey entertained the King the second time, when, for duties to the
King, and free gifts to his followers, the Abbot expended the sum of 1543 l.
13 s. 4 d. He entertained also two Cardinals which were traveling toward
Scotland to mediate for a peace betwixt King Edward and the Scots: And the
Abbot presented one of them called Gaucelmus with a Psalter curiously written
with golden Letters: And those Cardinals in their return coming hither again,
the Abbot presented Gaucelmus with an embroidered Cope, of the value of 100
Marks: And the other Cardinal Lucius de Aysk, with a silver Cup gilt, and fifty
Else of Scarlet. So that the moneys expended by Abbot Godfrey, for Vestments,
and ornaments of the Church, for Lands purchased to his Abbey, and for gifts to
several persons, amounted to the sum of 3646 l. 4 s. 3 d.

Abbot Godfrey made him a Pastoral Staff of Silver, gilt over, and in the head
of it was the image of the Trinity; which is the first and last staff that I
find amongst any of the Abbots. When he had governed his Abbey the space of
twenty two years, he died, and lies buried at the upper end of the Quire
betwixt William Genge, and John Deping: The Brass of his Monument was divorced
from his Marble, in the year 1643. being his pourtraicture, and a small
inscription in the Verge.

Whilst he lived his Library consisted of these Books, Duae Bibliae, una
Gallice scripta. Avicenna. Instituta apparitata. Sextus liber Decretalium cum
apparatu. Legenda Sanctorum. Summum bonum. Regula Sanctorum Benedicti and
Basilii, cum aliis rebus. Processionarium. Breviarum in duobus voluminibus.
Manuale cum exequiis mortuorum.

Godfrey being dead, there came an extent from the King against the Lands of
the Abbey, and Barony of the Abbot, when a Jury upon Oath returned them at this
rate. The Abbot of Peterburgh received for Rent yearly at l. s. d. Castor 18 10
6 Thorpe 15 1 6 ob. Burghberry 64 9 4 Glinton 23 6 1 Witherington 20 9 4 Walton
12 16 11 Eyebury 24 5 0 Oundle 43 11 0 Aston 15 16 11 Wermington 52 13 4 ob.
Kettering 57 3 6 Cottingham 19 4 11 Stanwigg 16 7 10 ob. q. Irtlingburgh 18 12
0 Polebroke 14 6 8 Okeslow Navesford Tinwell 16 6 9 Eston 35 10 1 ob. q.
Collingham 34 4 5 ob. Fiskerton 69 1 2 Scotter 37 6 0 Walcot 9 19 2 Thurlby 7 1
8 Stanford 2 0 0 In all 621 l. 16 s. 3 d. ob.

Yet was not this the whole Demesnes of the Abbot in those times, for there
were many other Manors, and many Rents, and Lands, in, and about Peterburgh,
and in several Counties, but these are all which Wittlesey has recorded, and I
have no leisure to examine why there were no more returned. Godfrey being dead,
Anno 1321. 12. Call. September being the 15 year of King Edw. 2. the person
thought fittest to succeed him, was

35. ADAM de Boothbie
Born there and was made a Monk in Peterburgh, where he also had the Office of
Subcelerarius: Being chosen Abbot he repaired to the King then in the Isle of
Tanet, for his confirmation, which he obtained: And having also Episcopal
confirmation, he repaired the second time, to the King for his Temporalities,
which were likewise confirmed unto him, paying the Fees, and other demands at
that time due.

His acts in the several years of his government are more punctually related by
Wittlesey, than I intend to transcribe. In his first year, Thomas Earl of
Lancaster making War against the King, to wit King Edw. 2. Adam aided the King
with the sum of 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. and toward the Kings expedition into
Scotland with 200 l. more. In his fourth year the Manor of Torpel, and Vpton
came to the possession of Edmund surnamed Woodstock, half brother to King
Edward the second now reigning, and there arising great troubles betwixt the
Earls Officers, and the Abbots Tenants, all was quieted by the Abbots becoming
a Tenant to those Lands, paying the yearly rent of 106 l. 13 s. 4 d. In his
seventh year which was the first of King Edward the third, there arose a great
contention betwixt him and John Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, about the Son
of Galfridus de la Marc, which Galfridus Lord of Northburgh died Anno 1327.
holding three Knights-fees of the Abbey of Peterburgh; and was buried at
Peterburgh in S. Mary's Chapel amongst his Predecessors. And the said
Galfridus held also of the said Earl of Essex Lands in the County of Essex by
Knights-service. He had three Wives, and his last Wife, by name Margaret, he
put away, when she was great with Child, at Peterburgh, where the Child being
born, and baptized, was called by the name of his Father, Galfridus: this young
Galfridus had two Sisters by his Fathers side, who charged him with being
illegitimate, saying that Margaret his Mother was not their Fathers Wife, but
his Concubine, so that he had no hereditary right to his Fathers Lands. Abbot
Adam as guardian to the Child defended the Cause three years in the Consistory
at Lincoln; and in the Arches, constraining the Sisters to desist. But
afterward, Queen Philipp (Wife to King Edward the third, Daughter of William
Earl of Henault, whom Roger of Northburgh Bishop of Chester; (so called by
Wittlesey, though I cannot find any such man elsewhere) the Kings Proxy, had,
beyond Sea, espoused for the King) coming to Peterburgh on New-years-day, and
the said Earl of Essex attending on her toward York (where King Edward then
was, expecting her coming for the solemnization of Marriage, which was
performed the 24 day of the said Month of January 1327) the said Earl demanded
young Galfridus of the Abbot, and by threatenings, and violence gat possession
of him: Whereupon the Abbot pursued the Earl at the Law, the Earl on the other
side accused the Abbot and his Covent of certain outrages upon his Manor of
Plaisic in Essex; but this matter was composed by the Abbots giving the Earl
100l. and yet the Earl was still possessed of Galfridus; keeping him at
Kimbauton in the County of Huntingdon: Registrum Adae in manu D. H.
The King sent his Breve to the Sheriff to seize upon him, and to bring him to
York, there to appear before the Judge, and to be awarded to his right
Guardian. But at length the Earl Wittlesey.
without more ado (being conscious of his ill act) freely restored the Child to
the Abbot, and moreover languishing upon his Bed of sickness, and drawing
toward his end, he commanded his Executors to restore the 100l. to the
Monastery of Peterburgh: And the Abbot married young Galfridus to the Daughter
of Galfridus Scroope, then one of the Kings Chief Justices.

Regist. Adae.
About this time the Sheriff of Northampton required assistance and contribution
from the Abbot of Peterburgh, and his Tenants toward the Wall of Northampton
Park, which was quieted by the Kings writing to the Sheriff from York, his
Letters bearing date February 12. the second of his Reign: wherein he certified
the Sheriff, that by ancient Charters of Kings his Predecessors, the Abbot, and
Convent of Peterburgh with all their Lands and Dominions should be free from
all works of Castles, Parks, Bridges, and Enclosures.

Regist. Adae.
The same day there was Inquisition made concerning the Bridge leading into
Peterburgh, which being gone to decay, the question was, Who should repair it?
for this there was a Jury empannelled, six of Northamptonshire, and six of
Huntingdon-shire, who upon examination returned an Ignoramus after this manner:
that there was none of right bound to repair, or sustain the Bridge, seeing
none had done it in former time: for there was no Bridge there until Godfrey
Abbot of Burgh, of his own good will, in the fourth year of King Edward Father
to King Edward that now is, erected the said Bridge, and himself kept it in
repair so long as he lived: But the King and Queen coming to Peterburgh, the
present Abbot Adam repaired the said Bridge for their passage, although he was
not bound thereunto: to this the Jurors set their several Seals. At this
entertainment of the King, Queen, and John of Eltham the Kings Brother, besides
diet of meat and drink, the King and Q. at Peterburgh.
Abbot in gifts, Jewels (Jocalibus) and presents, expended in ready money the
sum of 487 l. 6 s. 5 d. And for his Confirmation, 50 l. 13 s. 4 d. more. At
other times also Abbot Adam was very free of his Purse, giving the King toward
an expendition into Scotland 100 l. and to the Queen 20 l. Attending upon the
King at Oundle, and Stanford he expended 34l. 7s. 4d. with many other sums
when the King or Queen came near his Monastery to Walmisford, Bourn, or
Croyland: And the second time giving entertainment King and Q. at Peterburgh.
to the King and Queen at his Monastery of Peterburgh, besides other things, he
expended 327 l. 15 s. And after this, Prince Edward, the Kings eldest Son, with
his two Sisters, and their Servants came and stayed at Peterburgh eight weeks,
which cost not the Abbot nothing.

Wittlesey.
In the time of this Abbot there was an Indictment at Northampton against a
stoppage of the Water at Vpwell, so that the River of Nen could not have its
course toward Lynn, whereby the Counties of Northampton, Lincoln, Bedford,
Huntingdon, and Cambridge, were much endamaged: The Abbot of Peterburgh
labored hard to get the drain scowred, and at length procured a Decree from
Galfridus Scroop the Kings Chief Justice for clearing the passage, the Abbots
of Ramsey, Thorney, and Croyland joining with him, this cost the Abbot of
Peterburgh 63 l. 11 s. 1 d.

In Abbot Adams time there happened a fray in the Chapel at Registr. Adae,
fol. 41.
Oxney, and blood being shed therein, the Chapel was polluted, and stood
suspended from its privilege of Divine Service: The Bishop of Lincoln being
then otherwise employed, could not attend to reconcile it, but gave his consent
that any other Bishop might: whereupon Abbot Adam wrote to the Bishop of
Carlisle, entreating him, that, as he returned from the Parliament toward his
Manor of Horncastle, he would come, and reconcile the said Chapel. And as
Abbot Adam had been free toward the King, so was the King to him, confirming
his Possessions, and Privileges, particularly by Charter, the tenth of his
huntings Tenth of huntings.
throughout Northamptonshire, that whosoever hunted any game throughout this
County, for the Kings use, or by his authority, was responsible to the Abbot of
Peterburgh for the tenth thereof, which were granted, and confirmed long before
by his Predecessors, King Richard 1. and W. Rufus. And King Henry 3. and King
Edward 1. did both of them command by their express Warrant to the Forester
that the Abbot of Peterburgh should have five Bucks in acknowledgment thereof.

What this Abbot was for Learning, and Ability in his Function, let the Reader
conjecture by his Library, which Wittlesey sets down. Decretales. Sermones
Johannis de Abbevile. Mediapars Missal. Breviarium. Manuale. Liber Chartarum.
Actus Apostolorum and Epistolae Canonicae and Apocalypsis. Gerardus super
Psalterium. Summa summarum. Diurnale. Dicta Senecae cum 36 tractatibus content
is in eodem volumine. These were his Books, set down by Wittlesey, which agrees
with another ancient Catalogue that I have by me.

Adam in the beginning of his eighteenth year, died, being the year of our
Lord, 1338. and the 12 of King Edward 3. On the fourth day of December
following he was honorably interred, the Abbot of Ramsey performing his
funeral service, and making a Sermon. He was buried betwixt the Quire, and the
great Altar, a fair Marble Stone being laid over him, with some Brass upon it,
which was taken away in the late demolition of Monuments. The Epitaph written
about it was this: Claustri praelatus hujus cubat hic vocitatus
Adam qui natus erat a Boothby nece stratus
Vir castus, justus, omni virtute robustus.
M semel, x trina, ter, and sex, i quoque bina.
Pars donetur ei celestis nunc requiei.


Presently after his death was the Seal of the Monastery broken, and care was
taken for the Kings consent to a new election: But before we name the
Successor, we shall present the Reader with a bill of Adams funeral expenses,
which I shall give in Latin, as I find it in Wittlesey, If the Reader be but a
good Deipnosophist he may construe the meaning of some words better than I can.

In cera 250li De frumento pro distributionibus pauperum 45 quarters. De
allecibus pro eisdem 1000. culibet 6. In pane pro die sepulturae, frumenti 20
quarters Brasii pro cervisia 40 quarters In vino 1 dolium, 1 pipam In allecibus
pro die sepulturae 8500 De Lupis aquaticis grossis 100 De Cod-lingis 12 Sem. De
Haddok 1 Sem. De Spar-lingis 1 Sem. De Salmon. 24 De Milvellis 120 De Dogdrout
100 De Plais 10 Sem. De Congris 1 De Wilkis 5 Sek. De grossis anguillis 5
estik. De minutis anguillis 70 estik. De Sturgeon 1 Barrel. De Lintea tela pro
nappis mensarum, and pro naperouns 200 Vlnae. De Platellis, and diversis
garnitis 1400 De Trowes 12 Bollis 4 De ciphis de ligno pro vino and cervisia In
ollis luteis pro vino, and cervisia 300 De Corbellis. 5

Abbot Adam being interred, and the turmoil of his funeral past, the thoughts
of the Monks returned to continue the succession in

36. HENRICUS de Morcot,
A wise, and discreet man: Being elected Abbot, he was according to the custom
(though this be the first mention that I find thereof) carried on shoulders
with a Te Deum, to the great Altar, and from thence to the Pulpit, where the
Prior published his Election. Then Henry took his journey toward London, but
the King being then at Antwerp, Henry's Election was confirmed by those whom he
left in Authority, with whom Abbot Henry compounded for his Manors, and Lands,
for the sum of 200 l. the Queens money excepted, and the reservation to the
King of the Knights-fees, and the advowsons of the livings of the Monastery,
during the vacany. And so Henry returned toward Peterburgh: and although he
might have returned to some of his own Manors, yet with the Abbot of Thorneys
leave, he stayed at Stanground the space of three weeks. In the mean time Simon
of Islepe Vicar general to the Bishop of Lincoln (the Bishop being then out of
the Kingdom) published in the Church of Peterburgh, that, if any persons could
object any thing against Henry, or the form of his Election, they should appear
such a day in the Church of S. James in Thrapstone, and signify the same,
where, because none appeared, the said Simon ratified the Election, and granted
his Letter to any Bishop to confer his benediction upon this new Elect, at any
place within, or without the Diocese of Lincoln, which was performed by the
Bishop of Ely, the Lord Chancellor, in his Chapel, at his house in Holbourn.
Then did the Chancellor direct his Letters to the Convent, and Tenants of the
Church of Peterburgh for their obedience to this their Abbot, and also to
William Trussell the Kings Eschaetor beyond Trent, not to meddle with any Lands
belonging to the Church of Peterburgh. Abbot Henry being returned, staid a
while at his Manor of Eye, and shortly after came to Peterburgh, and was
installed, the seventh of the Ides of Feb. Anno 1338. which was the twelfth
year of K. Edward 3.

Here Walter of Wittlesey leaves me, who hitherto has been a good guide to our
story, wherein further our progress must be assisted by such other Records, and
Rolls, as we light of. When Abbot Henry had governed this Church about 15.
years, he died, Anno 1353, which was the 27 of King Edward 3. His Library
consisted of these Books, viz. Parva Biblia. Decreta. Decretale. Apparatus
sexti Libri Decretalium. Liber qui vocatur Innocentius. Hostiensis in summa.
Breviarium. Antiphonarium cum Psalterio. Processionarium. Item Decretale.
Catholicon.

He had a sharp, and long contest with Sir Nicolas de Ry, and the Abbot of
Swinestead, for Lands recovered from the Sea to his Manor of Gosberchirch in
Linconshire, the story whereof Mr. Dugdale has set down at large, from a
Peterburgh Manuscript, Hist. of Imb. and Draining, page 235.

Henry being dead, was buried betwixt the Quire, and the great Altar, near unto
his Predecessor Adam. His grave being in the year 1648. Jan. 11. opened to
receive the body of John Towers late Lord Bishop of this place, there was found
a Seal of Lead (the instrument wholly consumed) having on the one side these
Letters thus inscribed SPA SPE over their several Effigies, on the reverse
Clemens P P vi. It Is probable that the instrument was some indulgence gotten at
the Jubilee, which was but three years before.

I must not here pass by a mistake of Pitseus, who, in his book of English
Writers, page 448. makes mention of one Johannes Petroburgensis, who, as he
says, was first a Monk, and afterward Abbot of Peterburgh, and lived about
the year 1340. that he was a very learned man, and wrote Annals Anglorum,
which he might do; But for his being Abbot here at this time, sure I am, there
was none such. And Possevine in his Apparatus making mention of one Johannes
Burgensis, who wrote such a Book, says, that he lived Anno 1200. but is not
able to distinguish betwixt this and an other John mentioned in the life of
Henry of Overton, although Pitseus makes them two distinct John's. Vossius
contradicts Possevine concerning the time of this supposed John, but neither
does he agree with our account. Henry being dead there succeeded

37. ROBERTUS Ramsey.
And all that we can say of him is, that he succeeded Henry, and was Abbot here
the space of 8 years: and that these books were the materials of his study.
Prima pars, and 2 Hostiensis in Decreta in 2. Vol. Hostiensis in Summa.
Speculum judiciale. Decretale. Derivationes Hugutionis. Prima pars and 2
Hostiensis in Decreta. His next Successor was

38. HENRICUS de Overton
Heu. de Pightesly.
Who was made Abbot Anno 1361. or as some say a year after, being the 36 of King
Edward 3. No memorable act of his is extant upon any Record that I have seen;
Only that he instituted a yearly solemnity for the Soul of William Courtney
Archbishop of Canterbury, of Mary Courtney his Mother, and of Hugh Courtney her
Husband Earl of Devon, and for the Souls of the Brethren, and Sisters of the
said Archbishop: And likewise for the Souls of the Abbots of Peterburgh his
Predecessors, and Successors. For which annual solemnity, he appointed, by his
Charter, bearing date 1390 the sum of 15l. out of the Manor of Thulby, and
some other Lands. But why Abbot Henry should have the house of Courtney in so
high esteem, I find not.

In his time great Commotions were raised against the Church in several places,
which as Richardus Knighton, Canon of Leicester, relates, in the year 1381.
reached to the Church of Peterburgh, where the Countrymen, and Tenants arose
against the Abbey, with intention to have destroyed it; but by the hand of God,
they were prevented. What the cause of these commotions was, or the manner of
their pacification, as yet I do not find.

About this time flourished a very learned man, one Johannes de Burgo, who
wrote certain Books, Of the Sacraments, and a Book known to this day by the
name of Pupilla oculi. He was Pastor of the Church of Collingham in the County
of Nottingham, then belonging to the Monastey of Peterburgh: Afterward he was
chosen Chancellor of the University of Cambridg, which at length he
relinquished, and returned to Collingham where he died Anno 1386. as Pitseus,
and others write. Page 542.


Henry was Abbot here 29 years complete, and died in his thirtieth year Anno
1391. which might be the 14, or 15 of King Richard 2.

His Library was but small, only these Books. Decretale. Johannes de Deo.
Breviarium novum. Catholicon. Breviarum in two Vol. Innocentius. Liber de vita,
and moribus Tartarorum.

Henry being dead there succeeded

39. NICOLAVS,
Whom H. of Pightesly sirnames Elmstow. Being made Abbot 1391. he continued so
the space of five years. I have little to say of him, only I find in the
account of his Celerarius for his second year of his being Abbot, wherein the
daily expenses of his Table are recorded, that his provision for that year,
(all entertainments of strangers being also considered) amounted to no more
then 79 l. 0 s. 11 d.

His Library had in it these Books. Digestum vetus. Digestum novum. Codex
Justiniani. Liber azonis. Raymundus. Liber Poenitentiale. Parvum volumen.
Digestum infortiatum. Instituta. Quaterna de lege. Vnus lib. de fisica. Alius
Liber de lege. Psalterium pulchrum. Psalterium Latin and Gallice scriptum. Now
although the private Libraries of these Abbots were thus small, yet was there a
public Library for the whole Monastery stored with above 1700 Books, or
Tractates, as by an ancient Matriculary of that Library may appear in an
Appendix to this our story.

Nicolas dying in his 5. year 1396. the 19. or 20. of 2 King Rich. 2. there
came in his place

40. WILLIHELMVS GENGE,
Who was the first mitred Abbot of Peterburgh, and continued in his Government
here the space of 12 years, both which, his Epitath will demonstrate. He was
buried betwixt the Quire, and high Altar: the brass of his Monument
participating of the same fate with the rest in the late devasting, or
devesting of Monuments Anno 1643. His Epitaph must now live in paper, and it
was this.

Prudens praelatus Wilihelmus Genge vocitatus,
Primus mitratus Abbas, jacet hic tumulatus.
Sum vivebat, claustrum summeque regebat,
Mundum spernebat, quae fecerat, illa docebat.
Vixer at ornatus virtutibus, immaculatus,
Tunsus, quadratus, tentatus, and igne probatus.
Annis bissenis Burgum rexit been plenis.
Vt careat poenis precibus potiamur amoenis.
41. JOHANNES DEEPING
Was made Abbot in the year 1408. being the 10 of King Henry 4. When he had
been Abbot the space of 30 years, he resigned his place, accepting of a
Corrodie for his life, which was but one year more. He lies buried at the
upper end of the Quire at the left hand of his predecessors Godfrey of
Croyland, and William Genge. The brass of his Monument fared as other Monuments
did in the year 1643. the Inscription was this. Orate pro anima Johannis
Deeping quondam Abbatis hujus Monasterii, qui obiit 5 die Decembris 1439.

42. RICHARDVS ASHTON
Was, upon the resignation of John, made Abbot 1438. the 17 year of King Henry
6. and continued therein about 33 years. Throughout the whole succession of the
former Abbots, I find but small, or no discovery what order the Monks of
Peterburgh were of, or under what rule they lived (saving the forementioned in
Johannes de Caleto) but in the time of this Richard enough is delivered by
Roger Bird his Register, telling us that they were Benedictine Monks or Monks
of the black Order, and lived under that rule: but when this rule was first
received here, I cannot positively say, though probably it was from the
beginning. In the time of this Richard strict inquisition began to be made into
Discipline, how the Monks of this Order observed the rules of their Founder,
for which purpose, the Bishop of Lincoln sometimes visited the Abbey of
Peterburgh, and sometimes the Abbots of this Order visited one another
Monasteries according to articles agreed upon in their General Chapter, which
was commonly held at Northampton. As the Abbot of Eyneshame in Oxfordshire sent
his summons to the Abbot of Peterburgh, Johannes permissione divina Abbas Mon.
de Eyneshame, Ordinis Sancti Benedicti Lincoln. Dioc. ad visitanda omnia, and
singula Monasteria nigrorum monachorum dicti Lincoln. Dioces. In Capitulo
generali ejusdem Ordinis apud Northampton, etc. And so the Abbots of
Peterburgh, Bardney, Thorney, Ramsey, Trinity Monastery in Norwich, the Priory
of S. Ethelreda in Ely, did mutually visit each other, as occasion served.

Many Corrodies were granted by this Abbot Richard, but the Abbey for diet got
their Lands, or other Benevolences: Two were remarkable: the first of John
Delaber Bishop of S. David's, Bird Fol. 45.
who was much affected toward this Monastery, and for bestowing upon them his
Mitre, Cross, Dalmaticks, Sandals, Sabbatines, Gloves, and Mass Book, he
received a Corrody, which he might take at his own choice, either at
Peterburgh, or at the Abbots Manor of Eyebury, with a yearly pension of 32l.
to be received during his life out of the Abbots Manor of Kettering, in
consideration of a great sum of Money which the Abbey had borrowed of him, and
he forgave it.

The other Corrody was to Alice Garton, Widow, which I thought fit to mention,
in regard the pavement of the Church Bird Fol. 63.
does still retain the memory of her, and her family, which lies buried in the
Body of the Church, over against the Cloister door.

On the first stone are engraven these verses. Hic duo sunt nati Thomae Garton
tumulati,
Thomas quinquennis fuit, Agnes feretriennis.


On the second, these. This Tho. Garton beautified some of the Windows in the
Western Cloister with painted glass.
Corpus sub Lapide Thomae Garton jacet art,
Conjugis Aliciaeque suae dextra sibi part:
Quorum nunc animae coelesti luce requiescant.


On the third, these. Conjugis Aliciae Thomae Garton miserere,
O pater egregie, quiat tecum residere:
Mantello test viduali vixit honest.


Brigge Fair. Vid. Chartam in App.
In the 2 year of this Abbot Richard 1439. King Henry 6 by his Charter bearing
date July 14 and the 17 of his Reign, granted to the Abbot, and Convent of
Peterburgh the keeping of a Fair for three days, viz. on S. Matthew's day, the
day before, and the day after, and that they should hold the said Fair as well
in Huntingdonshire, as Northamptonshire: which Fair is now commonly known by
the name of Brigge Fair. And in regard that a Fair was formerly granted to be
kept the same day at Northolm in the time of Abbot Godfrey, as has been said,
it is probable that the Fair there, either by reason of discontinuance, or some
other inconvenience, was settled here at Peterburgh.

Bird Fol. 14.
This Abbot Richard was summoned to sit in Parliament at Westminster, and being
unable to undertake such a journey, he delegated William Tresham, and John
Kirkby Clerk of the Parliament, to sit in his place, and to act for him, and in
his name, as if himself were present, as appears by his Letter to the King,
dated Febr. 12. 1444.

He was summoned again to a Parliament at Coventry, where he took the Oath of
Allegiance to King Henry in manner and form as follows.

Bird Fol. 49.
I Richard Ashton Th'abbot of Peterburgh knowledge you most high, and mighty
and most Christian Prince King Henry the Sixth, to be my most redoubted Severayn
Lord, and rightwessly by succession born to Reign upon me, and all your lege
People. Whereupon y voluntarily without cohertion promitte, and oblish me by
the Faith, and Troth that y owe unto God, and by the Faith, and Troth, and
ligeance that y owe unto you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, that I shall be
without any variance, True, Faithful, humble, and obeysaunt Subjet, and
Liegeman unto you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, And that y shall be unto my
life's end, at all times, and places, ready, and attending in my most hearty wise,
and manner, as any Liegeman owes to be unto his Sovereign Lord, putting me in
my true, undelayed Devoir to do all that that may be unto the well, and suerty
of your most Royal Person, of your most noble Estate. And the way conservation
and continuance of your most high Authority, pre-eminence, and Prerogatyf, to
the well, suerte, and preserving of the Person, of the most high, and benign
Pryncesse Margaret the Queen my Sovereign Lady, and of her most noble Estate,
she being your wife, And also to the well, suerte, and honor of the Person of
the right high and mighty Prince Edward my right redoubted Lord, the Prince
your first begotten Son, And of the right high, and noble Estate of the same,
And faithfully, truly, and obeysantly in my most humble wise, and Manner,
Honor, serve, obey, and bear mind Allegiance unto my most redoubted Sovereign
Lord during your life which God Fadir of mercy, for my most singular recomfort,
preserve, long in prosperity to endure: And if God of his infinite power take
you from this transitory life, me bering lif here in this World, that than y
shall accept my said redoubted Lord the Prince Edward your said first begotten
Son for my Sovereign Lord, and bear my troth, Feith, and Legiaunce unto him,
as my natural born Sovereign Lord. And aftre him unto his Succession of his
Body lawfully begotten, And in defaute of his Succession, wiche God deffend,
unto any other succession of your Body lawfully coming, And that y shall never
at any time, for any manner, occasyon, color, affinite, or cause, consent, gyf
aid, assistance, or favor, or agree to any thing, that y may understond, or
know, by any mean that may be prejudicial, or contrary to the premises, or
any of them, but that y shall as soon as y may so have knowledge, put me in my
dew undelayed devoir in my most hearty, and effectuous wise and manner,
without color, or fayntise, with my body, goods, might, pouer, counsel, and
advertisement to resist, withstond, and subdue all them that would in any wise
presume to do contrary to the premises, or any of them. So God me help, and
those holy Evangelists. In witness whereof y set to these presents my Seal, and
my Sign Manuel.

After that Richard had been Abbot here about thirty three years, he surrendered
his Government into the hands of the Bishop of Lincoln, June 27. 1471. which
being certified to the King then Edward 4. and in the 11 year of his Reign,
upon the Convents Petition for a new Election, the person thought fittest to
succeed was

43. WILLIHELMVS RAMSEY,
Being a Monk of this Monastery, out of that good repute which the whole
Convent had of him, was chosen to succeed Richard Ashton. He contributed with
John Maldon toward the brazen Standard, with a displayed Eagle on the top,
which is still extant in this Church, and serves for the Bible to lie upon for
the Reading of the Lessons. On one of the knops is this Distich.

John Maldon Prior, and Willelmus de Ramiseya
Haec tibi lectrina dant Petre metallica bina.
Fol. 70.
The Election of this William is so punctually set down by Roger Bird (who
calls himself the Abbots Chaplain) that because it will make for the
understanding of the Officers of the Monastery in those times, I shall give it
in the Authors own words. In quo quidem termino videlicet xxvii die Julii supra
scripta hora Capitulari, celebrata primitus, and solempniter prout decuit ad
magnum altar in Ecclesia Conventuali Monasterii nostri antedicti Missa de
Sancto Spiritu, pulsataque campana more solito and consueto convenerunt and de
facto capitulariter pariter and communiter ob hoc and ad hoc congregati fuerunt
in dicta domo nostra capitulari omnes qui voluerunt potuerunt and debuerunt
hujusmodi electioni futuri Abbatis nostri commode interesse videlicet: Ego
dompnus Johannes Maldon Prior and praesidens praedictus, Johannes York magnus
Senn. in firmaria, Willielmus Walmesford Senn. in firmaria, Willielmus Burgh,
Robertus Lydington, Robertus Notyngham Sub-Prior, Johannes Pycheley gardianus
de Oxney, Richardus Oxford Subeleemosinarius, Johannes Burgh Praecentor,
Willielmus Spalding Infirmarius, Henricus Lynne sufficienter licentiatus ad
peregrinandum comperuit per Willielmum Burgh confratrem suum nomine
procuratoris, qui quidem Willielmus Burgh onus procuratorii hujusmodi in se ad
omnem juris effectum acceptavit and admisit, cujus tenor inferius describitur,
Johannes Nall Celerarius, Johannes Hill tertius Prior claustralis, Johannes
Baston Camerarius, Nicolaus Overton Magister operis and Pitenciarius Johannes
Glynton Sacrista, Willielmus Bury quartus Prior claustralis, Willielmus Ramsey
Receptor and Senescallus, Robert Burghscolaris, Johannes Croyland senior
Refectarius, Johannes Rypon magnus Eleemosinarius, Thomas Burgh hostilarius,
Johannes Morys, Johannes Gent scolaris, Edmundus Lynne, Georgius Burgh
Subsacrista, Johannes Tylly, Thomas London custos crucis, Gilbertus Holbech,
Johannes Lincoln, Thomas Pynchebek, Willielmus Newark, Johannes Croyland
scolaris Richardus Multon Capellanus Prioris Willielmus Holbech Galfridus Lynne
and Willielmus Shelford Monachi dicti Monasterii ordinem and regulam sancti
Benedicti in eodem express professi and in sacris ordinibus constituti
conventum dicti Monasterii sic facientes ac jus and voces in hujusmodi
electione solum habentes prout in and de facto tunc convenimus and
capitulariter tunc congregati fuimus cum non essent aliqui absentes neque fuit
esset neque sit plures monachi neque fratres aut alii vel alius jus aut vocem
in hujusmodi electione habentes vel habens propositoque verbo Dei per
confratrem nostrum Willielmum Burgh sequentem hoc thema, Vnde quaeram
consolatorem tibi Et deinde invocata statim spiritus sancti gratia per
solempnem decantationem ympni. Veni Creator spritus cum versiculo Emitte
spiritum tuum and oratione Deus qui corda, etc. Factis etiam vice nomine and
mandato nostris per Willielm. Rest. Mandatarium nostrum sufficienter in ea
part constitutum publicis Proclamationibus in valvis and hostio domus
capitularis nostri quod omnes praetendentes, etc.

By this Chapter, and after this manner was William Ramsey chosen to succeed
Richard Ashton, and was installed Abbot August 1. 1471. being the eleventh year
of K. Edw. the fourth. And although the precedent vacancy was but short, yet
the Treasurer of the Exchequer demanded 40 l. for composition for his
Temporalties, but the Kings Letter to the Treasurer took off that demand: And
the Archdeacon claiming his Palfrey for his Installation Fee, the Popes Letter
took off that also.

Abbot William in his ninth year, Anno 1480. having committed an oversight in
releasing a Felon, who having stolen a piece of Bird fol. 117. and Rotulo
privato.
Cloth at Ketering, and some other things, was for that Felony committed to the
Goal at Peterburgh, where the Felon secretly bribed Abbot William with forty
shillings, and he quietly dismissed him: for which dismission Abbot William
himself was indicted at the Sessions before John Catesby, and Guido Walston,
Justices of the Peace, and being found guilty, was forced to put in security of
six sufficient men, for his good Behavior.

In his tenth year 1481. The Church of Oundle was made an Oundle Church
appropriated.
Appropriation. And Anno 1486. The Church of Bringhurst in the County of
Leicester.

This William found opposition from some of his Tenants, they Bringhurst
appropriated.
of the Manor of Bellasise making insurrection, to the number of one hundred,
from thence and the adjacent parts, throwing in Hedges, and Ditches, returning
with Bagpipe, and great jollity for what they had done. The Abbot complained
hereof, but what was the issue, the Informer tells not.

William having been Abbot here about twenty five years, died, and lies
interred at the upper end of the body of the Church, under a fair Marble, which
of late was plentifully adorned with Brass, but disrobed thereof with the rest.
About the Stone went a verge of Brass, containing this Epitaph.

Abbas Burgensis Will'elmus ut hic tumulatus,
Ramisey natus, praelatus jam nece stratus.
En qui protrusis rodendus vermibus instat
Vir prudens, justus, pius, omnibus and honorandus,
Castus, benignus, omni virtute decorus,
Cord suo statuit nunquam offendere Christum,
Castigans rigidos, tractans pietate modestos,
Debita persolvi, and diruta multa novari.
Praestet plena suis stipendia jam cenobitis,
Et propter missas celebrandas cotidianas
Ipse Monasterio semper servabat honorem.
Pax donetur ei....................
44. ROBERTUS KIRTON,
Formerly a Monk of this Monastery, had his Commendatory Letters from William
Ramsey to Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, to be Bird fol. 78.
made Priest, those Letters bearing date March 3. 1473. This Robert succeeded
William Ramsey, and was made Abbot Anno 1496.

In his fourth year, viz. 1499. the Church of North-Collingham North-Collingham
appropriated. Registrum Lincoln.
was made an Appropriation. In his nineteenth year, which was Anno 1515. on
July 8. William then Bishop of Lincoln, Visited this Monastery, In which
Visitation many things out of order were complained of and rectified; amongst
which, these are the most remarkable. That one John Walpool a Monk, was
Seditious amongst his Brethren: that he had stolen out of S. Oswalds shrine
certain Jewels, and what he could elsewhere lay his hands on, and given them to
Women in the Town. That one Reginald Bray (what he was I know not, but he is
called Dominus) should have a due proportion of Diet, for number of Dishes.
That the Monks haunted a Tavern near the Monastery, and gave themselves to
singing and dancing in the Dormitory till 10 or 11 a Clock at Night to the
trouble of the rest. That at the Celebration of the Funeral of the late William
Abbot of the Monastery, there was withholden from every Priest 6 s. 8 d. and
from every Monk 3 s. 4 d. which was used to be given at such times. This Robert
Kirton had great contention with his Tenants in Peterburgh about Pasturage, in
the Fenn called Burgh, a little Fenn adjoining to the Monastery; which, as the
Inhabitants alleged, the Abbot had overcharged with 1500 Sheep in two flocks:
complaining also to the King, then Hen. 8. that he had suffered thirty
Tenements in the street called Boongate-street to fall to utter decay, and then
emparked the same ground, and made it a place The Park.
for his own Deer. But notwithstanding these contests, Abbot Robert forgot not
to enlarge, and beautify the buildings of his Monastery; for he built that
goodly building at the East end of the Church, now commonly known by the name
of The New Building New buildings.
wherein he placed three Altars, opposite to three pair of Stairs descending
from the back of the great Altar: The places of those Altars are yet
discernable, though their use be not known. He built a Chamber in his dwelling
House, calling it Heaven-gate-Chamber, which is extant, and retains its name
to this day. Heaven-gate Chamber.
He made in his great Hall that goodly Bow window overlooking the Cloister, the
memory whereof is fresh to this present age. He set up in the Church the
Crucifixerium or Rood-loft, now standing at the entrance into the Quire, though
placed something lower than it was at its first erection. He set up the Gate
leading to the Deanery which is yet standing, and retains the memory of the
Builder, in his Hieroglyphick of a Crosier, with the letter R, and a Church or
Kirk placed upon a Tun; which must be construed with the allusion thus, Abbot
Robert Kirk-Tun, and so Kirton. He beautified the Chapel of S. Mary, or The
Ladies Chapel with pictures, and gilded work, much of which was lately extant.
He maintained a long suit in Law against Margaret Countess of Richmond and
Darby, about Knights-service for Lands in Torpell, Thorpe, Watervile, and
Achirch, wherein at last he prevailed. I know not whether I have done well or
ill, in declaring the acts of this Robert; but this must be according to the
capacity of the Reader, for I find Abbot Robert thus pleading for himself.
Legitur in historia scholastica, quod Antipater Idumaeus M. Herodis pater in
quodam praelio in servitio Imperatoris multis vulneribus confossus est, qui
tandem accusatus, and rejectis vestibus, dixit. Ego nolo me, Domine Imperator,
excusare apud te, sed ista vulnera quae suscepi pro te, loquantur pro me, si
ego diligo te: Sic ista parva praedicta loquantur pro me, si aliqua feci digna
Deo laud. Si interrogaretur, utrum haec manifestari, vel celari debent, nec
carnalibus, and incredulis sunt revelanda, nec devotis, prudentibus, and vere
fidelibus sunt abscondenda.

And when he had been Abbot about thirty two years, he was buried in the said
Chapel. His Monument was in the year 1651. levelled with the ground, above
which it was erected some four foot, and placed upon an hollow Arch where his
body lay, and at the head thereof was a fair Stone lying even with the
pavement, which covered a pair of stairs going down into the Sepulcher. There
let him rest (if I may say he rested) till we pass to his Successor the last of
all the Abbots.

45. JOHN CHAMBERS
Was born in Peterburgh, but what he was, or upon what score made Abbot,
Records are wanting to inform us: His advancement to the Abbatical Chair was
Anno 1528. which might be the 19 or 20. of King Henry 8. In his first year,
Cardinal Wolsey came to Peterburgh, where he kept his Easter, upon Palm Sunday
he carried his Palm, going with the Monks in procession, and the Thursday
following he kept his Maundy, washing, and kissing the feet of fifty nine poor
people, and having dried them, he gave to every one of them 12d. and three Else
of Canvass for a shirt, he gave also to each of them a pair of shoes, and a
portion of red herrings. On Easter Day he went in procession in his Cardinals
Vestments, and sang the High-Mass himself after a solemn manner, which he
concluded with his benediction and remission, upon all the hearers.

In the seventh year of this John, Katherine the first wife of King Hen. 8. and
Mother of Queen Mary, died at Kimbolton Castle in the County of Huntingdon,
Jan. 8. 1535. and was buried in this Church, betwixt two pillars on the
Northside of the Quire, near to the great Altar, her Hearse being covered with
a black Velvet Pall, crossed with white Cloth of silver, which how it came to
degenerate into one of meaner value is unknown to us, yet this changeling was
also taken away Anno 1643. with her Spanish Scutcheons affixed thereunto.

Some write, that for her sake the Church of Peterburgh fared Lord Herbert in
King Hen. 2 Kings 23. 18.
the better at the dissolution of Abbys, and was turned into a Cathedral, as if
King Hen. (like King Josiah, who favored the grave of the Prophet) should
favor his Wifes grave in this place. Be it so, or no, the goodly structure of
the place, convenient situation for a new erection, with accommodations
thereunto, might make a fair plea for a reprieve from the stroke of that Ax
which cut others down.

I have not as yet seen any Record showing how John Chambers demeaned himself
toward King Henry, or complied with him in that great dissolution of Abbys,
that the King should continue him in his place, and not put him to death, as he
did some, or depose him, as he did others: But probable it is, that Abbot John
loved to sleep in a whole skin, and desired to die in his nest wherein he had
lived so long, and perhaps might use such means, as might preserve (if not his
means to his Church, yet) his Church to posterity.

And now, that we are come to those times, wherein that great alteration in the
Church, and alienation of her Revenues, happened; for our more orderly proceeding
in the declaration thereof, we shall first present the Reader with an Inventory
of the Church-Utensils, and of the Abbots domestic goods, and then take him
abroad to view the Manors, and Lands, that he may understand what was taken
from, and what continued to, the Church of Peterburgh.

On the 30 of November 1539. being the 31 of King Henry 8. an Inventory was
taken as follows.

Imprimis, One Cross set with Crystal, silver, and gilt. Item One Cross of
silver, gilt, with a staff of silver. Item One Cross of Byrral, with a staff of
silver. Item One old Cross plated upon wood. Item Five staves of the Rectores
Chori, with heads of silver. Item Two Candlesticks, gilt. Item Two Candlesticks
parcel gilt. Item Two Censors gilt, parcel of them. Item One Censor gilt. Item
One Ship gilt, with a foot. Item One little Basin and Ewre gilt. Item Ten
Chalices gilt, with the Patens. Item One little Chalice parcel gilt. Item One
broken Crewet gilt. Item One holy water-stock parcel gilt. Item A Ghospeller,
and a Superaltare garnished with silver, and gilt. Item Two Verge rods of
silver.
ALTAR-Cloths.
Item One Altar-Cloth of two Kings, and Bishops. Item Two Altar-Cloths of
Purple Velvet, embroidered with Eagles, and Flower de Luces. Item Two
Altar-Cloths of Bawdkyn. Item Two Altar-Cloths of Cloth of silver. Item Two
Altar-Cloths of Bawdkyn with Leopards, and Stars. Item Two Altar-Cloths of
white Bawdkyn. Item One Altar-Cloth of white Diaper, with a border embroidered
with Bucks.
ALBES.
Red Albes for Passion-week 27. Item Eight Albes with Crowns and Moons. Item
Fourteen red Albes. Item Forty blue Albes of diverse sorts. Item Seven and
twenty other Albes to be worn on single Feasts. Item Six Albes with Peter-Keys.
Item Six Albes called The Kydds. Item Seven Albes called Meltons. Item Six
Albes called Dogs. Item One old Albe richly embroidered. Item Eight Albes with
Apples of Cloth of gold. Item Eight Albes with Apples of blue Tissew. Item Five
old Albes with red Tissew. Item Eight Albes embroidered with Vines. Item Five
old Albes embroidered. Item Fourteen Albes embroidered with diverse sorts. Item
Thirty Albes of old Cloth of Bawdkyn. Item Nine Albes embroidered with green.
Item Thirteen Albes of diverse sorts. Item Fourteen green Albes with counterfeit
Cloth of gold. Item Four Albes called Ferial White. Item Seven Albes called
Ferial Black.
VESTMENTS.
Item One suit of Crimson Velvet upon Velvet with a Cope, and Albe suitable to
the same. Item One Chesible with an Albe called The Burgon. Item One suit of
blue Damask with a Cope, and thirteen Albes to the same. Item One suit of
Purple Velvet embroidered with Flowers and Angels, with a Cope and five Albes.
Item One suit of black Velvet with a Cope, and four Albes with Flowers. Item
One suit of rich white Cloth of Bawdkyn with seven Albes. Item One suit of blue
Velvet with five Albes. Item One suit of red Velvet with ragged staves, with
three Albes of green Bawdkyn. Item One suit of Crimson Velvet with Flowers and
one Cope, and three Albes. Item One suit of red Satin with three Albes. Item
One suit of red Tissew with three Tunicles. Item One suit of blue Tissew with
two Tunicles. Item One suit of Cloth of gold with orphers of Tissew. Item One
suit called The Crowns with two Copes. Item One suit called The Londus with
four Copes. Item One suit of Peter Keys with two Copes. Item One suit of the
Dogs with two Copes. Item One suit of the Meltons so called with eight Copes.
Item One suit called Overtons with three Copes. Item One white suit called
Godfreys without a Cope. Item One suit of white silk called The Georges with
eight Copes. Item One suit called the Kydds with four Copes. Item One suit
called Red Needle Work with two Copes. Item One suit of green silk called
Martyrs with four Copes. Item One suit called The Squirrels with two Copes.
Item One suit of green silk called The Cocks with one Cope. Item One suit of
green Velvet with one Cope. Item One suit of yellow silk with two Copes. Item
One suit of changeable silk with one Cope. Item One suit called The Daysies
with one Cope. Item One suit called The Popinjays without a Cope. Item One suit
of Purple Velvet without a Cope. Item One Vestment of black Velvet with one
Albe. Item Three Tunicles of black Woorsted. Item One suit of course red
without a Cope. Item Three Tunicles with Peter Keys. Item One Vestment called
The Vines.
COPES.
Imprimis, Eighteen of red Tissew. Item Two Copes called The Burgons. Item
Three Copes called The Golds. Item Six Copes of red Velvet. Item Three Copes of
red Bawdkin. Item One Cope of red Damask. Item Six Copes of blue Tissue. Item
Two Copes of dun Tissue. Item Nine blue Copes called The Roots. Item Five Copes
of blue Velvet. Item Thirteen Copes of blue silk called The Georges. Item Seven
Copes of blue Bawdkin called The Hindes. Item Four Copes of old black Bawdkin.
Item Seven Copes of Satin of Cyprus. Item Three Copes of red silk. Item Three
Copes of green silk. Item Four Copes of red Needlework. Item Four Copes of
green Velvet. Item Thirteen Copes of white Silk. Item Two other Copes.
In the QUIRE.
Imprimis The high Altar plated with Silver, well gilt, with one image of
Christ's passion, and a little shrine of Copper, enameled, for the Sacrament.
Item two pair of Organs, and two desks of Latten, seven Basins hanging, with
four Candlesticks, and Banners of Silk above the Quire, joining to the Tomb
where Q. Katharine lies buried. Item in the enclosed place where the Lady
Katharine lies buried one Altar Cloth, of black Cloth, one Pall of black
Velvet, with white cloth of Silver Crossed, and one white Altar Cloth. Item
belonging to the same remaining in the Sacristy, two Candlesticks of Silver
parcel Gilt, one Chalice, and two Crewets gilt. Item One pair of Vestments of
black Velvet, with an Albe to the same. Item Ten Clothes called Pedecloaths to
lie before the high Altar. Item Sixteen Clothes to hang in the Quire. Item At
the upper end of the Church, three Altars, and upon every Altar a Table of the
Passion of Christ, Gilt, with three stained Fronts.
In the Ladies CHAPEL.
Imprimis An Image of our Lady with reddis Rissey, set in a Tabernacle well
gilt, upon Wood, with twelve great Images, and four and thirty small Images of
the same work, about the Chapel. Item a pair of Organs, one Desk, and four
Seats, one Tabernacle of the Trinity, and one other of our Lady, one Desk, and
one old Candlestick of Latten, four Pedecoaths called Tapets. Item Two
Vestments of white Damask with Flowers, one red vestment of Satin with
Flowers, and also Albes for the same. Item One suit of Crimson Velvet with
Orphers of Imagery of Gold, and one Cope, and four Albes. Item Three white
Altar Clothes, one of them Diaper, with three old painted Fronts, two Orfers,
eight Surplisses.
In S. John's CHAPEL.
Item A Table of Alabaster, one front of painted Clothes, with two Images of
Alabaster.
In S. James CHAPEL.
Item One Table of Alabaster, two Images of the same, and one Front of painted
Clothes.
In the Rood LOFT.
Item One Table upon the Altar, eighteen Images well gilt, one Desk of Wood,
two Orfers, one Front of painted Cloth.
In the Body of the CHURCH.
Item One Altar with Images, Gilt, one Front of green Silk, with Ostrich
Feathers, one Coffer, the Altar of our Ladies Lamentation, Gilt, one Front of
painted Clothes, four Lamps in diverse parts of the Church.
In the South I WILL.
Item In S. Oswalds Chapel, one Altar with a Front of painted Cloth, one
Table, Gilt, of S. Oswald. Item In S. Bennets Chapel, one Altar with a Front
of painted Cloth, one Table, Gilt, with the story of S. Bennet. Item in S.
Kyneburghs Chapel, one Altar with a Front of painted cloth, with one Table,
well Gilt.
The Trinity CHAPEL.
Item The Altar with a Front of old Silk, one white Altar cloth of Diaper, two
Candlesticks of Latten, one Table of Alabaster, one Coffer, and Seats of Wood,
one Lamp. Item In S. Sprites Chapel, a Table of Alabaster, one Front of
painted Cloth.
In the CLOISTER.
Item One Conduit, or Lavatory of Tynne, with diverse Coffers, and Seats there.
In the Ostrie CHAPEL.
Item One Altar Cloth, two Fronts of painted Clothes, two Latten Candlesticks,
one Coffer, one Super-altar of Marble, one Vestment of Green Silk, one Vestment
of dovecoloured Silk, two Albes.
In the Chapel of LOW.
Item one Altar, two Fronts of old painted Clothes, two white Altar Clothes,
two Vestments of Silk, one Red, the other Green, and one Albe of Needlework.
Item One Chalice, Gilt, one Corporas, one pair of Candlesticks of Latten, three
Bells to ring in the Chapel.
In the Infirmary CHAPEL.
Item One Table of Alabaster, one Front of Silk, two Candlesticks of Latten,
three Coffers, four Seats, one Vestment, one Albe of white Silk, with Orfers of
red. Item One Vestment of white Bustian for Lent, with an Albe, three
Corporasses, with cases, two Altar Cloths, one old Vestment, one old Albe. Item
One Vestment of blue Chamlet, with Moons, and Hearts, with one Albe to the same.
Item One Vestment of red course Satin of Cyprus, with Hearts, and Knots. Item
One little Bell, one Lamp hanging, one broken Silver Crown. Item Old Clothes to
cover Saints in Lent.
In the Abbots Gallerie CHAPEL.
Item One Table of Alabaster.
In the other CHAPEL.
Item One Table of Alabaster, three old Chests, an old Almery.
In the Abbots HALL.
These Tables were taken away 1644. to be used at the Siege of Croyland, and
never returned.
Item four fixed Tables, four Forms, one Table with two Tresles, at the high
Bench, the hangings old Tapestry, one Cupboard, one Chair, one Chaffer.
In the Abbots KITCHEN.
Item three great boiling Pots, seven small Pots, four Panns, two Kettles, one
great brass Pan, with two Handles, a Ladle, a Scummer, five Spits, one stone
Mortar, one Brandiron with four Bars, two Racks of Iron, one Gridiron with
four Bars, two Racks of Iron, one Gridiron, one flesh Hook, two frying Panns,
one Porrenger, one fire Fork.
In the Abbots Fish-HOUSE.
Item Old dry Ling of the last year 24 warp. Item Great Ling of this year 100
warp. Item In middle and small Ling 100, and a half warp. Item In dry
Haberdine 203 Fishes. Item Stockfish 208 Fishes. Item Salmon half a Barrel.
In Eyebury FARM.
Item In Sheep 29 score, and ten sheep. Item Oxen 19 Item Bulls, and Bulchins 5
Item Kine 18 Item Heifers two years and upwards 13 Item Steeres 8 Item Yeerling
Calves 12 Item Gueldings for the Saddle 4
In the Abbots BREWHOUSE.
Item Four Furnaces great and small, two of Copper, and two of Lead, two great
Mashing Fats, an ark for ground Malt, three Fatts, five yieling Fatts, six and
thirty Keelers, two cleansing Sives, four Couls, and a graining Tub.
In the GARNET.
Item Six quarters of Malt, ten quarters of Wheat, two quarters of Oats, two
quarters of Barley, six bushels of Pease.
In the BARNES.
Item Fifty loads of Hay by estimation.
The Abbots PLATE.
Imprimis A Basin, and Ewer of Silver, one Silver Pot of a quart, two standing
pieces, covered, all Gilt, two flat Bowls of Silver, two Salts with one cover
Gilt, one Nut without a cover, two ale Pots with two covers, four Masers great
and small, one dozen of silver Spoons, two and twenty Masers great and small,
with bands of Silver, and Gilt, two pieces of Silver, and ten Spoons of Silver,
a Horn with two feet of Silver, and Tipped, a Nut Tipped with Silver, and Gilt.
The length, and breadth of the Church and other parts thereof.
Imprimis, The Church containing in length 8 score yards, in breadth 34 yards.
Item, The Ladies Chapel containing in length 46 yards, in breadth 14 yards.
Item, The Cross Isle on the North side in length 18 yards, and in breadth 12
yards. Item, Three Chapels with the entry into the Ladies Chapel in length 14
yards, in breadth 7 yards. Item, The Isle on the South side with the Chapels
in length 21 yards, in breadth 20 yards. Item, The Cloister about four square,
in length 168 yards, in breadth 6 yards. Item, The Chapter House in length 28
yards, in breadth 11 yards. Item, The great Dormitory in length 64 yards, in
breadth 13 yards. Item, The little Dorter in length 33 yards, in breadth 12
yards. Item, The Fratry in length 54 yards, in breadth 14 yards. Item, The
Infirmary in length 65 yards, in breadth 10 yards. Item, The Chapel at the
gate of the Monastery 14 yards in length, in breadth 8 yards. Item, The Vestry
containing in length 18 yards, in breadth 6 yards. Item, The Abbots Hall, in
length 32 yards, in breadth 12 yards. Item, The Abbots great Chamber in length
33 yards, in breadth 10 yards. Item, In the two Steeples of the Monastery at
the Front, Bells 10, and in other several places of the houses, Bells 4. Item,
The Convents Kitchen in length 25 yards. Item, The Lavers in the Cloister
weighing 100 lib.
All which goods were assigned to the said Abbot being Guardian for the same
time, by the Commissioners

Philipp Price, John Tregonnel, and others.

Two years after this Inventory, viz. 1541. and of King Henry 33. the King
changed the person from an Abbot to a Bishop, the Church from a Monastery to a
Cathedral, and the Town of Peterburgh from a Village to a City.

Here I must acknowledge my self at a stand, as not able to give a perfect
account of all Manors, Lands, and Tenements belonging to the Monastery of
Peterburgh at the time of the dissolution; for it had Lands, or Tenements in
Catworth, Thorp Watervile, Achirch, Tichmersh, Winwick, Hemington, Kynethorp,
Armiston, Grendone, Thurning, Pappelee, Beningfield, Addington, Slipton,
Twywell, Woodford, Churchfield, Stoke, Pilketon, Craneford, Burlee, Thornhaw,
Sibberton, Walmisford, Etton, Lolhame, Southorp, Walcot, Vfford, Helpiston,
Woodcroft, Vpton, Cathwait, Torpel, Baddington, Aston, Nunton, Deeping,
Bernack, Marham, Hargrave, Allington, Glapthorne, Cotterstock, Angotby,
Osgotby, Swinstead, Witham, Careby, Gretton, Thrapston, Denford, Ringsstead,
many Lands in Holland, etc. Which, how, or when they were alienated from this
Monastery, whether by the King, or by the Monastery it self before, I cannot
say; But of such Lands as the Abbey was at this time in full tenure and
possession of, King Henry made a tripartite kind of division, assuming a third
to himself, confirming another third upon the Bishop, and the rest upon the
Dean, and Chapter. Those which King Henry took to himself, being surrendered
unto him, were then let out unto Tenants at a yearly rate, these, and thus.

Com. North. Or L. Russel afterward E. of Bedford.
Eyebury, then in the hands of Sir John Russel. 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. Oxeney, then in
the hands of Roger Horton Gent. 1 l. 10 s. 0 d. Dosthorp, called Gillims, and
le Lane-land then in the hands of John Stoddard. 2 l. 0 s. 0 d. Pillisgate, in
the hands of David Vincent. 19 l. 0 s. 0 d. Kettering cum Pightesly with the
Advowsons of the Rectories there, in the Queens hand 111 l. 3 s. 4 d. ob. q.
dimid. Given first to the Dean and Chapt. but taken away again with Polebrook
also.
Stanwigge, then in the Queens hand. 27 l. 16 s. 0 d. ob. Cottingham cum
Desborough with the Advowsons of the Rectories, in the Queens hand. 67 l. 2 s.
1 d. Oundle with the Advowson of the Vicaridge in the hand of the Lord Russel.
172 l. 0 s. 3 d. ob. Ashton, in the Queens hand. 29 l. 3 s. 8 d. Wermington cum
Egilthorp, with the Advowson of the Vicaridge, in the Queens hand. 97 l. 4 s.
10 d. ob. q. Polebroke, with the Advowson of the Rectory, then in the hands of
Sir Edward Montague. 12 l. 14 s. 0 d. ob. q. Clopton with the Advowson of the
Rectory, in the hands of William Dudley Esquire 3 l. 17 s. 4 d. Lullington with the
Advowson of the Rectory in the hands of Sir Edward Mountague 8 l. 15 s. 7 d.
ob. Hundreds of Polebrook and Navesford in the Q. hand s. 19 l. 9 s. 3 d. q.
Hundred of Howkeslow in the Queens hand. 16 l. 13 s. 4 d. q. Com. Rutland.
Tinwel with the Advowson of the Rectory, in the hands of Sir William Cecil. 33
l. 13 s. 4 d. Com. Lincoln.
Gosberkirk in the Queens hand. 74 l. 9 s. 2 d. ob. q. 3 ob. Com. Hunt.
Fletton in the hand of Roger Forest. 27 l. 0 s. 6 d. Sum. total. 733 l. 9 s. 9
d. 0. 3 pt. q. and dimid.

King Henry having taken these Lands from the Church of Peterburgh, made
provision for the Bishopric, to which he subjected the Counties of Northampton
and Rutland for his Diocese, and appointed the Abbots dwelling for the Bishops
Palace, and for his maintenance confirmed these Lands, viz. Burghbury, Eye,
Singlesholt, Northam, Witherington, Walton, Paston, Gunthorp, Southorp,
Thirlby, The Hundred of Nassaburgh. A Pasture in Park-lane of 8 Acres. 40
Acres. Sheepcotes, S. John's Yard, The Vineyard, and Toothill, Snorshills,
Edgerly 50 Acres. In Padholm 18 Acres, Eastwood 180 Acres, Westwood Burghbury
246 Acres, The Spittle. More at Eye and the Tything Barn there, Pensions from
Helpiston, Etton, Wittering; Houses and Shops in the Parish of S. Gregory,
London, and in the Parish of S. Bridget. The Advowsons of Castre, Bernack,
Paston, Polebrook, Scotter, South Collingham, The Vicaridge of S. John Baptist
in Peterburgh, The Deanery of the College at Irtlingburgh, and the Chantry
there, The Chapel of S. John, upon or adjoining to the Bridge in Stamford. For
all which the Bishop was to make to the King Annual acknowledgement by the
payment of 33l. 10s. 8d.

In this Dotation of the Bishopric, bearing date September 4. and of King
Henry 33. which was of our Lord 1541. John Chambers Hen. Isaacson in his
Chronology. page 375. B. Goodwin in J. Chambers.
the present Abbot was nominated for the Bishop (whom some will have to be
Doctor of Physic, and Dean of S. Stephen's in Westminster) and continued in
his new transformed government about the space of 15 years to the year 1556.
the 4, or 5. of Queen Mary: Although an Inscription in Brass about the Verge of
his Marble Monument bears date otherwise, for it was thus, Credo quod
redemptor meus vivit, and in novissimo die de terra surrecturus sum, and in
carne mea videbo Deum, salvatorem meum: reposita est haec spes mea in sinu meo.
Moritur die........... Anno Domini Millesimo, Quingentesimo, Tricesimo. Which
could not be, for then he must die about his second year of government, long
before the dissolution of his Abbey, when he was nominated Bishop, for Goodwin
says, he was consecrated Bishop October 23. 1541. But it is probable that
there was a mistake, which if it happened in his time, a wonder he did not reform
it; the Monument indeed might be extant in his time, for he might be careful in
providing the house of his mortality before he came to inhabit therein. At the
foot of his figure upon the same Stone was laid a plate of Brass, wherein these
Verses were engraven. En pius, en validus pastor jacet hic Johannes
Burgh, Burgo natus, ac domus hujus apex.
Cui caro, mundus, opes cesserunt, idgenus omne
Praelia divinus carnea vincit amor.
Ordinis infestos redigens sub vindice mores,
Dum comes ipse fuit, norma, locique decor.
Pauperimos ditans, lapsis peccata remittens,
Mitibus ipse pius, asperimus rigidis.
Sta, lege, funde preces, Deus est cui singula cedunt,
Dic, velit ipse dare celica regna sibi.


He had also another more stately Monument at the head of this, made of white
Chalk-stone, with his Statue exquisitely carved, lying on the top (perhaps
being Abbot, and Bishop he might have a Monument for each) but these Monuments
(habent sua fata sepulchra) were demolished Anno 1643.

There were lately some doors in the Church curiously carved with the device of
this John, thus, An Eagle, a Crosier and Mitre, a Bur-dock with Burs thereon,
and a Ro-buck, with the Letters R. O. on his side, the sum whereof was John,
Abbot or Bishop of Bur-row.

At the same time that King Henry thus established the Bishop and his Revenues,
he established also the Dean, and Chapter with theirs, of which hereafter:
Return we now to our Series of Succession.

John Chambers being dead, the Succession continued in

46 DAVID POOL,
Who was first Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, afterward Dean of the
Arches and Chancellor of the Diocese of Lichfield, and made Bishop of
Peterburgh 1556. But I find not his nomination thereunto by Queen Mary, only
the Pope's in the donation and confirmation of him in this Bishopric. For it
is sufciently known, that this Church and Kingdom of England began again to
submit to the Roman yoke, from which they had been delivered in the time of
King Edward 6. under which relapse I find the Popes power in reference to the
Church of Peterburgh to have been more practiced than ever it was before; for,
throughout the whole Series of Abbots formerly recited, I find not any Papal
election, ratification, confirmation, or any other writing, whereby the Pope
contributed any thing to the establishment of any Abbot, either to the Convent
or any other persons; but all was from the King alone, who either himself
nominated the person, or accepted of such a one as the Monks elected, whom he
ratified and confirmed in the Abbey. But now (and I suppose through the
succumbency of Q. Mary and K. Philip to the Roman Chair) this David was
presented unto, and confirmed in this Bishopric by Paul the fourth Pope of
that name; whose Letters in the behalf of Bishop David were as follows. First
for his nomination or presentation. Paulus Episcopus, servus servorum Dei,
Dilecto filio Davidi Pool Petriburgen. salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Apostolatus officium nobis meritis licet imparibus ex alto commissum, quo
Ecclesiarum omnium divina dispositione praesidemus, utiliter exequi coadjuvante
Domino cupientes solliciti cord reddimur, and solertes ut cum de Ecclesiarum
ipsarum regiminibus agitur committendis, tales eis in pastores praeficere
studeamus qui populum suae curae creditum sciant non solum doctrina verbi, sed
and exemplo boni operis informare, commissasque sibi Ecclesias velint, and
valiant auctore Domino salubriter regere, and foeliciter gubernare; dudum
siquidem provisiones Ecclesiarum omnium tunc vacantium, and in antea
vacaturarum ordinationi, and dispositioni nostrae reservavimus, decernentes
extunc irritum, and inane, si secus super hiis per quoscunque quavis
auctoritate scienter, vel ignoranter contingeret attemptari. Postmodum vero
Ecclesia Petriburgensis cui bonae memoriae Johannes Episcopus Petriburgensis
dum viveret, praesidebat, per obitum ejusdem Johannis Episcopi, qui extra
Romanam curiam debitum naturae persolvit, pastoris solatio destituta, nos
vacatione hujusmodi fide dignis relationibus intellecta, ad provisionem ejusdem
Ecclesiae, celerem, and foelicem, de qua nullus praeter nos hac vice se
intromittere potuit, sive potest, reservatis and decreto obsistentibus
supradictis, ne Ecclesia ipsa longae vacationis exponatur incommodis, paternis
and sollicitis studiis intendentes, post deliberationem quam de praesiciendo
eidem Ecclesiae personam utilem and fructuosam cum fratribus nostris habuimus
diligentem -- -- Petriburgensem, seu alterius civitatis, vel dioeceseos, legum
Doctorem de legitimo matrimonio procreatum, and in aetate legitima constitutum,
quem charissima in Christo filia nostra Maria Angliae, Franciae Regina
illustris nobis per suas literas commendavit, and cui apud nos de munditia,
honestate morum, spiritualium providentia, and temporalium circumspectione,
aliisque multiplicum virtutum donis fide digna testimonia perhibentur,
direximus oculos nostrae mentis: Quibus omnibus debita meditatione pensatis, de
persona tua, nobis, and eisdem fratribus, ob tuorum exigentiam meritorum
accepta, eidem Ecclesiae de ipsorum fratrum consilio, auctoritate Apostolica
providemus, teque illum Episcopum praeficimus, and pastorem, curam and
administrationem ipsius Ecclesiae tibi in spiritualibus and temporalibus plene
committendo, in illo qui dat gratias, and largitur praemia, confidens quod
dirigente Domino actus tuos praefata Ecclesia per tuae diligentiae laudabile
studium, regetur utiliter, and prospere dirigetur, ac grata in eisdem
spiritualibus and temporalibus suscipiet incrementa. Jugum igitur Domini tuis
impositum humeris prompta devotione suscipe, curam, and administrationem
praedictas sic exercere studeas, solicit, fideliter, and prudenter, quod
Ecclesia ipsa gubernatori provido and fructuoso administratorigaudeat se
commissam, tuque praeter aeternum retributionis praemium, nostram, and
Apostolicae benedictionem, and gratiam exinde uberius consequi merearis. Dat.
Romae apud Sanctum Petrum Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo Quingentesimo
Quinquagesimo sexto, nono Kal. Aprilis, Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo. The
other Letters were to the Church of Peterburgh for the reception of David for
their Bishop, and were as follows. Paulus Episcopus, servus servorum Dei,
dilectis filiis Vniversis Cathedralis Ecclesiae Petriburgens. salutem, and
Apostolicam ben. Hodie Ecclesiae Petriburgen. tunc per obitum bonae memoriae
Johannis olim Episcopi Petriburgen. extra Roman. curiam defuncti pastoris
solatio destitut. de persona dilecti filii electi Petriburgen. nobis, and
fratribus nostris obsuorum exigentia meritorum accepta, de fratrum eorundem
consilio Apostolica autoritate providimus, ipsumque illi in Episcopum
praefecimus, and pastorem, curam, and administrationem ipsius Ecclesiae, sibi
in spiritualibus, and temporalibus plenarie committendo, prout in nostris inde
confectis literis before continetur. Quocirca universitati vestrae per
Apostolica scripta mandamus, quatenus eundem Davidem electum devote
suscipientes, and debita honorificentia prosequentes, ei fidelitatem debitam
nec non consueta servitia and jura sibi a vobis debita exhibere integre
studeatis, alioquin sententiam sive poenam quam idem David electus rite
tulerit, in rebels ratam habebimus, and faciemus, auctore Domino, usque ad
satisfactionem condignam inviolabiliter observari. Dat. Romae apud Sanctum
Petrum Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo quingentesimo quinquagesimo
sexto, nono Kal. Aprilis, Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo.

Jo. Mathe B. Jens. Jo. Csyrinus p. m. Jo. Gunnos. Larengus. Jo. Bapt. Capata
Ant. Gibert.





Tortura Torti page 146.
To these Letters was affixed the Common Seal of Lead. But as peremptory as they
were, they could not secure David in his Bishopric from the just Authority of
the Q. Eliz. who, in the second year of her Reign, ejected him, and placed
another in his room. What became of him after his ejectment, let the late
Learned and Reverend Bishop Andrews be the Informer: for the Author of a Romish
Pamphlet, I mean Bellarmine, having charged those times with cruelty, that such
Bishops as were deposed by Queen Elizabeth, were yet more hardly used, and died
in misery: The Bishop gives us account of them, and particularly of this our
David, in these words. Polus Petriburgensis summa comitate habitus, liber
semper, Principis beneficio, and in agro suo matura aetate decessit. His
Successor in the Bishopric was

47. EDMUND SCAMBLER,
Whom some will have to have been first a Secular Priest, which we will not
stand upon. He was when he was nominated to this Bishopric, but Bachelor in
Divinity, as appears by the Queens Letter to the Church for his Election,
bearing date November 11. and second of her Reign, 1560. He was Authorized to
hold in Commendam with his Bishopric of Peterburgh a Prebendary in York, and
another in Westminster, for the space of three years by Commission from the
Queen, bearing date May 13. Anno Eliz. 3. And from Matthew Archbishop of
Canterbury, bearing the same date. But he was made Bishop something before
February (some say January) 16. being the year of our Lord 1560.

What he was for Learning, and integrity of Religion in the now reformed Church
of England wherein he was a Bishop, may appear by these Doctrinal Articles,
which in his first Episcopal Visitation he prescribed to the Dean and
Prebendaries of his Church, requiring their subscription thereunto. For as yet
the general Articles of the Church of England were not formed, until about two
years after, Jan. 29. 1562. B. Scamblers Articles were these, 1 Sacra Scriptura
in se continet omnem doctrinam pietatis, ex qua sufficienter and error convinci
possit, and veritas stabiliri. 2 Symbolum Nicaenum, Athanasii, and quod
communiter Apostolorum dicitur, continent brevissime articulos fidei nostrae
sparsim in Scripturis ostensos: qui istis non crediderint, inter veros
Catholicos non sunt recipiendi. 3 Ecclesia Christi est in qua purum Dei verbum
praedicatur, and sacramenta juxta Christi ordinationem administrantur, and in
qua clavium autoritas retinetur. 4 Quaevis Ecclesia particularis autoritatem
habet instituendi, mutandi, and abrogandi caeremonias, and ritus
Ecclesiasticos, modo ad decorem, ordinem, and aedificationem fiat. 5 Christus
tantum duo sacramenta express nobis commendat, Baptisma and Eucharistiam, quae
conferunt gratiam rite sumentibus, etiamsi malus sit Minister, and non prosunt
indigne sumentibus, quamvis bonus sit Minister. 6 Laudandus est Ecclesiae mos
baptizandi parvulos, and retinendus. 7 Coena Dominica non est tantum Symbolum
benevolentiae Christianorum interse, sed magis Symbolum est nostrae
redemptionis per Christi mortem, and nostrae conjunctionis cum Christo, ubi
fidelibus vere datur, and exhibetur Communio corporis, and sanguinis Domini. 8
Sacramentum Eucharistiae ex usu Primitivae Ecclesiae, neque servabatur vel
elevabatur, vel adorabatur. 9 Missa, quae consuevit a sacerdotibus dici, non
erat a Christo constituta, sed a multis Romany Pontificibus confirmata; nec
est Eucharistia ex se sacrificium propitiatorium, sed recordatio sacrificii
semel peracti. 10 Scholastica transubstantiatio panis and vini in corpus and
sanguinem Christi, probari non potest ex sacris literis. 11 Non omne peccatum
mortale, seu voluntario perpetratum post baptismum, est irremissibile, and
peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum. 12 Post acceptum Spiritum potest homo peccare, ac
denuo resipiscere; neque sine peccato vivit, quamvis regeneratio, in Christo
imputetur. 13 Justificatio ex sola fide est certissima doctrina Christianorum.
14 Elizabetha Regina Angliae est unicus, and supremus gubernator hujus regni,
and omnium dominiorum, and regionum suarum quarumcunque, in rebus and causis
Ecclesiasticis, quam temporalibus. 15 Verbum Dei non prohibet foeminarum
regimen, cui obediendum est juxta ordinationem Dei. 16 Romanus Pontifex nullam
habet jurisdictionem in hoc regno Angliae, nec alia quaecunque potestas
extranea. 17 Leges civiles possunt Christianos, propter flagitia, morte punire.
18 Christianis licet ex jussu Principis bella gerere, and ex justa causa and
propria possidere. 19 Doctrina scholasticorum de Purgatorio, and invocatione
Divinorum, nullum habet fundamentum ex verbo Dei. 20 Praeceptum Dei est, ut
quae leguntur in Ecclesia, illa lingua proferantur, quae ab Ecclesia
intelligatur. 21 Absque externa, and legitima vocatione non licet cuiquam sese
ingerere in aliquod ministerium Ecclesiasticum, vel seculare. 22 Matrimonium
inter Christianos legitime juxta verbum Dei initum and contractum, est
indissolubile, nec per traditiones hominum unquam vellendum. 23 Coelibatus
nulli hominum statui praecipitur, neque injungitur ministris Ecclesiae ex verbo
Dei.


Haec omnia vera esse, and public docenda profiteor, eaque juxta datam mihi
facultatem, and eruditionem tuebor, and docebo: Hancque meam confessionem manus
meae subscriptione testificor, contrariamque doctrinam abolendam esse judico,
and detestor.


By these Articles it may appear, that Bishop Scambler was no friend to the
Church of Rome, nor they to him; and whether it was for these Articles or some
other Book which he published, I find him recorded in the Roman Index of Books
prohibited, and branded with the Title of Pseudoepiscopus: But his name and
memory are the more honorable by that name of Infamy which the Papists might
cast upon the Worthies of our English Church. Scambler having been Bishop here
the space of twenty three years, was translated to Norwich, whither, he that
would know the residue of his life, end, burial, or Epitaph, must follow him,
it being without the Climate of our story. But whilst he was at Peterburgh, he
empaired the honor, privileges and revenues of his Bishopric, passing quite
away the Hundred of Nassaburgh, with the whole Liberties thereof, The Goal, The
Manor of Thirlby, The Manor of Southorpe, etc. to the Queen, from whom the
Earls of Exeter enjoy them to this day: As if King Henry had not taken away
enough, the Bishop himself would pass away more. Scambler being translated to
Norwich, there succeeded

48 RICHARD HOWLAND,
Who was Master of S. John's College in Cambridge, and made Bishop here March
16. 1584. being the 27 year of Queen Elizabeth. We have not much to say of him,
his parts, or actions, but shall enlarge this Paragraph of his being Bishop
here, with the story of Mary Queen of Scotts her death at Fotheringhay Castle,
and burial in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh. The whole progress of her
life and actions, from her first arrival in England, May 16. 1568. to her
coming to Fotheringhay, with her several places of removal, and several
keepers, is so largely related by Mr. Vdal, Mr. Saunderson and others who have
wrote her story, that I shall remit the Reader to them, and content my self
with her death and burial.

Upon the seventh day of February, 1586. (eighteen years from her first
arrival) The Commissioners for her execution came to Fotheringhay, the Earls of
Shrewsbury, Kent, etc. and Thomas The Earl of Shrewsbury was George Talbot, and
E. Marshal of England. The Earl of Kent was Henry Gray.
Andrews of -- -- Sheriff of Northamptonshire for that year. By these the Queen
of Scotts understanding that the Lease of her life was not long to last, only
one day longer, she seemed not dismayed with the Message, but told the
Commissioners, she did not think that Queen Elizabeth would have consented to
her death; but since it was so, she would most gladly embrace it, and in order
thereunto, desired of the Commissioners the benefit of her Clergy, that her
Confessor might come to her, which the Commissioners denying, propounded the
Bishop, or Dean of Peterburgh, which the Queen of Scotts refused. The
Commissioners being departed, she gave order for her Supper, at the time
whereof she drank to her servants, and comforted them, because she saw them
much troubled for her. After Supper she perused her Will, and Inventory: At her
usual hour she went to Bed, slept some part of the night, and spent the rest in
Prayer. Her fatal day being come, she arose to prepare her self for her last
lying down, when calling her servants together, she read over her Will to them,
letting them know what Legacies she had bequeathed. Then did she apparel her
self after this manner, In borrowed hair, a Bourn, having on her head a
dressing of Lawn edged with bonelace, and above that, a vail of the same, bowed
out with wire, and her Cuffs suitable: about her neck a Pomander chain, and an
Agnus Dei hanging at a black Ribband, a Crucifix in her hand, a pair of Beads
at her girdle with a golden Cross at the end. Her uppermost gown was of black
Satin, printed, training upon the ground, with long hanging sleeves, trimmed
with Akorn buttons of Jet, and Pearl, the sleeves over her arms being cut, to
give sight to a pair of purple Velvet underneath; her Kirtle, as her Gown, was
of black printed Satin: her Boddies of Crimson Satin unlaced in the back, the
skirt being of Crimson Velvet: her Stockins of Worsted, watchet, clocked and
edged at the top with silver, and under them a pair of white: Her Shoes of
Spanish Leather with the rough side outward.

Thus attired she came forth of her Chamber to the Commissioners, who were
ready in the passage to receive her, and to accompany her to the Stage whereon
she was to act the last scene of her life, making as yet no show of sadness,
until Melvin her servant presenting himself on his knees, bewailing not only
hers, but also his own misfortune, that he was to be a sad reporter to Scotland
of her death: then with some flux of tears she comforted him, that he should
shortly see the troubles of Mary Stuart have an end; sending by him her
commands to her Son, and bidding him tell him, that she had done nothing
prejudicial to his Kingdom of Scotland. Then addressing her self to the
Commissioners, she told them that she had certain requests to make to them,
viz. that a certain sum of money might be paid to one Curle her servant, which
Sir Amyas Pawlet had knowledge of. That her servants might enjoy such Legacies,
as, by her Will she had bequeathed unto them. That they might be fairly used,
and safely sent into their own Country: To the first Sir Aymas Pawlet gave his
testimony, and promise: The rest were also promised and performed. Yet said the
Queen of Scots, I have one request more to make, that you would suffer my
servants to be about me at my death, to which the Commissioners returned a
refusal, the Earl of Kent saying, that their presence would be a disturbance to
her, and besides he feared there would be some superstition practiced in
pressing to dip their handkerchiefs in her blood. My Lord, said the Queen, I
will pass my word they shall do no such things, Alas poor souls, it will do
them good to bid their Mistress farewell: Your Mistress (meaning Queen
Elizabeth) being a Maiden Queen, for womanhoods sake would not deny me this
courtesy, and I know she has not so straightened your Commission, but that you
might grant me more than this, if I were of a far meaner condition Whereupon
the Commissioners consulted, and granted her the nomination of six persons to
be with her: so she nominated four men, Melvin, her Apothecary, her Surgeon,
and another old man: And two women which used to lie in her Chamber. After this
she proceeded toward the great Hall in the Castle, Melvin bearing up her
train, two Gentlemen of Sir Amyas Pawlets, on each hand one, and Mr. Andrews
the Sheriff going before. The Scaffold at the upper end of the Hall was two
foot high and twelve foot broad, hanged with black, and she seemed to monnt it
with as much willingness, as ease, and took her seat, the Earls of Shrewsbury
and Kent standing on her right hand, Mr. Andrews the Sheriff on her left, and
the two Executioners opposite before her. Then was the Commission read by Beal
Clerk of the Council, which she seemed as little to regard, as if it had not
concerned her at all: After the reading of the Commission Doctor Fletcher Dean
of Peterburgh addressed an Exhortation to the Queen of Scots, that she would
consider her present condition, and withal, the vanity of her Religion, which
he besought her to renounce, but she refused, professing her readiness to die
therein. The Lords desiring her to join with them in prayers, she also refused,
alleging the difference in their Religions, and saying she would pray by her
self: But the Dean was by the Commissioners desired to pray, which he did in
these words.

Dr. Fletcher's Prayer.
O Most gracious God, and merciful Father, who according to the multitude of
thy mercies do so put away the sins of them that truly repent, that thou
remembrest them no more; Open, we beseech thee, thine eyes of mercy, and behold
this Person appointed unto death, whose eyes of understanding, and spiritual
light, albeit thou have hitherto shut up, that the glorious beams of thy favor
in Jesus Christ do not shine unto her, but is possessed with blindness and
ignorance of heavenly things (a certain token of thy heavy displeasure, if thy
unspeakable mercy do not triumph against thy judgment) yet O Lord our God,
impute not, we beseech thee, unto her those her offenses, which separate her
from thy mercy, and, if it may stand with thine everlasting purpose, and good
pleasure, O Lord, grant unto us, we beseech thee, this mercy, which is about
thy throne, that the eyes of her heart may be enlightened, that she may
understand, and be converted unto thee, and grant her also, if it be thy
blessed will, the heavenly comfort of thy Holy Spirit, that she may taste, and
see, how gracious the Lord is: Thou have no pleasure, good Lord, in the death
of a sinner, and no man shall praise thy Name in the pit; renew in her, O Lord,
we most humbly beseech thy Majesty, whatsoever is corrupt in her, either by her
own frailty, or by the malice of the ghostly enemy: visit her, O Lord, if it be
thy good pleasure, with thy saving health, as thou did the offender at the
side of thy Cross, with this consolation, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: say unto her soul, as thou did unto thy servant David, I am thy
salvation, so shall thy mercy, being more mighty, be more magnified. Grant
these mercies, O Lord, to us thy servants, to the increase of thy Kingdom, and
glory at this time. And further, O most merciful Father, preserve we most
humbly beseech thy Majesty, in long and honorable peace and safety, Elizabeth
thy servant, our most natural Sovereign Lady and Queen; let them be ashamed and
confounded, O Lord, that seek after her soul; let them be turned backward, and
put to confusion that wish her evil: And strengthen still, Lord, we pray thee,
the hand and balance of justice amongst us, by her gracious government: So
shall we, both now, and ever, rest under thy faithfulness and truth, as under
our shield and buckler, and bless thy Name and magnify thy mercy, which
live, and reignest one Most Gracious God, for ever and ever, Amen.

The Queens assent and attention to this prayer were withdrawn to her own
private Devotions, which she performed after the custom of her Religion out of
her own Portuary, with her Beads, and Crucifix, sometimes in the Latin, and
sometimes in the English tongue; which being ended, the two Executioners with
her women, began to disrobe her, whereat she said with a smiling countenance,
that she was never served by such grooms before, nor was she wont to put off
her clothes before such a company. Her women with a Corpus Christi cloth
wrapped up three cornerwise, covered her head and face; which done, they
departed, and the Queen was left alone to close up the Tragedy of her life by
her own self, which she did with her wonted courage, and devotion, kneeling
down upon the Cushion, and saying in Latin, In te, Domine, speravi, ne
confundar in aeternum. Then she groaped for the block, whereon she laid down
her head, crying out, In manus tuas, Domine, etc. and then the Executioner at
two strokes separated her head from her body, saving a sinew, which a third
stroke parted also: the Executioner took up the head, and showed it to the
assembly, and Dean Fletcher cried, So perish all the Queens enemies, which was
seconded by the Earl of Kent. Her head coming clear out of her dressing,
appeared very gray, as if she had been much elder than she was, it was polled
very short, which made her (as has been said) to wear borrowed hair. The
Executioner that went about to pluck off her Stockins, found her little Dog
crept under her Coat, which being put from thence, went, and laid himself down
betwixt her head and body, and being besmeared with her blood, was caused to be
washed, as were other things whereon any blood was. The Executioners were
dismissed with Fees, not having any thing that was hers. Her body with the
head, was conveyed into the great Chamber by the Sheriff, where it was by
Surgeons Embalmed until its Interment.

The Castle of Fotheringhay was at that time by Lease from Queen Elizabeth in
the hands of Sir William Fitz-Williams of Milton in the same County who was one
of the Queens Pensioners, who by reason of his relation to the place, was sent
to by the Commissioners that he should come and guard them in his Castle, this
was required of him the first time that the Commissioners came, in October
before, for the Queens Examination, and Trial: but Sir William Fitz-Williams
refusing, because he was not summoned by order from the Queen; the
Commissioners procured such order, and by virtue thereof summoned him again,
which he obeyed: This gave him opportunities of visiting sometimes the Queen of
Scots, and conversing with her, wherein he deported himself with such
respective civility and courtesy, that the Queen a little before her death,
gave him many thanks, and told him she had nothing to requite his kind usage
withal, but if he pleased to accept of her Sons picture hanging at her
Beds-head, he should take it, which he did, and his Successors do still enjoy
it.

Thus died Mary the unfortunate Queen of Scots (a woman for her parts, fit to
be a Queen) in the six and fortieth year of her age, and the eighteenth of her
continuance in England, in a fair possibility of spinning the thread of her
life to a greater length, had fate been as propitious to her as nature.

We shall follow the remainder of this great Personage, her body, to the Earth,
and so leave her.

The Manner of the Solemnity of the Scottish Queens Funeral, being the first of
August, 1587. when she was buried in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh.
Upon Tuesday being the first of August were the Funerals appointed to be
celebrated for the Scottish Queen in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh, and
accordingly there were sent thither from the Court, the Queens household
Officers, to make preparation for the Diet, Mr. Dorrel and Mr. Cox, for the
Funeral Offices Mr. Fortescue Master of the great Wardrobe: The Heralds came
down three or four days before, and appointed (together with the Bishop and the
Dean) the place for the body to be Interred, which was devised over against the
lying of Queen Katherine, near to the Tomb of John last Abbot, and first Bishop
of that Church. There was a rich Hearse erected above the first step of the
Quire, near to the place of the burial, and the whole Quire and Church were
hanged with black. Upon Sunday at night the thirtieth of July, the body was
brought by Torch-light from the Castle of Fotheringhay (where it had lain since
the time of Execution, being the eighth of February before) by Garter King at
Arms, and other Heralds, with some number of Horse, in a Chariot made of
purpose, covered with black Velvet, and adorned with her Ensigns accordingly,
between one and two of the Clock in the night: where attended for it before the
Church, the Bishop of Peterburgh, and the Dean of the Cathredral Church, the
Master of the Wardrobe, Clarentius King at Arms, and diverse, as well of her
Majesty's Servants, as other persons; There came with the body, six of the
Scottish Train, as Melvin, the Master of her Household, and Physician, and
others: the body with the closures weighed nine hundred weight, which being
carried, and attended orderly by the said persons, was committed to the ground
in the Vault appointed, and immediately the Vault was covered, saving a small
h^^e left open for the Staves to be broken into. There was at that time (...)
Offices of the Church Service done, the Bishop (...) have executed therein, but
it was by all that were (...) Scottish as others, thought good, and agreed,
(...) be done, at the day, and time of solemnity. Upon (...) in the afternoon,
came to Peterburgh, all the Lords, and Lad^^^, and other Assistants appointed,
and at the Bishops Palace was prepared a great Supper for them, where all at
one Table supped in the great Chamber being hanged with Black, where was a
State set on the right side thereof of purple Velvet. Upon Tuesday morning, the
chief Mourners, Lords, and Ladies, and other Assistants being ready, about ten
of the clock they marched from the Hall of the Bishops Palace, as follows.

The Countess of Bedford Chief Mourner.
The Earl of Rutland. The Earl of Lincoln. The Countess of Rutland. The
Countess of Lincoln. The Bishop of Peterburgh. The Bishop of Lincoln. L. Dudley
L. Chamberlain. L. S. John of Basing L. Stew. L. Willoughby of Parham. L.
Compton. L. Mordaunt. The Dean of Peterburgh. Lady Mordaunt. Lady Talbot. Lady
Dudley. Lady S. John of Basing. Lady S. John of Bletshoe. Lady Mary Savel. Lady
Cecil. Lady Mountague. Lady Nowel. Lady Manors. Mrs. Allington as a Lady. 8.
Scottish Gentlewomen. Sr. Tho Cecil. Sr. Tho. Manors. Sr. Edw. Mountague. Sr.
George Hastings. Sr. Richard Knightly. Sr. Andrew Nowell. Sr. George Savel. Sr.
James Harrington. Mr. John Manors as a Knight. 18. Scottish Gentlemen. Diverse
Esquires with Gent. 2 Kings at Arms Garter. Clarentius. 5. Heralds at Arms. An
hundred poor women.
The solemnity being settled, the Prebends, and the Quire, which received them
at the Church door, sung an Antheme, the Scottish, all, saving Mr. Melvin,
departed, and would not tarry at Sermon, or Ceremonies. The Bishop of Lincoln
preached, Wickham.
out of that 39. Psalm 5, 6, 7 ver. Lord let me know mine end, etc. Who shall
gather them, etc. In the Prayer, when he gave thanks for such as were
translated out of this vale of misery, he used these words: Let us give thanks
for the happy dissolution of the High and Mighty Princess Mary late Queen of
Scotland, and Dowager of France, of whose life and death, at this time, I have
not much to say, because I was not acquainted with the one, neither was I
present at the other: I will not enter into judgment further, but because it
has been signified unto me that she trusted to be saved by the blood of
Christ, we must hope well of her Salvation: For, as Father Luther was wont to
say, many one that lives a Papist, dies a Protestant. In the discourse of his
Text, he only dealt with general doctrine of the vanity of all flesh. The
Sermon ended, the offering of the Chief Mourner and hatchments were received by
the Bishop of Peterburgh, and the offerings of the rest, by the Dean, which
ended, the mourners departed; The Ceremony of burial was done by the Dean, the
Officers breaking their Staves, and casting them into the vault upon the
Coffin: And so they departed to the Bishops house, where was a great Feast
appointed accordingly: The concourse of people was of many thousands, and after
dinner the Nobles departed away every one toward his own home. The Master of
the Wardrobe paid to the Church for the breaking of the ground in the Quire and
making the grave 10l. And for the blacks of the Quire and Church 20l.

When Cardinal Barbarini, afterward Pope Urban 8. wrote his Poem upon this
Queens death, wherein he has this, Regalique tuum funus honor caret, etc.
either he was ignorant of this her manner of interment, or else he undervalued
it, as not suitable to her quality.

This relation was attested in a Church Register by Dean Fletcher himself,
subscribing his name thereunto: to which (especially that of the Sermon) we may
give more credit than to Martin Mar-Prelate, who, to slander the Bishops of
England with Popery in a railing Pamphlet which he entitled an Epistle,
charged the Bishop of Lincoln with praying at this solemnity, That his Soul,
and the Souls of all the rest there present might be with the Soul of that
unrepentant Papist departed. Though the Bishop, as became a charitable
Christian, might hope well of her Salvation, yet who but Martin again would
accuse him of being so credulous, as to bind up his own Salvation in so
confident an assurance of hers?

Shortly after this interment, there was a table hanged up against the wall,
which contained this Inscription. Maria Scotorum Regina, Regis filia, Regis
Gallorum.
Vidua, Reginae Angliae Agnata, and Haeres proxima:
Virtutibus Regiis, and animo Regio ornata, jure Regio
Frustra saepius implorato, barbara, and tyrannica
Crudelitate ornamentum nostri seculi, and lumen
Vere Regium extinguitur: Eodem nefario judicio
Et Maria Scotorum Regina morte naturali, and omnes
Superstites Reges, plebeii facti, morte civili mulctantur.
Novum, and inauditum tumuli genus, in quo, cum vivis
Mortui includuntur, hic extat: Cum sacris enim Divae
Mariae cineribus, omnium Regum, atque Principum vio*
latam, atque prostratam Majestatem hic jacere scito:
Et quia tacitum Regale satis superque Reges sui
Officii monet, plura non addo, Viator.


Which in English may be rendered thus. Mary Queen of Scots, daughter of a King,
Widow of the King of France, Cousin, and next heir to the Queen of England,
adorned with Royal virtues, and a Royal mind (the right of Princes being
oftentimes in vain implored) by barbarous, and Tyrannical cruelty, the ornament
of our age and truly Royal light, is extinguished. By the same unrighteous
judgment, both Mary Queen of Scots, with natural death, and all surviving Kings
(now made common persons) are punished with civil death. A strange and unusual
kind of monument this is, wherein the living are included with the dead: For,
with the sacred ashes of this blessed Mary, know, that the Majesty of all
Kings, and Princes, lies here violated, and prostrate. And because Regal
secrecy does enough and more admonish Kings of their duty, Traveller, I say no
more.

This Table continued not long, but was taken away, and cast aside, by whose
hand, or order I know not, yet the Royal Ensigns of an Helmet, Sword, and
Scutcheon remained to the year 1643. hanging high over the place of her burial,
yet did not their height secure them from the storms, which then fell upon this
Church, and Monuments.

After that the body of this Queen had rested in this place the space of 25
years, her Son King James being minded to remove it to Westminster, wrote to
the Church of Peterburgh, as follows.

JAMES R.

Rich. Neile.
TRusty, and well-beloved, we greet you well: for that we think it appertains to
the duty we owe to our dearest Mother, that like honor should be done to her
Body, and like Monument be extant of Her, as to others, Hers, and our
Progenitors have been used to be done, and our selves have already performed to
our dear Sister the late Queen Elizabeth, we have commanded a memorial of her
to be made in our Church of Westminster, the place where the Kings and Queens
of this Realm are usually interred: And for that we think it inconvenient, that
the Monument, and Her body should be in several places, we have ordered that
her said Body remaining now interred in that our Cathedral Church of Peterburgh
shall be removed to Westminster to her said monument: And have committed the
care, and charge of the said translation of her body from Peterburgh to
Westminster to the Reverend Father in God, our right trusty, and well-beloved
servant the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield bearer hereof, to whom, we require
you (or to such as he shall assign) to deliver the Corpse of our said dearest
Mother, the same being taken up in as decent, and respectful manner as is
fitting. And for that there is a Pall now upon the Hearse over Her Grave, which
will be requisite to be used to cover Her said Body in the removing thereof,
which may perhaps be deemed as a Fee that should belong to the Church, we have
appointed the said Reverend Father to pay you a reasonable redemption for the
same; which being done by him, we require you that he may have the Pall to be
used for the purpose aforesaid.

Given under our Signet at our Honor of Hampton Court, the eight and twentieth
day of September. in the tenth year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland,
and of Scotland the six and fortieth.

In obedience to this Letter the Body of the Queen of Scots was taken up the
eleventh of October following, in the year of our Lord, 1612. and translated to
Westminster, where we shall leave Her, and return to our succession of the
Bishops of Peterburgh.

Howland having been Bishop here the space of 15 years, died at Castor, and was
buried in his own Cathedral at the upper end of the Quire. And there succeeded

49. THOMAS DOVE
Who was Dean of Norwich, and Chaplain to Queen Elizabeth, who had so good
esteem of him for his excellency in preaching, reverend aspect and deportment,
that she was wont to call him The Dove with silver wings. He entered upon his
Bishopric in the year 1600. and continued therein the space of 30 years.
During which time, he was, like S. Paul's Bishop, a lover of Hospitality,
keeping a very free house, and having always a numerous Family, yet was he so
careful of posterity, that he left a fair estate to his Heirs. He died upon the
30 of August 1630. in the 75 year of his age, and lies buried in the North
cross Isle of the Church. Over his body was erected a very comely Monument of a
long quadrangular form, having four corner pilasters supporting a fair Table of
black Marble, and, within, the pourtraiture of the Bishop lying in his
Episcopal habit. At the feet on the outside were these Inscriptions. Si
quaeras, viator, quo hospite glorietur elegans haec mortis domus, ipsa prose
loquetur, ipsa pro illo, quae ideo loqui didicit, ut sciant illi qui eo
ingratitudinis inhumaniter obriguerunt, ut in manes, in urnas saevire studeant,
non defuturam saxis linguam quae doceat de mortuis been loqui. Vindex hoc, and
pium marmor sacros cineres tegit, and sanctiorem memoriam protegit (Charissimum
utrumque pignus redituri Domini.) Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Thomae Dove,
quem novit Waldenum Ecclesiasten doctissimum, Nordovicum Decanum
vigilantissimum, haec ipsa Ecclesia Episcopum piissimum, cui, postquam trigint
a annis magno cum honor praefuisset, ad magnum illum animarum Episcopum
transmigravit: Bonus pastor translatus ab ovibus in terris ad Agnum in coelis,
quocum regnabit in secula. Hoc me loqui voluit Gulielmus Dove, Equ. Aur. Optimi
hujus patris filius natu-maximus, honoris, and pietatis

ergo.

Carmine non pous est, sat sat praestabit abunde,
Si sat flere potest officiosus amor.
Vixt Epitaphium sibi: Te sprevisse (Poeta)
Quam facile poterit, qui been vixit? Abi.
Atque abeo: durum est numeris aptare dolorem
Atque aequo lachrymas currere posse pede.
Me muto, tibi non poterunt monumenta deesse,
Vivum quem soboles tam numerosa refert.
Hoc addam: Hic illa est senio argentata Columba
Davidis, coelos hinc petit ille suos.
Dixi: Musa loquax tanto non apta dolori
Si non flere satis nostra, silere potest.


But this Monument was in the year 1643. levelled with the ground, so that
Bishop Dove's Epitaph, in stead of Marble, must now live in paper.

50. WILLIAM PEIRSE
Being Canon of Christ's Church in Oxford, and Dean of Peterburgh, was made
Bishop after the death of Dove, and installed Nov. 14. A man of excellent
parts, both in Divinity, and knowledge of the Laws: very vigilant and active he
was, for the good both of the Ecclesiastical, and Civil State; and had he
continued longer in this See, he would have rectified many things then amiss:
But he was translated to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells after two years
presidency at Peterburgh.

51. AUGUSTINE LINDSELL
Was Dean of Lichfield, and upon the translation of Peirse, made Bishop of this
Diocese, being elected December 22. 1632. and installed by Proxy, Febr. 25.
following. He was a man of very great learning, and gave sufficient evidence
thereof to the Church by setting forth that excellent edition of Theophylact
upon. S. Paul's Epistles, which work will make his name and worth live, and be
honored among all learned Divines, Foreign and Domestic. In his time the
Parsonage of Castor was annexed to the Bishopric to be held in Commendam,
which was effected by W. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, as he left recorded in
his Diary. When he had been Bishop here the space of two years, he was
translated to Hereford, and shortly after ended his life to the greatloss of
the Church of England.

52. FRANCIS DEE
Was taken from his Deanery of Chichester, and made Bishop here, being elected
April 9. 1634. and in May 28. following installed by Proxy. He was a man of
very pious life, and affable behavior. After he had with much diligence and
honesty, meekness and hospitality gloriously shined in his Ecclesiastical Orb
here the space of four years and six months, he died, much lamented, October 8.
1638. bequeathing by his will toward the reparation of his Cathedral Church
the sum of an hundred pounds, and lies buried in the upper part of the Quire
near to his Episcopal Seat.

53. JOHN TOWERS
Being Dean of this Church, ascended the other step, and was made Bishop after
the death of Dee, being installed March. 8. 1638. He enjoyed his Bishopric in
peace a very little while, for presently great dissensions arose betwixt the
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which occasioned the Bishops attendance
upon the King, both in the North at York, and at London in time of Parliaments,
that which was convened, April 13. 1640. and dissolved May 5. following (the
Convocation sitting by the Kings express Commission until May 29, wherein the
new Canons were made) and that also which began the same year, November 3. and
was of a far longer continuance: On August 5. this year the great Commission
for draining the Fenns began to be holden at Peterburgh, the Commissioners
sitting in the Bishops great Hall until the 11. of the same month, the
determinations therein being since known by the name of Peterburgh Law. On the
third of November following a new Parliament began to sit, Bishop Towers,
according to his place, giving attendance there; In the year following arose
great opposition against Bishops, as to their Office, and power in having Votes
in Parliament, insomuch that many of them apprehending their insecurity in
attending upon the House (much opposition meeting them in the way) some of
them, to the number of twelve, drew up a Protestation against all such Laws,
Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and determinations, as in themselves, null, and of
none effect, which in their absence from December 27. 1641. had passed, or
should afterward pass, during the time of their forced absence from the House
of Lords: which Protestation so heightened the displeasure against them, that
those twelve Bishops were charged with High Treason, and committed to the
Tower. Only Bishop Morton, and B. Hall to the Black Rod. Of those twelve
Bishops, The other 11 were Williams Archbishop of York. Morton B. of
Duresme-Wright B. of Coventry and Lichfield. Owen B. of Asaph. Peirse B. of
Bath and Wells. Cook B. of Hereford. Skinner B. of Oxf. Wren. B. of Ely. Owen
B. of Landaffe. Goodman B. of Gloucester. Hall B. of Norwich.
John Towers Bishop of Peterburgh was one, continuing under restraint some 4 or
5 months, and being enlarged, returned to his bare Palace of Peterburgh, where
(although his revenues were taken away yet) he enjoyed but little quiet, or
security, being continually alarmed by threatenings and molestations which
caused him to fly to Oxford, then the Kings Garrison, under which shelter he
continued until it was surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax, and then, (on June 29.
1646.) Bishop Towers came again to his own dwelling at Peterburgh. But then did
other troubles draw nearer to him, sicknesses and diseases, which prevailed
upon him until they had brought him to his dissolution, which happened January
10. 1648. twenty days before his great Master King Charles, and he was buried
the day following in the Grave of Abbot Henricus de Morcot, as has been said
before.

His eminency in his Bishopric was more illustrious by his being passive than
active in the dispensation of his Office, the times not digesting such zeal in
the way of conformity to the Church of England, as he was endowed withal: yet
did he Preach as often as occasion required, wherein he was so excellently
qualified, as that he had but few equals, and fewer superiors in his time.

He was earnest in his zeal to the house of God, a testimony whereof he gave
long before he had relation to the Church of Peterburgh, which I have heard
from his own mouth, and it was this: King James using to visit Castle-Ashby,
the Seat and Mansion of the Earls of Northampton, where Dr. Towers was Parson,
It was the custom of those household Officers which belonged to the Wardrobe, to
use the Chancel of the Parish Church for a Wardrobe, King James not knowing any
thing thereof: Dr. Towers being to Preach before the King, in his Sermon spoke
something in signification thereof, which King James apprehending, and laying
up, he questioned Dr. Towers presently after Sermon about it. D. Towers
acquainting him with the abuse, and that he thought himself bound in conscience
to say what he had said: The King was so far from being displeased, that he
thanked him for his honest boldness, and gave order for the remedying of that
abuse. Presently after the death of Bishop Towers, the purchasers of his
Episcopal Palace began to demolish it, and the first place they laid their
hands on, was the Chapel, Jan. 29.

John Towers being dead, the Church of Peterburgh continued under an
Inter-Episcopate for the space of a dozen years (although the Bishop was made
but a Cipher some years before) until it pleased the Sun of Divine mercy to
dispel that black cloud which had so long Eclipsed the glory both of Church and
State, by the happy, (and never to be forgotten) restoration of His Sacred
Majesty King Charles the Second, to his just Rights, who out of His pious care
for this Church, appointed

54 BENJAMIN LANY
Dr. in Divinity, Dean of Rochester, and Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge,
whose election was November 20. 1660. and Installation December. 21. His
Presidency here was not long, nor his Hand short in expressing its benevolence
toward the repairing of the Cathedral Church. His removal was to the
Bishopric of Lincoln, 1662. And his Successor

55. JOSEPH HENSHAW
Dr. in Divinity, and Dean. of Chichester was elected April 15. 1663. and
Installed May 28. being Ascension day.

Thus having set down the Succession of the Abbots, and Bishops of this
Cathedral Church, we shall now apply our selves to the other Ecclesiastic
Government, viz. The Dean and Chapter, which K. Henry founded at the
dissolution of Abbyes.

This he constituted of a Dean, and six Prebendaries, to be exempt from the
Bishop of Lincoln, and his Jurisdiction, and also distinct from the Bishop of
Peterburgh, and to be an entire Ecclesiastical Corporation of themselves. Their
temporal jurisdiction in such Manors, Lands and Rents as were assigned to
them, was like that of the Abbots formerly, as their Successors therein. To the
Dean and Prebends, all other Officers and Members were subordinate, and this
was the Original Constitution and foundation of the whole.

The Dean l. s. d. Six Prebendaries Priests l. s. d. Eight Petty Canons l. s.
d. These were afterward taken away, the King releasing them for Stanwigge and
Polebrook.
Four Students in Divinity l. s. d. Eight Clerks, or singing-men, l. s. d. An
Epistoler l. s. d. A Ghospeller l. s. d. Two Sextons l. s. d. Eight Choristers
l. s. d. A Master of Choristers l. s. d. Twenty Scholars at the Grammar School
l. s. d. Six Alms-men or Beads-men l. s. d. The Head-Master of the
Grammar School l. s. d. The Usher l. s. d. A Yearly distribution in Alms. l.
s. d. For the Yearly reparation of the Cathedral l. s. d. This was taken off in
time of K Edw. 6.
For making and mending of Highways. l. s. d. A Steward of the Lands l. s. d.
Auditor of the Accounts l. s. d. Two Porters, l. s. d. Principal Cook l. s. d.
Under-Cook l. s. d. Butler l. s. d. Purveyor l. s. d. Receiver of the Rents l.
s. d. For extraordinary expenses Yearly l. s. d. Organist l. s. d. Sub-Dean l.
s. d. Sub-Treasurer l. s. d. Chantor l. s. d. Two Counselors in Law l. s. d.
Solicitor l. s. d. Register l. s. d. Principal Steward l. s. d. Keeper of the
Cloak. l. s. d.

These were the Officers and dependents of this Church, amongst which the
Revenues were to be distributed. But I have not yet met with any Authentic
Copy for all these, save only the Dean and six Prebendaries. The rest I find in
several Transcripts, which vary one from another, that whether they were all
fixed by authority, or some left to the discretion of the Governors of the
Church, to be changed as occasion served, I cannot justly say.

The Lands and Rents assigned to this foundation were, first, the whole site or
bounds of the Monastery (excepting such as were allotted to the Bishop) wherein
were many dwelling houses assigned to several places, as to the Dean,
Prebendaries, and Churchmen such as performed daily service in the Church,
which were set forth by the Kings Commission bearing date, July 20. 1541. The
Revenues for the Dean and Chapter, with such offices and places as were
subordinate were these.

In Northamptonshire.
l. s. d. Manor of Peterburgh rated Yearly at 127 07 00 ob. Manor of
Longthorp 41 16 11 q. Manor of Castre 51 10 07 q. Manor of Sutton 17 00 4
Manor of Glinton and Peikirk 63 15 00 Manor of Maxey 19 04 00 Manor of
Northburgh 07 08 01 Manor of Stamford S. Martins 18 11 03 ob. Manor of
Irtlingburgh 33 05 11 ob. Manor of Stanwigge 25 08 00 ob. Manor of Polebrook
40 08 01 ob. q. Leicestershire.
l. s. d. Manor of Eston and Bringhurst 92 06 01 q. Lincolnshire.
l. s. d. Manor of Fiskerton 68 15 03 ob. Manor of Repham, Scothern, Sudbrook
40 09 10 Manor of Scotter 49 04 06 Manor of Walcot 06 18 01 Manor of
Grantham 00 12 08 Stamford beyond the Bridge 00 07 00 Boston 00 10 00 Manor of
Careby 00 07 00 Liberty or Hundred of Scotter 03 08 04 Nottingham-shire.
l. s. d. Manor of North-Collingham and South-Coll. 85 19 5 Huntingtonshire.
l. s. d. Manor of Botolphbridge, and Overton 07 12 00 Manor of Alwalton 39
10 05 Sum. total. 811 16 01 q.

Out-Rents in other places not comprehended in the former values.
Fishing in Wittlesmere 03 13 04 Fishing in Woland 01 13 04 Fishing in the
Water of Vpwell Com. Norf. 00 02 04 Fishing in the River Nene 07 00 00

Advowsons and Presentations of Churches belonging to the Dean, and Chapter.
Peikirk, Northburgh, Stanwigge, Alwalton, Fiskerton, Irtlingburgh, All Saints,
Vicaridges of Maxey, North-Collingham, Bringhurst. Stanwigge Parsonage was
afterward taken away with the Manor.


Portions or Pensions from several Churches.
Castre 05 00 00 Peikirk 01 18 00 Northburgh 00 10 00 Bernack 05 10 00
Irtlingburgh 01 13 04 Stanwigge 01 16 08 South-Collingham 01 00 00 Polebrook 01
00 00 Fiskerton 00 15 00 Scotter 02 00 00 Careby 00 07 00 Thornhaw 00 03 00
Vfford 00 16 08 Woodford, and Stoke Doile 02 08 08

Churches Appropriate.
Maxey, Eston, North-Collingham.

In these Lands the Dean and Chapter of Peterburgh enjoyed such privileges as
commonly Lords of Manors used to do. Yet was there one special privilege
which the Abbots from ancient times enjoyed, and executed, and by the Grant of
King Henry, and also by Queen Elizabeth, January 29. and third of her Reign,
confirmed unto the Dean and Chapter a Privilege known of late days by the name
of Non molestandum, that is, a freedom from payment of Tolls and Customs in
all Fairs, Markets, passages of Bridges, Ways, Ports, in and without the Realm
of England. This the Dean and Chapter of Peterburgh had power to grant to their
Tenants, and there are some living, who reap benefit by this Non molestandum;
at this very day; this privilege having been granted unto them, when the Dean
and Chapter were in power so to do: And whosoever should act contrary to this
Privilege, was to incur the penalty of ten pounds. And by her general
Inspeximus bearing date July 9. in the ninth year of her Reign Anno 1567. she
confirmed all the Lands and Privileges of this Church.

What Religious care the late King Charles had for the augmentation of the Dean
and Prebendaries, with other Stipendiaries belonging to this Church, shall be
seen in the close of our Appendix.

The Succession of this Ecclesiastical body from the first Constitution thereof
by King Henry, was thus, the first in each being particularly nominated in King
Henry's Charter.

DEANS.
1 Francis Abree, Prior of Northampton, Bachelor in Divinity, was made Dean
1541. 2 Gerard Carlton, Bachelor in Divinity, 1543. 3 James Curtop, Master of
Arts. 4 John Boxhall, Doctor of Law. 5 William Latimer, Doctor in Divinity
1560. In his time the Cathedral was by a great Peer begged of Queen Elizabeth
to build him an House, upon Information to the Queen that it was ruinous, and
no Prayers said therein: but Dean Latimer recovered it by the Queens favor,
upon better Information. 6 Richard Fletcher, Doctor in Divinity 1585.
translated hence to the Bishopric of Bristol, thence to Worcester, thence to
London. 7 Thomas Nevil, Doctor in Divinity 1590. first Master of
Magdalen-Colledge, and after of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where he built
that stately back Court commonly known by his Name. 8 John Palmer, Doctor in
Divinity 1598. was Master of Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge. 9 Richard Cleyton
Doctor in Divinity 1608. first Master of Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge, then
of S. John's. 10 George Meriton, Doctor in Divinity 1612. 11 Henry Beamount,
Doctor in Divinity 1616. 12 Guil. Pierse, Dr. in Divinity, Canon of
Christ-Church in Oxford, made Dean 1622. translated to the Bishopric of
Peterburgh, afterward to Bath and Wells. 13 John Towers, Doctor in Divinity
1630. translated to the Bishopric of this Church. 14 Thomas Jackson, Doctor in
Divinity 1638. President of Corpus-Christi College in Oxford. He lives, and
will live in his learned Works to the Worlds end. 15 John Cousin, Doctor in
Divinity 1640. Master of S. Peter's College in Cambridge, preferred to the
Bishopric of Durham. 16 Edward Rainbow, Doctor in Divinity, and Master of
Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge, installed Dean of this Church, Jan. 5. 1660.
Advanced to the Bishopric of Carlisle, to which he was consecrated July 10.
1664. 17 James Duport, Doctor in Divinity, of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge,
Installed July 27. following.
The Succession of the Prebendaries was as follows.

In the first PREBEND.
Matthew Whittall, D. D. A secular Priest. Howeton. Peter. Anthony Burton, M.
A. Robert Rodes, B. D. William Bailey, B. D. William Smith, B. D. Tobias Bland,
B. D. Sub-Almoner to Q. Eliz. and Parson of Abbot Rippon, Com. Hunt. John
Bridgeman, D. D. removed to the Bishopric of Chester. John Williams, D. D.
removed to the Bishopric of Lincoln. October. 11. 1621. He wrote himself John
Lincoln elect C. Sigilli, whilst he was Prebendary here.
Thomas Swift, B. D. Parson of Waddington, Com. Lincoln. Simon Gunton, M. A.
Cambr.
In the second PREBEND.
William Judd, B. D. A Monk of the place. Edwin Sands, D. D. William Binsley,
L. D. Edwin Sands, restored, being ejected by Q. Mary, or withdrawing himself,
as others did in her days. Nicolas Shepherd, D. D. William Hill, M. A. Edward
Lively. Robert Williamson, D. D. Parson of Tichmarsh Com. Northampton. Robert
Williamson, D. D. Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon. John Howorth, B. D. President of
Magd. Coll. Cantabr. afterward D. D. and Mr. of the same College. William
Henchman, M. A. Parson of Barton Com. Northampton. Cambr.
In the third PREBEND.
Robert Pierson, T. B. A Monk of the place. Christopher Hodgson, B. A. Edward
Baker, Cler. James Howland, M. A. William Bailey, B. D. Edward Marshal, T. B.
Parson of Wimple Com. Cantab. Warner Marshall, M. A. Parson of Castor.
Sebastian Smith, M. A. Oxon. Abraham Jackson, M. A. William Louch, M. A. Oxon.
In the fourth PREBEND.
John Barlow, M. A. Nicolas Murrey, L. B. Miles Johnson, James Ellis, L. D.
Richard Cleyton, D. D. Richard Cleyburne, D. D. John Pocklyngton, D. D. William
Towers, B. D. Oxon. Thomas Greaves, D. D.
In the fifth PREBEND.
John Cheyney Prior, Pollard, B. D. Richard Kay. B. D. Thurstane Murry. Nicolas
Brown, B. D. Henry Williamson, B. D. Thomas Dove, M. A. Archdeacon of
Northampton. Henry Smith, D. D. Mr. of Magd. Coll. Cambr. William Halls, M. A.
In the sixth PREBEND.
Richard White, A Monk of the place. Isham, M. A. William Binsley. Robert
Johnson, B. D. Richard Smith, B. D. John Aungier, L. D. Robert Summer, M. A.
now Parson of Northburgh. John Wyldbore, M. A. Parson of Wittering. Thomas
Lany, B. D. John Whitehall.
I have now no more to do to the body of our story but to present the Reader
with a relation of some few Monuments with their Inscriptions, not yet
mentioned, and then the story of this Church will arrive at its period.

But before I give the relation of the Monuments of this Church, I shall let
the Reader know when, and by whom they were destroyed. In the year 1643. the
Town of Croyland was, by the inhabitants thereof, made a Garrison for the King,
which they had great reason to do, not only to show themselves good Subjects,
but good Tenants, they holding their Lands of him. In the month of April, on
the 18 day, came the Parliament-Forces to Peterburgh in order to the besieging
of Croyland, and here having settled themselves in their Quarters, they fell to
execute their fury upon the Cathedral, destroying all things as the malicious
Eye of each Sectarian Varlet prompted him to do mischief, beating down the
Windows, defacing the Monuments, tearing the Brass from Grave-stones,
plundering of Vestments, Records, and whatsoever else came to hand, which
nothing could resist: Their Commanders, of whom Cromwell was one, if not acting,
yet not restraining the Soldiers in this heat of their fury.

But some two or three days after, a finger of divine vengeance touched
Cromwell, (although his rabble and he would not see it). For, being at that time
quartered in the house of Mr. Cervington, commonly called the Vineyard, at the
East end of the Cathedral, out of the Court of which dwelling, there was a
passage into the Churchyard (which since is mured up) ascending by 3 or 4
Stonesteps, Cromwell, (as others did) riding up those steps, his Horse fell
under him, and rising suddenly under the lintels of the door, dashed his head
against the lintels, so that he fell to the ground as dead, was so carried into
the house, and it was about a fortnight ere he could be recovered: those who
were eyewitnesses affirmed that the blow raised splinters in his Scalp near a
fingers length. But yet the siege of Croyland went on, and on the 28 of April
the Town was taken, on the 5 of May. Cromwell with his Forces marched to
Stamford, and other places, leaving the abomination of desolation in this
Church behind them. And now I shall give an account of such Monuments as were
in the Church before their coming, and have been added since.

I shall begin at the Nave, or body of the Church, where I shall omit such as
are broken, and worn out, as not to be completely rendered: Many also as bear
only names, and dates of burial, which will give but little content to any that
should read them.

As you enter into the Church, high above, on the left hand, stands the figure
of R. Scarlet once a Sexton of this Church, one that was famous in his
generation, as may be collected by what is under written.

You see old Scarlet's picture stand on high,
But at your feet there does his body lie.
His gravestone does his age, and death time show,
His Office by these tokens you may know.
Second to none for strength, and sturdie Limme,
A scare-babe mighty voice, with visage grimm:
He had interred two Queens within this place;
And this towns Householders in his live space,
Twice over: But at length his own turn came,
What he for others did, for him the same
Was done: No doubt his Soul does live for ay
In Heaven, though here his body clad in clay.
Joining to a Pillar on the Northside stood a comely Font, the water whereof,
though it purged many, yet it could not purge this Vessel, in the opinion of
those that brake it down, 1643.

Against the Cloister door are some ancient Inscriptions, only this perfect,
besides that of Garton formerly mentioned in Abbot Richard Ashton.

Aswalton natus jacet hic Henricus humatus.
Presbiter ornatus, cui solvas Christ reatus.
Something beyond toward the upper end, lies a fair marble of late adorned
with the figure of the deceased, in Brass, and on a Edward 3. Anno 46.
Plate round about, Hic jacet tumulatus Robertus de Thorp Miles, There was one
Sir W. Thorpe, L. Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, who for Bribery was
condemned to be hanged. Anno Edw. 3. 24. 22. y. before this Robert.
quondam Cancellarius Domini Regis Angliae, qui obiit vicesimo nono die Junii,
Anno Domini Millesimo, trecentesimo, septuagesimo secundo, Cujus animae
propitietur Deus, Amen.

By his side is another fair Marble which carried this Inscription, Hic jacet
tumulatus -- -- miles, filius Domini Willielmi de Thorpe, qui moriebatur apud
Tou'ton Wat'vyle die Jovis, xo. die Augusti, Anno Domini Millesimo,
trecentesimo LXXV. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

On the left hand is a Marble bearing the figure of a cross legged Knight,
after the manner of the Templers with a dog at his feet; lately the Brass was
divorced from the Marble; and Senour Gascelin de Marham stripped of his
Monumental bravery.

A little above, Here lies the Body of William Leafield sometimes Edwardi 3.
Anno 49.
Inhabitant of this City who departed this life, January 22. Anno Domini 1625.

Near unto, lies one that was taken away in his budding, his name and quality
may be seen in the Inscription.

Robertus Carrier Subter, and Supra.
Anno Dom. 1651. Aetat. 19. Grad. Bacc. 1. November. 24.

Not far from this is one later, who may be mentioned as another Siphrah both
in function and piety. Here lies the Body of Jane Parker, the wife of
Valentine Parker, She departed this life, Sept. 19. day, 1653.

Here lies a Midwife brought to bed,
Deliveresse delivered;
Her body being churched here,
Her Soul thanks gives in yonder Spheer.
A little higher, lies a fair Marble which acts the second part of Niobe,
weeping for many figures of Brass which it has lately forgone, if the
Inscription may be thought worth the weeping for.

Siste gradum, mortale meum speculare Sepulchrum,
Hic ego qui jaceo sum genus ecce tuum.
Frater Willimi Ramsey venerabilis olim
Istius Abbatis hic in honor loci.
Petriburgh Bailey Killire vocor ipse Johannes,
Mecum sponsa jacet ecce Johanna mea.
Tot mihi sunt nati, mihi sunt nataeque puellae
Willimus, Thomas, Willimus, and ipse Johannes,
Walt'rus, Richardus, Thomas, Agnes mihi Marga,
Grata fit proles ac Katherina mihi.
Orate, precor, nos omnes ut Deus ipse
Salvet ab inferno: Pactus fuit en lapis iste
1489. April. 19.

The Epitaph of W. Ramsey Abbot near adjoining, has been related already, only
be it added, that his Rebus on a plate of Brass was a Ram carrying a W. and sey
written over, which was William Ramsey.

At the upper end of the South Isle, was an effigies of Brass fastened to a
Marble with an Inscription thus, Hic jacet Johannes de Harwedon quondam
Senescallus Burgi, Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

On either side, betwixt the two foremost Pillars, were two Chapels, but
oblivion has sequestered them from our account. Proceed we now to the Quire,
but by the way a small Inscription stays our foot, in the passage. Hic jacet
Jornandes de Tringham Prior hujus loci: Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

The Quire presents nothing legible in the pavement, more than what has been
already mentioned: only the wooden sides did very lately retain some memorial
of their ancient ornaments, both paintings and writings, though their defects
be now supplied with the gilded ceiling of the Ladies Chapel. It was (as has
been said) in the time of Abbot W. of Watervile near five hundred years since,
ordered as we have lately known it, and the fashion of both Pictures and
Letters, might plead such antiquity. For the Paintings, they were not to be
commended, neither here, nor in other places of the Church, for it has long
since been found Peatham in his Complete Gent. Treat. of drawing, and limning,
Cap. 17.
fault with, that in Peterburgh-Minster, you may see Saint Peter painted, his
head very near, or altogether as big as his middle. Their Subject was Scripture
stories, and underneath Latin Distichs, some whereof (though somewhat
different) were written in the windows of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury,
as the W. Somner in his Survey of Canterb. p. 385.
Surveyor thereof has left Recorded. Many of these Verses are perished with
age, these were lately legible.

Under the Picture of the Prophet Isaias, En pariet, and concipiet, sic fert
Isayas,
Virgo Deum, semper inviolata manens.


Under Moses's Bush. Non ardens ardere rubus: non tacta videtur
Virginitas tangi, dum parit absque pari.


Under Gedeon's fleece. Virginitas vellus, Verbum ros, arida tellus
Est caro virginea: Conca quid? Ecclesia.


Under the Pictures of Mary and Elizabeth. Plaude puerperio, virgo vetulae,
quia vero
Obviat hic pietas, veteri dat lex nova metas.


Another by it. Oscula justitiae dat pax cognata Mariae,
Applaudet Regi praecursor, gratia legi.


Under Araon's rod budding. Vt contra morem dat amygdalus arida florem,
Sic Virgo puerum verso parit ordine rerum.


Under Nebuchadnezzar dreaming. Vt Regi visus lapis est de monte recisus,
Sic gravis absque viro Virgo parit ordine miro.
These on the Southside: On the Northside were these to be read.

Under Boaz. Tingere consuluit buccellam Booz in aceto
Ruth: Thomas Christi palpat and ipse latus.


Under the Prophet Habakkuk. Abaccuc Solemn cernit sublime levatum,
Coelos ascendit Christus, eosque regit.


Under the fire descending upon the Sacrifice. Ignis de coelo descendens, en
holocausta
Devorat: and sacris Spiritus ecce venit.


Under the Picture of David. Iste propheta David Dominum reverenter adorat,
Vt confirmentur optima dona Dei.


Both these sides of the Quire were adorned after an old decent manner, with
hangings of Tapestry formerly mentioned in the Inventory, but in the year 1643.
they were taken away, and dispersed.

Toward the upper end of the Quire, on the South side, a little above the
Monument of Abbot John, there is a comely structure of white Chalk-stone, being
alike on both sides, but it is not known what it was raised for, unless
conjecture may pass it for a Monument of one Reginald Lolworth who lies buried
by it, in the South Isle, on whose stone this Verse is legible, Hic jacet
egregius Lolworth Reginaldus humatus.

The rest is worn out. But who this Reginald was I know no more than the stone,
whereon the word Egregius is much abated by oblivion of the Person.

But the greatest ornament of the Quire (and indeed of the whole Church) was
the High Altar, a structure of stone most exquisitely carved, and beautified
with gilding and painting; it was ascended unto by about a dozen steps, and
from its basis reared after the manner of a comely wall some six foot high,
upon which were several curious Pilasters supporting a fair arched Roof whereon
were three goodly Spires reaching almost to the top of the Church, the whole
frame dilating it self to each side, all gilded and painted, saving some void
plain places, which were anciently filled up with Plates of silver, as has
been mentioned in the Inventory. I wish I could present the Reader with the
Effigies of it, as Mr. Somner has done that in the Cathedral of Canterbury.

But were it never so glorious and beautiful to the eye, for that it had been
built and used in times of Popery, and superstition, it was adjudged criminous
enough so as to deserve demolition.

The Altar or Table it self was a goodly freestone, which was long since
removed, and laid in the pavement adjoining, and a Table of wood set in its
place, notwithstanding which change, the Abbots Chair of stone adjoining to the
South end, suffered no alteration, but continued to our times. It was, as
tradition has derived it to us, the representative of S. Peter's Chair, where
the Abbot himself sat at appointed times.

But must an honest Convert be hanged because he was once a Thief? must a
regenerate person be damned because he was once carnal? might no reformation,
purgation, or alienation of this Altar to a more honest, and better use (as
Altars in the Primitive times of Christianity were) reprieve it from the
violent hands of an enraged multitude? yet it would not: for in the year 1643
it was beaten down to the lowest base of plain work, and so stood as a deformed
spectacle some eight years, and then 1651. a private person disliking it
because there was not a through reformation, it was ordered that the remainder,
with the whole mound whereon it was erected, should be levelled with the
pavement of the Quire.

Ovid. Met. 2.
Now, as was said of Phaetons overthrowing the Chariot of the Sun, Aliquis malo
fuit usus in illo, There was some good from that evil, for the world had the
more light: So the removal of this Altar brought something to light which had
long been concealed: viz. a certain Iron like the Beam of a Balance passing
through that part of the Altar to the Abbots Chair, which for what use it
served, I cannot say. On the right hand, that is, on the South side, appeared
these two Verses written on the Wall in ancient Saxon Letters, now to be seen.

Partus, and integritas, discordes tempore longo
Virginis in gremio foedera pacis habent.
On the other side also in two hollow places of the Wall were found two Chests
of about three foot long a piece, in each of which were the bones of a Man, and
of whom appeared by a Plate of Lead in each Chest, whereon the name of the
person was engraven; in the one was Elfricus, on the other Kynsius, both which
had been Archbishops of York, and being dead, their bodies were interred in
the Monastery of Peterburgh, where formerly they had been Monks.

In those time, Epitaphs, and Inscriptions on the outside of Monuments, were,
either not yet, or, not commonly used, but a plate of Lead was put into the
Coffin having the name of the deceased party, and so it was done to Dunstane
Archbishop of Canterbury, as Matthew Paris witnesses. Ad ann. 1527.


But Elfricus, and Kynsius could not have their repositories so short, from the
beginning, but it is probable they had a removal, from under ground to lie
above ground, in this Wall so near the Altar; their first places of Sepulture
being not thought fit to contain them any longer. The place of Elfricus burial
I cannot tell, but for Kynsius, I have heard my Father who was well read in the
Antiquities of this Church, say, that the Marble Monument now lying on the
Northside of the Quire, was his. It bears the Portraicture of a shaven Monk
lying on the top.

Beyond the Quire, the most Eastern part of the Church, is the New Building
erected by Abbot Robert Kirton, as has been said. The windows therein are
fair, and lately beautified with painted glass, which contained no great matter
worthy of recital, save only the pictures of Saints, largely expressed.

In the South end of this building lie many of the family of Ormes interred,
Sir Humfrey Orme, Frances his Lady with their Children. In the Wall adjoining
was placed a fair and comely Monument, with their Statues: which Monument was
first erected upon the burial of a virtuous Gentlewoman of the same name, born
in Sommerset-shire, whom Humfrey, the eldest Son of Sir Humfrey, had taken to
Wife, who, though by her Marriage she changed not her name, yet she did her
Country, and here died. Under her Figure was written this Epitaph. Mistake
not, Reader, I thee crave,
This is an Altar, not a Grave,
Where Fire raked up in Ashes lies,
And Hearts are made the sacrifice
Till time and truth, her worth, and fame,
Revive her embers to a flame.


I cannot tell, whether this Monument fared the worse for the Statues, or the
word Altar in the Epitaph, but it was defaced, And Sir Humfrey Orme, his Lady,
and eldest Son, lived to see the death of what was erected to continue their
memories after death.

Near toward the midst of this building, lies interred the body of Frances,
Wife to Dr. John Cousin Dean of this Church, who died (not long after her
Childbirth) March 25. 1642. A Gentlewoman well deserving a Monument to
perpetuate her name, and memory, for which purpose her honored Husband made
some progress in one upon the pavement with black and white Marble chequered,
but before it could be completed on the Wall, by a Statue or Inscription, it
was blasted by an Eastern wind. The day of her burial was remarkable in this,
that, whilst the Child (a Daughter Christened Anne) was at the Font to be
Baptized, the Mother lay by upon the Bier to be carried presently to her Grave.
A pretty accident (if we may call it an accident) fell out the day before. It
being the Eve of the Annunciation, (and none making the least question but that
this Gentlewoman was in a fair way of recovery after her delivery, and all
things prepared for the Christening of the Child) the Chanter, whose Office it
was to appoint the Anthems, appointed to be sung that part of the
Burial-Service Composed by Mr. Wilkinson, I am the Resurrection, etc. Dean
Cousin, being then at Church, and having the Anthem brought him, asked the
Chanter, why he appointed this Anthem? The Chanter replied, It is a good Anthem
and you have not yet heard it. The next morning this Gentlewoman died, and that
day the same Anthem was sung again at her Burial. Dean Cousin afterward
observed the Omen.

As you pass out of this building on the Northside of the Church there was
lately a passage into the now demolished Ladies Chapel, in which passage was a
little Chapel on the right hand, Archt over with Stone, having a fair
East-window, and on the Northside little windows looking into the Ladies
Chapel: Over head, were two Chambers, which common tradition has told, to
have been the habitation of a devout Lady, called Agnes, or Dame Agnes, out of
whose Lodging-Chamber there was a hole made a-skew in the window walled up,
having its prospect just upon the Altar in the Ladies Chapel, and no more. It
seems she was devout in her generation, that she chose this place for her
retirement, and was desirous that her eyes, as well as ears, might wait upon
her public Devotions. I could never yet see any Record to inform me who this
Dame Agnes was: And surely, this Church owes the world a better account of her
than I can give, in regard she was a great Benefactoress to it, giving that,
which at this day is commonly known by the Name of Dame Agnes Wood, not far
from Peterburgh. Over against this, on the left hand, was a little Chapel, but
what, or whose, we cannot say.

In the Ladies Chapel were many fair Gravestones, but few Inscriptions, only
these. Hic jacet Helena nomine English quondam uxor, Willielmi Gunton, quae
obiit 9 Octobris 1613.

Near unto this was buried Simon English, who was of great esteem in his
generation, for a Schoolmaster, under whom the late famous, and learned
Antiquary Sir Robert Cotton and many others of his time, and quality, received
education. The Inscription in Brass upon his Monument, was this. Simoni English
Archididascalo Petriburgi celeberrimo Epiphaniae die, Anno Domini 1592. mortuo,
Discipulus Thomas Green Hieronymi filius, Gratitudinis ergo, posuit.

The Eastern window of this Ladies Chapel was the fairest, and goodliest in
all the Church, scarce a fairer in any other Cathedral. It was adorned with
painted glass, containing many stories, amongst the rest, of Julian the
Apostate, and these two Verses. Cuspide Mercurii Julianus Apostata caesus
Vincis, ait, vincis, heu, Nazarene potens.


At the West end of this Chapel were two small Chapels of wooden enclosure,
in one of which (the Northern anciently the Chapel of S. John the Baptist) are
interred the bodies of Christopher Swinscoe Gent. and Alice his Wife, their
Monument of Marble is still extant, but the Inscription lost.

This Alice was a good Benefactoress to the poor of the Town. In this Chapel I
have often seen a Stone in the pavement, hollowed like a shallow Platter, which
tradition has said to have been so worn by the frequent kneeling of a devout
person thereon, which might be, it being at that end which was next to the
Ladies Chapel. But now that stone is gone.

In a Pillar near, was a pretty small Monument of John Aungier Dr. of Law and
Prebendary of this Church, but this Pillar could not support the Monument
longer then 1643. Near adjoining to this Pillar, was the Chapel of S. James.

Now we are in the North Cross Isle, where W. Paris, who (as has been said)
built the Ladies Chapel, and Bishop Dove, are interred. At the North end of
this Isle was a Monument of wood affixed to the Wall, letting survivers know
that it was in remembrance of Richard Worm, whose quality and condition may
appear by the copious Inscriptions thereon.

Richardus Worm Armiger, natus in hac urbe Petriburgensi, primo bonis literis,
and artibus liberalioribus instructus, In Accademia Cantabrigiensi Magister
Artium evasit, legibus deinde, and civilibus, and municipalibus dans operam,
earum professione, patriam, amicos, seipsum and juvit, and ornavit plurimum:
Qui post decursum 59 annorum, Domino animam tradidit 13. Maii, 1589.

Quod cernis parvo tumulo consurgere saxum
Hospes nunc Wormi contegit ossa mei.
Jure fuit, studiisque valens, subsellia legum
Saepe patrociniis personuere suis.
Sed non immunem fati fecere Camaenae;
Quique aliis cavit, non cavet ipse sibi:
Et didicit binas qui leges calluit ante
Tertia jam fati jura subire sui.
Quod potuit fecit vivus, promptusque petenti,
Quae potuit patriae commoda far, tulit.
Et miseris mitis succurrit, donec egenis
Qui dare consueverat, vermibus esca fuit.
Et vermes pascit merito, qui vermis and ipse
Natura factus, nomine dictus erat.
Interea vivit, superas subvectus ad auras,
Et fruitur Christo spiritus ipse suo.
Sic, and mortuus hic, and vivus pendet ab illo
Pendens qui pro illo de cruce membr a dedit.
Allusio ad nomen Worm.
Vermis edat vermem? Credas: cum vermibus ecce est
Vermis: sic Vermis vermibus esca manet.
Vermis edat Vermem? haud credas, non vermibus ipse est
Vermis, nec Vermis vermibus esca manet.
Sic est, sic non est, verum est hunc esse beatum
Vermibus absque suis, vermibus absque suis.
Allusio ad dictionem suam, Veritati adhaereto.
Worm quasi verum, sicque sonat, sic nomen, and omen.
Worm verum vere dictio vera dedit.
Dictio non dispar, vix est ubi littera dispar
Worm been sic verum, qui posuit, posuit.
Haesit Worm vero (parilis conjunctio very est)
Worm haesit verum, dictio parque pari est.
Fuit Worm.
Qui fuit, est, erit ut fuerat, Divina voluntas
Cum voluit fieri, sic voluit fieri.
In the same Isle upon the Pavement are these two Memorials written upon their
Grave-stones. Christus Rogeri Clyff dignetur misereri
In Burgo natique Prioris, and hic tumulati.


The other, Hic William natus Pightesle quiescit humatus
Facta prioratus claustro rexit monachatus
Sit prece salvatus Petri, coeloque locatus.


At the South end of this North Isle, near the Quire, is a Vault descending
into the ground by stairs of Stone, and at the bottom a low arched passage
going under the Church, wherein any might go some five or six yards, and there
find the way stopped with the fall of the Earth over head, but how far further
this Vault went, or to what end it was first made, I could never learn. Happily
it might lead to some penitential Purgatorian place; or like Mortimors hole at
Nottingham, be a subterraneous passage to some other buildings which are now
perished.

Step we now over the Quire to the South cross Isle, and there we shall see on
the North end of it next the Quire, the Chapel of the Trinity, and three
little Chapels on the East side, the first of S. Oswald where the Heart of
Abbot Robert Sutton was buried, the second of S. Benedict, the other of S.
Kyneburga, who probably was here buried upon her removal from her Church of
Castor.

The pavement presents but one Monumental Stone of William Exton Prior, the
Plate of Brass accompained his fellows in the Monumental year of this Churches
Monuments. The Inscription was this, Hic Wilihelmus erat Prior Exton,
philosophator
Nobilis ex genere, generis quoque nobilitator


Ingulphus makes mention of Radinus the great Earl of Hereford, who married
Godda sister to King Edward, that he was buried at Burgh, but in what place of
the Church, is not known.

On the West side of this Isle stands the Chapter house, where the Church
Records were kept, and slept securely until 1643. when they were roughly
awakned, or rather cast into a deeper sleep of oblivion, most of them being
torn, and the rest dispersed, to the great prejudice of the knowledge of this
Churches ancient affairs, and particularly of this our Story. Anciently this
place was the Chapel of the Ostrie: As for the old Chapter House that was in
the Eastern Cloister, a goodly building, founded by King Peada, but now
demolished: In it were buried three of the Abbots, but no Inscriptions to
inform us which they were; their Marble stones with their Pourtraitures or
Statues exquisitely carved on them are now to be seen removed into the South
Isle, not far off in this Isle is to be read toward the Cloister door, Hic
jacet Georgius Fraunceys Monachus and natus in Burgo Sancti Petri, quondam
Subprior hujus Monasterii, cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

If the Reader be not weary with the recital of these trifling antiquities, let
him but go along with me into the Cloister, and there we will part. The
dimensions of this Cloister has been remembered in the Inventory. The Windows
were all complete and fair, adorned with glass of excellent painting: In the
South Cloister was the History of the Old Testament: In the East Cloister of
the New: In the North Cloister the Figures of the successive Kings from King
Peada: In the West Cloister was the History from the first foundation of the
Monastery of King Peada, to the restoring of it by King Edgar. Every window had
at the bottom the explanation of the History thus in Verse.

THE FIRST WINDOW.
Col. 1.
King Penda a Paynim as Writing seyth
Gate yese five Children of Christen feyth.
Col. 2.
The noble King Peada by Gods grace
Was the first founder of this place.
Col. 3.
By Queen Ermenyld had King Wulfere
These twey sons that ye see here.
Col. 4.
Wulfade rides as he was wont
Into the Forest the Heart to hunt.
THE SECOND WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Fro all his men Wulfade is gone
And suyth himself the Heart alone.
Col. 2.
The Heart brought Wulfade to a Well
That was beside Saint Chaddys Cell.
Col. 3.
Wulfade asked of Saint Chad
Where is the Heart that me has lad.
Col. 4.
The Heart that hither thee has brought
Is sent by Christ that thee has bought.
THE THIRD WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Wulfade prayed Chad that ghostly Leech
The Faith of Christ him for to teach.
Col. 2.
Saint Chad teaches Wulfade the feyth
And words of Baptism over him he seyth.
Col. 3.
Saint Chad devoutly to Mass him dight
And hoseled Wulfade Christy 's knight.
Col. 4.
Wulfade wished Saint Chad that day
For his brother Rufine to pray.
THE FOURTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Wulfade told his Brother Rufine
That he was Christened by Chaddys doctrine.
Col. 2.
Rufine to Wulfade said again
Christened also would I be fain.
Col. 3.
Wulfade Rufine to Saint Chad leedeth
And Chad with love of Faith him feeds.
Col. 4.
Rufine is Christened of Saint Chaddys
And Wulfade his Brother his Godfather is.
THE FIFTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Werbode Steward to King Wulfere
Told that his Sons Christened were.
Col. 2.
Toward the Chapel Wulfere began go
By guiding of Werbode Christys foe.
Col. 3.
Into the Chapel entered the King
And found his Sons worshipping.
Col. 4.
Wulfere in woodness his Sword out drew
And both his Sons anon he slew.
THE SIXTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
King Wulfere with Werbode yoo
Burying gave his Sons two.
Col. 2.
Werbode for vengeance his own flesh tare
The Devil him strangled and to hell bare.
Col. 3.
Wulfere for sorrow anon was sick
In Bed he lay a dead man like.
Col. 4.
Saint Ermenyld that blessed Queen
Counseled Wulfere to shrive him cleen.
THE SEVENTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Wulfere contrite hyed him to Chad
As Ermenyld him counseled had.
Col. 2.
Chad bade Wulfere for his sin
Abbeys to build his Realm within.
Col. 3.
Wulfere in have performed than
Brough that Peada his brother began.
Col. 4.
Wulfere endued with high devotion
The Abbey of Brough with great possession.
THE EIGHTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
The third Brother King Etheldred
Confirmed both his Brethrens deed.
Col. 2.
Saxulf that here first Abbot was
For Ankerys at Thorney made a place.
Col. 3.
After came Danes and Brough brent
And slew the Monkys as they went.
Col. 4.
Fourscore years, and sixteen
Stood Brough destroyed by Danes teen.
THE NINTH WINDOW.
Col. 1.
Saint Athelwold was bidden by Gods lore
The Abbey of Brough again to restore.
Col. 2.
Saint Athelwold to King Edgar went
And prayed him to help him in his intent.
Col. 3.
Edgar babe Athelwold the work begin
And him to help he would not lyn.
Col. 4.
Thus Edgar and Athelwold restored this place,
God save it, and keep it for his grace.
Here I have a fair invitation to conclude with my heartiest prayers that this
Church may stand, and be employed to Gods glory, and his peoples good. To
which, how far the usurped authority of the late times was propitious, I leave
to the world to judge by the ensuing Act, Passed 19 August 1651.

An ACT Concerning the MINSTER in Peterburgh.
BE it Enacted by the Parliament now assembled, and it is Enacted by the
Authority of the same, that the great Church called the MINSTER within the City
and Borough of Peterburgh, and the Churchyard thereunto belonging, shall be
employed, and made use of by the Inhabitants of the said City and Borough in
all time to come for the public worship and service of God, and for a
Workhouse to employ the poorer sort of people in Manufactures, the said
Inhabitants at their own Costs and Charges, repairing and maintaining the same.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX.

BEING A TRANSCRIPT OF SUCH Charters and Privileges As are mentioned in the
foregoing DISCOURSE.

King Wolfere HIS CHARTER FOR THE Endowments and Privileges OF THE MONASTERY
OF MEDESHAMSTED.
WOlfere Dei beneficio Rex Merciorum, and Mediterraneorum Anglorum
Australiumque regnorum, praesentibus, and posteris omnibus, Christum sanctamque
ejus Ecclesiam colentibus perpetuam Salutem. Benedicat anima mea Dominum Jesum
Salvatorem meum: Et coram omnibus viventibus confiteor ei cum fratribus, and
sororibus meis populisque meis novo nuper baptismate initiatis, quia
Soljustitiae ortus est nobis, qui nos de tenebris idololatriae transtulit in
admirabile lumen suae agnitionis: Qui non solum reos paternis roribus absolvit,
and advenas, and pupillos suscepit, sed etiam in filios adoptionis credentes
elegit: Cumque aeterna regna omnium regnorum distributor suis fidelibus
repromiserit, etiam in hac brevi via qua ad aeternitatem transitur, nos regnare
facit. Quid ergo retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? cum sine
ipso nihil habeamus, nihil valeamus, nihil sumus: magna etiam aviditate salutis
nostrae omnium Largitor accipit parva, and infirma nostra quatenus causam
habeat retribuendi maxima sua: quodque dederimus sanctis suis, quodque dilectae
Ecclesiae suae, hoc sibi datum and acceptum ipse testabitur in fine, mercedem
quoque justi justi susceptorem promittit accepturum esse. Quia propter illum
divinae fidei, and Ecclesiarum principem, regnique Dei Clavigerum per quem
admittar in Paradisum Domini specialius reconciliari mihi gestio per
privilegium domus suae quae in Medeshamstede studio venerabilis Abbatis Saxulfi
gloriose est condita, and divina Monachorum familia been disposita: Cui
quicquid Antecessor germanus meus Peada vel Oswinus Christiana fide confrater,
and conregnator concessere, non solum mea autoritate cupio stabilire, verum
etiam de meo aliquid addere. Ego, ita faventibus fratribus meis Aethelredo ac
Meruvala cum beatissimis sororibus meis Kyneburga, and Kynesuida, quarum prior
Regina mutavit imperium in Christi ancillatum praesidens Monasterio
Kyneburgensi quod suo nomine decoratur, matter sacrarum Virginum: altera
illibata virginitate in divinum flagrat thalamum. His inquam consentientibus
trado Beato Petro ad praefatum Medeshamstede Monasterium haec stagna, and
paludes, and lacus, and piscaturas, cum terris videlicet, and omnibus
infrajacentibus quae de meo regali jure vel principum meorum mutuatione, and
assensu amodo in perpetuum libere famulentur Deo famulantibus: Quae ita hic
determinari volumus. Ab ipso Medeshamsted ad Northburch, and inde ad locum quem
vocant Folies, and inde totam paludem indirectam usque ad Esendic, and de
Esendic ad locum quem Federmuder dicunt, and deinde in directum ad locum via
december leugiarum quem Cuggedic circa habitantes nominant, and deinde ad
Raggewith and de Raggewith quinque miliariis ad Magistram aquam quae ducit ad
Elm, and ad Wisebeche, atque inde sicut itur tribus leugiis contra cursum
Magistrae aquae usque ad Trokenholt, and de Trokenholt indirectum per immensam
paludem ad Dereforde longitudine viginti leugiarum, and inde ad Gratescross per
unam pulchram aquam Bardanea nomine sex leugiis ad Paccelade: Sic and in medium
partitis stagnis plurimis, and immensis paludibus cum habitatoribus
Huntedunensis provinciae una cum stagnis, and lacis Scalfremere, and
Wyttlismere, and aliis quamplurimis ad haec pertinentibus, cum terris quoque
and mansionibus quae adjacent in Australi part de Scalfremere, and cum
infrasepta undique palude usque ad Medeshamstede, and sic de Medeshamstede
usque ad Walmisford, and de Walmisforde usque Clive, and inde ad Eston, and de
Eston ad Stamford, and de Stamford sicut aqua decurrit ad supradictam
Northburch. His ergo terminis omnia sint juris ejusdem Apostolici Monasterii:
Haec inquam omnia licet parva ita concedo sicut ego regaliter tenui, vel ab
aliis effeci libera quatenus ab omni servitute absoluta, in proprias tantum
expensas liberrima possideat Ecclesia tanquam Regina, non tanquam Famula. Haec
nobis Beato Petro principante, principalis in sua regione, and specialius
Romana sit Ecclesia: Hic quaeramus ipsum patronum qui Romae non possimus. Non
decet, immo non expedit nobis, ut haec serviat quae fide ipsius Petri Christo
regaliter desponsata est: Reges gentium, ait Dominus Petro, a quibus accipiunt
tributa? A filiis, an ab alienis? Ab alienis, inquit Petrus: Ergo liberi sunt
filii, dicit Dominus. Ergo and a nobis sit libera haec Regina matter cum filiis
suis Ministris Dei nostri, ut dimissis his quae Regis erant, tota liberate
quae sunt Dei Deo reddant. Alia quoque Monasteria quae Dei famuli Saxulfi
instantia assurgunt, cum aliis Ecclesiis finitimis quae deinceps generantur,
hujus primaevae matris visceribus fovenda, and educanda pignora commendamus:
quatenus Christiana Religio nostris primum temporibus nostrum regnum ingressa,
ubique propagetur, confirmetur, perpetuetur. Hanc oblationem nostram Beatissime
pater Deusdedit Apostolica manu tua obsecro perenniter corroborari, qui
Successor legationis fidei Beati Gregorii, and propagator Evangelii pacis
Protodoctoris nostri Augustini, sextus ab ipso Beato Augustino Apostolicus
Vicarius praesides Ecclesiae Dorovernensi. Tu quoque mi frater Aethelrede, and
vos sorores piissimae Kyneburga and Kynesuida pro mutua animarum nostrarum
redemptione huic Testamento nostro testes optimi, ut praemiis condigniores
subscribite: Precor and omnes Successores meos, sive filii, sive fratres, sive
externi Reges successerint, ut hoc nostrum pactum ita servent inviolatum sicut
volunt recipere rectitudinis praemium, and evadere rapacitatis supplicium.
Inter has donationes, and sanctiones Venerabilis pater Monasterii Saxulfus
habens Monachos Anachoreticae conversationis amatores, suggessit mihi cum
nonnullis fratribus velle se quidem Dei nutu, and nostro assensu Monasterium in
ipsa subjacente heremo cum heremiticis cellulis in honor Dei genetricis
construere in loco qui jam nomen accepit Ancarig, quatenus ibi vel Coenobitae
pro Anachoritis, vel Anachoritae pro Coenobitis divina pace possint conversari.
Quibus tum ego, quod semel inquam vobis perpetuavi, and si ad alios vestros
usus converteretis, non habuissem contradicere, quanto magis cum id
proposueritis in aedificationem Ecclesiae, and in augmentationem religionis
divinae: Immo ego faveo, and laudo, ut perficiatur eo loci haec bona, and
laudabilis voluntas vestra juxta vestram ditionem in Domino. Quicunque ergo
haec quae nostra vel caeterorum fidelium donatione Beato Petro consecrata sunt,
auferre vel diminuere praesumpserit, Ipse Janitor coeli diminuat ejus partem in
retributione beata; Ejus vero qui haec largius auxerit, augeat gaudia
sempiterna. Hujus Confirmationis isti testes subscribuntur. Ego Wolfere Rex cum
sociis, Regibus, and Patribus, ac Ducibus hoc testamentum donationis meae
praesente Apostolico Patre nostro Deusdedit, confirmavi. Ego Oswinus Rex
Nordanhimbrorum amicus Abbatis Saxulfi immo Ecclesiae Dei debitus adjutor
laudavi. Ego Sighere Rex voluntary immo Christianae fidei recenti perceptione
Regi Wolfero subjectus consensi. Ego Sibbius Rex simili gratia devotionis, ac
nova industria baptismatis eundem Wolfere habens praelatum subscripsi. Ego
Aethelredus frater Regis cum eodem consensi. Ego Kyneburga soror Regis
amplector. Ego quoque soror Regis Kyneswida favi. Ego Dorovernensis Ecclesiae
Pontifex Deusdedit annui. Ego Ithamor Rofensis Episcopus corroboravi. Ego Wina
Londoniensis Episcopus subnotavi. Ego Jerumanus Merciorum Episcopus approbavi.
Ego Tuda Episcopus aspiravi. Ego Wilfridus Presbyter famulus Ecclesiarum, and
bajulus Evangelii Dei in gentes affectavi. Ego Coppa Presbyter missus a Rege
Wolfero legatione Dei convertendis Whitt.
gentibus in Yikt. benedixi. Ego Abbas Saxulfus saepedicti Monasterii gratifice
conclamavi. Signum Imminae Principis. Signum Edberti Principis. Signum Yitberti
Principis. Signum Herefridi Principis. Signum Abonis Principis. Signum
Athelwoldi Ministri. Signum Brordani Ministri. Signum Walberti Ministri. Signum
Alhmundi Ministri. Signum Fredregysi Ministri. His, and caeteris Optimatibus,
ac Ministris Regis, haec collaudata sunt. Sancitum est hoc Privilegium Anno
Domini D. C. LXIIII. Wolferi Regis, VII. Deusdedit IX. Quod nullius insana and
puniendi cupiditas violet.

By this Charter it may appear that the bounds of the Monastery of
Medeshamsted, from East to West were twenty Miles, and that Thorney and
Wittlesey with their appurtenances were within the limits thereof, but Saxulf
intending to build Thorney, and authorized thereunto by King Wulfere, abated so
much from his Monastery of Medeshamsted, and so made Thorney an entire Abbey of
it self.

PRIVILEGES GRANTED BY King Ethelred, NEXT BROTHER, and SUCCESSOR TO King
Wolfere, TOGETHER WITH Pope Agatho.
GLoriosissimo filio Regi Merciorum Ethelredo, fratribus quoque and Coepiscopis
Theodoro Dorobernensi, and Saxulpho Mediterraneorum Anglorum, and Merciorum
Episcopo, caeterisque consacerdotibus, Agatho Servus servorum Dei in Domino,
Salutem. Dominus regnat, exultet terra, laetentur insulae multae, reges terrae,
and omnes populi, and caetera omnia laudent nomen Domini, quia exaltatum est
nomen ejus solius. Gratia Domini nostri Jesu Christi Regis omnium seculorum,
foeliciter quotidie adimpletur haec exhilaratio, quod Reges, and gentes orbis
terrarum, and praecipue juxta Divinum Oraculum Reges insularum multarum adorant
and colunt ipsum Jefum Christum unicum Dominum, and Regem suum, unde etiam
sanctum nomen Ejus specialius benedicimus, quod vos Praecellentissime fili, cum
vestris piae memoriae fratribus non solum damnosa sculptilia daemoniorum cum
paternis erroribus exterminantes, verum Salvatorem agnovistis, and verae
Divinitatis effecti estis cultores, verum etiam ad convertendos subjectos vobis
Reges, and populos, fidei balteo, ut boni Ministri Christi vos accinxistis.
Cumque and in Ecclesiis, and Baptisteriis extruendis quibus populus
acquisitionis Dei multipliciter devote laboretis, hanc charitatis vestrae
fragrantiam familiarius amplectimur, quod de Ecclesia Beati Petri quam adeo
primitivam Abbatiam censetis in regione vestri Imperii, quae est
Mediterraneorum Anglorum in loco qui appellatur Medeshamsteda, praeclaram, tam
benevola vota nobis Regia scilicet legatione mandaveritis. Hanc quippe, ut
perhibetis, Antecessores vestri, and fratres Christianissimi per venerabilem
virum nuper Abbatem, nunc consacerdotem Saxulphum regaliter condidere, and
amore Beati Petri praecipue coluere, ac Regia largitate, necnon and liberate
Regia cum privilegii descriptionibus gloriosius extulere. Hanc, and Vos
Clarissime fili non minore fervore Regalis industriae vultis Romana and
Apostolica autoritate contra omnes impetus procellosi mundi perpetuo muniri,
immo etiam quantum est in prompta vestri benevolentia, Romanam and Apostolicam
eam facere, ubi Beatum Petrum nobis quidem corpore, vobis vero spiritu semper
praesentem possideatis, ubi and a vobis, and a toto regno vestro ac si Romae
requiratur, ac piis veneretur votis fidelium: Apparet nimirum vos esse intimum
filium hujus quae totius orbis matter est principalis Ecclesiarum, and ipsum
ejus Praesidem affectare patronum qui Clavigeri potestate nobis aperiat regna
coelorum. Quapropter non solum voluntary, sed and maxim gratias agentes,
Annuimus piae vestrae petitioni quatenus praedicta Ecclesia in Medeshamstede
Romana sit, and Apostolica, ubi Beatum Petrum nobis quidem corpore, vobis vero
spiritu semper praesentem possideatis, ubi and a vobis, and a toto regno
vestro, ac si Romae requiratur, and piis veneretur votis fidelium, and sicut
Regia autoritate, ita Apostolica confirmatione sit Apostolica, sit ab omni
servitute seculari libera, ita viz. ut quemadmodum vos dictastis, nec Rex, nec
Episcopus, nec Praeses aliquis Abbati ipsius post electionem Ecclesiae and
Regis assensum quicquam terreni oneris injungat, non censum, non tributum, non
militiam, non aliqua unquam servitutis occasio de omnibus rebus ad Ecclesiam
ipsam pertinentibus, vel in magno, vel in minimo, ab ullo exigatur, quatenus
sub Rege suo Defensore, non Tyranno, libere Christo soli deserviat. Episcopus
quoque dioeceseos, non typo praelationis, sed officio charitatis, huic se
impendat, Abbatemque ipsius ac si Romanum Legatum, and Comministrum Evangelii
habeat, and secundum sibi socium aestimet, non subjectum. Nullum vero
potentatum in hoc Monasterium praeripiat, nec ordinationem ibi, nec quodlibet
officium sine Abbatis favore arroget: Sed neque ab ipsis intimis and
peculiaribus locis, and parochiis vel in omni privilegio ipsius juris quicquam
praeter ejusdem Abbatis assensum accipiat, vel faciat, ne qua scil. abusione
pacem perturbet gregis Dominici, quales scandalizare est cum mola asinaria in
profundum demergi. Ubi autem electus ex ipsa congregatione Abbas ordinandus
erit, ab Archiepiscopo Dorobernensi Romani Pontificis Vicario, aut a quo ipse
modo efficaciori jufferit, Rege favente, ordinetur, nec parochianus Pontifex,
sive ipse, sive alius aliquis praedicta duntaxat autoritate ordinaverit,
quicquam in eum praeter fraternitatis obsequium praeripiat. Hanc Ecclesiam
caeteris Imperii vestri Monasteriis quae modo assurgunt, vel deinceps in omnem
posteritatem nascantur, tanquam religionis primitias excipimus, quatenus
Apostolica gratia, suique Petri, vestraeque promotionis praerogativa praestet
caeteris a Tamense fluvio, sicut, and orta perhibetur matter primaria: Abbas
quoque ejus reliquis Arctoae Plagae prior habeatur, and in omnibus conventibus
anterior sedeat, ita duntaxat, ut ad sacrae fidei, religionis, charitatis, and
concordiae compaginem loco primogeniti, and vice Romana affectuose praeluceat
confratribus, non imperet. Sed and in aula Regia, and Regalibus consiliis sicut
Monasterii praestantia exigit, laudamus, ut primus vel inter primos adhaereat
Regi. Et exemplo Saxulphi omnes successores opportune, seu importune regem
frequentent, religiosa conversatione a terrenis revocent, ad coelestia erigant,
ad pietatem, ad justitiam, ad Dei cultum hortatu crebro accendant. Hanc quoque
ad vestrum votum non solum voluntary, verum etiam necessario concedimus
benedictionem huic Apostolicae Ecclesiae, quatenus tam vos quam caeteri populi
vestri Imperii totius quoque Britanniae, sed and proximorum regnorum nationes
quicunque vel viae longinquitate, vel varia necessitudine praepediti Romae
Beatum Petrum in urbe sua revisere non sufficitis, hic cum spiritu vobis
cohabitantem, plena fide requiratis, hic vota persolvatis, hic absolutionem
peccatorum and Apostolicam benedictionem per ipsum ligandi atque solvendi
Principem fideliter speretis, and justa desiderii cum precibus exaudiri, ac
coeli januam vobis aperiri credatis. Haec igitur and caetera quaecunque sunt
tam a vobis, quam a fratribus, and antecessoribus vestris huic Monasterio in
aeternam haereditatem, libertatemque perpetuam donata, ac privilegiorum
sanctionibus perhenniter commendata: Quaecunque etiam in posterum, aut a vobis,
aut a successoribus vestris, vel a quibuslibet personis usque in finem jure
tradentur, omnia scilicet secundum vestram postulationem Apostolica Beati Petri
autoritate confirmamus: and ita haec observanda ab omnibus Regibus, and
Principibus Britanniae contestamur, sicut ipsum coeli janitorem timent
offendere. Si quis autem haec in aliquo (quod absit) violare praesumpserit,
cujuscunque potestatis, aut ordinis sit, excommunicatorio ipsius Sancti Petri
gladio nisi emendaverit, excidatur: Qui vero custodierit, quique res Ecclesiae
amplificare maluerit, ipsius Clavigeri gratia suscipiatur: Et sicut Infernus
raptoribus, ita defensoribus Paradisus aperiatur.

Scripsit quoque idem Papa in eodem Privilegio ad eundem Regem, and ad
Reverendissimum Archiepiscopum This Epistle is extant in Sir Hen. Spelman's
Book of the Eng. Councils. page 163.
Theodorum, and ad Saxulphum Episcopum, ut secum Regiam, and Apostolicam
saepedictae Ecclesiae libertatem corroborarent, and indelibiliter
subscriberent, and anathematizarent quicunque haec violaret. Hoc Privilegium
sancitum and confirmatum est a Sancto Papa Agathone, assentiente Concilio
Centum Viginti Quinque Episcoporum, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis Sexcentesimo
Octogesimo, and per Sanctum Wilfridum destinatum est. Postea vero approbatum
est ab Archiepiscopo Theodoro in Concilio celebrato in Campo Hetfelda, ipso
Rege gratanter, and devote cum Regali autoritate has terras, and possessiones
cum omnibus rebus ad eas pertinentibus Beato Petro ad praefatum Medeshamstede
Monasterium tradente, anathematizante, and obsecrante, ut Apostolico gladio
animadverterentur quicunque de his aut de omnibus rebus ad ipsam Ecclesiam
appendentibus quicquam detraherent: Hoc est, Bredune, Repingas, Cedenac,
Suineshened, Heanbrig, Lodeshale, Scuffenhalch, Costesford, Streteford,
Wetelburna, Lusgerd, Hethelhuniglond, Barchanig. Haec inquit Beato Petro
Regaliter habita, Regaliter concedo habenda in perpetuam haereditatem, atque
liberrimam Ecclesiae proprietatem, obsecrans per ipsum Apostolorum Principem ne
quis unquam succendentium tam de his quam de omnibus rebus ad ipsam Ecclesiam
appendentibus quicquam detrahat. Quod si quis fecerit, omnibus Episcopis
damnantibus and his praesentialiter subscribentibus Apostolico gladio
animadvertatur. Archiepiscopus quoque Theodorus ita intulit, Ego Theodorus
Dorobernensis Cathedrae inthronizatus juxta Apostolicum Papae Agathonis
mandatum Privilegium Monasterii Medeshamstede subscriptione nostra confirmo:
Cujus violatores damno, and excommunico, defensores vero gratifico, and
benedico. Et Saxulfus, Ego humilis Saxulfus Regali beneficio, aliud Ms. addit.
ejusdem Monasterii fundator, ita corroborare gaudeo, sicut ei specialius,
optima cupio, ut nihil usurpem vel derebus, vel de Officiis ipsius Monasterii
praeter voluntatem Abbatis, and postulationem, nec ego, nec successores mei:
Ego quoque omnem violentiae abusionem anathemate hinc excludo. Subscripserunt
autem and assenserunt Reverendissimus Archiepiscopus Eboracensis Wilfridus, and
Ostrid Regina Ethelredi Regis, and Adrianus Romanus Legatus, and Johannes
Romanus Legatus, and Putta Roffensis, and Waldhere Londonienss Episcopus, and
omnes Comites, and Principes terrae totius Angliae. Cuthbaldus quoque Abbas ita
finivit. Ego Cuthbaldus ejusdem Monasterii Abbas speciali amore amplector, ut
quisquis haec servaverit, valeat, quisquis praevaricatus fuerit (quod absit)
omnium Episcoporum ac sacerdotum excommunicatione dispereat.

AMEN.
THus does Walter of Wittlesey give us but a mixed relation of King Ethelred 's
Charter, whom I have chosen to follow, rather than a later Copy, he being of
greater antiquity may so pass for authority also. Now because as has been said
before in our History, that Abbot Martin going to Rome took along with him this
Charter, which was not approved by Pope Eugenius who granted him one of another
strain, I shall (if it be no trouble to the Reader) present that also, as the
same Author has left it upon Record, that the difference may be seen.

Postmodum autem (says he) per multa tempora, illud idem Privilegium Abbas
Martinus de Bek portavit ad praedictam Curiam Romanam in tempore Eugenii Papae
tertii ad confirmandum vel renovandum, sed non concipiebatur in recta forma ut
videbatur Curiae, quoniam unus Cardinalis in Consistorio dicebat haec verba, Ne
des honorem nominis tui precamur alteri: and tunc concessum erat eidem Abbati
Martino Privilegium subsequens.

EUGENIUS Servus servorum Dei: Dilecto filio Martino Burgensi Abbati,
ejusdemque fratribus tam praesentibus quam futuris regularem vitam professis in
perpetuum. Desiderium quod ad religionis propositum and animarum salutem
pertinere dignoscitur, animo nos decet libenti concedere, and petentium
desideriis congruum impertiri suffragium. Ea propter Dilecte in Domino fili
Martine Abbas, quoniam per multos labores Apostolorum limina nostram
praesentiam devotione debita visitasti, tuis, and fratrum tuorum justis
postulationibus clementer annuimus, and Beati Petri Apostolorum Principis
Burgensem Ecclesiam in qua Divino mancipati estis obsequio, sub Beati Petri,
and nostra protectione suscipimus, and praesentis scripti Privilegio
communimus: Statuentes, ut quascunque possessiones, quaecunque bona eadem
Ecclesia impraesentiarum just, and canonice possidet, aut in futurum
concessione Pontificum, largitione Regum, vel Principum, oblatione fidelium,
seu aliis justis modis praestante Domino poterit adipisci, firma vobis, and
vestris successoribus, and illibata permaneat. Inprimis, haec propriis duximus
exprimenda vocabulis. In Northamptonscire, Burch, quae antiquitus Medeshamstede
vocabatur, ubi ipsum Monasterium situm est, cum Capella, Mercato, Theloneo,
Cuneo Monetae, cum paludibus, boscis, and caeteris appendiciis suis. In Farseta
2 Piscatores, cum 2 mansuris terrae, and 2 naves in Wyttlismere. Castra cum
Ecclesia and Capella eidem Ecclesiae adjacentibus, cum molendinis and omnibus
pertinentiis suis. Wetherington and Walton, cum appendiciis suis. Glinton and
Peychirch cum Ecclesia, and Capella, cum Theloneo de Deping, and Peychirch, cum
piscatura, and caeteris appendiciis suis. Pillesgate cum appendiciis suis. In
Stamford Quinquaginta novem mansuras terrae, cum terris, molendinis, Ecclesiis,
Theloneo, Cuneo Monetae. In eadem villa in Lincolnscire septem mansuras.
Tinguellam, cum Ecclesia, molendino, and caeteris appendiciis suis. Undel cum
Ecclesia, and Capella, and cum toto jure eidem villae adjacente quod
Ethenhundred vocatur, cum molendino, mercato, Theloneo, nemoribus, and
appendiciis suis. Eston cum molendino, and pertinentiis suis. Wermington cum
Ecclesiis, molendinis, and caeteris appendiciis suis. Kettering cum Ecclesia,
molendino and pertinentiis suis. In Irtlingburgh december hidas cum Ecclesia,
molendino and pertinentiis suis. In Stanwigge tres hidas cum Ecclesia,
molendino, and pertinentiis suis. In Aldwincle tres hidas, cum Ecclesia, and
pertinentiis suis. Cottingham cum Ecclesia, molendino and caeteris pertinentiis
suis, scil. Benrefeld, Driffeld, Middilton, cum foresto. Pightislee cum
Ecclesia, molendino, and pertinentis suis. In Northampton sedecim mansuras. In
Lincolnscire Scotere cum Ecclesia, molendino, and appendiciis suis, scil.
Thorp, Scalthorp, Fiskerton cum Ecclesia, and suis pertinentiis. In Hoyland
tres carucatas terrae cum salinis. In Walcote septem carucatas terrae. In
Thurleby unam carucatam, and tres bovatus terrae, cum Ecclesia, and
pertinentiis suis. In civitate Lincoln quatuor mansuras. In Graham, mansuras,
and terram quam Colgem dedit Ecclesiae de Burgo. In Thorkesye, octodecim leugas
de prato, and unam piscaturam, and unam mansuram. In Notinghamscire, Colingham
cum Ecclesiis, molendinis, piscaturis, and cum appendiciis suis. In
Huntedonscire, Alwalton cum Ecclesia, molendinis Theloneo navium, and
pertinentiis suis. Flitton cum Ecclesia and pertinentiis suis. In burgo
Huntedon terram Godrici Leffled. In Leycestrescire, Eston cum Ecclesia de
Bringhurst, molendinis, and caeteris appendiciis suis. In Lenna unam mansuram.
In Well quatuor millia anguillarum singulis annis. In Clopton unam virgatam
terrae. Haec etiam quae ab ipso Monasterio in feodo tenentur nihilominus
duximus annotanda. viz. Feodum Anketilli de Sancto Medardo, Thornhaw,
Wettering, Sibberton, Angoteby, Etton, cum appendiciis eorum. Feodum Rogeri
infantis, Torpel, Ufford, Pilketon cum appendiciis suis, and terram quam habet
in Makeseya. Feodum Asselini de Watervile, Thorp, Marham, Upton cum eorum
appendiciis. Feodum Radulphi filii Wilihelmi, Luddington, Messingham, cum
appendiciis eorum. Feodum Gaufridi infantis, Gunthorp, Suthorp, and terram quam
habet in Stoke, cum appendiciis eorum. Feodum Gaufridi de Lamara, Makeseya,
Thurleby cum appendiciis eorum. Feodum Radulphi de Nevile, Scotton, Malmton,
cum appendiciis eorum. Feodum Rogeri Malfe, Wodeford cum appendiciis suis.
Feodum Roberti Frehille, Dalmiton cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Wilihelmi de
Lunetot. Clopton cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Roberti Marmioun, Langeton,
Pokebroc cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Gaufridi de Winchestria, Armeston,
Burghlay, cum appendiciis eorum. Feodum Gilberti Faunel, Walcote cum
appendiciis suis. Feodum Roberti de Fisi, Sutton cum appendiciis suis. Feodum
Rogeri de Melton, cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Radulphi Tot in Paston. Feodum
Wallon' in eadem villa cum appendiciis. Feodum Ysenbardi, Pappele cum
appendiciis suis. Feodum Wimundi, Stoke cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Engelrami,
in eadem villa. Feodum Roberti de Oyli, Craneford. Feodum Richardi Engaine,
Benifield. Feodum Wilihelmi Engain, Hargrave cum appendiciis suis. Feodum
Theobaldi, Bringhurst cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Godefridi de Cambrey,
Plumbtre, Berham cum appendiciis suis. Feodum Roberti de Guinges, Carleby cum
appendiciis suis. Feodum Gaufridi de Nevile, Walcote cum appendiciis suis.
Feodum Eylsi, Helpiston cum appendiciis suis. In Wenewyk tenementum Brutnaldi.
Feodum Pancenolt in Eston. Feodum Ansredii in Overton, in Thorp, and in
Ermiston. Tenementum Turici in Churchfield, Wermington, and Undel. Tenementum
Viviani in Wodecroft. Tenementum Osberni in Muscham. Tenementum Geroldi.
Libertates a Regibus Angliae eidem Monasterio concessas pia devotione, and
scripto eorum confirmatas, atque antiquas, and rationabiles ipsius Monasterii
consuetudines vobis nihilominus confirmamus. Obeunte vero M. nunc ejusdem loci
Abbate, vel tuorum quolibet successorum, nullus ibi qualibet surreptionis
astutia, vel violentia praeponatur, nisi quem fratres communi assensu, vel
fratrum pars sanioris consilii secundum Dei timorem, and Beati Benedicti
regulam providerint eligend. Praeterea praedecessoris nostri Sanctissimi Papae
Gregorii vestigiis inhaerentes, missas publicas ab Episcopo in vestro Coenobio
fieri prohibemus omnino, ne in servorum Dei recessibus, and eorum receptaculis
ullis popularibus occasio praebeatur conventibus, vel mulierum fiat novus
introitus, quod omnino non expedit animabus eorum. Nec audeat Episcopus aliquis
ibi Cathedram collocare, vel quamlibet potestatem imperandi habere, nec aliquam
ordinationem, quamvis levissimam faciendi, nisi ab Abbate loci fuerit rogatus:
quatenus Monachi semper maneant in Abbatum suorum potestate, nullusque Monachum
sine testimonio, vel concessione Abbatis sui in aliqua teneat, vel ad aliquem
promoveat honorem. Decernimus ergo, ut nulli omnino hominum liceat praefatum
Coenobium temere perturbare, aut ejus possessiones auferre, vel ablatas
retinere, minuere, seu alibet vexationibus fatigare, sed omnia integra
observentur, eorum pro quorum gubernatione, and sustentatione concessa sunt,
usibus omnimodis profutura, Salva sedis Apostolicae autoritate, and
Diocesanorum Episcoporum Canonum.
Canones justitia. Si qua igitur in futurum, Ecclesiastica, secularisve persona
hanc nostrae constitutionis paginam sciens contra eam temere venire
temptaverit, secundo, tertiove commonita, si non satisfactione congrua
emendaverit, potestatis, honorisque sui dignitate careat, reamque se Divino
judicio existere de perpetrata iniquitate cognoscat, and a sacratissimo
corpore, sanguineque Dei, and Domini Redemptoris nostri Jesu Christi aliena
fiat, atque in extremo examine districtae ultioni subjaceat; Cunctis autem
eidem loco justa servantibus sit pax Domini in Christo, quatenus and hic
fructum bonae actionis percipiant, and apud districtum Judicem praemia aeternae
pacis inveniant. Amen. Dat. Sextodecimo Call. Januarii, Anno Domini M. C. XL.
sexto.

Such another Privilege was granted by Pope Gregory the Ninth 1228. but I
shall not trouble the Reader with it, but make a retrograde motion to King
Edgars Charter.

THE CHARTER AND PRIVILEGES OF King Edgar, After that the Monastery of
Medeshamstede had been destroyed by the Danes, and continued in its desolation
ninety six years, and then restored through the pious industry of Athelwold
Bishop of Winchester, when the name thereof was changed into Burgh: Together
with the Confirmations of several Kings his Successors.
GRatia Domini nostri Jesu Christi Regis omnium saeculorum, omnia suo nutu
distribuentis regna terrarum, and moderantis habenas rerum. Ego Edgar sub ipso
sydereo Rege praesidens magnae Britanniae saepe petitionem Venerabilis, and Deo
dilecti Pontificis Adelwoldi super stabilitate Ecclesiarum, quarum ipse
infatigabilis constructor, accepi, maxim autem super antiqui Monasterii
restitutione, ac liberate, quod primitus Medeshamstede, modo Dei adjutorio, ac
sua, ac nostra instantia restauratum, Burch appellatur, Quod scil. quadam
praerogativa gratiae Sancti Petri, ac pristinae nobilitatis eminentius diligit.
Recolens enim illud a pristinis Regibus, Wolfero necnon Ethelredo aliisque
successoribus magnifici ditatum, and Regalibus privilegiis fortissime
stabilitum, sed ab externo Paganorum exercitu destitutum, Hic Dei sapiens
archietectus magno zelo domus Dei studuit reparare: Et acquisitis, ac redemptis
possessionibus rerum cum nostra Regali donatione prout potuit amplificare. Ego
itaque pro gratia Sancti Petri, tantique patris charitate, atque animae meae
redemptione, concedo gratantissime illud sanctum, and Apostolicum Coenobium in
perpetuum esse liberum ab omni seculari causa, and servitute, ut nullus
Ecclesiasticorum vel Laicorum super ipsum, vel super ipsius Abbatem ullum
unquam habeat dominium, sed ipso Abbate cum subjecta Christi familia in pace
Dei, and superni Janitoris Petri patrocinio illud regente, ac Rege in omnibus
necessitatibus adjuvante, ab omni mundiali jugo tam securum aeternaliter
persistat, quam liberum, sed etiam ab Episcopali exactione, and iniquietudine,
ex Apostolica liberate, and Reverendissimi Archiepiscopi nostri Dunstani
autoritate cum suis appendiciis, id est, Dodisthorpe, and Eye, and Paston
perpetuo maneat absolutum. Villam quoque Undale cum toto jure adjacentium quod
Ethenhundred Anglice nominatur, and cum Mercato, ac Theloneo ea prorsus
liberate donamus, quatenus nec Rex, nec Comes, nec Episcopus praeter
Christianitatem attinentium parochiarum, nec Vicecomes, nec ulla unquam major,
minorve persona, ulla dominatione occupare, nec de ipsa villa Undale ubi
legitime considere debet, in alium locum transfer ullatenus praesumat: Sed
tantum Abbas praedicti Coenobii illud cum suis causis, and legibus, totum in
sua potestate liberrime teneat, and quando, vel in quo loco sibi placuerit,
sine ulla contradictione sedere faciat. Item terras nostro adjutorio vel dono,
vel optimatum meorum per praefatum Episcopum eidem Monasterio adsectas quae hic
ex part titulantur, id est, Barwe, Wermington, Aschton, Kettering, Castre,
Eylisworth, Walton, Wetherington, Eye, Thorpe, and unum Monetarium in Stamford
in perpetuam libertatem concedimus. Sint ergo tam istae villae quam ceterae
omnes quae ad ipsum Monasterium pertinent, cum universis rebus, and rationibus
suis, and totum quod appellatur Sake, and Soke, ab omni Regali jure, and ab
omni seculari jugo in aeternum libere, and in magnis, and in minimis, in
silvis, campis, pascuis, pratis, paludibus, venationibus, piscationibus,
mercationibus, theloniis, omnium rerum procreationibus Dei beneficio
provenientibus. Concedimus etiam quartam Fishing in Wittlesey-Meer.
partem stagni quod dicitur Witlismere per Episcopum Adelwoldum acquisitam, cum
omnibus scil. aquis, piscuariis, stagnis, and paludibus attinentibus, usque ad
hos terminos circumjacentes, quorum Septentrionalis est ubi primum intratur
Merelode de amne Nene, Orientalis ad Kingsdelf, Australis ad Aldwinesbarne qui
locus est in palude contra medietatem viae Ubmerelode, Occidentalis ubi aqua de
Opbete finitur ad terram, quae omnia antiquitus ad illud sacrosanctum
Monasterium multo latius, and longius pertinuisse probantur. Mercatum quoque
The Market in Burgh.
constituimus in Burch singular, ut nullum aliud habeatur inter Stanford, and
Huntingdon, and ad illud damus ibidemque persolvi jubemus totum sine
contradictione ulla Theloneum, hoc est, primo de Witlismere usque ad Theloneum
Regis quod jacet ad hundred de Norman-Cross, and de Witlismere sicut Merelode
venit ad aquam Nene, and inde sicut aqua currit ad Walmisforde, and de
Walmisforde usque ad Stanford, and de Stanforde juxta cursum aquae usque ad
Cruland, and de Cruland usque ad Must, and de Must usque ad Kingsdelf, and
deinde usque praedictum Witlismere: Propter varia quippe lucra, and
corporalium, and spiritualium utilitatum hoc mercatum decrevimus illic
celebrari, and undique illud requiri, quatenus and Dei Ministri inde adjuventur
propinquius, and a concurrente populo inter terrena necessaria coelestia
petantur subsidia dummodo per Sancti Petri quaesita patrocinia: and per
missarum audita mysteria secundum fidem cujuslibet ibi possint redimi
diversarum offensionum debita. Porro decedente Abbate de eadem congregatione
fratres, successorum idoneum eligant, and Regis favore ordinetur. Hanc igitur
totius Abbatiae, tam in longinquis, quam proximis possessionibus Regificam
libertatem ab omnibus approbatam, excepta moderata expeditione, and pontis,
arcisve restauratione satagimus per ipsum devotissimum hujus descriptionis
autorem Adelwoldum a sede Apostolica Romanae Ecclesiae juxta primitivum ejusdem
Monasterii institutionem perpetuo corroborare: Quam quicunque in aliquo violare
praesumpserit, ipsius summi Praesidis Petri, and Romanae Hierarchiae, omniumque
sacrorum ordinum animadversione in infernum aeternum damnetur: Qui vero
provexerit, and defensaverit, in sort electorum Dei remuneretur. Sancitum est
hoc Privilegium Anno Dominicae Incarnationis Nongentesimo Septuagesimo secundo,
meique Imperii terreni Anno sexto decimo. Quod his probabilibus testibus cum
Sanctae Crucis indicio subnotatur juxta meam subscriptionem. Ego Edgar totius
Albionis Basileus hoc Privilegium cum signo Sanctae Crucis confirmavi. Ego
Dunstan Dorovernensis Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus hoc idem cum trophaeo agiae
Crucis corroboravi. Ego Oswaldus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus subscripsi. Ego
Adelwold Praesul consignavi. Ego Alfstan Episcopus favi. Ego Athulf Pontifex
consensi. Ego Asewi Abbas non renui. Ego Osgar Abbas approbavi. Ego Athelgar
Abbas consensi. Ego Alfere Dux. Ego Adthelumen Dux. Ego Brichnodus Dux. Ego
Oslac Dux. Ego Adelward Minister. Ego Ernulf Minister. Ego Afsis Minister. Ego
Alfunard Minister. Ego Freyegist. Ego Thured. Ego Vif. Ego Wilfric. Ego Offered.
Ego Wolftan. Ego Ringulf. Ego Alfstan. Ego Athelsis. Ego Wolfeah. Ego
Athelmund. Ego Thureford. Ego Alfelin. Ego Frana. Ego Freyegist.

Ego Edwardus Rex Anglorum Monarchiam regiminis tenens, Hoc decretum patris mei
per deprecationem Abbatis Adulfi perhenniter affirmavi. His testibus adjunctis
quos supra nominavimus.

Ego Ethelredus Anglorum Imperio sullimatus has donationes Predecessorum meorum
regnante Abbate Kenulfo solidavi, cum his testibus, Dunstano, and Oswaldo
Archiepiscopis.

Ego Cnut Rex Anglorum Deo favente, and Elfsino Abbate deprecante, hoc
Privilegium cum Optimatibus corroboravi.

Ego Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum hoc testamentum Antecessorum meorum,
postulante Abbate Leufrico, comprobavi: Et villam de Fiskerton quam Regina mea
ipso Abbate Leufrico instante pro me dedit, vel potius reddidit, juri Sancti
Petri in Burch concedo liberam cum terris, silvis, and aquis, and omnibus rebus
pertinentibus. Similiter de aliis terris, id est, Eston, Fletton, Overton,
Alwalton, Osgotby, and caeteris quae in eo tempore adjectae sunt. Concedo eidem
loco Sake, and Soke, Tol, and Them. Testibus Regina Eadgitha, Stigando, and
Aldredo Archiepiscopis, Haroldo, and Costino, cum caeteris Optimatibus meis.

His particular CHARTER FOR FISKERTON, Follows more at large.
In manu Geo. Quarles Armig.
O Portet nos quos Deus praefecit temporaliter Rectores populo suo, ad omnes
facere justitiam. Maxim autem ad Matrem nostrae salutis Ecclesiam, per quam
Christiani facti perveniamus ad aeternam Dei Misericordiam, qui judicabit Reges
terrae, and secundum opera sua reddet unicuique. Quapropter ego Edwardus Rex
Anglorum pro Villa Fiskertuna data in Burgh Sancto Petro jubeo fieri nostrae
confirmationis Testamentum contra omnium scilicet calumniam iniquorum. Hanc
quippe Villam cum Leofriva foemina Lundonica haberet omnino propriam and
liberam Beato Petro in praedictum locum, per obitum suum donavit eam sicut
fideli Testimonio nobis probatum est, perpetuo possidendam ea scilicet plena
liberate qua ipsa possidebat. Haec obiit in via Hierosolymae. Quod ubi
Leofricus Abbas de Burgh cognovit, ad nos causam suam retulit, and per idoneos
testes justum comprobavit, nostrumque assensum inde postulavit. At Regina mea
Edryd cum terram vendicasset, dicendo quod hanc sibi eadem foemina decrevisset,
idem Abbas per me and principes meos, Reginae fratres Haroldum and Tostinum,
ipsius potentiam flexit, datisque ei in gratiam xx marcis auri and ornamentis
Ecclesiae quae ad alia xx marca appreciantur, terram Monasterio suo liberrimam
and integerrimam restituit. Hanc igitur donationem ego Rex Edvardus cum ipsa
Regina ita annuo, concedo, and confirmo quatenus tota illa possessio Fiscartuna
in aeternum sit perpetua and dominica ipsius Sancti Petri in Burgh ad usus sibi
servientium, atque ita maneat libera in terris, aquis, silvis, pratis, pascuis,
cunctisque rebus and justitiis pertinentibus cum saca and socna, ut nullus inde
quicquam repetat praeter Arcis vel expeditionis subsidium. Hanc ergo contestor
omnes posteros meos Reges and Judices per Dominum omnium judicem, justitiae
amatorem, and totius injustitiae vindicem, nequis unquam audeat quicquam tam ex
his quam de omni jure Sancti Petri detrahere aut diminuere, quia revera sicut
illi consequuntur aeternam vitam qui Ecclesiam Dei amplificant, ita illis
manent sempiterna Tormenta qui eam in aliquo spoliant. Qui autem haec
violaverit, omnium Sacerdotum and Ministrorum Dei ore Anathema sit. Anno ab
Incarnatione Domini Millesimo LX. confirmatum est hoc Testamentum. Cui testes
conspicui subscribendo annotantur.

Ego Eduardus Rex constitui. Ego Edryd Regina concessi. Ego Stigandus
Archiepiscopus collaudavi. Ego Aldredus Archiepiscopus comprobavi. Ego Wolfrius
Lincoln. Antistes corroboravi. Ego Haroldus Dux favi. Ego Tostinus Dux testis
fui.
Signum Raulfi Regis dapiferi. Signum Asgeri Regis dapiferi. Signum Signum
Godrici, filii Edryfe. Signum Ulf de Lincona. Signum Askill Tokes sun. Signum
Laulf Maltes sun.
Ego Wilihelmus Dei beneficio Rex Anglorum, petente Abbate Brandone, istud
Privilegium in omnibus laudo, and confirmo, sicut suprascripti Reges ante me.
Similiter and terras fratrum, vel propinquorum suorum quas habebant sub Rege
Edwardo haereditarias, and liberas, hoc est, Scotter, Scotton, Malmeton,
Ragenaldetorpe, Messingham, Cletham, Hibaldistow, Walcote, Muscham, cum omnibus
adjacentibus Ego concedo Monasterio suo, and ejusdem loci Patrono Beato Petro
Apostolo, in perpetuam liberas, and quietas cum omnibus consuetudinibus quae
appellantur Anglice Sake, and Soke, quatenus jugiter sint proprie, and
dominice,................... infirmas and quaslibet necessitates ibidem Deo
servientium. Haec ergo nemo haeredum vel successorum meorum temerare audeat, ne
excommunicationis gladio intereat, and pro haereditate Ecclesiae infernum
possideat. Huic testes affuere Aldradus Archiepiscopus Eboracensis, Wilwinus
Lincolniensis Episcopus, Merlesuein Vicecomes, Vif filius Topi, Willielmus
Comes, Willielmus Malet. Ingelramus Presbyter.

K. William Rufus HIS CHARTER For the Tenth of his HUNTINGS IN
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
WIllielmus Rex Anglorum Omnibus fidelibus suis, and Ministris, and
Francigenis, and Anglis, Salutem. Sciatis me concessisse, and dedisse Sancto
Petro, and Abbati de Burgo totam decimam de mea venatione in Northamptonshire,
and amodo concedo ut illam omni tempore habeant. Testes Rad. Pagnallo, and W.
Peverello, and R. de Escuris, and H. de Bello Campo. Dat. per Richardum Engaine
apud Bristestocam.

This Charter was again granted by King Henry the second, and likewise by King
Richard the first, and another also for Huntingdonshire, which we shall give in
its place.

King Henry II.
HIS CHARTER Confirming the Eight Hundreds TO THE MONASTERY OF PETERBVRGH.
HEnricus Rex Anglorum, and Dux Normannorum and Aquit. and Comes Andeg.
Justiciariis, and Vic. and Ministris suis Angliae Salutem. Praecipio quod
Willielmus Abbas de Burgo teneat been, and in pace, and libere and quiet, and
just, and honorifice octo hundreda sua cum omnibus libertatibus, and liberis
consuetudinibus suis, and justitiam suam de octo hundredis suis sicut aliquis
Antecessorum suorum, melius, and liberius, and quietius, and honorificentius
tenuit tempore Regis Henrici Avi mei: Et prohibeo ne quis eum in aliquam novam,
and injustam consuetudinem ponat. T. Thoma Cant. apud Winton.

This CHARTER was also Confirmed by King Richard the First.

King Richard I. HIS CHARTER FOR A FAIR To be holden Eight Days in PETERBURGH.
S. Peter's Fair.

RIchardus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, Dux Normannorum, Aquitan. Comes Andeg.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vic.
and omnibus Ministris and fidelibus suis Francis, and Anglis, Salutem. Sciatis
nos concessisse, and Carta ista confirmasse Benedicto Abbati de Burgo, and
omnibus successoribus suis, and Monachis ibidem Deo fervientibus, Nundinas octo
dierum in Villa de Burgo omni anno in festo Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli. Quare
volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, ut praedicti Abbas, and Monachi habeant in
praedictis Nundinis omnes libertates, and liberas consuetudines quas alii
Baroni nostri habent in Nundinis suis. Et prohibemus ne aliquis eos inde
impediat, nec Mercatoribus illuc venientibus, vel inde redeuntibus, aliquod
gravamen inferat, vel molestiam faciat. T. Waltero Rothom. Archiepiscopo. 24
Martii. Apud Rothom.

King Richard I.
HIS CHARTER FOR A Weekly MARKET in Scotter in Lincolnshire, Market and Fair at
Scotter in Lincolnshire.
belonging to the MONASTERY of Peterburgh, and for a FAIR to be holden for
three Days.
RIchardus Dei Gratia Rex Angl. Dux Norman. Aquit. Comes Andeg. Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justic. Vic. and omnibus Ministris,
and fidelibus suis, Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, and praesenti Carta
confirmasse Benedicto Abbati de Burgo, and omnibus Successoribus suis and
Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, ut commune Mercatum in Villa sua de Scotter
in omni septimana in die Jovis, and Nundinas trium dierum omni anno in eadem
Villa ad festum Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli. Quare volumus, and firmiter
praecipimus, ut praedicti Abbas and Monachi habeant in praedicto Mercato, and
in praedictis Nundinis omnes libertates, and liberas consuetudines quas alii
Baroni nostri habent in Mercatis, and Nundinis suis. Et prohibemus ut nullus
eos inde impediat, nec Mercatoribus illuc euntibus, vel redeuntibus, aliquod
gravamen inferat, vel molestiam faciat. T. Waltero Rothom. Archiepiscopo. 24
Martii. Apud Rothom.

King Richard by his Charter bearing Date the first Year of his Reign, which
was 1189. granted the former Fair to Peterburgh, and this to Scotter, which
because they (with other Privileges granted to this Monastery) were in some
sort changed whilst he was detained in Almain in his return from Warring in the
Holy Land, he renewed his Charter, September 15. in the Tenth Year of his
Reign; says John Trikyngham.

King Richard I.
HIS CHARTER FOR THE Abbot and Covent OF PETERBURGH To have the Tenth of
HUNTINGS IN HVNTINGDON-SHIRE, And also for themselves to HUNT.
RIchardus Dei Gratia Rex Angl. Dux Norman. Aquit. Comes Andeg. Justic. Vic.
Forestariis and Omnibus Ministris, and fidelibus suis, Francis, and Anglis,
Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, and Carta ista confirmasse Abbati de Burgo,
and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus totam decimam totius Venationis quae
capietur in Huntingdonscire quicunque eam ceperit, in perpetuum: Et quod liceat
eis venari Leporem, Vulpem, and Catum: salva alia venatione nostra. Et ideo
prohibemus ne aliquis eos inde impediat, nec Decimam praedictam eis detineat:
Et praecipimus Forestariis ut unusquisque in Balliva sua eis decimam suam
habere faciat. T. Waltero Archiepiscopo Rothom 24 die Martii, Apud Rothom.

King Richard, and King John granted also many Charters to this Monastery, both
for their Lands, and Privileges in general, and many in particular, which I
shall not here-recite, but only some few relating to our Story.

THE CHARTER OF JOHN Whilst he was Earl of Moriton, GRANTED TO THIS MONASTERY
FOR VENISON.
JOhannes Comes Moret. Vic. and Forestariis and omnibus Ballivis suis de
Northamptonscire, Salutem. Sciatis me concessisse Carissimo amico meo Benedicto
Abbati de Burgo and omnibus Successoribus fuis, and Monachis ejusdem loci cum
vacaverit seeds Abbathiae de Burgo in perpetuum tres Cervos, and sex Damas
singulis annis capiendos quandocunque voluerint a Nativitate Sancti Johannis
Baptistae usque ad exaltationem Sanctae Crucis, ubi magis voluerint, sive in
Foresta mea de Schirwode, sive in Clay. Ideo praecipio vobis quod permittatis
eis vel hominibus suis capere praedictam venationem infra praedictos terminos
in praememoratis Forestae meae locis absque impedimento, vel contradictione,
quae eis fiat inde: Hoc tamen fiat per visum Forestariorum meorum. Testibus,
Stephano Ridell Cancellario meo, Willielmo de Wenn. Rogero de Plan. Apud
Theokisbiri.

King John HIS CHARTER Concerning the Deforestation OF NASSABVRGH.
JOhannes Dei Gratia Rex Angl. Dux Hiberniae, Dux Norman. Aquitan. Comes Andeg.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Com. Baron. Justic. Vic. Praepositis,
Forestariis, and Omnibus Ballivis, and fidelibus suis, Salutem. Sciatis nos
intuitu Dei, and Beati Petri, and ob reverentiam Beati Oswaldi Regis, and
Martyris, and pro salute nostra and Antecessorum, and Successorum nostrorum
concessisse, and praesenti Carta confirmasse Abbati de Burgo, and Monachis
ibidem Deo servientibus, and militibus, and libere tenentibus qui habent terras
vel tenementa in Nasso Burgi infra has metas, scil. inter aquam de Nene, and
aquam de Weland sicut aquae in Charta H. 3.
convenient in Croyland, and de Walmisford sicut magnum Chiminum extendit se
usque ad Stupendiston extra villam de Stanford, and de Stupendiston extra domum
Sanctimonialium Sancti Michaelis de Stanford per rectam lineam usque in Weland:
Ita quod praedicta domus sit infra praedictas metas: Quod ipsi habeant in
perpetuum totam terram infra praedictas metas deforestatam: Ita quod, nec nos,
nec haeredes nostri ibidem ab eis vel successoribus and haeredibus eorum
aliquid exigere possimus quod ad Forestam vel Forestarium pertineat, vel
occasion Forestae. Concessimus etiam eis quietantiam sectae quatuor hominum,
and praepositi de qualibet villata infra metas praefatas ad placita Forestae
coram Capitali Justiciario nostro de Foresta ubi placitum non est super eos. Et
quod omnia attachiamenta, and omnia placita emersa, tam de viridi, quam de
venatione, and regardo, and in bladimentis, and vastis boscorum factis Chapter H. 3.
facta infra metas praedictas post ultimum iter Justiciariorum nostrorum de
Foresta itinerantium in Northamptonscyra, amodo in perpetuum remaneant, and non
summoneantur, vel placitentur: Quia volumus quod de omnibus supradictis in
perpetuum sint quieti. Concedimus etiam praedictis Abbati de Burgo and Monachis
ibidem Deo servientibus in puram and perpetuam Eleemosynam Centum Acras quietas
de regardo in Maneriis suis de Cotingham and de Eston, ut possint illas libere
assartare, and excolere pro voluntate sua. Quare volumus, and firmiter
praecipimus quod praedicti Abbas and Monachi, Milites and libere tenentes
praedictas libertates, and quietantias habeant in perpetuum sicut praedictum
est. Testibus, Domino S. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo. Dominis W. London. P.
Winton. W. Wigorn. W. Coventr. Episcopis. R. Com. Cestr. W. Mariscallo. Com.
Penbr. W. Com. Sar. R. Le Bigot. Com. Northfolc. W. Com. Waren. W. Com. Arund.
W. Com. Ferar. R. Com. de Clare. Dat. per manum Magistri Richardi de Marisc.
Cancellarii nostri. Apud Oxoniam 1214.
12. Aprilis, Anno regni nostri 16.

This Charter was again Confirmed by K. Hen. 3.

King Henry III.
HIS CHARTER FOR A FAIR To be holden Eight Days in PETERBURGH, And for a Weekly
Market at KETTERING IN NORTH AMPTON-SHIRE.
HEnricus Dei Gratia Rex Angl. etc. Sciatis quod concessimus and hac praesenti
Carta confirmavimus Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri, and Monachis ibidem Deo
servientibus, quod habeant unum mercatum apud Manerium suum de Kettering
singulis septimanis per diem Veneris: Et quod habeant apud Burgum Sancti Petri
unam feriam singulis annis per 8 dies duraturam a secunda Dominica infra
Quadragesimam in 8 dies sequentes: Ita tamen quod praedictum Mercatum, and
praedicta feria non sint ad nocumentum vicinorum mercatorum, and vicinarum
feriarum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod praedicti Abbas, and
Monachi habeant and teneant praedictum mercatum, and praedictam feriam in
praedictis locis in perpetuum, been, and in pace, libere, and quiet, cum
omnibus libertatibus, and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi mercatum, and
feriam pertinentibus, sicut praedictum est.

King Henry III.
HIS CHARTER FOR A FAIR AT OXENEY To be holden there for Eight Days.
HEnricus Dei Gratia Rex Angl. etc. Sciatis quod concessimus, and hac nostra
Carta confirmavimus Abbati, and Conventui de Burgo Sancti Petri, quod ipsi and
Successores sui in perpetuum habeant unam feriam apud Oxeneye singulis annis
per octo dies duraturam. viz. a Vigilia nativitatis Beatae Mariae in octo dies
sequentes, nisi illa feria sit September. 7.
ad nocumentum vicinarum feriarum. Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus pro
nobis, and haeredibus nostris quod praedicti Abbas, and Conventus habeant
praedictam feriam apud Oxeneye, sicut praedictum est, cum omnibus libertatibus,
and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi feriam pertinentibus, libere, and
quiet, and pacifice in perpetuum. His testibus, etc.

THE PRIVILEGE OF THE JUSTICES FOR THE ABBOT OF PETERBURGH TO HUNT.
1253.
PRaeceptum est apud Hokham per Justiciarios Domini H. Regis Angl. scil. per
Dominum Galfridum de Langley, W. Britonem, and W. Trussel. Petro de Nevile tunc
Forestario, quod permittat Abbatem de Burgo venari, and capere ubi voluerit in
Balliva sua, Leporem, Vulpem, and Catum silvestrem secundum proportum Cartarum
Dominorum Regum Angliae quas inde habet: Et canes suos non expeditatos, and
hominum suorum in dominciis suis in eadem Balliva. Anno regni Regis Henrici
filii Regis Johannis 34.

Pope Innocent IV.
HIS INDULGENCE FOR THE MONKS To cover their Heads in time of Divine Service.
INnocentius Episcopus Servus servorum Dei, Dilelecto filio Abbati Monasterii
de Burgo Sancti Petri Ordinis Sancti Benedicti Lincolniens. Dioc. salutem, and
Apostolicam benedictionem. Ex part dilectorum filiorum Prioris, and Conventus
Monasterii tui fuit nobis humiliter supplicatum, ut cum idem Monasterium sit in
frigido loco constructum, nec valiant absque gravi periculo corporum hic mali
praecipue tempore discoopertis capitibus interesse divinis officiis
celebrandis, licentiam eis utendi pileis ipsorum ordini congruentibus dum
eisdem intersunt officiis, de solita misericordia concedere curaremus. Volentes
igitur ipsorum preces affectu paterno admittere in hac part, discretioni tuae
per Apostolica scripta mandamus, quatenus eisdem postulata concedas prout
videris expedire. Dat. Lugd. Call. Septembris, Pontificatus nostri Anno septimo.

M S. Eliens. in manu Geo. Glapthorn, Arm. page 41.
The same Privilege was granted to the MONKS of Ely, by Alexander the Fourth,
who succeeded Innocent.

King Edward I.
HIS CHARTER FOR A Thursday-Market AT NORTHOLM, AND FOR A FAIR To be holden
there for two Days, Sept. 20, 21.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baron. Justic.
Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis,
Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, and hac Carta nostra confirmasse Dilectis
nobis in Christo Abbati, and Conventui de Burgo Sancti Petri, quod ipsi, and
Successores sui in perpetuum habeant unum Mercatum singulis septimanis per diem
Jovis apud Manerium suum de Northolm juxta Eye in Commit. Northt. and unam
Feriam ibidem singulis annis per duos dies duraturam, viz. in vigilia, and in
die Sancti Matthaei Apostoli, nisi Mercatum illud, and Feria illa sint ad
nocumentum vicinorum Mercatorum, and vicinarum Feriarum. Quare volumus, and
firmiter praecipimus pro nobis, and haeredibus nostris, quod praedicti Abbas,
and Conventus, and Successores sui in perpetuum habeant praedict. Mercatum, and
Feriam apud Manerium suum praedictum cum omnibus libertatibus, and liberis
consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi Mercatum, and Feriam pertinentibus, nisi Mercatum
illud, and Feria illa sint ad nocumentum vicinorum Mercatorum, and vicinarum
Feriarum sicut praedictum est. His Testibus, venerabilibus Patribus, W.
Archiepiscopo Angliae Primate, W. Coventr. and Litchfield, and J Cicestren.
Episcopis, Henrico de Lacy Com. Lincoln. Thoma Comite Lancastr. Humfrido de
Bohun Comite Hereford, and Essex. Rad. de monte Hermerii Comite Gloucestr. and
Hereford. Adomaro de Valentia, Roberto la Ward Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and
aliis. Data per manum nostram apud Wolvesey, 7 die 1306.
Aprilis, Anno regni nostri Tricesimo Quarto.

Common Tradition has preserved some dark remembrance of this Fair, but, as
has been before observed, it is probable for some inconvenience to have been
translated to Peterburgh, where a Fair was granted upon the same day, as may
appear by the following Charter. Which Fair is held, and continued to this day,
to the great benefit both of the City, and parts adjacent.

King Henry VI.
HIS CHARTER FOR A FAIR To be holden in PETERBURGH For three Days. Sept, 20,
21, 22. commonly called Brigge-Fair. Brigge-Fair.

HEnricus Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dom. Hiberniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ballivis, Ministris, and omnibus
fidelibus suis, salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, and de
avisamento, and assensu consilii nostri, concessimus, and hac praesenti Carta
nostra confirmavimus Dilectis nobis in Christo Abbati, and Conventui de Burgo
Sancti Petri, quod ipsi, and Successores sui in perpetuum habeant unam Feriam
singulis annis apud pontem de Peterburgh juxta aquam de Neene, tam in Comitatu
Northt. quam in Com. Hunt. ex utraque part ejusdem pontis in dominio eorundem
Abbatis, and Conventus ibidem per tres dies duraturam, viz. in vigilia, and in
die Sancti Matthaei Apostoli, and in Crastino ejusdem festi tenens: Nisi Feria
illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum Feriarum. Quare volumus, and firmiter
praecipimus pro nobis, and haeredibus nostris, quod praedicti Abbas, and
Conventus, and Successores sui praedicti in perpetuum habeant praedictam Feriam
apud pontem de Peterburgh juxta aquam de Neene tam in Com. Northt. quam in Com.
Hunt. ex utraque part ejusdem pontis in dominio dictorum Abbatis, and
Conventus ibidem cum omnibus libertatibus, and liberis consuetudinibus ad
hujusmodi Feriam pertinentibus, nisi Feria illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum
Feriarum sicut praedictum est. His Testibus, Venerabilibus Patribus, H.
Cantuar. and J. Ebor. Archiepiscopis. Y. Bathon. and Wellen. Cancellario
nostro. W. Lincoln. and W. Sarum. Episcopis. Charissimo Avunculo nostro
Humfredo Gloucestr. ac Carissimo Consanguineo nostro Richardo Ebor. Ducibus.
Henrico Northumber. and Will. Suffolc. Senescallo Hospitii nostri,
Consanguineis nostris Carissimis, Comitibus. Necnon Radulfo Cromwell
Thesaurario nostro Angliae, Waltero Hungerford, and Willielmo de Bardolf,
Camerar. nostro Militibus, and Magistro Willielmo Lynwode Custode privati
Sigilli nostri, and aliis. Dat. per manum nostrum apud Manerium nostrum de
Sheen, Quarto decimo die Julii, Anno Regni nostri Decimo Septimo. 1439.


The Town of Peterburgh has in our memory kept another Fair upon the Feast of
S. Oswald, August 5. but I have not yet met with the Original of it: which Fair
is now quite fallen, and like to be buried in obscurity, unless some
well-willers to the Privilege shall endeavor to restore it according to its
ancient custom, if the time of Harvest will permit.

Now because I have in Abbot Robert Sutton directed the Reader to Prince Edward
's security to the Abbot, and Convent of Peterburgh for their Obligation to
certain Merchants for money borrowed of them by the Prince, I shall let the
Reader see it, and the manner thereof:

EDwardus Illustris Regis Angliae Primogenitus Universis Christi fidelibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem in Domino. Noverit universitas
vestra quod religiosi viri Abbas, and Conventus de Burgo Sancti Petri Lincoln.
Dioces. quibusdam Mercatoribus Senen. in quadam pecuniae summa pro nobis, se,
and omnia bona Ecclesiae literis suis signatis dudum specialiter obligarunt; Et
nos propter hoc, Manerium nostrum de Graham cum suis pertinentiis dictis
Abbati, and Conventui sponte tradidimus, Ita tamen quod si dictis Mercatoribus
de dicta summa pecuniae suo termino per nos satisfactum non fuisset, memorati
Abbas, and Conventus dictum Manerium cum suis pertinentiis tenerent donec
praefatam pecuniae summam de dicto Manerio una cum damnis, interesse, and
expensis factis vel faciendis occasion dictae pecuniae suo termino non solutae
plenarie percipient, sicut apparet per quasdam literas super hoc inter nos and
ipsos Abbatem, and Conventum confectas, ac Chirographatas, quarum una pars
residebat penes ipsos nostro sigillo signata, alia vero residebat penes nos
sigillo dicti Abbatis signata. Et quia de praefata pecuniae summa memoratis
Mercatoribus per nos plenarie extitit satisfactum, dicti Abbas and Conventus
partem dicti Chirographi nostro sigillo signatam nobis London restituerunt, and
quia alteram partem ejusdem Chirographi sigillo dicti Abbatis signatam promptam
non habuimus, nec habemus ad praesens, volumus, and concedimus pro nobis, and
haeredibus nostris quod dicta pars sigillo ipsius Abbatis signata, cassa sit,
and vacua, and penitus nullius valoris in perpetuum, and nihilominus dictis
Abbati, and Conventui restituta, quandocunque, and ubicunque fuerit inventa,
sine aliqua dilatione, and contradictione. In cujus rei testimonium
praesentibus sigillum nostrum apponi fecimus. Dat. etc.

The late King Charles the First, who was not inferior to any of his Royal
Predecessors for religious care and protection of this Church, with others of
the like nature, for which he might as deservedly as any challenge the name of
Nursing Father, the glory of which name shall never be Ecclipsed by the
blackest cloud of any Edomitical generation) had such a vigilant eye upon this
Church, that for the benefit and improvement of Officers, as well for the
future, as for the present, He wrote to the Dean and Chapter, as follows.

TO OUR Trusty and VVell-beloved THE DEAN and CHAPTER OF OUR Cathedral CHVRCH
OF PETERBURGH, And to the DEAN and CHAPTER of that CHURCH that hereafter for
the time shall be.
CHARLES R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. We have lately taken the state of
our Cathedral and Collegiat Churches into our Princely consideration, that we
may be the better able to preserve that livelihood which as yet is left unto
them. Upon this Deliberation we find that of later times there has not risen a
greater Inconvenience, than by turning Leases of one and twenty Years into
Lives, for by that means the present Dean and Chapter, put great Fines into
their Purses, to enrich themselves, their Wives, and Children, and leave their
Successors, of what deserts soever to us, and the Church, destitute of that
growing means, which else would come in to help them: By which course, should
it continue, scarce any of them could be able to live and keep house, according
to their Place, and Calling. We know the Statute makes it alike lawful for a
Dean and Chapter, to let their Leases for the Term of One and Twenty Years, or
three Lives; but time and experience have made it apparent that there is a
great deal of difference between them, especially in Church-Leases, when men
are commonly in Years before they come to those Places. These are therefore to
Will and Command you, upon the peril of Our utmost displeasure, and what shall
follow thereon, that notwithstanding any Statute, or any other pretense
whatsoever, you presume not to let any Lease belonging to your Church into
Lives that is not in Lives already. And further where any fair opportunity is
offered you, if any such be, you fail not to reduce such as are in Lives into
Years. And we do likewise Will and Require, that these Our Letters may remain
upon Record in your own Register Books, and in the Registry of the Lord Bishop
of that Diocese, that he may take notice of these Our Commands unto you, and
give us, and Our Royal Successors knowledge, if you presume in any sort to
disobey them. And further, whereas in Our late Instructions, We have Commanded
all our Bishops respectively, not to let any Lease after We have named any of
them to a better Bishopric, but did not in those Instructions name the Deans,
who yet were intended by Us: These are therefore to Declare unto you, that no
Dean shall presume to renew any Lease either into Lives or Years, after such a
time as We have nominated him either to a better Deanery or a Bishopric, having
observed, that at such times of Remove, many men care not what or how they Let,
to the prejudice of the Church, and their Successors. And this is our express
Command to you, your Chapter, and your Successors, which in any case We require
both you and them strictly to observe, upon pain of Our high displeasure, and
as you, and they will answer the contrary at your and their utmost perils.

Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of Greenwich the Two and twentieth day of
June, in the Tenth Year of Our Reign.
TO OUR Trusty and VVell-beloved THE DEAN and PREBENDARIES OF OUR Cathedral
CHURCH OF PETERBURGH.
CHARLES R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. We are informed that the Dotations
and Allowances in our Cathedral Church of Peterburgh are very mean both for
your selves the Dean and Prebendaries, and for the Petty Canons, Clerks, and
other subservient members therein: And further that there is very little left
to keep so goodly a Fabric as that Cathedral is, in sufficient reparation.
Wherefore in our Princely Care and Zeal to Gods service, We are ready to take
notice of every good Proposal which may tend to the supportation and
advancement of the same. Forasmuch therefore as it is represented unto Us by
the most Reverend Father in God our Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved
Councellor, The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that a very fair opportunity
will within few years offer it self (the like whereof if that be omitted, can
hardly at any time after be hoped for in that Church) namely by the renewing
the Lease of the Manors of Castor and Sutton which are the Inheritance of that
Cathedral, and are reputed to be clearly worth five hundred and threescore
pounds per annum, or thereabouts over and above the Rents which now are
reserved upon them. In this regard We are pleased to direct these Our Royal
Letters unto you, willing and requiring you the Dean and Prebendaries that
whenever you shall next renew the said Lease, so as to add any Term of Years
thereunto, you shall not aim at your own present advantage only, but also at
the future good of that Church in succeeding Ages: And shall therefore reserve
the full sum of Three hundred and Ten pounds per annum (over and above the old
Rent) upon the same: By which increase (as We have caused it to be apportioned)
you shall be able to add unto the Deans place, Threescore pounds yearly; unto
every Prebendary, Sixteen pounds yearly; unto every Petty-Canon Six pounds;
unto every Clerk, Three pounds six shillings eight pence; unto every Chorister,
One pound thirteen shillings four pence; unto the Master and Teacher of them,
Three pounds; Unto the Chanter Three pounds, unto the Organists Ten pounds; to
either of the Sextons forty shillings; and toward the repair of the Fabric of
the Church Forty six pounds: to the great Improvement of all the said places,
and encouragement of all those that from time to time shall be employed in Gods
Holy Service among you. And Our Royal Will and Pleasure is, that at the next
Chapter to be held by you, after the receipt hereof, you shall make a
Chapter-Act to this very purpose, causing also these Our Royal Letters and
directions to be faithfully Registered in your Chapter-Book: And that every
succeeding Dean, and Prebendary together with his admission and instalment,
have notice given him hereof, until these our Princely and Pious provisions for
that Church shall be accomplished and fully perfected. And that after these Our
Royal Letters shall be Registered, you lay them up safe among your Evidences,
there to be kept as a Monument of Our Care to the Service of Almighty God.

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster the Ninth of November, in
the fourteenth Year of Our Reign.
I shall here present an Ancient Catalogue of a Library in this Monastery,
which, having no Date annexed to it, must be left to conjecture when it might
be taken. The Marginal Illustrations I have taken out of Bellarmine, Pitseus,
Trithemius, and affixed them thereunto.

Matricularium Librariae Monasterii Burgi Sancti Petri paucis libris non
examinatis.
A He was a Scotchman, and lived Anno 820. Bellarm.
Claudius super Matthaeum. Expositio Joh. Chrysostomi super In principio erat
Verbum. Expositio ejusdem super Evang. de Muliere Cananaea. Expositio Bedae
super Evang. Non est arbor bona. Expositio ejusdem super Evangelium, Facta sunt
Encoenia. Sex sermones de Sancta Maria. Duo Sermones de Sancta Agnete. Vita
Sancti Romani Rothomagensis Episcopi. Dunstane was made Archbishop of Canterb.
961. and sat their 27 years, Somner.
Vita Sancti Dunstani Archiepiscopi.
B Dialogus Basilii, and Johannis. S. libri sex. Augustinus de Poenitentia.
Gennadius was a Priest at Marseiles, Anno 490. This Book is extant amongst S.
Austins works, says Bellarm.
Gennadius de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus. These Collations are extant in C -- --
See G.
Collationes Nesteronis Abbatis. Collationes Abbatis Abraham. Collationes
Abbatis Cheremonis.
C Amongst S. Ambrose his works this Pastorale bears the Title De dignitate
Sacerdotali. Tom. 4.
Pastorale Ambrosii Quaestio Hieronymi de induratione cordis Pharaonis, and de
aliis quatuor quaestionibus. Item de 15 signis ante diem Judicii.
D Augustinus de libero arbitrio. Damianus was a Monk of Ravenna, Anno 1060.
and wrote the life of Abbot Odilo says, B -- --
Liber Petri Damiani Monachi qui dicitur, Dominus Vobiscum. The Life of Odilo
and Maiola were also written by Osbinus a Monk of Canterbury, Anno 1074. Pits.
This Odilo, says Trithemius, was Abbot of Cluniack, and died Anno 1048. He
succeeded Maiolus who was Abbot there, says Sigehert. Anno 975. 998.
Vita Odilionis Abbatis. Vita Sancti Maioli. Vita Willielmi Alcurbues. Quaedam
miracula Leonis Papae.
F Hieronymus de Interpretationibus Hebraicorum nominum. Expositiones
Hebraicarum literarum. Quaedam sententiae ex dictis diversorum Theologorum
collectae de Mysterio corporis and sanguinis Christi.
G. Albinus or Alcuinus was Scholar to Beda, and Tutor to Charles the Great,
Anno 770. says Trithemius; 780. says Bellarmine.
Albinus super Ecclesiasten.
H Hieronymus super Marcum. Vita Sanctae Mildredae Virginis.
I Tractatus Origenis de Susanna. S. Nicolas was Bishop of Myra, mentioned Act
27. 5. and died Anno 309. December. 6. is to his memory.
Vita Sancti Nicolai. Vita Sancti Botulphi Abbatis. Tractatus de Translatione
sanctorum tor -- -- Guthlacus was Confessor to Ethelbald K. of Mercia, the
Founder of Croyland Monastery, Anno 716. His life was written by Felix a Monk
of Croyland, Anno 730. and afterward done into Verse by William a Monk of
Ramsey, Anno 1180. Pits. His life was written by -- --
Vita Sancti Guthlaci. Not known by this name in S. Ambrose.
Sermo B. Ambrosii de observantia Episcoporum. Ambrosius de mysteriis. Extant in
his 4 Tome.
Ambrosius de Sacramentis. In S. Ambr. works it is De Helia, and Jejun.
Ambrosius de utilitate and laud jejunii. Hyponosticon Augustini contra
Pelagianos, and Celestranos.
L Epistola Paulae, and Eustochii ad Marcellam exhortatoria de sanctis locis.
Epistola Hieronymi de Septies percussa. Epistola ejusdem ad Oceanum de morte
Fabiolae. Epistola ejusdem ad Marcellam. Epistola ejusdem ad Laetam de
institutione filiae. Plures Epistolae Hieron. ad Marcellam. Item ad Oceanum de
quaestione Evangelii, Qui dixerit verbum adversus Filium hominis. Item Epistola
ad Marcellam. Item Epistola Hieron. ad matrem and filiam in Galliis
commorantes. Item Epistola ad Castorinam materteram. Item Epistola ejusdem ad
Salvinam de Nebrid. and viduitate servanda. Item Epistola ejusdem ad
Aggeruchiam de Monogamia. Quaestiones ejusdem ad Hedibiam, s. duodecim.
M Tractatus Joh. Chrysostomi super Epistolas Pauli ad Hebraeos. Tractatus
ejusdem de vii. horis diei.
N Augustinus de mendacio ad Consentium, liber unus. Item alius liber de
mendacio. Item duo libri ad Vicnentium de eadem re. Augustinus de natura and
origin animae, ad Renatum. Item alius liber de natura and origin animae, ad
Petrum. Sermo Arrianorum. Augustinus contra eundem sermonem. Augustinus contra
adversarium legis, and Prophetarum libri duo. Augustinus de adulterinis
conjugiis, libri duo. Sermo Sancti Augustini de pastoribus. Item Sermo ejusdem
de ovibus. Augustinus ad Marcellinum de Spiritu and litera, liber unus.
Sententia Augustini de libro retracttaionum super librum de unico baptismo.
Augustinus de unico baptismo liber unus. Epistola Augustini ad Marcellinum de
quibusdam quaestionibus. Augustinus contra Donatistas de baptismo libri septem.
Augustinus ad Marcellinum de baptismo parvulorum libri duo.
O Orosius was a Priest of Spain, and Scholar to S. Austin, Anno 420. Trith.
425. Bellarmine.
Sexaginta quinque quaestiones Orosii Presbyteri, and totidem responsiones
Augustini. The Epistles commonly vogued to have passed betwixt S. Paul and
Seneca, are extant. Hence S. Hierom inserted Seneca amongst his Ecclesiastical
writers. Nicolas Triveth an English man, Anno 1324. paraphrased upon these
Epistles: So likewise did Faber Stapulensis.
Epistolae Senecae ad Paulum. Epistolae Pauli ad Senecam. Epistola Anselmi
Archiepiscopi de sacrificio Azymi, and fermentati. Anselmus de processione
Spiritus Sancti Anselmus was made Archbishop of Cant. Anno 1093. He succeeded
Lanfrancus.
. Anselmus, Cur Deus homo. Formula vitae honestae Martini Episcopi, quae agit
See L. IX.
de quatuor virtutibus Cardinalibus. Musa Martini. i. Cacosionus lingua paterna
sonat. Lanfrancus was made Archbishop of Cant. Anno 1070. This Book is extant,
Printed Lovanii, 1551.
Lanfrancus contra Berengarium de Corpore, and sanguine Domini. Ernulfus was
Abbot of Peterburgh, and from thence translated to Rochester. See B....
Quaedam solutiones Ernulfi Episcopi Roffensis ad quosdam quaestiones Lamberti
Abbatis Sancti Bertani. Sermo Eusebii de Corpore and sanguine Domini. See Q.
Sermo Isidori Episcopi Hispalensis de eadem re. Quid quibus temporibus sit
legendum, aut canendum. Commentum Boetii de Trinitate. Expositio super idem
Commentum. Libellus contra Eutichen, and Nestorium. Expositio super eundem.
Isidorus de ordine creaturae. Bacharius Macceus a Briton, disciple to S.
Patrick, Anno 460. Pits. who mentions this Epistle under this Title,
Dereparatione lapsi, ceu, de fructu poenitentiae ad Januarium.
Epistola S. Bacharii ad Januarium. Anselmus de concordia praescientiae and
praedestinationis and gratiae Dei cum libero arbitrio. Consuetudines Monachorum
Cluniacensium. Epistolae diversorum Pontificum. Laurence was Deacon to Xystus
Bish. of Rome, and under Decius about Anno 252. was roasted upon a Gridiron. S.
Ambrose S^r. 71. and elsewhere makes glorious mention of him. August 10. is his
Memorial.
Passio S. Laurentii versifice. Mauritius was Commander of 6666 Soldiers who
being all Christians, were put to the Sword at Agaunum a Town in Helvetia, in
the time of Dioclesian, about the year 399. as the Roman Martyrologies record,
who celebrate his memory Sept. 22.
Passio S. Mauritii sociorum and ejus, versifice Versus de S. Pafnutio. De
poenitentia Thaidis meretricis. Versus de transgressione Jonae prophetae.
Versus de Jepte. Versus de Susanna. Exhortatio vitae honestae. She was -- --
some of her Relics were kept.
Vita Sanctae Anstrobertae Virginis, versifice, and diversa ejusdem Miracula.
P Quaestiones Albini de Genesi, and solutiones. Tractatus de mensuris and
ponderibus. Interpretationes quorundam nominum veteris testamenti.
Q Sermo Augustini de Cantico novo. Aug. in his 9 tome.
Sermo de quarta feria. Aug. in his 9 tome
De Cataclysmo. De tempore Barbarico cum Sermon de Trinitate. Aug. in his 9
tome.
Isidorus was Bishop of Sevil in Spain, An 630. These Tractates are recorded by
Trithemius and Bellarmine.
Liber prooemiorum Isidori cum libris veteris testamenti, Aug. in his 9 tome.
and novi. Liber Isidori de ortu, and vita patrum veteris and novi testamenti.
Isidorus de patribus veteris and novi testamenti, Quis cujus typum gesserit.
Catalogus Isidori de Catholicis Scriptoribus. Catalogus Hieronymi de Catholicis
Scriptoribus. Gelasius was Bishop of Rome, Anno 490. Bellarm.
Epistola Gelasii Papae, and septuaginta Episcoporum de recipiendis, and non
recipiendis libris. Catalogus Gennadii de Catholicis Scriptoribus. See B.
Item Catalogus Isidori de Catholicis Scriptoribus. Robertus Tumbeley Rob.
Tumbeley was Monk of Croyland, says Pitseus, but knows not when he lived.
super Cantica Canticorum. Expositio S. Cypriani Martyris super Orationem
Dominicam. Duo libri Soliloquiorum S. Augustini. Augustinus de Immortalitate
animae liber unus. In his 1 tom. 1. Retract. c. 5.
Augustinus de Quantitate animae liber unus. In his 1 tom. 1 Retract. c. 8.
Augustinus de definitionibus Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum liber unus. Quaedam
excerpta de tribus libris Augustini contra Parmenianum.
R Augustinus de vera religione liber unus. Augustinus ad Valentinum de gratia,
and libero arbitrio, liber unus. Augustinus de 8 quaestionibus Dulcitii.
Augustinus contra Pelagianos de Praedestinatione Divina. Responsiones Augustini
ad quaedam sibi falso objecta contra fidem. Sex Sermones Augustini de
Nativitate Domini. Sermo Eusebii de Nativitate Domini. Sermo Origenis de
Circumcisione Domini. Tres Sermones Augustini de Epiphania Domini. Augustinus
de Doctrina Christiana.
S Hildefonsus was B. of Toledo, An. 658. says Bellarmine, and both he, and
Trithemius makes mention of this book which, say they, the blessed Virgin took
so well, that she gave him thanks for it.
Liber Hildefonsis Episcopi de perpetua virginitate B. Mariae.
T Augustinus de Virginitate. In his 7 Tome.
Augustinus de nuptiis and concupiscentia. Liber Soliloquiorum Isidori
Hispalensis Episcopi.
U Quaedam excerpta de scriptis diversorum Doctorum. Libellus de Tonis.
Proverbia Senecae. Expositiones diversarum partium. Augustinus de Verbis
Domini. Idem de tempore munitionis. De duodecim lapidibus. De proprietate
cantus ann.
X Apotheosis v PN ad D PN. SS PD.
Y Eusebius who lived Anno 326. wrote this Chronicle from the beginning of the
World to 329. of Christ, then S. Hierome continued it to 382. then Prosper of
Aquitain continued it to 448. and after him others.
Chronica Prosperi. Augustinus de diversis quaestionibus. Gennadius. Sermo
Augustini de dedicatione Ecclesiae. Isidorus super librum Regum, sed
imperfectus.
Z Epistola ad Augustinum Quod vult dei Diaconi. Et Augustinus ad Quod vult
deum Diaconum.
A Beda Beda one of the greatest Scholars of that Century, flourished in
England his native Country, Anno 731.
de Compoto, and de naturis rerum. Chronica Bedae. Liber Dionysius, commonly
called Exiguus, was a Scythian by Nation, and for his piety and learning,
became an Abbot in Rome, Anno 525. says Bell. 540. says Trithem.
Dionysii Abb. urbis Romae ad Petronium Episcopum de Compoto. Epistola ejusdem
ad Bonifacium de eadem re. Helpricus Helpericus was a Monk of the Monastery of
S. Gallus, An. 1069. says Trithem. who nominates this book with some others
which he wrote.
de Compoto. Tractatus de 12 signis, and signa depicta. Sententiae diversorum
de cursu stellarum. Ratio regularum Abaci.
B.. Beda super Tobiam. Beda super triginta quaestiones de libris Regum. Beda
super Canticum, Abacuc. Beda de Templo Salomonis. Augustinus contra quinque
haereses. Sermo Augustini de Muliere forti. Hieronymus super Ecclesiasten. See
O
Tractatus Ernulfi Episcopi Roffensis de Incestuosis conjugiis.
C.. Retractationes Bedae de quibusdam quaestionibus praecedentis tractatus.
Interpretationes Bedae de quibusdam nominibus Hebraicis.
D.. Beda super verbum Neemiae sacerdotis liber unus. Liber unus magni Aurelius
Cassiodorus was Abbot in Ravenna, Anno 575. says Trithemius who mentions
this, though Bellarmine does not.
Aurelii Cassiodori Senatoris de Anima.
E.. Homiliae Caesarii Episcopi ad Monachos per x. homilias. Homiliae There
were two Eusebii Emiseni, One Anno 350. remembered by Trithemius, the other An.
430. by Bellar.
Eusebii Emiseni ad Monachos per vii. homilias. Admonitio Caesarius was Bishop
of Arles, Anno 670. says Trithemius, which Bellarmine is against, and will
have him An. 499. See C xiii.
B. Caesarii Episcopi ad sororem suam. Regula S. Basilii Cappadociae Episcopi
per octo and december capitula.
F... Bernardus de Consideratione ad Eugenium Papam.
G.. Translatio Sancti Cuthberti Episcopi. Duodecim libri Cassiani Johannes
Cassianus was a Scythian by Nation, and Deacon under Chrysostom, Anno 435.
Trithemius. 440. Bellarm. His works are extant, Printed Basileae, 1497. wherein
he is also called Johannes Eremita.
. Liber december Collationum a Johanne Heremita conscriptus. Item septem
Collationes ab eodem conscriptae.
H.. Ambrosius de Sacramentis libri sex. Idem de Mysteriis liber unus. Idem de
Officiis libri tres. Item Johannes Constantinopoleos civitatis Episcopus de
compunctione cordis libri 4.
I.. Liber Ambrosii de Nabuthe.
K.. Ambrosius de laud virginum libri tres. Item de laud viduarum liber unus.
De Virginitate libri duo. Epistola Ambrosii ad Vercellensem Ecclesiam. Sermo
ejusdem de lapsu virginis consecratae. Sermo ejusdem ad violatorem. Lamentatio
ejusdem super eisdem.
L.. Ambrosius de Patriarchis liber unus. Duo libri ejusdem de excessu fratris
sui. Tres libri ejusdem de laud virginum. Vnus liber de laud Viduarum. Duo
libri ejusdem de virginitate. Sermo ejusdem de lapsu virginis consecratae.
Sermo ejusdem ad violatorem. Lamentatio ejusdem super eisdem.
M.. Libellus de differentiis partium.
N.. Expositio libri Jesu Nave de morte Moysi. Expositio libri Judicium.
Expositio super Ruth. Expositio Regum iv.
O.. Liber Poenitentialis in fine.
P.. See G.
Alquinus ad Guidonem Comitem, de vitiis, and virtutibus. Glossae super
epistolas Pauli. Liber cucullarum. Miracula de imagine Domini. Tractatus
cujusdam de Dedicatione Ecclesiae. Item de Clericis ordinandis. Item de
convenientia veteris, and novi Testamenti.
Q.. Vita S. Martini Episcopi Perhaps this might be that which was written by
Sulpitius Severus.
. Altercatio Apostolorum cum Simone Mago.
R.. Vita S. Egidii Abbatis.
S.. Aetates ab origin mundi. Tractatus sic incipiens Evangelistis. Expositio
super Orationem Dominicam. Quaedam Evangelia Glossata. Tractatus de
Sacramentis. Liber poenitential. sive Pastorale magistri Bartholomaeus Iscanus
lived An. 1188. says Pitseus, and makes mention of a book which he wrote De
Poenitentia. Bish. Godwyn dates him B. of Exeter 1161.
Bartholomaei Exon. Episcopi. Tractatus de diversis libris Bibliae.
T.. Dares Dares Phrygius was a Soldier in the Trojan War, and a writer of it:
His History was translated out of Greek into Latin by Cornelius Nepos, which he
dedicated to Crispus Sallustius, and is extant.
Frigius de Excidio Trojae. Libellus Pauli de itinere Aeneae -- -- and de
casibus ejus. Gesta Romanorum Valenti Maximo Augusto conscripta. Liber de
Origin and gestis Francorum, sed imperfectus. Gesta Tyrii Apollonii
Philostratus in the time of Severus wrote the life of Apollonius a Pythagorean
Philosopher, by some accounted a great Magician: Philostratus wrote his
Miracles to parallel them with those of our Blessed Savior, to please Julia
wife to the Emperor Severus.

U.. Historia persecutionis Africanae provinciae tempore Genserici, and Henrici
Regis Vandalorum, a S. Victore Episcopo Patrievicensi conscripta.
X.. Epistola Alexandri ad Magistrum suum Aristotelem. Dares Frigius de Excidio
Trojae.
Y.. Fulgentius Fulgentius was Episcopus Rus^ensis, a City in Africa, An. 500.
Johannes Ridevallus who lived Anno 1330. paraphrased upon this piece of
Fulgentius, and is now in the public Library of the University of Cambridge,
says Pitseus.
de expositionibus fabularum. Dares Frigius de Excidio Troiae. Prophetia
Sibyllae.
Z.. Liber graduum. Libellus sic incipiens Aes ustum.
A... Commentum Herbasii super Aphorismos Hippocratis. Liber Galen a Physician
of Pergamus in the time of M. Aurelius, and Commodus, about 170 years after
Christ.
Galeni de febribus. Antibolomenon. Isagoge Johannicii. Item Antibolomenon. De
Phlebotomia. Prolivius -- -- de Physica.
B... Decreta Willielmi Bastardi and emendationes quas posuit in Anglia.
Tractatus magistri Johannes Biletheus, or Bilet; Pitseus is doubtful whether he
was English or French, yet makes mention of this book which is commonly
printed, and joined with Durandus his Rationale. He flourished about the year
1328.
Johannis Beleth de officiis Ecclesiasticis and consuetudinibus.
C... Litera quae sic incipit Hugoni S. Victoris Priori.
D... Tractatus de Computatione a sinistra in dextram. Regula S. Basilii. Liber
Sermonum sic incipiens Humilitas mons est. Duo libri Soliloquiorum Isidori.
Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum. Epistola Hieronymi ad Paulinum Presbyterum de
capitulis divinorum librorum, non tota.
E... Ambrosius de Nabuthe. Vita S. Wadragisili Abbatis. Passio S. Nicasii
sociorumque ejus. Passio This Dionysius seems to be the same mentioned Acts 17.
34. His companions were Rusticus and Eleutherius, who (as the story goes) were
beheaded at Paris under Domitian. They say that Dionysius being beheaded, his
body rose upright, and stooping down took up its own head, and carried it two
miles in its arms, and laying it down again, was there buried. His Memorial is
October. 9.
S. Dionysii sociorumque ejus. Liber de inventione miraculisque eorum. Vita S.
Wulfrani Episcopi.
F... Decreta Gregorii de quiet Monachorum.
G... Liber Sermonum sic incipiens Dicite pusillanimes This book is reckoned
amongst those of Petrus Babion an English man who lived Anno. 1317. Pits.
.
H... Tractatus Cypriani de 12 abusivis seculi. Formula vitae honestae.
Septuaginta quinque epistolae Cypriani.
I... Epistolae Ernulfus came into England 1164. and labored a reconciliation
betwixt King Hen. 2. and T. Becket. Hoveden page 282.
Ernulfi Lexoviensis Episcopi. Excidium Troiae versifice. Tractatus de
Astronomia. Vita S. Agnes was martyred at Rome being 13 years of age, in the
time of Dioclesian, about the year 304. When the fire would not burn her, she
was thrust into the mouth with a sword. S. Ambrose in his first book De
Virginibus, and in his 90 Sermon. is copious in her praise, and story. The day of
her memory is Jan. 21.
S. Agnetis versifice. Versus de ruina urbis Romae.
K... Edilnulphus de Monachis.
L... Visio Baronei Monachi. Narratio Josephi de S. Maria Magdalena. Tractatus
de naturis bestiarum and volucrum.
M... Formula vitae honestae. Versus de Jona propheta, and de Thaide. See O.
Passio S. Laurentii versifice. Vita S. Mariae Aegyptiac. secundum Hildebertus
was first Bish. of Cenoma a Town or Province in France, afterward Arch-Bish.
of Tours An. 1090. says Trithemius as to the first An. 1125. says Bellarmine
as to the second. They both mention Poetical, and other works of his, but
neither of them this, yet Vossius ascribes it to Hildebert, page 281. and 378.
Hildebertum Cenomanensem Episcopum. Passio S. Mauritii sociorumque ejus
versifice. Versus Hildeberti Cenomanensis Episcopi de Missa.
N... Interrogationes, and responsiones optimae de Theologia quae sic incipiunt
Deus sum verus, and vere summus. Anselmus de vera poenitentia. Sermones
pauci. Excerptiones libri Pastorale Beati Gregorii sic incipiens, Ipsi
regnaverunt. Introductiones de quibusdam themis ad praedicandum. De
convenientia Veteris ac Novi Testamenti. Symphonius, Eusebius, Hieronymus in
Expositionem Marci. Quaedam quaestiones, and solutiones de Trinitate, cum
aliis. Liber Hugonis qui dicitur There is a Summa sententiarum attributed to
Hugo, Monk and Abbot of S. Victor in Paris, Anno 1130. perhaps this was it.
Bell.
Summa Divina. Tractatus de Ordinibus, and ordinandis, and de excellentia
sacrorum ordinum, and de vita ordinandorum secundum Hugonem. Item diversae
materiae per 7 folia sequentia, prima materia sic incipit, Quoniam fecisti
judicium meum. Expositio super certos versus Psalterii sic incipiens Beatus
vir, cum aliis diversis sequentibus. Liber Richardi Folkingham. Liber qui sic
incipit Dei Omnipotentis. Compendium sententiarum secundum Magistrum Hugonem.
Notulae super Scholasticam Historiam. De mystica, and Allegorica significatione
propriorum nominum quae leguntur in Veteri Testamento. Allegoriae de Veteri
Testamento per Magistrum Richardus de S. Victore natione Scotus. An. 1130. Bell.
R. de S. Victore per 14 libros. Tractatus de Oratione Dominica.
O... Tractatus de Oratione, and modo orandi, and quo studio vel affectu
orandus sit Deus. Tractatus de 7 petitionibus in Oratione Dominica. Alia
distinctio de 7 petitionibus. Titulus super Symbolum. Tractatus super Symbolum
Apostolorum.
P... Tractatus de interdictu Angliae. Tractatus de trino modo precandi. De
miseria humanae conditionis. Descriptio loci amoeni, and de mensibus anni.
Tractatus de virtutibus imitandis and earum distinctionibus. Vitae S. Thomae
martyris versifice. Liber quo sic incipit De Cupiditate Adae.
Q... Compendium Veteris Testamenti. Exorcismus Baptismatis Alexander Necham
might be the Author.
.
R... Tractatus super Ave Maris stella. Meditationes Guidonis. Tractatus super
Magnificat. Tractatus super Evangelium Qui Manducat. Descriptio Ecclesiastici
pastoris. Tractatus qui sic incipit Ne videar magnificare. Prophetiae Merlini
versifice There were two Merlins: Ambrosius Merlinus born at Caermardin in
Wales, who flourished about An. 480. The other Merlinus Calidonius An. 570.
whom Geofsry of Monmouth converted into Latin Verse. Pits. And perhaps this
might be it.
.
S... Templum Domini. Tractatus de Modo confitendi. Tractatus qui sic incipit
Bona in tempore. Tractatus qui sic incipit Domum fecit Solomon. De poenitentia
injungenda religiosis secundum Magistrum W. de montibus. Qui been praesunt,
versifice. Regula Beati Francisci. Tractatus de Sacramento altaris. Casus
quibus excommunicatur quis ipso jure. Tractatus de 7 aetatibus.
T... Tractatus de nominibus deorum. Historia Britonum. Ambrosius super Lucam.
Sermones diversi. Compilatio excerpta de Confessionibus Augustini, and
Epistolis Leonis Papae, and libris Cassiani, and aliorum Doctorum.
U... See S..
Liber poenitentialis Bartholomaei Exon. Episcopi. Liber Sermonum.
X... Hugo This Hugo was Monachus Corbeiensis, Anno 1120. says Trithemius who
recites this book amongst others which he wrote.
de Folieto de aedificatione claustri materialis. Tractatus super quibusdam
psalmis de Psalterio.
Y... Liber Soliloquiorum. Tractatus de duobus luminaribus. Etymologiae
quorundam nominum. Meditationes Hugonis de S. Victore. Compilatio diversarum
quaestionum. Visitatio infirmorum. Phalecolum cum expositione ejusdem.
Z... Tractatus qui sic incipit Quantum docet in clementia. Liber moralis
philosophiae. Tractatus qui sic incipit Miraculum. Dissuasio Nicolas Trivit,
An. 1328. And John Rideval, An. 1330. did both write upon the tractate of
Valerius. Pitseus.
Valerii ad Rufinum Ne ducat uxorem. Libellus de diversis rebus.
A iv. Vita S. Swithuni S. Swithune was Bishop of Winchester, and died An. 862.
Mat. Westminster.
. Tractatus qui sic incipit Amor terrenus inviscat animam
B iv. Ambrosius de Officiis. Libellus de diversis rebus. Tractatus de
differentiis in crucibus faciendis in Canone sic incipiens, In virtute sanctae
Crucis.
C iv. Liber Sermonum per annum. Liber de nature a quarundam avium.
D iv. Parvus tractatus qui sic incipit Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.
Tractatus bonus qui sic incipit Quamlibet peritus.
E iv. Liber H. Praepositi de Sempringham de Oratione, and inquisitione Dei.
Tractatus qui sic incipit qui viderit mulierem ad concupiscendam eam.
Compendium poenitentiale glossatum. Tractatus de agnitione peccatorum.
F iv. Tractatus de humilitate Monachorum. Tractatus de art qui sic incipit
Introducendus in hanc facultatem. Divisiones, and subdivisiones soni per quas
pervenitur ad propositiones. Item ars disserendi, sive discernendi verum a
falso. Tractatus qui sic incipit Cum hoc nomen. Tractatus de Baptismo.
G iv. Exactiones de Romana Civitate. Seneca de remediis fortuitorum malorum.
H iv. Tractatus de operibus sex dierum.
I iv. Tractatus de modo precandi. Tractatus Petrus Blesensis was Archdeacon of
Bath 1177.
Petri Blesensis sic incipiens Quid sit mundus.
K iv. Expositio This seems to be Remigius Antisiodorensis, who lived Anno 890.
and whom Fulco Bishop of Rhemes called thither to erect Schools, Bellar. See N
vi.
Remigii super Focam de Nomine and Verbo. Vita S. Agnetis. Expositiones
quorundam verborum.
L iv. Tractatus de Sponso, and Sponsa, scil. Christo, and Ecclesia. Expositio
Bernardi super Canticum Canticorum.
M iv. Quidam tractatus qui sic incipit Ductus est in desertum. Ordo de
celebrando Concilio. Tractatus de Philosophia. Versus de iis quae sunt
insinuanda in sermonibus. Statuta Generalis Capituli nigrorum Monachorum
celebrati Oxon. Alia Statuta ordinis Monachorum quae sic incipiunt In primis.
N iv. Descriptio quatuor Evangelistarum, and quid significant figurae illorum.
Tractatus super illum versum Homo cum in honor esset. Parvus tractatus de
Jure.
O iv. Constitutiones Abbatum Archiepiscopatus Cantuariensis apud Oxon. factae.
Concilium Oxon. sub Magistro S. Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi celebratum. Libellus
de modo poenitendi, and de poenitentia injungenda. Sermones Stephen Langton was
made Arch-B. of Cant. Anno 1206. and sat there 22 years, says Somner. The
dividing of the Scriptures into Chapters, as they are now commonly received, is
attributed to him by Pitseus, but denied by Parker and Godwin.
Stephani Archiepiscopi. De virtutibus and vitiis. Distinctiones secundum
ordinem Alphabeti. Tractatus de Trinitate and unitate. De vocabulis quae de Deo
dicuntur, vel ab aeterno, vel ex tempore. De processu negotiorum civilium, and
ordine judiciorum.
P iv. Tractatus de quatuor virtutibus Cardinalibus. Tractatus de praeceptis
legis. Quaestio quare magis filius sit incarnatus quam Alexander Necham wrote
of this question, says Pitseus, and perhaps this might be his. See V iv.
Pater, vel Spiritus Sanctus, cum aliis quaestionibus de Theologia.
Q iv. Aliud Psalterium de Beata Virgin, and Orationes de eadem. Tractatus de
Incarnatione Domini, and redemptione humani generis. Meditationes Anselmi
Archiepiscopi ad excitandum timorem Dei.
R iv. Vita S. Oswaldi versifice. Sermones. Annotationes de rerum creatione ad
excitationem memoriae.
S iv. Sermones and optima dicta This might be W. de Montibus who was
Chancellor of Lincoln, An. 1210. and wrote also ad quasdam Moniales, says
Pitseus.
Cancellarii Lincoln. per totum annum. Sermones ejusdem and Epistolae ad
Sanctimoniales. Sermones Magistri Reginaldi Gupill.
T iv. Tractatus Magistri This Richard was a Monk of Westminster, Anno 1348.
says Pitseus, but he makes no mention of this book.
Richardi de Circestre super symbolum majus, and minus. Expositio Praecentoris
super Orationem Dominicam. Tractatus Richardi Episcopi Londoniensis ad Regem
Henricum, Rithmice. Tractatus de Sacramentis. Postillae super Marcum. Glosae
super eundem. Vtilis tractatus de Tabernaculo Moysis. Item multi tractatus de
Sacramentis. Glosae super Matthaeum. Quaedam expositiones super Epistolas
Pauli, and quaestiones. Glosae super Exodum. Quidam Sermones He was called
Gilbertus Glanvile, and lived 1185.
Gilberti Episcopi Roffensis. Quaedam Quaestiones Magistri Praepositi.
U iv. Sermones Alexander Neckam lived Anno 1227.
Alexandri Necham and aliorum. Euphrastica ejusdem cum Sermonibus. See O iv.
Moralia Stephani Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi super Exodum, Judic. and Ruth.
X iv. Quidam Sermones Magistri Rogeri Supprioris Eliensis, and Magistri T. and
Magistri W. de Montibus. Quidam versus Glosati ejusdem W. de Montibus.
Similitudinarium ejusdem. Tractatus ejusdem de Philosophia. Sermones Magistri
Alexandri Necham.
Y iv. Quaedam excerpta de Glosis super Psalterium. Quaedam Epistolae
Hieronymi. Acceptiones quorundam nominum in Theologia. Historia Pentateuchi.
Z iv. Quidam versus. Excerpta de Sermonibus, and Homiliis S. Augustini.
Explanatio verborum in legibus. Quidam Sermones S. Archiepiscopi, and Alexandri
Necham. Historia Tobiae versifice. Vtilis tractatus cujusdam ad Novitios. See X
vii.
Institutio Prioris de Esseby ad Novitios cum Distinctionibus virtutum, and
vitiorum, and philosophia. Versus Magistri P. de Veteri, and Novo Testamento.
Quaedam utilia secundum Magistrum R. Supprioris Eliensis. Quidam Sermones
Alexandri Necham. Tractatus de Poenitentia secundum Suppriorem Sulbicensem.
Quaedam Excerpta de Darete.
A v. Liber de Gestis Normannorum. Gesta Caroli secundum Turpinus was
Arch-Bish. of Rhemes, Anno 850. says Trithemius, and makes mention of this
book.
Turpinum Episcopum quomodo acquisivit Hispaniam.
B v. Collectare Adae de S. Victore de Septem Septenis. Epistolae W. de
Montibus ad Moniales. Morale dogma versifice. Cantor super Genesin. De
Psalterio Alexandri Necham.
C v. Glosae Statii Thebaidos. Glosae Ovidii de Ponto. Glosae Nasonis Tristium.
Glosa quae sic incipit Author iste Venusinus. Tractatus quare Ars dicitur
reperta.
D v. Dialogus inter Moysen, and Petrum. Duae Epistolae Hieronymi ad Paulinum,
and Nepotianum de vita Clericorum, and Monachorum. Epistola ejusdem de december
nominibus quibus Deus nominatur apud Hebraeos. Disputatio Hieronymi de Ratione
animae. Dialogus Augustini, and Hieronymi. Epistola Hieronymi ad Rusticum
Monachum.
E v. Tres libri Marci Tullii Ciceronis Tuscularis. Liber Platonici philosophi
de Deo Socratis. Glosae super Ovidum m -- -- -- -- -- -- um. Glosae super
Priscianum. Libellus de diversis rebus. Tractatus contra vitia. Liber de
comprehendenda corporum proceritate. Liber de diversis rebus inter Decium and
Postiamum. De divisione dierum Romanorum, Atheniensium, Babyloniorum, and
aliorum. Item de diversis nominibus in Veteri Testamento.
F v. Rasis, Rasis an Arabian by birth, but bred up in Africa. A great
Philosopher and Physician. He lived...........
and Almasor Autores -- per x. libros de Physica. Ars Medicinalis. Summa
Magistri Rogerini super Viaticum. Item Practica. Viaticus Isaac.
G v. Liber Sermonum. Tractatus super Epistolas Pauli, and super 2 Epistolam
Petri.
H v. Notulae super Canonicas Epistolas. Bathoniensis ad Nepotem suum. Liber de
Philosophia. Tractatus de Compoto. Liber Petri Adelfonsis. See A xiii.
Tractatus de quibusdam libris Veteris Testamenti. Liber de Physica. Item de
figuris in Grammatica.
I v. Compendium Veteris Testamenti. Decrementum regni Hierosolymitani, and
desolatio ejus.
K v. Propositions Bellarmine names not this book amongst others of this Author.
Petri Blesensis Bathoniensis Archidiaconi contra perfidiam Judaeorum.
Lamentationes ejusdem de hominis corruptione. Sermones ad religiosos.
L v. Practica Matthaei Platearii. Glosae Oribasii super librum urinarum
Theophili, and super librum Pulsuum Philareti, and super librum Prognosticorum
Hippocratis, and super librum Aphorismorum. Antidotarium Nicolai. Liber
Matthaei Platearii de simplici Medicina.
M v. Quaedam Moralia in Hieremiam, and Ezechielem secundum diversos doctores.
Vita He was consecrated Bish. of Lincoln, An. 1186. Godw.
S. Hugonis Lincolniensis Episcopi, versifice secundum Magistrum H. de Davench.
Quidam versus de mediis syllabis. Quidam rythmus de sancta Cruce. Certamen
inter Regem I. and Barons versifice per Magistrum H. de Davench. Tractatus
Innocent 3. He was B. of Rome, Anno 1200. Bellarmine and Trithemius make no
mention of this book under this name.
Innocentii Papae de Dulia, and Latria. December Sermones Alexandri Necham. Octo
Sermones S. Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis. Item alii Sermones secundum diversos
Doctores.
N v. Sermo de Epiphania Domini. Sermo de Passione Domini. Proverbia Senecae.
Excerptiones ex libris Senecae de beneficiis. Tractatus There was Serlo
Dorovernensis, Anno 960. And Serlo Presbyter, who was Abbot of Exeter, Anno
1129. Pitseus. But this Tractate was written by Johannes Serlo, commonly called
Magister, who lived An. 1160. Pits. See R vii.
Magistri Serlonis super Orationem Dominicam Seneca ad Callionem de remediis
fortuitorum malorum. Epistolae Senecae ad Lucilium. Alloquium Anselmi
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis. Augustinus de spiritu, and anima.
O v. Templum Domini.
P v. Tractatus de Sacramentis. Tractatus super Genesin. Tractatus super
Fulgebunt justi.
Q v. Liber Poenitential. See O viii. Bellarm. writes of one Robert of Sorbon
who lived Anno 1265. and wrote a book of Confession which perhaps was this.
Magistri Roberti Flaviensis, vel de S. Victore. Quaedam divisiones. Persecutio
Ecclesiae sub Decio, and Valeriano versifice, cum versibus de S. Oswaldo.
R v. Tractatus super id Genes. Vidit Jacob scalam. Tractatus super id. Quoniam
cogitatio hominis confitebitur tibi.
S v. Hymnarius glosatus.
T v. Sermones in festo Mariae Magdalenae. Sermones If this was not a Nickname
of Peter Comestor, I cannot find who he was. See X vii.
Magistri Petri Manducatoris.
U v. Tractatus Alexandri Necham de tribus viribus animae. Verborum
significationes super librum sententiarum secundum This Roger lived An. 1160.
Pitseus sets down the books which he wrote, but not this.
Magistrum Rogerum Salisburiensem.
X v. Compendium Theologiae qui sic incipit Deus unus est. Tractatus Vnde Missa
exordium habuit. De transubstantiatione Corporis Christi. Excerptiones
Epistolarum Cassiani.
Y v. Expositio Magistri Petri super librum Job, Henrico Regi Anglorum.
Sententia L. Archiepiscopi de liberate Monachorum. Quaedam excerpta de libro
Soliloquiorum Isidori, S. Homo respondit rationi. Tractatus de diversis figuris
and aliis partibus Grammaticae, qui sic incipit Ferrum rubiginem. Tractatus de
singulis libris Bibliothecae, tam Novi quam Veteris Testamenti. See M v.
Tractatus Innocentii 3. de Dulia, and Latria, and cultu Dei, and imaginum.
Z v. Versus excerptionum Veteris, and Novi Testamenti in quibus breviter
continetur Summa totius operis. Liber Tobiae and Job versifice. Verba Floris
Judicis de Susanna versifice. Homilia Origenis super Cantica Canticorum
versifice. Contentio spiritus, and carnis versifice. Liber qui sic incipit Papa
stupor mundi. Liber Marci Valerii Martialis Epigrammaton ad diversos autores
versifice.
A vi. Tractatus de diversis morbis mentis and corporis. Meditationes Beati
Bernardi. Item Cur Deus homo.
B vi. Libellus Beati Augustini qui dicitur Cherub. Quaedam notulae de
Confessione facienda. Quaedam lectio This Adam lived An. 1257. was Monk of
Worcester, and afterward was elected B. of Ely, but Hugh Balsham, by the
favor of Pope Alexan. 4. obtained it against him. Pits.
Magistri Adae de Marisco fratris Minoris. Quaedam Epistolae Senecae and
Lucilium. Liber de miseria humanae conditionis.
C vi. Sermo de vitiis and virtutibus, Petendam esse solitudinem, versifice.
Tractatus de Trinitate. De art praedicandi cum sermonibus sequentibus, and
literis Innocentii Papae, and aliorum. Moralis expositio super Cantica
Canticorum Rythmice composita. Sermo qui sic incipit Meliora sunt verba tua
vino.
D vi. Sermones in Dominicis, S. a Dom. 6. usque ad 25. Liber Sermonum Horatii.
Doctrinale Magnum. Summa Richard Wetberset lived Anno 1350. This book is
amongst some others of his in Pitseus.
Richardi Cancellarii Cantabrigiensis, Qui been praesunt.
E vi. Graecismus. Tractatus de Accentu. Tractatus Radulphi de Mediis syllabis.
F vi. Liber Boetii Glosati de Consolatione Philosophiae. Versus Licentii ad
Augustinum, and versus Augustini ad Licentium. Versus de Institutione Sacrae
Missae.
G vi. Parvus tractatus inter defensorem, and accusatorem.
H vi. Musica Boetii Boethius Manlius Severinus was Consul of Rome, and
Councellor to Theodoricus the Emp. by whose command he was put to death, Anno
524. says Trithemius, who recites this book of Music amongst his other works.
. Musica Guidonis, and alii parvi tractatus de Musica.
I vi. Epistolae Senecae ad Paulum, and Pauli ad Senecam. Epistolae Senecae ad
Lucilium. Seneca de Beneficiis. Seneca de Clementia ad Neronem. Seneca de
Paupertate. Seneca de Remediis fortunae. Ludicra Senecae de Claudio Nerone, vel
Ludus Senecae, Liber declamationum Senecae. Tragoediae Senecae. Seneca de
naturalibus quaestionibus.
K vi. Priscianus de Constructione Priscanus the Grammarian was born at
Caesarea, and was favorite to Cozroe K. of Persia, Anno 620. Trith.
. Priscianus super 12 versus Virgilii. Institutio ejusdem de Nomine, and
Pronomine, and Adverbio. Priscianus de Accentibus. Liber de Barbarismis, and
Soloecismis. Isagoge Porphyrii. Categoriae Aristotelis. Liber peri ermenias.
Liber divisionum Boetii. Categorici Syllogismi.
L vi. Liber de Art poetica. Sermones ejusdem. Epistola ejusdem.
M vi. Versus Bedae presbyteri de die judicii. Theodulus, Sedulius, Prosper,
versus Abonis. Versus Sibyllae de die judicii. Ovidius de mirabilibus mundi.
Ovidius de Somno. Divinationes Symphronii. De pedibus metrorum, and art
versificandi. Regulae de ultimis, and primis syllabis. Ovidius de annulo.
Ovidius de pulice. Regulae de primis, and ultimis syllabis. Regulae de ultimis,
and penultimis.
N vi. Expositiones quarundam partium per Alphabetum. Remigius super Donatum
majorem, and minorem Trithemius makes mention of this work of Remigius. See K
iv.
. Isidorus super Donatum. Libellus Bedae presbyteri de metrica art. Remigius
super Focam Grammaticum. Institutio Prisciani Grammatici.
O vi. Cato. Quintus Serenus de Medicamine. Symphonius de Divinationibus.
P vi. Tullius de Divinatione. Timene ejusdem. Liber Tullii de Fato. Libellus
ejusdem de paradoxa Stoicorum. Lucullus ejusdem. Tres libri ejusdem de Legibus.
Q vi. Tullius de Divinatione. Liber Tusculanarum Marci Tullii Ciceronis.
R vi. See O.
Epistolae Senecae ad Paulum and Epist. Pauli ad Senec. Ratio novem Musarum
secundum quosdam philosophos. Culex Virgilii. Dirae Virgilii. Capa Virgilii.
Versus Virgilii de Est and Non est. Versus ejusdem de institutione viri boni.
Ecloga ejusdem de Rosis nascentibus. Moretum Virgilii. Epitaphia ejusdem a
duodecim sapientibus conscripta. Versus eorundem de diversis rebus. Versus de
12 primis Imperatoribus Romanorum. Versus Sibyllae de die judicii. Versus
Augusti Caesaris de laud Virgilii. Liber Theoduli. Versus de lapsu primi
hominis. Versus de Jephte. Versus de Susanna. Proverbia Senecae. Disputatio
inter Accusatorem and Epaminondam.
S vi. Invectiva Salustii in Ciceronem. Salustius Crispus in Bellum
Catilinarium.
T vi. Macrobius de Somno Scipionis. Macrobius de Saturnalibus, sed
imperfectus.
U vi. Liber Prosperi. Versus Bedae presbyteri de die judicii. Versus Abonis.
X vi. Prosper. Cato. Versus de die judicii. Dirocheum Prudentii.
Y vi. Libellus Donati de voce, and literis, syllabis, pedibus, accentibus, and
posituris. Libellus Servii de modis syllabarum. Donatus de Barbarismo. Persius
Glosatus. Psychomachia Prudentii.
Z vi. Bucolica. Georgica. Persius. Libellus Prudentii de laud Martyrum.
Dirocheum Aurelius Prudentius an elegant Poet, flourished An. 390. says
Bellarmine. 380. says Trithemius, who records many more of his works, than
Bellarmine does, but neither of them any by the title of Dirocheum. It should
be Diptochaeum.
ejusdem. Versus Abonis. Macer de viribus literarum, Regulae de primis
syllabis.
A vii. Macer Cajus Licinius Macer wrote a Roman history, and was contemporary
with Virgil. There was another Aemilius Macer about the same time, who wrote of
Birds, Serpents, and Herbs.
. Macrobius. De Somno Scipionis. Glosae super Platonem juxta Magistrum
Manegraldum.
B vii. See T.
Excerpta de versibus Martialis coci. Versus contra praepositos.
C vii. Salustius. Invectivae Ciceronis in Catilinam libri 4. Invectivae
Salustii in Ciceronem, and Ciceronis in Salustium. Oration Tullii pro Marco
Marcello. Oration ejusdem pro Quinto Ligario. Oration ejusdem pro Rege Deiotaro.
Proverbia Senecae. Dicta diversorum doctorum, and Gregorius de liberate
Monachorum. De praevaricatione, and poenitentia Regis Salomonis, quid senserint
nostri Doctores, Augustinus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Bacharius, and Beda.
D vii. Ovidius de remedio amoris. Ovidius Tristium. Ovidius Fastis.
E vii. Ovidius Tristium. Ovidius in Ibin. Ovidius de Nuce. Versus de
mirabilibus mundi. See L x.
Ovidius de Somno. Ovidius de medicamine faciei. Ovidius de medicamine aurium.
Ovidius de annulo. Ovidius de pulice. Ovidius de cuculo. Dares Frigius de
excidio Trojae. See T..
Fulgentius de expositione fabularum.
F vii. Ovidius Epistolarum. Ovidius de art amandi. Ovidius de remedio amoris.
G vii. Ovidius de are amatoria. Ovidius de remedio amoris. Ovidius sine
titulo. Ovidius de Ponto. Ovidius de Fastis. Glosae super Ovidium in Ibin.
Tractatus de iis quae quaerebantur antiquitus in principiis librorum. Beda de
Tropis.
H vii. Donatus minor. Tract at us ejusdem de voce, and litera, and tonis,
accentibus, and posituris. Donatus major. Dialogus de partibus orationis, and
alia quaedam de Grammatica parvis instruendis utilia. Institutio Prisciani
Grammatici.
I vii. Liber Eutyci Grammatici Eutychius Proculus the Grammarian was
Schoolmaster to Antoninus Pius. Vossius.
. Commentum Sedulii super eundem.
K vii. Cato per aequipollentiam, libri 4. Liber Amani de fabula, S. Rustica
deflenti. Persius.
L vii. Interrogatio quarundam partium, and responsio. Tractatus de pedibus
metrorum. Versus de ludo Scaccorum Robert Helcot who lived Anno 1349. wrote De
ludo Scaccorum, but by Pits. it may seem that his books began in Prose.
Hieronymus Vida wrote in Verse a Poem called Scaccheae ludus, printed Basilicae
1534. but I cannot say it was this.
. Regulae de primis syllabis sic incipiens Regula splendescit. Item regulae de
primis and mediis syllabis. Regulae de Vltimis syllabis. Item regulae de
primis, i. Labile, and labis. Colores Rhetorici. Tractatus de Tonis. De
Symphonia facienda. De Organis faciendis. De tintinnabulo. Item de Organis.
Epist. Gerberti ad Constantinum de Proportionibus. Textus Rythmachiae. Abacus.
Libellus de Compoto. Tractatus de Computationibus annorum ab origin mundi
usque ad Christum. Figurae and divisiones. Item Scriptum de Compoto. Compotus
Gerlandi. Compotus Philippi de Tanu, Gallice. Item Calendarium.
M vii. Remigius super Donatum. Item libellus Bacharii. Sententia Anselmi de
motione altaris. Epistola Senecae ad Callionem de remediis infortuitorum.
Anselmus de Concordia praescientiae and praedestinationis gratiae Dei cum
libero arbitrio. Expositiones partium per Alphab. usque ad I literam.
N vii. Versus qui sic incipiunt Adae peccatum. Versus qui sic incipiunt Res
manet. Notulae super Poetriam. Notulae super Persium.
O vii. Tullius de Senectute. Tullius de Amicitia.
P vii. Glosae super Priscianum imperfectae.
Q vii. Versus inter Mariam and Angelum. Questus fratrum a'e propositis suis.
Versus de Clavibus Philosophiae. Querimonia ovis de lupo.
R vii. Liber Petri Eliae super majus volumen Prisciani. Item liber de
Constructione. Summa Magistri Roberti Blund de Grammatica. Liber de Barbarismo,
and Syllogismo. Regulae Magistri Serlonis de primis syllabis. See Nv.
Liber qui sic incipit Inter Summa Philosophiae
S vii. Bernardus de Amore Dei. Bernardus de diligendo Deum.
T vii. Liber Esdrae prophetae. Liber Methodii de Creatione mundi. See K viii.
Liber qui vocatur Virgilio Centena prole Gentilium. Carmina ad obsequium fidei
retorquentis.
U vii. Notulae Symmachi. Proverbia Euodi.
X vii. Tractatus Trithemius says that Alanus de Insulis who lived An. 1300.
wrote De art praedicandi, probable that this was he under another name.
Magistri Alani Poretani de Art praedicandi. Tractatus super Missam, Item de
eodem. Glosae super Canonem Missae. Tractatus de septem septenis. Tractatus
Prioris de Essebi Pitseus makes mention of Alexander Essibiensis, a Prior who
lived Anno 1220. but this book is not amongst those by him there cited. See Z v.
de Art praedicandi. Summa de Sermo de Cruce, and Sermo de uxore Levitae. Tres
Sermones Magistri Rogeri de Dominicis de Pentecoste. Tractatus ejusdem de domo
sapientiae. Duo Sermones Magistri P. Comestoris. Cherubin de Confessione. Sermo
Magistri P. Comestoris. Sex Sermones Bernardi Abbatis Clarevallensis. Tres
Sermones Magistri P. Comestoris. Quaedam Regulae Theologiae. Septem Regulae
Ciconii: Solutiones quarundam contrarietatum. Sermo Magistri S. Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis. Tractatus Innocentii Papae de miseria humanae conditionis.
Tractatus H. de S. Victore de oratione. Glosae Alexandri Necham super Quicunque
vult. Liber Isidori ad Sororem suam Florentinam.
Y vii. Tropae Magistri W. Cancellarii Lincoln. Duo Sermones Petri Comestoris.
Tractatus de operibus sex dierum, i. Hexaemeron. Tractatus de sex verbis Domini
de Cruce. Glosae super Hymnos. Tractatus Magistri H. de S. Victore de
Ascensione. Tractatus de septem septenis. Versus Magistri Matthaei Windoniensis
super Tobiam. Versus sive A. and -- Versus Magistri Galfridus Vinsalf, or De
Vino Salvo, lived Anno 1199. Pits. where this book is found amongst his other.
G. Vinesalvi de Art loquendi. Summa Magistri Matthaei Windoniensis de Art
versificandi. Eulogium Johannis Cornubiensis John of Cornwall. See G xi. Pitseus
records this book, and says that it is in the Library of Baliol Coll. Oxon.
. Summa de Jure. Objectiones Christianorum and Judaeorum secundum Cancellarium
Lincolniensem. Liber Bernardi Silverstris. Tractatus de mysteriis numerorum.
Z vii. Compendium Veteris Testamenti. Tractatus qui sic incipit Cum omnes
prophet as. Matutinae S. Mariae de usu seculari.
A viii. Tractatus Magistri Petri Blesensis super librum Job. Liber Magistri
Robert Curson lived Anno 1218. was made Cardinal, and Legate into England.
Pits. names this book with his other, and says it is in the Library of Bennet
College Cambridge.
Roberti Curson de Septem septenis. Liber Bernardi Abbatis Clarevallensis ad
Eugenium Papam. Liber Innocentii Papae de Miseria humanae conditionis. Liber
Magistri H. de S. Victore de Oratione. Glosae Alexandri Necham super Quicunque
vult. Liber S. Ambrosii de bono mortis. Sermo de Ascensione qui sic incipit
Beatus vir cujus est auxilium abs te.
B viii. Expositio Haebraicorum nominum secundum Alphabetum.
C viii. Expositio omnium partium minus not arum in Biblia praeter nomina
propria. Sermones diversi.
D viii. Tractatus de potestate clavium. Tractatus de Sacramento Poenitentiae.
Tractatus de Poenitentia religiosis injungenda. Tractatus de Incarnatione Verbi
Dei. Quatuor Sermones. Gesta Aeneaepost destructionem Troiae.
E viii. Tractatus de Consuetudinibus, and Legibus Angliae. Consilium
Lateranense.
F viii. Templum Domini. Tractatus de professione Monachorum.
G viii. Testamentum 12 Patriarcharum. Historia Trojanorum secundum Daretem
Frigium. Vita Joachim. Epistola Hieronymi Cromatio, and Eliodoro. Bernardus de
Praecepto and Dispensatione. Quaedam Epistolae Bernardi.
H viii. Octo libri Physicorum Aristotelis. Quatuor libri Coeli, and Mundi.
Quatuor libri Meteororum. Liber Veteris Ethicae. Liber generationum. Liber
Novae Ethicae. Liber de Vegetabilibus. Tres libri de Somno and vigilia. Liber
de Morte, and Vita. Liber de Sensu, and Sensato. Tres libri de Anima. Liber de
Causis. Liber sic incipiens Quid sit Philosophia. Vndecim libri de
Consideratione.
I viii. Augustinus de Conflictu vitiorum at que virtutum. Meditationes
Bernardi. Salutes cujusdam sapientis. De Purgatorio Patricii Henry a Monk of
Sawtrey Abbey, Com. Hunt. who lived Anno 1140. and Sylvester Giraldus, Anno
1214. wrote of S. Patricks Purgatory.
. Libellus de Poenitentia W. de Montibus.
K viii. Alcuinus ad Guidonem Comitem de Virtutibus acquirendis and Vitiis
evitandis. Quaedam miracula Edmundi Archiepiscopi. Libellus Methodii Martyris
S. Methodius was Bishop of Tire in Palestine. An. 285. Bellarm. and was
Martyred under Dioclesian. See T vii.
. Quaedam Decretales Epistolae ad ordinem Monasticum pertinentis. Tractatus
Innocentii Papae tertii super Canonem Missae.
L viii. Tractatus Of this Peter See A xiii. Trithemius makes no mention of
this tractate.
Petri Alphonsi qui vocatur Scholaris disciplina. Lapidarius, Gallice.
M viii. Epistolae Beati Bernardi ad Elredum Abbatem quae dicitur Speculum
Charitatis. Ecclesiastes.
N viii. Exhortationes Sanctorum diversorum Patrum.
O viii. See S xi.
Liber Pastorale a Magistro I. de Deo Compositus. Speculum Juniorum. Statuta
Ottonis cum Concilio Oxon.
P viii. Regulae Juris. Chrysostomus super Orationem Dominicam. Expositio
fratris Thomas Aquinas of the order of Predicants, died Anno 1274.
Thomae secundum Doctores de Oratione Dominica. Tractatus fratris Thomae de
Oratione Dominica. Tractatus ejusdem super Credo. Tractatus ejusdem super Ave
Maria. Tractatus ejusdem de December Praeceptis. Tractatus ejusdem de Articulis
fidei. Tractatus ejusdem de Sacramentis. Quaedam de Gestis Regis Richardi.
Mirabilia quaedam Angliae numero 25. Quaedam dict a moralia. Quaedam Gesta
antiquorum. Quaedam dict a Poetarum. Quaedam de diversis libris Senecae. De
quibusdam Imperatoribus, and Regibus. Fabulae Aesopi. Tractatus de vitis
Patrum. De vita Cisterciensi. De vitis Praedicatorum. De vita B. Dominici. De
B. Virgin, de diversis sanctis. Historiae diversorum. Narrationes de Speculo
Historiali. Quaedam de Gestis Caroli Magni. Verba Gregorii super Job. Verba
ejusdem super Ezechielem. Verba Chrysostomi super Matthaeum, imperfect. Verba
ejusdem super Johannem. Verba ejusdem de Reparatione lapsi. Verba ejusdem de
Compunctione. Verba Originis de Gaudiis beatorum, and de suppliciis damnatorum.
Augustinus completus de eisdem. Quaedam Metaphorae and exempla. 32 Sermones de
diversis temporibus, and festis. Tabula secundum ordinem Alphabeti, and per
Vocales.
Qviii. Tractatus ejusdem de Confessione. Tractatus Magistri Rob. ad Stephanum
Archiep. Tractatus Segeri de Confessione. See Q v.
Tractatus Magistri Roberti Flaviensis sic incipiens Res Grandis. Meditationes
Bernardi.
R viii. Dialogus Gregorii.
S viii. Tractatus qui sic incipit In virtute sanctae crucis. Tractatus de
Confessione: Sermones diversi. Tractatus de Reverentia Orationis. Mala quae
proveniunt a septem mortalibus peccatis. Epistola Baldwinus Devonius born at
Exeter, was made Arch-B. of Cant. 1184. sat there 7 years and died in the Holy
Land, going thither with K. Rich. 1. He first laid Wales to the Province of
Canterbury. Somner. Pits. says he died An. 1193.
Baldwini Archiepiscopi de Poenitentia. Libellus Alcuini Levitae ad Guidonem
Comitem. Quomodo se homo debet habere in prosperis, and adversis. Sermones
diversi. Libellus de Mysteriis quae contigerunt ab initio mundi, usque ad
Abraham, and sic post sex aetates per octo libros.
T viii. Tractatus de Narrationibus Evangeliorum. Tractatus Quomodo Confessio
sit semel in anno facienda. Sermo W. de Montibus. Tractatus de Poenitentia
religiosis injungenda. Tractatus quanta sit virtus confessionis.
U viii. Liber Accentus: Tractatus Magistri Petri Blesensis super librum Job.
Quaestiones de Regula S. Benedicti, and Solutiones super tribus substantialibus
in eadem regula.
X viii. Tractatus de Themate in praedicatione, de thematis dilatione, de
dilatationis ordinatione sic incipens, Quoniam aemulatores. Tractatus de libro
Prisciani, and de aliis libris Philosophiae and aliarum partium particulariter
tangens materias sic incipiens Cum omnis eloquentiae doctrina. Tractatus de
animalibus secundum Aristotelem generaliter. Expositio quorundam verborum
contentorum in regula S. Benedicti.
Y viii. Tractatus de Physica, Tractatus de utilitate corporis excerptus de
secretis secretorum Aristotelis. Tractatus de Condition hominis, and pro
quibus conditus est. Tractatus de Poenitentia. Tractatus de operibus Forsan
Hierarchicis, William Occam who lived An. 1347 wrote De artibus Hierarchicis
says Pitseus, and happily this Tractate might be his.
Jerarchisis. Tractatus de Confessione facienda.
Z viii. Parvum Doctrinale. Cartula. Apologia Bernardi ad Cluniacenses.
Speculum poenitentis. Versus de Biblia historialiter. Tractatus de Sacramentis.
and de 10 praeceptis. Tractatus Innocentii Papae 3 super Canonem Missae.
Epistola This Nicolas lived Anno 1140.
Nicolai Prioris S. Albani Mauricio Monacho.
A ix. Dactyle quid latitas. Versus de Morte Roberti Lincoln. Episcopi.
Tractatus de notitia Sacramenti. Sermones diversi. Quaedam Autoritates S.
Augustini.
B ix. Breviloquium pauperum, S. Flecto genua. Quidam tractatus de Mysteriis
Missae. Quidam tractatus disputativus de Immortalitate animae.
C ix. Statuta, and provisiones Regum.
D ix. Libellus de Causis. Libellus de Articulis fidei.
E ix. Orationes diversae. Secretum Secretorum Abbreviatum. Meditationes
Augustini.
F ix. Meditationes Augustini. Meditationes Bernardi.
G ix. Sententiae abbreviatae. Tractatus super Canonem Missae. Tractatus de 4
virtutibus Cardinalibus. Tractatus de Professione Monachorum.
H ix. Augustinus de Spiritu, and Anima. Meditationes Bernardi. Bernardus de
Praecepto, and Dispensatione. Augustinus de divisione potentiarum Animae.
Innocentius super Canonem Missae. Libellus This Robert Grosthed was B. of
Lincoln, and died Anno 1213. Trithemius calls him Rupertus Lincolniensis.
Several works are found in this Catalogue more than Trithemius names.
Bellarmine has passed him by, although he was a great writer in the age
wherein he lived: but Sixtus Senensis speaks well of him.
Roberti Grostest Lincoln. Episcopi. Liber ejusdem de Confessione. Parabolae
Salomonis. Liber Ecclesiastes. Septem Septenae. Speculatio pauperis in deserto.
Versus de Decretis. Tractatus de Sacramentis. Tractatus super Canonem Missae.
Testamentum 12 Patriarcharum, S. filiorum Jacob.
I ix. Flecto genua. Meditationes Bonaventurae. Itinerarium mentis in Dominum
Roger Twiford alias Goodluck who lived Anno 1390. wrote an Itinerarium mentis,
but whether or no this, Non constat.
. Formula vitae honestae. Lamentatio Mariae in morte filii ejus. Tractatus de
Virtutibus. Tractatus de 10. Praeceptis. De Quatuor virtutibus Cardinalibus.
L ix. Vita B. Mariae Virginis. Secreta secretorum Aristotelis. Meditationes
fratris Bonaventurae. Libellus Martinus Episcopus Dumiensis lived An. 540.
says Trithemius, who records this book amongst some other of his.
Martini Episcopi S. Formula vitae honestae. Itiner arium mentis in Dominum.
Meditationes Bernardi. Formula Monachorum a B. Bernardo edita. Practica 4.
virtutum Cardinalium secundum narrationes exemplares. Liber Augustini
Hipponensis Episcopi de Definitionibus Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum. Tractatus
Bernardi de Dolor, and Lamentatione B. Mariae in morte filii ejus. Tractatus
de Oratione Dominica. Tractatus de 10. Mandatis. Epistola Bernardi ad Sororem
suam volentem recedere a Monasterio. Tractatus de Adventu, and utilitate
Adventus Christi secundum diversos Doctores, and de signis ante diem Judicii,
de Antichristo, and ejus signis, and de die Judicii in uno tractatu. Epistola
fratris R. Domino G. Abbati Alponsi, and fratribus ejusdem loci. De
Conversatione Mariae Magdalenae post Ascensum Domini, and de Obitu ejus, per
Josephum:
N ix. Orationes diversae. Rythmus de Memoria passionis Domini. Matutinae de
Cruce cum Passione depicta. Quinque Gaudia B. Virginis, Gallice, cum imaginibus
de pictis. Orationes diversae de Passione cum Passione depicta.
M ix. Bernardus ad fratres de monte Dei. Tractatus de Art praedicandi.
O ix. Meditationes Augustini, Augustinus de Spiritu, and Anima. Tractatus de
Electione, cum multis aliis. Anselmus de Similitudinibus.
P ix. Promissio primis parentibus facta post peccatum, De oleo misericordiae.
Meditationes fractris Bonaventurae. Meditatio de Redemptione generis humani per
passionem Christi.
Q ix. Algorismus. Practica 4. virtutum Cardinalium. Theorica earundem, S.
formula vitae honestae. Quaestiones utiles de quarto libro sententiarum.
Bernardus ad Cluniacenses, and contra eos. Idem ad fratres de monte Dei. Idem
ad Eugenium Papam. Speculum Caritatis.
R ix. Tractatus de bonitatibus Triaculae. Gallice. Ordinarium vitae
religiosae, S. Dietarium, and Itinerarium. Vita S. Mariae. Secreta Secretorum
Aristotelis. Tractatus parvus, sedimperfectus de prognosticatione puerorum qui
nascuntur in certis planetis. Regula S. Benedicti versifice. Versus de
Vrbanitate, Latin, and Gallice scripti. Versus de Sidedero, and septem, and
quatuor alii versus sequentis. Quomodo tres filii Noae regnum inter se
diviserunt post diluvium. Versus de septem mortalibus peccatis. Vita Adae, and
Evae, and de Oleo misericordiae.
S ix. Tractatus docens praedicatorem perfect Deum diligere, Gallic scriptus.
Tractatus de Poenitentiis and Remissionibus.
T ix. Tristreni Gallice: Amys, and Amilion Gallice.
U ix. Epistolae Jacobi, Petri, and Johannis and Judae Glosatae. Sermones
diversi.
X ix. Gradale W. de Montibus. Sermones. Glosae super Scholasticam Historiam.
Y ix. Tractatus qui sic incipit Extendit Jesus manum. Tractatus qui sic
incipit Gladius dicitur ipse Deus. Tractatus qui dicitur Passio Christi.
Tractatus quot modis redemit Deus populum. Tractatus de Transitu: Tractatus de
Virtute. Tractatus de Zelo.
Z ix. Cantica Canticorum glosata, Lamentationes Jeremiae glosatae. Liber
Sapientiae glosatus: Liber Sapientiae non glosatus.
A x. Concordantiae quorundam verborum 4 Evangeliorum Allegorice W. de
Montibus. Significationes verborum ejusdem. Concordantiae ejusdem Veteris, and
Novi Testamenti. Proverbia ejusdem: Contrarietates ejusdem: Regulae Theologiae
ejusdem.
B x. Tractatus de Art praedicandi. Cherub de Confessione.
C x. Tractatus super Evangelium In principio er at Verbum. Tractatus de Ornatu
Clericorum. Quaestiones diversae de Theologia. Tractatus super Beatus vir.
D x. Tractatus de Confessione: Tractatus de lapidibus.
E x. Tractatus de Poenitentia: Visio cujusdam quae contigit in Osseria.
F x. Tractatus de quatuor Sacramentis Ecclesiasticis. Tractatus de mysterio
Missae cum aliis: Regula S. Basilii. Tractatus de quatuor humoribus ex quibus
homo constat.
G x. Quidam casus Decretalium. Versus de duodecim Abusionibus Clericalibus.
Versus de duodecim Abusionibus seculi.
H x. Tractatus Canonum discordantium. Tractatus super Psalm. Qui habitat: Cum
aliis.
I x. Tractatus de praemissione Psalmorum. Tractatus de Canone Missae.
K x. Summulae diversae de Theologia. Tractatus de Art praedicandi.
Significationes quorundam nominum secundum Alphabetum. Interpretationes
Hebraicorum nominum. Concordantiae Bibliae distinctae per quinque libros.
L x. Liber qui sic incipit Flores Grammaticae. Liber Distigii glosatus.
Ovidius de mirabilibus versifice glosatus.
M x. Concilium Lateranense, Liber qui dicitur Viaticus. Concilium Stephani
Archiepiscopi Oxon. celebratum. Tractatus super Orationem Dominicam. Sermones
diversi: Tractatus super librum Levitici. Prometheus de Origin Juris Canonice:
Exameron. Tractatus Magistri Roberti super Exodum. Constitutiones Honorius 3
was Bishop of Rome 1210. Mart. Polonus.
Honorii Papae tertii glosatae. Concilium Ottonis London celebratum. Tractatus
Magistri H. de S. Victore de Ascensione Domini. Tractatus de causis Decretorum
Versifice. Glosae super libros Regum.
N x. Numeriale in tribus quaternionibus sequentibus. Sermones and quaestiones
in tribus quaternionibus sequentibus. De multiplici lepra, and septem
petitiones, and sacrificia in duobus quaternionibus. Versus Magistri Henrici de
vita S. Oswaldi, and aliorum in uno quaternione. Breviarium Papiae. Brevia
Regis Henrici, and Articuli Justiciariorum. Hymnarius glosatus secundum
Alexandrum Necham.
O x. Continentiae in Decretis per distinctiones, causas, and consuetudines.
Constitutiones novae Innocentii Papae quarti. Constitutiones apud Ludgun.
promulgatae. De Sententiis Frederici quondam Imperatoris.
P x. Liber de Miseria humanae conditionis. Tractatus de condition hominis,
and pro quibus conditus sit. Meditationes fratris Bonaventurae.
Q x. Versus differentiarum. Tractatus de Physica. Expositio super Canonem
Missae. Proverbia W. de Montibus per literas Alphabeti. Quidam sermones cum
aliis rebus. Quaedam not abilia Decretorum.
R x. Autoritates effectivae sanctorum ad praedicandum. Sermones fratrum
Praedicatorum, and Minorum.
S x. Tractatus de Philosophia sic incipiens Socrates in exhortationibus.
Tractatus de Mundo, and Stellis, and Planetis.
T x. Tractatus de Confessione audienda, and devotione. Quaedam dict a collect
a de dictis diversorum Patrum. Tractatus de Confessione facienda: De pollutione
nocturna. De malo Luxuriae secundum diversos Doctores. De septem Gratiis
Ecclesiae: De Continentia. De septem mortalibus peccatis; De horis diei. De
poenis Inferni: De fide, spe, and charitate. Tractatus qui sic incipit, Sicut
Turris David.
U x. Meditationes Bernardi. Liber Bernardi ad Anselmum Cardinalem de diligendo
Deum. Tractatus ejusdem de Gratia, and libero arbitrio. Tractatus de
deliberando, and consilio capiendo. Sermones Bernardi de Resurrectione Domini
cum aliis Sermonibus. Sermones diversi: Templum Domini. Dicta not abilia
cujusdam de multis, and magnis, periculis in Ecclesiasticis.
X x. Summa de Theologia: Templum Domini. Summa Magistri I find no Simon of
this name in Pitseus unless it was Simon of Feversham, who lived Anno 1370. And
wrote upon Aristotle's Ethics.
Simonis Cantuariensis, de vitiis, and virtutibus. Sermones Magistri Nicolai
Cancellarii Lincoln.
Y x. Anselmus Cur Deus Homo.
Z x. Sermones in Dominicis post Pascha. Tractatus de Poenitentia secundum
Magistrum Robertum. Sermones diversi: Miracula diversa. Versus de
transgressione Adae. Tituli hist. Genes. Sermones in Adventu, and Quadragesima.
Versus de aetatibus mundi: Proverbia libri Ovidii Versifice.
A xi. Moralis Philosophia: Phalecolum. Tractatus de duodecim abusionibus
seculi. Regula B. Augustini a Roberto exposita.
B xi. Epistola cujusdam Prioris de Concilio been vivendi. Speculum
Poenitentiae Magistri W. de Montibus. De Sanctimonia conservanda, and vitiis
carnalibus, and spiritualibus vitandis. Bernardus ad Cluniacenses, and
contraeos. See T xi.
Tractatus Petri Abbatis S. Remigii de Claustrali disciplina. Psalterium metrice
compositum. Tractatus de duodecim abusionibus seculi, metrice compositus.
Psalterium Seculi: Apocalypsis guliae.
C xi. Simphosius de divinationibus: Proverbia Gregorii. Quaedam Summa Kystani
Sacerdotis. Anselmus de Veritate, de libero arbitrio, de casu Diaboli, de
Incarnatione Verbi. Meditatio Anselmi: Quomodo Grammatica sit substantia, and
qualitas. De conceptu Virginali, and Originali peccato. De Sacrificio azymi and
fermentati. De concordia praescientiae, praedestinationis, and gratiae cum
libero arbitrio. Anselmus and Bosco Cur Deus Homo. Monologion Anselmi:
Prosologion ejusdem. Anselmus de Processione Spirit us Sancti.
D xi. Meditationes Bernardi: Meditationes Anselmi Archiepiscopi. Augustinus de
Spiritu, and Anima. See R xi.
Poenitentiale fratris Segeri a canonibus compendiose extractum.
E xi. Tractatus brevis versifice qui sic incipit Pluribus in dubium. Liber
Methodii historialis: Historia Britonum, Prophetiae Merlini.
F xi. Divisiones and definitiones. 7 vitiorum capitalium. Tractatus Magistri
Roberti de Lincoln. de Confessione, S. Quoniam......... Tractatus de levioribus
peccatis. De Antidot is vitiorum, and duodecim abusionibus. Bernardus de
Praecepto, and Dispensatione: Confessiones Augustini. Compendium Poenitentiale
glosatum Magistri W. de Montibus versifice. Speculum poenitentis W. de
Montibuus. Tractatus de Lege naturali, and spirituali. Meditatio S. Augustini.
See P xi.
Tropi Magistri H. Abrimensis de B. Virgin.
G xi. Excerpta B. Augustini de Decretis. Definitiones, and divisiones 7
vitiorum capitalium, and autoritates. Poenitentiale glosatum Magistri W. de
Montibus versifice. Tractatus R. Episcopi Lincoln. de Confessione. Bernardus de
Praecepto, and Dispensatione. Meditationes Bernardi. Excerpta B. Bernardi de 12
gradibus humilitatis. Apologia B. Bernardi ad Cluniacenses, and contracos.
Compendium Poenitentiale S. Quae suntpecc at a magis periculosa. Summa Magistri
Johannes Cornubiensis lived Anno 1170. says Pitseus, by whom these Tractates
are mentioned with others of his writing.
Johannis Cornubiensis, Qualiter fiat Sacramentum altaris per virtutem S.
Crucis: and de 7 Canonibus vel Ordinibus Missae. Tractatus veterum patrum de
venialibus peccatis. Epist. Bern. ad Monach. Lib. de Claust. disciplina.
Tractatus Innocentii Papae de Dulia, and Latria.
H xi. Tractatus super Symbolum fidei: Tractatus super Orationem Dominicam.
Tractatus super 7 dona Spiritus Sancti: Tractatus super quatuor virtutes
Cardinales. Tractatus super quatuor Virtutes Theologicas: Tractatus super
septem vitia Capitalia. Tractatus super 7 Sacrament a Ecclesiae: Tractatus
super duo mandata Charitatis. Tractatus super 10 praecepta legis: Tractatus de
erroribus Laicorum.
I xi. Definitiones and Species virtutum and vitiorum secundum W. de Montibus.
Quod salubris sit memoria passionis Christi secundum Bernardum. Summa Magistri
Johannes Cantianus lived Anno 1248. Pitseus mentions not this book by name, but
one like it, De Casibus Juris. See F xi.
Johannis de Cantia de Decretis. Tractatus de Confessione, and Contemplatione:
Tractatus de Purgatorio Patricii.
K xi. De miseria humanae conditionis. Tractatus de virtutibus qui sic incipit,
Dominus virtutum ipse est Rexgloriae.
L. xi. Tractatus de diversitate Curiarum. Tractatus de sententia
Excommunicationis secundum Reymundum. Chronica Alexandri: Versus de judiciis
urinarum glosatus, and non glosatus. Tractatus de 12 abusionibus Claustri:
Proverbia autorum. Expositiones partium Bibliae: Prometheus versificacatus:
Sompnarium. Propositiones magis famosae primi libri Physicorum and aliorum
librorum. Versus de Decretis secundum Henricum de Hamerincham. Versus ejusdem
de Decretalibus: Versus de Decretis cum sententiis eorundem. Sententiae
versificatae: Quaestiones and Responsiones inter Animam and Rationem. Tractatus
Gallicus de Modo Confessionis, and Ordine cum aliis rebus Gallice scriptis.
Tractatus de Modo muniendi.
M xi. Parvus tractatus de Alis Confessionis. Quidam Rythmus sic incipiens Qui
vult sane saint escrit and sensum Tropologicum. Altercatio inter Magistrum
Henricum de Hamrincham, and Magistrum Michaelem versifice.
N xi. Versus W. de M........... sic incipiens Cives coelestis. Quomodo Dominus
Innocentius Papa canonizavit B. Edmundum. Vita S. Thomae Martyris: and Miracula
aliorum sanctorum.
O xi. Regula S. Francisci, Regula S. Basilii, Regula S. Augustini.
P xi. Matutinae B. Virginis de miraculis ejus composit us. See F xi.
Tropi magistri P. Abincensis de B. Virgin. Compilatio brevis de Confessione
semel in anno facienda.
Q xi. Casus diversi extracti de Decretis, and Decret alibus.
R xi. Tractatus This Simon was Monk of Winchester, Anno 1360. says Pits. but
this is not amongst his works there recited.
Simonis de Hentona de Cruce Christi. Meditationes fratris Benaventurae editae
ad aedificationem fratrum Minorum. Rythmus de Passione Christi: Rythmus de
memoria Christi, Templum Domini. Meditationes Bernardi: Tractatus de mysteriis
Missae. Vita Sancti Alexis, Gallice. Versus magistri Michael Blaunpain, an
elegant Poet, lived 1250. This piece is with some other reckoned by Pits. See D
xi.
Michael. Cornubiensis contra magistrum H. Abrinensem. Liber Poenitentialis
fratris Segeri per Decreta, and Decretalia effectus. Aphorismus: Prognostica
Hippocratis: Regula S. Benedicti Gallice exposita.
S xi. Tractatus de Poenitentia. Tractatus de Ordinationibus, and de iis quae
concernunt Ordinationes. Pastorale Magistri I. de Deo: Tractatus de
Confessionibus.
T xi. Collationes Domini This William was Abbot of Peterburgh, Anno 1246.
William was Bishop of Antissiodorum in France 1240. Vna ejus sententia notari
solet, ut singularis, quod videlicet merita hominum justorum prius, and
principalius a fide quam a charitate dependeant, says Bellar. And probably it
was this which Abbot William of Peterburgh wrote against: or it might be the
Epitome mentioned in his Library. See the History.
Willielmi de Hotot Abbatis, de sententia magistri W. Antissiodorensis.
Historia B. Edmundi, Gallice. Regulae Theologicae. Compendium W. magistri de
montibus de Poenitentia religiosis injungenda. Inquisitiones fratrum minorum in
Confessionibus: Inquisitiones contra religiosos. Tractatus de Philosophia: De 4
generibus disputationum. Tractatus de octo Tonis: Tractatus de iis quae sunt
insinuanda in sermonibus. See B xi.
Tractatus de Sacramentis: Tractatus Petri Abbatis S. Remigii de Claustro
materiali. Tractatus de quadruplici similitudine: Tractatus de virtutibus.
Tractatus de aliquibus verbis contentis in tertio libro Regum: De capitalibus
vitiis. Tractatus optimus qui sic incipit, Beatus Benedictus. Tractatus sic
incipiens; Si habes brachium sicut Dominus: Tractatus de Musica.
U xi. Pastorale a magistro Johannes de Deo is mentioned by Trithemius, but not
his time only, he says, he was a learned Lawyer of Bononia, and sets down his
works of Law, but not this Pastorale.
J. de Deo compositum.
X xi. Regula S. Basilii: Definitio Confessionis: Sermo sic incipiens, Si
habes. Salutes cujusdam sapientis: Bernardus de periculo tentationis.
Augustinus de Origin Animae, vel de Spiritu, and anima. Sermo sic incipiens,
Ecce sacerdos: Qualiter fit Sacramentum Altaris. Sermo sic incipiens, Ecce
elongavi: Quid sit Praedestinatio. Summa de Originali peccato: Liber de 7
Septenis. De Confessione quae dicitur Cherub: De conflictu vitiorum. Quaestio
de Sacramento Altaris: Expositio super Canonem Missae. Sermo sic incipiens,
Nigra sum: Vita S. Thomae Martyris versifice.
Y xi. Tractatus de Anima sic incipiens: Si ignoras te O pulcherrima mulierum.
Z xi. Tractatus Ratriani de eo quod Christus natus est de Virgin.
A xii. Tractatus de multiplice divisione potentiarum animae. Testamentum 12
Patriarch. Oleum misericordiae.
B xii. Gesta Salvatoris quae invenit Theodosius magnus Imperator in Jerusalem
in Praetorio Pontii Pilati in codicibus publicis a B. Ambrosio Doronensi
Episcopo conscripta. De tribus fratribus cum Domino resuscitatis testimonium ei
perhibentibus. Confessio Judaeorum coram Pilato de Domino Jesu. Epistola Pilati
ad Imperatorem de Jesu. De Tiberio Imperatore, and Confusione Pilati. De
Veronica, and damnatione Pilati. Narratio de Assumptione S. Mariae. Visio
Elizabeth de Assumptione ejusdem. Quomodo crevit arbor de qua facta est Crux:
Miracula B. Mariae.
C xii. Regula S. Benedicti versifice. Tractatus secundum literas Alphabeti sic
incipiens, Avaritia.
D xii. Casus disputatus de eo qui intravit religionem, uxore sua in seculo
remanente. Registrum in Decretis; Tabula duplex in Evangelium secundum Canones.
E xii. Collationes de singulis libris Bibliothecae secundum ordinem Alphabeti.
Quaedam Homiliae Caesarii Episcopi ad Monachos. Admonitio B. Caesarii Episcopi
ad Sororem suam. Expositio super Malachiam Prophetam, and aliae multae per
prius de diversis. Poenitentiale sic incipiens Petisti a me. Symphonius
versifice de Divinationibus; Item Sermones diversi.
F xii. Epistolae Canonicae, and aliae Epistolae glosatae: Sermones diversi.
Tractatus de Confessione. Tractatus de iis quae sunt inquirenda in Confessione.
Poenitentia religiosis injungenda: Libellus de Silentio servando. Speculum
Poenitentiae a magistro W. de Montibus edit. Concilium Oxon. Stephani
Archiepiscopi: Definitio superbiae, and ejus speciebus.
G xii. Versus de 12 abusionibus: Libellus secundi Philosophi de Silentio.
Compendium poenitentiale glosatum: Speculum poetentis secundum W. de Montibus.
Poenitentia religiosis injungenaa secundum W. de Montibus. De peccatis
religiosorum contingentibus; De peccatis contra naturam contingentibus. De 7
Capitalibus vitiis: De inquisitione peccati: De his qui se inaebriant.
H xii. Quaedam Epistola ad Monachos sic incipiens, Dilecto Patri: Decretum
Innocentii Papae. Quaedam Epistola Bernardi ad Monachos: Bernardus de Praecepto
and Dispensatione. Tractatus de desolatione animae. Sermo sic incipiens Omne
quod natum est. Sermo sic incipiens, Vt filii lucis. Expositio Regulae S.
Benedicti a Smaragdo edita. Regula S. Basilii, Regula S. Francisci. Correctio
sive Reprehensio praelatorum, qui sic incipit, Scire desideras. Prophetia
Sibyllae de Incarnatione Verbi: Tractatus de 15 signis cum versibus. Tractatus
de Antichristo: Tractatus de 7 vitiis principalibus. Tractatus de Matre Domini,
and sororibus suis: Tractatus de december praeceptis. Tractatus quo die Divina
sapientia uterum Virginis ingressa est, cum quibusdam versibus, sic incipiens,
Cum fortuna tibi. Tractatus de Remedio professionis Monachorum. See I xi.
Summa Magistri J. de Cantia de Poenitentia. Tractatus Petri Blesensis super
librum Job.
I xii. Nova Logica: Ethica Nova, De somno, and vigilia, de sensu, and sensato.
K xii. Vita S. Francisci, Testamentum ejusdem, Regula ejusdem. Miracula
Fremundi Martyris, Vita, and passio ejusdem. Vita S. Edmundi Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopi He died, says Somner, 1242.

L xii. Tractatus de 7 Sacramentis, Tractatus de 10 praeceptis. Augustinus de
differentia spiritus, and animae, Expositio super Canonem Missae. Libellus
Petrus Alfonsus, L viii. A xiii.
Petri Alfulsi qui vocatur Scolaris disciplina. Expositio super Symbolum
Apostolorum.
M xii. Tractatus super Symbolum fidei, Tractatus super Orationem Dominicam.
Tractatus super 7 dona Spiritus Sancti, Tractatus super 4 virtutes Cardinales.
Tractatus super virtutes Theologicas, Tractatus super 7 vitia Capitalia.
Tractatus super 7 Sacramenta Ecclesiae, Tractatus super 2 mandata Charitatis.
Tractatus super 10 praecepta legis: Liber parvi doctrinalis. Quomodo Salve
Regina fuit ordinata. Tractatus de Confessione, imperfectus, Gallioe.
Meditationes Bernardi.
N xii. Tractatus de Complexione hominum. Fallaciae, and suppositiones, and
aliae summulae. Diversa capitula Decretalium. Parva summa de dolor dentium.
Quaedam excerpta de Magistro historiarum.
O xii. Tractatus qui sic incipit David in spiritu. Tractatus de Calendario.
Tractatus sic incipiens Laboravi in ludum.
P xii. Liber de Causis, Versus de Decretis. Tractatus de Philosophia super
dictum Opinamur. Tractatus sic incipiens, Inter Summas. Tractatus de his quae
sunt inquirenda in confessione. Collationes diversae, Tractatus de Sapientia.
Boethius de disciplina scholarium, Sermones diversi.
Q xii. Tractatus de Orthographia. Bernardus de Praecepto, and Dispensatione.
Tractatus Innocentii super Canonem Missae. Isagoge Magistri H. in Theologia.
Quaestiones de Anima, and ejus potentia. Physica Alexandri edita ab Aristotele.
R xii. Articuli diversi pro quibus quis excommunicatur. Versus de Sacramento
altaris. Quidam Canones, Versus de 7 mort alibus peccatis, and eorum speciebus.
Tractatus de Philosophia, Literae diversae. Tractatus de Sole.
S xii. Versus de judiciis urinarum. Liber qui dicitur Morale scholarium,
Tractatus de terra Tartarorum.
T xii. Quaedam Metaphorae sumptae a naturis bestiarum. Versus de Poenitentia,
Tractatus de Poenitentia. Versus de operibus sex dicrum, Errores Originis.
U xii. Algorismus, Tractatus de Sphaera Probable Johannes de Sacrobosco, who
lived An. 1256. wrote those Tractates, for Pitseus reckons them with his other
works.
. Liber Phalecolum Alexandri Necham.
X xii. Summa Segeri, Tractatus de Confessione religiosorum Solutiones
quarundam contrarietatum.
Y xii. Disputatio inter Animam, and Rationem. Liber de Sacramentis Veteris, ac
Novi Testamenti. Compendium Poenitentiale glosatum, Tractatus de Confessione.
Sermones diversi, Tractatus de societate mulierum vitanda. Parvus tractatus de
superbia.
Z xii. Expositio super Canonem Missae. Templum Domini cum illo tractatu
quoniam cogitatio Summa de 10 Praeceptis, and 7 Sacramentis. Libellus de
Institutione Novitiorum. Augustinus de Spiritu, and Anima. Tractatus Innocentii
Papae de Missa, Bernardus Silvestris. Versus qui sic incipiunt Scribo Sampsoni.
Versus John of Salisbury lived Anno 1182. Pitseus mentions this book to be in
several places, as in Cambr. and Oxon, and printed at London 1595. He was made
Episcopus Carnotensis, and known by that name in Trithemius.
Johannis Sarisburiensis in Polycraticon, Hieronymus de proprietatibus.
Tractatus de Grammatica, Versus de nominibus volucrum.
A xiii. Liber Poenitentialis secundum R. Lincoln, Liber Poenitent alis
glosatus. Symbolum majus, and minus. Speculum poenitentis, a Magistro W. de
Montibus edit. Liber This Peter was first called Moses, and of a Jew becoming a
Christian, King Alfonsus was his Godfather, and gave him this name. He lived
An. 1100. says Trithemius, who yet makes no mention of these Verses. Perhaps
this is the same with Adelphonsus. H..... L viii.
Petri Alfonsi, Versus de Decretis. Solatium animae, Rythmus Gallice, and
Latin sic incipiens Ky vult Sanoye.
B xiii. Solatium animae, Liber de miseria humanae conditionis. Meditationes
Bernardi, Tractatus super Canonem Missae.
C xiii. See E..
Epistola Caesarii fratribus Blagatensibus Monasterii. Augustinus de conflictu
vitiorum. Praedicatio Roberti Lincoln. viris religiosis. Narrationes diversae.
Tractatus de pace reformata inter Deum, and homines. Tractatus de Confessione.
D xiii. Regula S. Benedicti, Templum Domini. Liber Petri Aldulphi. Excerpta B.
Bernardi de 12 gradibus humilitatis. Bernardus ad Cluniacenses and contraeos.
Quae sunt peccata magis periculosa. Epistola B. Bernardi de Praecepto, and
dispensatione. See E xiv.
Qualiter sit Sacramentum altaris per virtutem sanctae crucis. Remedium
professionis, Solatium animae.
E xiii. Meditationes Bernardi, Tractatus de professione Monachorum.
Quaestiones Magistri Albini super Genesin. Seneca de 4 virtutibus, Regula B.
Francisci.
F xiii. See K xiii.
Descriptio Northfolciae, Consuetudines terrae Saracenorum.
G xiii. Liber soliloquiorum Isidori. Compilatio excerpta de diversis
doctoribus. Item duae aliae Compilationes universorum doctorum. Quaedam
excerpta de Canonibus. Praecepta Regularia S. Augustini. Tractatus sic
incipiens Necessarium valde sit.
H xiii. Macer de viribus herbarum. Tractatus contra diversas infirmitates.
Tractatus sic incipiens, Experimenta diversa.
I xiii. Sermones diversi, Excerpta de diversis doctoribus, and de decretis.
Versus sic incipientes Fraus profert florem. Tractatus de peccato in Spiritum
S. Versus de malitiis foeminarum. Vita Simonis de Monte forti Rythmice. Vita S.
Thomae Martyris Anglice. Septem mort alia peccata, Gallice, cum eorum
speciebus.
K xiii. Tractatus de Physnomia. Descriptio terrae A Monk of Peterburgh (whose
name I find not) wrote a description of Norfolk in derision of that Country,
and was answered by Johannes de S. Omero, who was a Norfolk man, and lived Anno
1219. Pitseus.
Northfolciae, Historia S. Georgii. Vnde 7 mortalia peccata, Gallice. Expositio
somniorum. Tractatus qui dies Lunae sunt boni, and qui mali. Tractatus
compilatus ex dictis diversorum doctorum, and poetarum.
L xiii. Solatium animae, Liber Poenitentialis ad Religiosos, and Laicos. Item
Launcereyes de Confessione.
M xiii. Psalterium B. Mariae. Formula vitae Monachorum a B. Bernardo edita.
Brevis compilatio de Confessione. Tractatus de Humilitate. Regula B. Benedicti,
Regula B. Augustini. Regula B. Basilii, Psalterium B. Hieronymi cum aliis
rebus.
N xiii. Liber de naturis lapidum cum moralitatibus.
O xiii. Item moraliter, Gallice.
P xiii. Tituli librorum decretalium. Tractatus de servit. tenebrarum.
Tractatus de Eucharistia, and aliis festivitatibus anni. Interpretatio
Hebraicorum nominum.
Q xiii. Sermo de destructione Jerusalem cum multis aliis capitulis. Quaedam
excerpta de libro Soliloquiorum Isidori, Ratio dicit, homo respondet. Tractatus
excerptus de quodam tractatu H. de S. Victore de Conjugio inter Mariam, and
Joseph. Tractatus de -- -- --, cum aliis bonis. Tractatus contra eos qui dicunt
Sine corporali commixtione non esse perfectum matrimonium. Regula B. Benedicti,
Regula S. Augustini. Versus de Monachis, Descriptio corporis humani. Tituli
Cardinalium. Liber metricus Veteris ac Novi Testamenti. Contentio Spiritus, and
Carnis metrice. Versus de descriptione nominum diversorum, ut Roberti, and
Richardi, and aliorum. Item versus de diversis materiis cum dictis sapientum
R xiii. Regula S. Basilii, Epistola Aristotelis ad Alexandrum. Item Job,
Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum, cum aliis rebus. Augustinus de verbis Domini.
Quaedam excerpta de diversis Doctoribus, and Canonibus. Septem mortalia
peccata, Gallice, Liber Job. Tractatus metrice compositus, sic incipiens, Post
tempus horridum.
S xiii. Tractatus de 12 abusionibus Claustri. Tractatus de 12 abusionibus
seculi. Historia Tartarorum. Libellus de vita, and moribus Tartarorum, and
eorum actibus. Tractatus incipiens sic Duo bona.
T xiii. Tractatus super illud Pauli, Si Spiritu vivimus. Tractatus de
Confessione. Vita S. Edmundi Archiepiscopi. Liber Adulfi qui dicitur Scholaris
disciplina.
U xiii. Tractatus de Logica qui sic incipit, Quoniam in disserendo. Petrus
Alfonsus. See L viii.
Disputatio Physicorum de interpretatione Somniorum. Tractatus de Superbia,
Tractatus de Confessione.
X xiii. Tractatus de Mundo, and ejus miseria, Gallice. Liber Poenitentialis
glosatus. Speculum poenitentis, editus a Magistro W. de Montibus. Solatium
animae, Confessio Roberti Lincoln. Episcopi. Versus glosati de Compoto
Calendarii. Libellus qui dicitur Massa Compoti. Versus de Decretis glosati.
Versus de iis qui deficiunt in accusationibus, Orationes diversae.
Y xiii. Salutationes, and Meditationes ad B. Mariam. Meditationes fratris
Bonaventurae, Liber qui dicitur Doctrina animae. See H ix.
Causa quare Robertus Grostest Episcopus Lincoln. fuerit a Domino Papa
excommunicatus. Solatium animae, Tractatus super illud, Nolite ante tempus
judicare. De Ordine Monachorum per Epistolas missas, Orationes diversae.
Z xiii. Meditationes Bernardi, Vita S. Edmundi Archiepis.
A xiv. Regula S. Benedicti, Tractatus sic incipiens Rationem autem humani
corporis. Versus de vita Monachorum omniumque hominum, Versus de Decretis.
Formula Vitae Monachorum, a B. Bernardo edita. Libellus de conflictu Augustini,
vitiorum and virtutum. Regula S. Basilii, Compendium Poenitentiale glosatum.
Tractatus de 7 Sacramentis Tractatus, de 10 Praeceptis. Expositio super Canonem
Missae, Duo libri Soliloquiorum Isidori Episcopi. Tractatus Qui in Lingua
Romana secundum Robertum Grostest Episcopum Lincoln. De principio Creationis
mundi, de medio, and fine. Vita S. Alexis, Gallice.
B xiv. Summa quae dicitur Laus divinae Sapientiae, and 7..... Macer de viribus
herbarum, Tractatus de imagine mundi.
C xiv. Augustinus de libero arbitrio, Regula S. Basilii. Vita Religiosorum a
B. Bernardo edita. Meditationes B. Bernardi. Bernardus de Praecepto, and
Dispensatione. Bernardus de 12 gradibus humilitatis, Bernardus ad Cluniacenses,
and contra eos. Boethius de disciplina Scholarium. Augustinus de 12 abusionibus.
Liber de septem septenis. Tractatus de mysteriis Missae. Augustinus de Spiritu,
and Anima. Liber differentiarum Isidori. Alquinus de vitiis and virtutibus.
Formula vitae honestae. Augustinus de Conflictu vitiorum. Ambrosius de 7
Sacramentis. Templum Domini. Tractatus veterum Patrum de Venialibus, and
minoribus peccatis. Liber de Dulia, and Latria. Liber de miseria humanae
conditionis. Isidorus de naturis rerum. Augustinus de observantia Episcoporum,
and Praelatorum. Augustinus, Qualiter homo factus est ad imaginem, and
similitudinem Dei. Augustinus de Charitate.
D xiv. E xiv. See G xi.
Summa Magistri J. Cornubiensis Qualiter fiet Sacramentum altaris. Speculum
poenitentis editum a Magistro W. de Montibus. Liber Soliloquiorum Isidori
Episcopi. Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum, and virtutum. Tractatus Innocentii
Papae de Dulia, and Latria. Liber Poenitentialis secundum Magistrum Robert
Rilwarby was Archbishop of Cant. Anno 1280. and likely to be the Author of
this Book, although Pits. names it not amongst many others of his.
R. Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum.
F xiv. Meditationes Bernardi. Liber de Miseria humanae conditionis. Tractatus
Magistri Petri Blesensis super librum Job. Regula S. Benedicti. Meditationes B.
Bernardi. Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum, and virtutum. Liber de miseria
humanae conditionis. See G xi.
Summa Magistri Cornubiensis super Canonem Missae. Tractatus Magistri Petri
Blesensis super librum Job.
G xiv. Tractatus qui sic incipit Vidit Jacob scalam. Tractatus super Te igitur
Clementissime Pater.
H xiv. Liber de naturis lapidum. De his quae sunt.......... ad coitum
faciendum.
I xiv. Tabula Salernic................ Salernicatorum.
K xiv. Tractatus de com............., Gallice. De 7 mortalibus peccatis,
Gallice. Quomodo Carolus acquisivit coronam domini, Gallice. De bello Valle
Runciae cum aliis Gallice.
L xiv. Miracula B. Virginis Gallice.
M xiv. Sermones diversi, Allegoriae Veteris ac Novi Testamenti. Tractatus
super Orationem Dominicam, Item Sermones.
N xiv. Libellus de Confessione Cum definitionibus 7 capitalium vitiorum.
Divisiones 7 Capitalium vitiorum, cum speciebus, and ramis, and circumstantiis
eorum secundum Magistrum Alexandrum Episcopum Cestriae. Tractatus de
Poenitentia injungenda.
O xiv. Matutinae cum horis de Cruce cum depunctione passionis uniuscujusque
horae. Meditatio de Passione Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
P xiv. Visio cujusdam quae contigit in Essexia. Tractatus Quare in Parasceve
non consecramus. Quaedam not abilia excerpta de libris Hieronymi contra
Jovinianum. Regula S. Benedicti, Gesta Barlaham, and Josaphat. Versus Qualiter
sit orandum, Versus de Passione Domini. Sermones diversi, Tractatus de Meditat.
S. Crucis. Tractatus de Confessione. Quae Clerici tenentur facere, Item
Sermones diversi. Visio cujusdam. Episcopi. Tractatus sic incipiens Conflictus
Spiritualis, sive Corporalis. Tractatus de Monachis. Historia de S. Edwardo
metrice composita. Versus sic incipientes Humanae menti.
Q xiv. Conceptio S. Mariae cum Assumptione ejusdem, Gallice. Vita and Passio
S. Thomae Martyris Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Gallice.
R xiv. Papias Versifice.
S xiv. Regula S. Benedicti versifice edita. Regula S. Basilii, Regula S.
Augustini.
T xiv. Elucidarium, Expositio Bernardi super Missus est. Tractatus de 12
abusionibus. Solatium animae, Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum, and virtutum.
Edicio de die judicii, Meditatio de sancta Cruce. De oleo misericordiae post
peccatum promisso. Meditatio de redemptione humani generis per mortem Christi.
U xiv. Item de Instructione animae.
X xiv. Manuale qui nos addiscit viam ad coelum, Gallice. Tractatus de 10
praeceptis Decalogi, Gallice. Tractatus de 7 mortalibus peccatis cum eorum
speciebus, and narrationibus diversis. Tractatus de 7 Sacramentis, Gallice.
Fabulae diversae Poetarum moraliter reductae, Gallice. Calendarium cum tractatu
de Compoto. See H ix.
Sermo Roberti Grostest quem praedicavit in praesentia Papae. Tractatus de
Philosophia. Parvus tractatus de Theologia. Meditationes Bernardi. Libellus de
Institutione Novitiorum secundum Magistrum H. de S. Victore. Quaedam
quaestiones, and solutiones super certis articulis contentis in Regula
Benedicti. Historia Britonum. Gesta Caroli Regis Magni in Hispania quomodo
liberavit viam Jacobitanam a potestate Paganorum. Bellum contra Eygelandum.
Bellum contra Ferratorium, Bellum contra Runciae vallem.
A xv. Quidam Sermo quomodo crevit arbor de qua fact a est Crux Christi. Vita
S. Mariae Virginis, Solatium Animae, Vita S. Fremundi Regis, and Martyris.
B xv. Consuetudines, and Statuta terrae Saracenorum, Quaedam scripta translata
a Graeco in Latinum a R. Grostest, Tractatus de septem mortalibus peccatis, and
eorum remediis, Tractatus de diversis dictis Doctorum.
C xv. Liber Salutaris Alquini Diaconi. Principium libri scintillarum cum aliis
rebus. Versus qui sic incipiunt Dum mea me matter: Item versus de dictis
diversorum Doctorum.
D xv. Itinerarium, Libellus de Articulis fidei. Tractat. de septem
petitionibus in Oratione Dominica. Tractatus de 10 Praeceptis, Tractatus de 7
Sacramentis. Tractatus de quatuor virtutibus Cardinalibus. Tractatus de dono
Spiritus Sancti, Item de Beatitudinibus.
E xv. Tractatus B. Bernardi de dolor, and lamentatione B. Mariae in morte
filii ejus. Speculum spirituale avaritiae. Tractatus super Ave Maris stella.
Testamentum 12 Patriarcharum. Narratio Either the same or the like story is in
Suidas in voce Jesus.
Theodosii Judaei amico suo Philippo Argentario quomodo Jesus filius Dei
electus fuit, and computatus Sacerdos inter eos fuit, and quo modo Maria
probata fuit Virgo. Vita a cujusdam Virginis nomine Elizabeth, quae stigmata a
Jesu Christi recentia, and manifesta in corpore ejus apparauerunt. De Secundo
Philosopho qui silentium servabat, and de quaestionibus There is extant an
Altercation betwixt the Emp. Adrian, and Epictetus the Philosopher, printed
Hamburgi 1615. but of this Secundus I find nothing.
Adriani Imperatoris. Quid Maria Magdalena egerit post Ascensionem. Liber Ysopi
versifice.
F xv. Consuetudines Ecclesiae Dorobernensis quas Lanfrancus misit Priori, and
Conventui. Extracta Gratiani de Decretis.
G xv. Quaestiones diversae, Gallice. De malis quae proveniunt ex dispensatione
Gallice. Eruditio Juliani ad discipulum ejus, Gallice. Infantia Salvatoris,
Gallice. Tractatus qualiter Dominus in cruce commendabat matrem suam Johanni
Evangelistae, Gallice.
H xv. Regula B. Benedicti. Expositio super Regulam S. Augustini secundum H. de
S. Victore. Tractatus de Informatione Novitiorum. Diadema Monachorum. Exaemeron
Hugonis de S. Victore. Epistola Aristotelis ad Alexandrum de Medicina, cum
aliis. Proverbia Senecae, Augustinus de vera and falsa poenitentia. Quaestiones
de quatuor libris Regum. Tractatus qui sic incipit Quoniam interiorum.
I xv. Fabulae de animalibus, and avibus, moraliter, Gallice. Qualiter Sibylla
Regina posita sit in exilium extra Franciam, and quomodo Makayre occidit
Albricum de Modisdene. Versus de quodam Claustrali facti.
K xv. Augustinus de con -- -- -- -- -- -- -- vitiorum. Augustinus de
Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus. Libellus de 4 virtutibus Cardinalibus. Augustinus de
verbis Domini. Meditationes Augustini, Meditationes Bernardi. Formula vitae
honestae, Regula B. Basilii. Vita B. Virginis. Tractatus B. Bernardi de lament
atione B. Mariae in morte filii ejus. Quaedam Summa de naturis animalium.
L xv. Tractatus Gregorii de expositione diversorum vocabulorum secundum
Alphabetum. Tractatus Grammaticalis de accentu mediarum syllabarum secundum
Alphabetum.
M xv. Isidorus de Summo bono. Distinctiones super quartum Sententiarum
versifice secundum Alphabetum. Versus proverbiorum Gallice, and Anglice.
Tractatus de Sacramentis. Tractatus de Ornamentis Missae pro diversis
Praelatis, and Sacerdotibus, and quid significant, and de spectantibus ad
Missam, Versus qui sic incipiunt, Scribo Sampsoni.
N xv. Tractatus de diversis languoribus curandis. Tractatus de vero amore,
Gallice. Vita S. Alexis, Gallice, Narrationes diversae moraliter reductae. De
discretione spirituum. Tractatus de vanitatibus, and occupationibus mundi,
Gallice. Vita There was a Margaret martyred at Alexandria by Olibrius governor
there under the Emp. Decius about the year 252. the story whereof is still
remaining in the first window of the North Isle of the Cathedral Church of
Peterburgh. And there was another Margaret Queen of Scotland, Wife to King
Malcome, whose story was written by Turgotus a Monk of Durham, who lived 1115.
and again by Ealredus Abbot of Rieval in Yorkshire, who lived Anno 1166. But
which Margaret this was, and who wrote her story in French, Quaerat lector, si
tanti aestimet.
S. Margaretae, Gallice.
O xv. Tractatus Bernardi de dolor, and lamentatione B. Virginis in morte
filii ejus. Secreta secretorum Aristotelis. Tractatus de 4 virtutibus
Cardinalibus. Templum Domini, Tractatus de Confessione. Speculum poenitentis
Magistri W. de Montibus. Compendium poenitentiale, Regula S. Basilii.
Augustinus de Conflictu vitiorum. Tractatus de Articulis fidei. Modus
confitendi saltem semel in anno.
P xv. De Antidotis vitiorum, De Praecepto, and Dispensatione. Concilium
Otthonis. Tractatus de extractu omnium virtutum principalium. De Inchoatione
Bruti, and aliis Regibus. Literae diversae.
Q xv. Guy de Burgoyne, Gallice. Gesta Osuelis, Gallice,
R xv. Conventio facta tempore Abbot Godsrey died Anno 1321.
Godfridi Abbatis inter Sacristam and Vicarium Burgi ex una part, and
Sub-eleemosynarium Burgi ex altera de Oblationibus percipiendis in Capella S.
Thomae Martyris juxta portam.
S xv. Synonymis: Tractatus parvus de Grammatica. Accentarius, Liber qui
dicitur Commentaria. Aequinoctium: Dictionarius, Alexander parvus.
T xv. Liber Elucidarii, Regula S. Basilii. Liber Soliloquiorum Isidori.
Tractatus de diversis poenitentiae fructibus and Collatione patrum cum
Abbatibus. Augustinus de conflictu vitiorum, Summum bonum.
U xv. Exitus B. Mariae, Vita S. Thomae Martyris. Liber metrice compositus qui
sic incipit, -- --.
X xv. Visio cujusdam Monachi de Evesham. Visio Audoeni de Purgatorio Patritii.
Seneca de verborum copia.
Y xv. Ordinarium vitae religiosae. Vita B. Mariae Virginis, Formula vitae
honestae. Privilegium Domini Papae Agathonis de Ecclesia Burgi. De
praevaricatione, and poenitentia Salomonis, quid senserint S. Patres nostri,
Augustinus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Bacharius, and Beda. Solatium Animae, S. Meo
me totum.
Z xv. See L vii.
De ludo Skackarii moraliter, De Oleo misericordiae.
A xvi. Lamentatio Gloriosae Virginis Mariae, Gallice. De 12 Articulis fidei,
Gallice, De 10 Praeceptis, Gallice. De 7 Peccatis criminalibus, Gallice. De
tractatu Confessionis, Gallice. De 7 Sacramentis, Gallice, Quaedam utilis
instructio sapientis, Gallice. De Confessione speciali, Gallice. Quaedam
Orationes Latin, and Gallice. Pater Noster cuidam sanctae mulieri expressa,
Gallice. Tractatus de Origin Mundi secundum Rob. Grostest, Gallice. Porta
Clausa, Gallice. Expositio Evangelii, S. In principio, Gallice. De regina
omnium vitiorum, S. Superbia, Gallice. Meditationes Bernardi, Latin. Oration
sine devotione, est quasi corpus sine anima.
B xvi. Amors ou estis venus. Lumer de Lais, Gallice. Speculum Edmundi,
Gallice. Pater noster, Gallice, Contemplationes pro diversis horis diei,
Gallice. Contemplatio de Passione Christi, Gallice. Disputatio inter spiritum,
and animam, Gallice.
C xvi. Proverbia Senecae: Liber qui vocatur Housbondrie, Gallice. Historia
Anglorum, Gallice, and Rythmice. Computatio annorum ab initio mundi usque ad
tempus Edwardi filii Regis Edwardi.

A SUPPLEMENT To the Foregoing HISTORY.
THE ancient name of this place all agree was Medeshamstede or Medeshamstud (as
it is called by Symeon Dunelmensis, and the Abbot Medeshamstudensis Abbas, by
Roger Hoveden ad An. 992.) or Medeshamstide, as it is in Radulphus de Diceto,
ad An. 1051. But whence it had this name is not so certain. The derivation
which Mr. Gunton gives of it, is out of Swapham, or rather Hugo (as I have
shown in the Preface) who says that as Eli had its name from the abundance of
Eeles taken in the Waters there; and Thorney from the Thorns and Bushes
wherewith it was overgrown; and Croyland from the Terra Cruda, moist and morish
Ground on which it stands; so this place from that Vorago or Gurges, (as he
terms it) in the middle of the River called anciently Medeswell. Whose
wonderful properties he derives from Springs perpetually bubling up; which kept
it from being frozen when the rest of the River was, and yet made it so cold,
that when the Sun was hotter than a Chimney fire (as his words are) no Swimmer
could endure it. And it must be confessed that Bid derives Eli ab anguillarum
copia, from the plenty of Eeles there; consentiens communi notitiae, says
Will. of Malmsbury (L. ult. de gestis Pontif. Angl.) agreeing to the common
notion: For it is known to all, there was such abundance of all other Fish, and
Fowl also in that place, ut pro uno ass, etc. that for one farthing, five men
and more might not only drive away hunger, but fill themselves to satiety. And
Thornei also other Writers will have so called propter dumorum condensitatem,
from the thickets of all sorts of Thorns, and Briers, etc. which Athelwold
caused to be cut up, says the same Malmsbury; intending in the very beginning
of his Episcopacy, to go and lead an Hermite's life in that place: Which he
magnifies to the Skies. That place also which we now call Crowland or Croyland,
is called Cruland both by Hugo and by Henry of Huntingdon. John Prior of
Hexham, Gervase of Canterbury and many others: And Crulant by Symeon of Durham
or rather Turgotus ad An. 1075. and Cruiland by Roger Hoveden, in Hen. 2. p.
547. and, more ancient than all this, King Edgar in his Charter to our Church
of Peterburgh, calls it Crulond: Which may make that derivation probable, from
crude Land which Ingulphus himself, who was Abbot of Croyland, gives of it;
crudam terram and coenosam significat. But for all this, I see no reason to
think that Medeshamsted had its name from the Medeswell; there being no such
deep pit in the River; and Hugo himself reporting it, with an ut dicunt, as
they say; and another plainer derivation offering it self, from the fair Meades
or Meadows, that lie on both sides of the River Nen, upon which this place
stands. Which in those days were the more considerable, because all the rest of
the Country thereabouts which was not Fenn, was Woods.

So I find in the Book called Swapham fol. CCXCV. that all the Nashum, or Nassa
as it was termed, afterward called the Liberty of Burgh, was solitary, and full
of Woods, without any Inhabitant: And so continued till the time of Adulphus,
who did but begin neither to clear the Country, by cutting down the Woods; and
to make Manors, and Granges. Presently after which, the place being new built,
its name was changed into Burch or Burg (as shall be then more largely shown)
which during all the time of the first Monastery, before it was burnt by the
Danes, had been called Medeshamstede, and frequently Medhamsted: As much as to
say, the Ham, i. e. Village or House, standing upon the Medes. And was sometime
simply called Hamstede; as I find in Matthew of Westminster. Who speaking of
the inrode made by the Danes, under the conduct of Hinguar and Hubba in the
year 870. and showing how they destroyed the North Country, and then passed
over Humber, and so went forward till they came to the Fenns, where they burnt
the Monasteries and killed their Inhabitants, he adds Horum autem nomina
Coenobiorum sunt, Croulandia, Thorneia, Rameseia, Hamstede, quod nunc Burgum
Sancti Petri dicitur. Which is no mistake in the Printed Book; for in a MS. now
in the Library of the Church of Westminster, I find the same words without the
least difference, but only the letter e in the end omitted, it being written
Hamsted.

Where I doubt not there was another Well, as Mr. G. observes by the way,
called St. Laurence his Well: and very probably was near the Chapel bearing
his name; which was dedicated to the use of the Infirmary. As appears by a
Charter of Willielmus de Midilton, a servant in the Infirmary, who gave to the
Abbot and Convent of Burgh and to the Infirmary of that place, a Noble of
annual Rent, ad sustentationem unius lampadis continue ardentis, in capella
Sancti Laurentii ejusdem Infirmariae; for the maintaining of a Lamp perpetually
burning in the Chapel of St. Laurence belonging to the same Infirmary. Swaph.
fol. CLXXXIX.

The Superstitious resort to it, was the cause I suppose of its being stopped up,
so that now there are no footsteps of it. For that moved Oliver Sutton Bishop
of Lincoln to send his Inhibition to restrain that kind of devotion, which (as
Mr. Gunton observes out of Dr. Hammond) was used both here, and at St. Edmund's
Well in Oxford: and, I may add, in other places also; as appears by the Records
of the Church of Lincoln. Where the Register of the Acts of this Worthy
Prelate, in the ten first years of his Government (which was twenty years in
all) are lost; and therewith this Act about the Church of Peterburgh: But there
still remain the Acts of the other ten; In the first of which he condemned that
superstitious devotion, which many people paid at St. Edmund's Well, in the
Fields near St. Clment's- Church, without the Walls of Oxford, as tending to
introduce the error of the Gentiles among Christs-worshippers; and in the last
the like foolish devotion at another Well in the fields of Lincelad, in the
County of Buckingham: Requiring the Archdeacons of Oxon and Bucks solemnly to
excommunicate all such persons as should presume hereafter, to frequent those
places, under the pretense of Miracles done there. Both which my worthy Friend,
Dr. James Gardener, Sub-Dean of the Church of Lincoln, having at my request,
transcribed for me, out of the Book of that Bishop's Memorandums, I have
thought good to communicate to the Reader; but that I might not too much
interrupt the course of this History, have placed them in the end of this
Supplement; together with some few other Records

I shall only note here, that there had been long an inclination in the people
to this superstition, appears by the Constitutions made in the Council held at
St. Paul's London MCII. by Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury. Where among other
things it was ordained, that none should dare to give holy reverence to the
bodies of dead Men, to Fountains, and other things (which some had done)
without Episcopal authority. The words are these both in Malmsbury L. 1. de
Gestis Pont. Angl. and Eadmerus L. 3. Hist. Ne quis temeraria novitate
corporibus mortuorum, aut fontibus, aut aliis rebus (quod contigisse
cognovimus) sine Episcopali autoritate, reverentiam sanctitatis exhibeat. But
within a few days almost all the Constitutions of that Council were broken; and
the principal transgressors were the Lawmakers; as William of Malmsbury's
words are, in MS. Copy of that Book in Sir John Cotton's Library: Which are
wholly omitted in the Printed Book among the Anglicarum rerum Scriptores: MDCI.
Eadmerus says the same, (without mentioning particularly the prevarication of
the Lawmakers) in the conclusion of those Constitutions. Et hic quidem
Lundoniensis Concilii textus est, qui non post multos institutionis suae dies,
multos sui transgressores in omni hominum genere fecit. And therefore no wonder
Oliver Sutton found the people still poisoned with this error, almost 200 years
after that Council: Which he honestly endeavored to remedy, by his Episcopal
Authority.

But it is time to return to our History: And to give a short account of the
Founder of this Monastery, and the time of its founding. The first Founder all
agree was Peada Son of Penda King of the Mercians. Whose story is thus
distinctly told by Hedda Abbot in a MS. Relation, still remaining in the Book
called Swapham. There was a great Friendship between Peada Son of Penda, and
Alhfrid Son of Oswin King of Northumberland (Brother to the great King and
Martyr Oswald) in so much that they made an interchangeable Marriage: Alhfrid
taking Kynesburga Sister to Peada, and Peada taking Alfeda (as he calls her)
Sister to Alhfrid unto Wife. Whereupon Peada by the persuasions of his faithful
Brother-in-Law, and of his own pious Sister, was made a Christian, and baptized
in Northumberland by that famous Bishop Finanus. From whom he received also
four Religious Preachers of the Gospel, to carry with him to his own Country;
whither he returned, plus jam gaudens de aeterna salute, quam de petita
Virgin, rejoicing more in the eternal Salvation, than in the Virgin he had
gotten in Northumberland. Symeon Dunelmensis speaks of this conversion, in the
very beginning of his History Cap. 4. and John Brampton names the place where
he was baptized, viz. Admurium (twelve miles from the Eastern Sea) together
with the four Presbyters which Finanus gave him, Ceadda, Abde, Betta and Dunna:
who coming into Peada's Country, converted a great many to the Christian Faith,
in two years time; for Penda did neither hinder these men from Preaching, nor
his people from believing.

All which is taken out of Bid L. III. Eccles. Hist. C. 21. where he says,
that not only Peada, but all his Nobles and Knights and every one of his
Servants and Attendants were Baptized, in vico Regis illustri, qui vocatur
Admurum. And that Penda when his Son returned, was so far from prohibiting the
entertainment of the Christian Religion in his Kingdom, that he hated and
despised those who having received the Christian Faith, did not live
accordingly: Saying, they were wretched creatures, who did not take care to
obey the God, in whom they believed.

These things were done two years before Penda died; and in his Epitome he
says Penda died An. 655, and the Mercians were made Christians. And in this
year the foundation of this Monastery is said to have been laid by Peada with
the assistance of Oswin King of Northumberland, and of devout people, newly
Baptized, and especially of Saxulph, as Hugo often says. Though the Chron.
Johannis Abbatis says it was An. 654. They are the very first words of it.
Anno Domini DCLIIII. fundatum est Monasterium de Burgo Sancti Petri, a Peada
Rege Merciorum Saxulfo Comite facto ejus Abbate primo. But Hedda, before
mentioned, carries it still higher; for he says this Monastery was begun five
and fifty years after the coming of Austin the Monk into England; ab
incarnatione Salvatioris DCL. exacti.

The great Stones, which Mr. G. observes were laid in the foundation, Hugo
says he saw, when the Monastery was burnt, and demolished, quales octo paria
boum vix unum traherent.

But it was only begun; for Peada died in the year 656. (as the forenamed
Chronicle of John Abbot tells us; A. DCLVI. Peada mortuo Wlferus regnabat super
Mercios, and erat Bissexto, etc.) and left the Building to be perfected by his
Brother Wolferus. Who, as Hugo says, was no less in love with this work than
Peada had been: but pursued it with great zeal till he had finished it, by the
help of Saxulfus, and the assistance of his Brother Ethelred and his two holy
Sisters Kyneburga and Kyneswitha: And having endowed it with Lands and other
Revenues, dedicated it to St. Peter.

This is all that Hugo says (save only what belongs to his Charter, etc.) in
whom I find not a word about his revolting from Christianity, or his growing
cold in it: nor in Hedda's Relation neither, quo modo incipiente Christianitate
in regione Mediterraneorum Anglorum initiatum sit Medeshamstedense Monasterium,
and subsequentibus privilegiis confirmatum, as the title of it bears. But quite
contrary he says King Wolfere was so flagrant (as his word is, in the worship
of Christ, that he made it his business, not only to kindle the like affection
in his own people, but to bring the Southern Kings and people that were subject
to him, ad veram Dei sectam to Gods true Religion; by sending them Royal gifts,
and enlarging their Dominions.

Yet I cannot say that Walter of Wittlesea devised all that story which follows
in Mr. G. about him, his Steward, his two Sons, and St. Chad and the Heart: but
he had it no doubt out of antienter Writers. For Leland begins his Second Vol.
of Collections out of a Book of an Author without name, but as he gathers, of
the Church of Peterburgh, whose title is De Martyrio Wulfadi and Rufini
filiorum Wulferi Regis. And there is an old MS. in Sir John Cotton's Library,
entitled Passio Sanctorum Wlfadi and Rufini filiorum Wlferi Regis: in which
the whole story is told more amply, with the Speeches made by all parties
concerned in it, as may be seen in the 2. Vol. of the Monasticon p. 119. Out of
which I shall transcribe nothing; but only note a few things wherein these two
Writers agree, and wherein they differ, or which are omitted by the one, but
related by the other.

Leland's Author says, that Werbord was tanquam secundarius in Regno; prime
Minister of State, as we now speak. And so says the other Writer, but explains
it thus; he was Secretary to Wlfere; having been a Privy Counselor to his
Father Penda: who esteemed him as David did Achitophel, and let him govern the
whole Kingdom under him, as Haman did under Ahasuerus. Which puffed him up so
much, that they both say he aspired to the honor of marrying the Kings
Daughter Werburg: only Leland's Author says, that he Courting her for his
Wife, was despised by the Virgin, by the counsel of her Mother Ermenild; the
other Writer says, he asked her of the King for his Wife, when she was but a
little Child, and the King consented: But the Queen denied it; and the two
Brothers were so incensed at the man's insolence (especially because he was a
Pagan) that they opposed his Petition to his face. From which time Werbord
meditated revenge, and contrived their ruin; which followed in such manner as
is related by Mr. G. Wolfere (says the Writer now mentioned) being like his
Father Penda, naturally fierce and prone to anger; and, when the fit was upon
him, more furious than any wild Beast.

They both say that, upon their being Baptized, both the Brothers persuaded St.
Chad to remove his Cell nearer to their Fathers Court, at Wlfercestre, in
Staffordshire; to give them the advantage of more frequent conversation with
him: and that, upon their being slain by their cruel Fathers own hand, he
retreated to his old Oratory again. But Leland's Author says they suffered
upon the tenth Kaland Augusti; the other upon the ninth.

They both agree that Werbord ran mad, as one possessed with a Devil; and the
latter of them says, he tore his own flesh from his arms with his own teeth;
and so died distracted. They agree also, that the Queen buried both her
Martyred Sons, in uno saxeo Sarcophago in one Stone Coffin; and that in process
of time she built a fair Church of Stone, in that place: for a multitude of
people coming there to pray, were wont to bring Stones along with them for the
building; which gave the place the name of Stanes. And the King, when he had in
cool blood considered of the fact, was pricked in Conscience, or rather
miserably tormented in mind, like a man upon the rack: and was thereupon
admonished to seek for ease, by confessing his Sin to St. Chad, and doing
whatsoever he enjoined. Who commanded him instantly to destroy all Idolatry,
and the Temples of Demons; to build Churches, found Monasteries, get Clergy men
Ordained, cause the Laws of Christ to be observed, etc. which he did, and among
other things, illud nobile Coenobium in Medeshamstede praediis and
possessionibus ditavit, etc. quod hodie Petresburch i. e. Civitas Sancti Petri
nominatur, says the last named Author. By which passage it appears, that he
lived after the Restoration of the Monastery by King Edgar: and that what
follows in Leland concerning the Procurator of the College at Stanes (which
Wolfere also founded for Canons Regular) going to Rome; to get the two Martyrs
Wulfade and Rufinus put into the Catalogue of the Saints, was done also, if the
story be true, long after their death. They both say, he carried the head of
Wulfade with him, though much against the will (says the latter Writer) of
almost all the Brethren. For he hoped thereby the more easily to obtain his
Petition. And to prove their Sanctity, though the Records of the Miracles done
by them, were destroyed by the fury of the Pagans, he voluntarily offered to
pass through a great fire (made by a pile of Wood) with the head of Wulfade:
which he said he had brought with him for that very end. But the Pope answered
as Christ did the Devil, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. For the Sacred
Canons did not appoint such trials by fire or water, nor decisions by single
combat; but they were invented by superstitious men. Yet taking compassion
upon the great pains he had taken in so long a journey; he granted the request;
and commanded their names to be put into the Martyrology of the Saints.

The Procurator and his Companions returning home with great joy, left the head
of St. Wulfade at Viterbium in the Church of St. Laurence, as Leland concludes
the story. Which the other Author explains thus; that in their journey they lay
one night in the City Biterinum (as he calls it) and, for greater security,
committed the head to be kept for that night, in the Church of St. Laurence the
Martyr: but in the morning when they came to take it again, they could not with
all their might, remove it from the place where they had laid it. And so with
shame and confusion of face came to their own Country, with the loss of that
Treasure: it being apparent that their carrying it from Kingdom to Kingdom,
through various places (and perhaps for gain, or honor, or favor) was not a
thing pleasing to God and the Holy Martyr Wulfade.

But what truth there is in all this, is hard to say: Cedda or Chad being gone
from those parts as far as York, before Wulfere's Charter to this Church;
which, by the story, must be supposed to have been granted immediately upon his
going to St. Chad: who in his Penance enjoined him, says the last Author, sub
omni celeritate with all speed, to cause Monasteries to be founded, etc. For it
bears date DCLXIIII. and Cedda, says the Chronicon Litchfeldense MS. in Sir
John Cotton's Library.
, was consecrated Bishop of York DCLXIII. Where having governed three year he
retired to his Monastery of Lestingay, where he had been Abbot, because
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury was not satisfied, that he had been duly
consecrated. It may be supposed indeed that before he went to York, all those
things happened, between the years DLVI. and DLXIII. But then here is the
mischief of it, that Jarmannus (one of those who subscribes Wulfere's Charter)
was not then Bishop of the Mercians, i. e. of Litchfield; for he was made so
the same year Cedda went to York DLXIII. and yet the story says, that when
Wulfere was troubled in mind, his Queen wished him to be advised by the holy
Bishops, Jermannum and Ceddam. Which supposes this to have been after Cedda was
come back to his old Cell or Monastery; that is after the year DLXVI. or in
that year: For Jarmannus having governed four years, says the Chronicon
Litchfeldense, died, and Theodore made Cedda Bishop of Litchfield Anno DLXVII.

And there is still one difficulty more, that Cedda, says the story, commanded
Wulfere immediately to destroy all Idolatry throughout his whole Kingdom: and
yet that was not done, if we may believe the Chronicle of our Church per
Johannem Abbatem, till the last year of his Reign DCLXXV. Where his words are
Wlferus Rex Merciorum omnium Ydolorum cultum ex regione fugavit.

Leaving these things therefore in uncertainty, let us pass to what follows;
that Wulferus dying Anno 675. (as Bede says in his Epitome) after he had
reigned 17 years; left his Kingdom to his Brother Etheldred, or as he calls him
Edilredus: who Reigning longer, had more time to add what was wanting to the
perfecting of this Monastery. To which he was the more inclined, because he
loved this kind of life so much, as to exchange his Crown for a Cowl. So Mr. G.
has observed out of Malmsbury; and I find the same in the Chron. Joh. Abbatis,
An. DCCIIII. Ethelredus Rex Merciorum factus Monachus, apud Bardeney. When he
was made Abbot of that place it does not appear: but he tells us that he dyed
Abbot the same year that Ethebald came to the Crown. Anno DCCXVI. Ethelredus
quondam Rex Abbas de Bardeney obiit.

But he that contributed the most toward the beginning and perfection of this
Monastery (and indeed toward the introduction of Christianity into these
parts) was that Noble person, who became the first Abbot of it,

SAXVLFVS.
Venerable Bede calls him Sexuulfus; but most other Writers Saxulfus (or
Saxulphus) who was so far assisting to Peada in the foundation of this
Monastery (which Hugo says he began to build per Saxulphum virum
potentissimum) that he is commonly called by all ancient Writers constructor
the Builder or at least Cofounder of it. In this style the Chronicon
Litchfeldense speaks of him. Hic erat constructor and Abbas Monasterii de
Medamstede quod nunc Petrusburgh. And Radulphus de Diceto ad An. 680. (speaking
of the deposition of Wilfrid Bishop of the Mercians) says that Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury ordained in his place Saxulphum constructorem and
Abbatem Monasterii quod dicitur Burch in regione Girviorum. A great many others
speak the same Language; and they all have it out of Bid L. IV. Histor.
Eccles. c. 6. where treating of the same matter, viz. Sexuulfus his ordination
to be Bishop, he gives this character of him, Qui erat Constructor and Abbas
quod dicitur Medeshamstedi, etc. And this memory of him continued after the
Monastery was burnt by the Danes, till the time of King Edgar, who restored it.
For when Hugo speaks of Athelwold's repairing of Thornei, he says he was moved
to it, because it had been founded and built by Saxulf who was, primus Abbas
and constructor Medeshamstede.

The meaning of all which is explained in King Wulphere's Charter, where he
says this House, Studio venerabilis Saxulphi gloriose est condita, was built
gloriously by the Care and Study of Saxulf. Who excited these Kings to this
Work, and looked after it with such diligence, and perhaps procured the
charitable Contributions of well disposed People toward it, that he might, in
some sort, be accounted the Founder of it. And in those terms Leland speaks of
him, in his Collections de Fundadatoribus Monasteriorum: where he says,
Ecclesia S. Petri de Burgo a Saxulfo fundata est. But Saxulf himself shows this
is not to be understood, as if it was built at his Charge, but by his care in
managing the Royal Bounty; For when he subscribes his Name to the Privileges
granted to this Church by Pope Agatho, approved by Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury, and confirmed by King Ethelred; he does it in these terms: Ego
humilis Saxulfus, regali beneficio ejusdem Monasterii fundator, ita coroborare
gaudeo.

But that which is most for the Honor of this Noble person, is that he was a
great Instrument in bringing the Christian Religion it self into the Kingdom of
Mercia. As appears from the relation of Hedda, who lived in or immediately
after those times: which show also what hand he had in the erection of this
Monastery. 'For having told us how Peada was converted, and Baptized in the
Northern parts, and brought with him hither the four Preachers, I before
mentioned, he adds, His accessit Comes and Cooperator illustris Saxulphus, vir
praepotens, and seculo and religione, Regiq. and Ecclesiae acceptissimus, etc.
To these joined himself as a Companion, and Co-worker, Saxulf, a very powerful
man every way, both in Secular and Religious affairs; being no less gracious
with the King, than acceptable to the Church. Who desiring to enlarge the new
Plantation of Christianity, by the favor of God and the benevolence of the
King, molitus est Monasterium nobile quod Medeshamstede dicitur, etc. built
that noble Monastery which is called Medeshamstede in the Country of the
Girvii, which he consecrated to St. Peter (by whom the Lord built his Church)
tanquam Ecclesiae primitias as the first fruits of the Church. In this place,
having got together a numerous society of Brethren, he sat Abbot and Doctor of
the Middle-Angles and Mercians, till he was advanced to be a Bishop:
instructing Unbelievers, baptizing those that believed; having religious Monks
his Disciples within doors; and without, Masters for the propagating of the
Faith. Insomuch that he built suffragan Covents, and other Churches, as
Daughters of this fruitful Mother.'

Of what Order these Monks were, and under what rule this Monastery was
founded, I believe no body now can determine. For it does not follow that
because they were Benedictines in after ages, they were so at the beginning:
Nay, it is certain, as I shall show in its due place, the Rule of St. Bennet
was not heard of in England, till after the foundation of this Monastery. The
Benedictine Monks indeed pretend, for the honor of their Order, that Austin
the Monk, and his Brethren (who came into England between fifty and sixty years
before this An. 597) were Benedictines. But no such thing appears from any
Records, but rather the contrary: for all agree, Austin was of the same Order
with him that sent him, viz. Gregory the great: and no less man than Cardinal
Baronius denies that he was a Benedictine. It is not certain indeed what Order
he was of; for there had been so many rules in the World for a long time before
him, that Cassianus says about the year 450, we see almost as many types and
rules used as there are Monasteries and Cells. In Italy, it might be easily
shown, there were several Orders at that very time when Austin came hither; and
had been so a good while before that: Out of which great variety they afterward
formed the Regulares Consuetudines; which were in such high esteem, that they
always had regard to them, in the reformations which, in process of time, were
made in Monastical Orders; as shall appear hereafter.

All that is proper for this place, is to inquire what Rule was observed by the
Monks in the North: from whence he came who converted Peada, and sent Preachers
to convert the Mercians. Which would prove so long a business, and yet leave us
in such uncertainty, that I think fit wholly to omit it; and return to Sexulph.

When he was advanced to the Episcopal Authority the forenamed Author does not
tell us: but we learn it from the Chronicon Litchfeldense, which says it was
DCLXXIII. Sexulfus post depositionem Winfridi per Theodorum, Episcopus
Litchfeldiae consecratus est An. Domini DCLXXIII. which is exactly agreeable to
the account given of these Matters by V. Bid who calls his Predecessor by the
name of Winfridus, whom other later Writers call Wilfridus, and Wolfridus: who
was deposed, they all say, by Theodore, ob meritum cujusdam inobedientiae; but
do not tell us what that disobedience was, which deserved so great a
punishment. For he was esteemed a good man, and had been Deacon to St. Chad, as Bede tells us: and thought worthy to be his Successor in the Episcopal See; to
which he was promoted An. DCLXX. and within three years time removed. Radulphus
de Diceto indeed says it was not till the year DCLXXX. Where he has these
words, Offensus Wilfrido Merciorum Episcopo per meritum cujusdam inobedientiae
Theodorus Dorobernensis Archiepiscopus, Eum de Episcopatu deposuit, and in loco
ejus Saxulfum Episcopum ordinavit, Constructorem and Abbatem Monasterii quod
dicitur Burch, in regione Girviorum.

Whenever this was, it is certain Sexulfus was his Successor; and is reckoned
the Seventh Bishop of the Mercians, or of Litchfield. For Duina a Scotch man
was the first Bishop of the Mercians, as well as of the Lindifararians (as my
Author speaks Chron. Litchf.
) the paucity of Priests in those days compelling them to set one Bishop over
diverse people: who having governed two years, dyed DCLVIII. and had another of
the same Nation his Successor, called Cellach; who left it presently and
returned to his Island Hii DCLIX. And then came Trumhere an Englishman, but
ordained by the Scots, who dyed DCLXII. And then Jarmannus who dyed DCLXVII. to
whom succeeded Cedda, or Ceadda (as Bede calls him) who was the fifth Bishop
(not the first as Mr. G. has it) and dyed DCLXX. And then, as I have said,
followed Winfrid, and after him Saxulf, who flentibus and moerentibus (as
Hugo's words are) ejus Monasterii fratribus, eligitur ad Episcopatum
Mediterraneorum Anglorum, and Merciorum, simul and Lindisfarorum. By which it
appears that the people of those different regions still continued under the
same Bishop. But in Saxulph's time a great and happy alteration was made, by
the increase, I suppose, of Priests; and of such Priests as were fit to be
advanced to the Episcopal charge. For the Bishopric of the Mercians (to say
nothing of Lindsfarn) was in his days divided in quinque Parochias, (into five
Diocesses, as we now speak) in Herefordensem, Wigornensem, Lichfeldensem,
Legecestrensem, and Lindifiensem. Two of which, it should seem by the forenamed
Chronicle, Sexulphus governed, viz. Litchfield and Leogastre; which were
divided after his death between two, Hedda and Wilfrid: but upon the death of
Wilfrid again united in Hedda who governed both Diocesses. By which Hedda the
Church of Lichfield was built secundo Kal. Januarii An. DCC. and the body of
St. Chad translated into it.

By all which it is evident that passage in Mr. G. p. 3. must be corrected,
that S. Chad was first Bishop of Litchfield, where he founded the Cathedral
Church. Bid says no such thing in the place quoted in the Margin, but rather
the contrary; that he had his Episcopal See at Litchfield, where he dyed and
was buried nigh the Church of St. Mary, and afterward, (viz. by Hedda as I have
shown) the Church of blessed St. Peter being built, his bones were translated
thither.

How long Saxulf governed this Church is not certain. The forenamed Chronicon
says he dyed DCLXXIIII. but it should be DCLXXXIIII. I make no doubt. For all
agree he was alive when Edilred, wasting the Country of Kent and prophaneing
Churches and Monasteries, made Putta Bishop of Rochester seek for safety else
where, and at last betake himself ad Sexulfum Merciorum Antistitem, as Bede
tells (L. IV. C. 12.) and this was in the year DCLXXVII. He was witness also to
the Privilege granted by Pope Agatho, as I showed before; which was DCLXXX. in
which year the forementioned division of the Kingdom of the Mercians into five
Diocesses, was made, as we learn from the MS. Chronicle of John Abbot. Whose
words are An. DCLXXX. Regio Merciorum in V. Parochias est divisa; per Theodorum
Archiepiscopum, and Johannem Romanum Archicanc. and Legatum. And Symeon
Dunelmensis mentions him ad Ann. DCLXXXIII. where speaking of the Towns given
by the King of Northumberland to St. Cutbert and his Successors, and of the
Witnesses to this grant, he makes Saxulf one of them, who thus subscribes: Ego
Sexulfus Merciorum Episcopus subscripsi. In the next year, I suppose, he dyed;
and left his See to Hedda, whom other Authors call Etheldus, and Bid L. IV. C.
12.) Eadhedus: for I find no ground for what Matthew. of Westminster writes, who
makes him to have lived till the year DCCV.

CUTHBALDUS.
Sexulf being promoted to the Sea of Litchfield An. DCLXXIII. Cuthbaldus was
chosen by all the Monks to be their Abbot; and that Saxulfi consensu and
voluntate, by the consent and the desire of Saxulph, as Hugo writes. Who gives
him this Character that he was a most religious and most wise person: in so
much that his relics were preserved in the Church after his death; he being
reputed a Saint.

I observed before out of Hedda's relation, how other Convents began to spring
out of this, as Daughters from a fruitful Mother, in the time of Sexulf. Which
grew so considerable in the time of Cuthbaldus, that they could not any longer
be well governed by him; but desired, as many other places did, an Abbot to be
appointed over them out of this Monastery of Medeshamstede. So Hugo reports it
(not as Mr. G. says, that they desired to have him for their Abbot, he being so
already, but) that they thought themselves happy and blessed, who could receive
either Abbot or Monk, from their first Mother; who might diligently instruct
them and preside over them. Whence it came to pass, says he, that from this
Monastery many others were built, and both Monks and Abbots appointed out of
the same Congregation, viz. at Ancarig, al. Thornei, and at Bricclesworth and
the rest of the places mentioned by Mr. G. p. 6.

Which is not to be understood, as if they became wholly independent upon this
Mother Monastery; for they still continued subject to it, as the manner was, in
after times, for small Abbeys, which had been drawn, as Colonies, out of a
greater, to be under the command of that from whence they were derived: being
as so many Cells, and members of it. Such were these, and several other,
mentioned by the same Hugo: which in the time of Pope Agatho had their
dependence upon this great Monastery, viz. Bredun, Reping, Cedenac,
Swinneshead, Hehanbyrig, Lodeshale, Schuffenhalch, Costesford, Streford,
Weteleburn, Lusgerg, Ethelhuniglond, Barchanig. Which were places not very far
from Medeshamstede, it appears by several Charters, which still remain upon
Record in the Book called Swapham. Where I find fol. CXXX. and XXXI. that in
the time of this Cutbald, the glorious King of the Mercians, Ethelredus, or
Adilredus (for he is called by both names) came to visit the servants of God in
this Monastery of Medeshamstede; and, to obtain their prayers for the relief of
his Soul, and out of a desire of Eternal life (as the words of his Charter are)
gave to the Friars there, all that land called Leugtricdun, triginta manentes
habentem. Not long after which, one of the Friars coming to this King upon a
certain occasion, he took a glebe from the forementioned Land, and put it,
super codicem Evangeliorum, upon the Book of the Gospels, in confirmation, and
for a testimony, of the aforesaid donation. Unto which these witnesses were
present; Sexulfus Episcopus Merciorum; Wecca and Berhthun Monachi; Hostryga
ipsius Regis Regina; Henfric and Eadfric principes Regis Adilredi: that none
might dare to attempt any thing, against this donation of the King; qui sibi
divinam donationem adesse optaret in futura vita. Amen. Which Leugtricdun I
have reason to think was an Appendix to one of the above named places. The
first of which Bredun was given to this Church of Medeshamstede by Friduricus
one of King Adilred's Noble Men, by a Charter bearing this Title, Fridurici
principis de Bredun, ad Medeshamstede. 'In which he says that the number of
Christians increasing and multiplying, he had given to the family of St. Peter
the Prince of the Apostles, inhabiting the Monastery of Medeshamstede, terram
cui vocabulum est Bredun viginti manentium, cum omnibus ad eam pertinentibus.
Which was done in the presence and with the consent of Saxulph (ejusdem gentis
Episc.) and of the abovenamed King Adilredus: For this end and purpose that
they should found Oratorium in eadem praefata terra, and there constitute a
Priest, for the teaching and Baptizing of the people. Which, upon due
deliberation, they undertook; and chose one of their own number whose name was
Hedda, a man endued with admirable Wisdom and all manner of Virtues: whom they
made Abbot of Bredun; with this condition, that he should acknowledge himself
to be a member of the Fraternity of Medeshamstede. So it runs in the Charter,
whose words are these: Et unum ex semetipsis nomine Hedda, Presbyterum mirabili
sapientia, in omni virtutum genere praeditum, summo libramine eligerunt; eumque
in loco praefato Abbatem constituerunt: ea tamen condition interposita, ut se
unum de eorum Fraternitatis membris esse noverit.'

And the same Religious Prince Friduricus, finding that this Venerable Abbot
Hedda, most diligently fed the people committed to his charge with the food of
divine Preaching, added another benefaction, in a distinct Charter; whose title
is, de Repinges ad Medeshamstede. Wherein he gives to the aforesaid Abbot
Hedda. XXXI. manentium terram, quae vulgo vocitatur Hrepingas; which is another
of those places above mentioned. This he did in the presence of King Adilredus,
and of Saxulph the Bishop of that Country: who joining their hands with his,
cespitunculam communiter praedictae terrae Sacrosanctae evangeliorum codici,
simul omnis coram multitudine populi imposuerunt; and so subscribed this Deed
with their own hands.

And afterward this Honorable Abbot Hedda (as the Book calls him fol.
CXXXIII.) and the Prior of the Monastery of Bredun obtained from King Adilred
other Land which had quindecim Manentes, (15 Tenants or Housekeepers as we now
speak) called by the name of Cedenanhac (another of the places depending on
Medeshamstede) for fifty Shillings; that is for Bedding and other Goods of that
value: which are thus specified in the Deed. Id est, duodecim lectorum
stramenta, utpote culcita plumacia, ornata capitalia, simul cum sindonibus and
lenis, quemadmodum in Britannia habere mos est: nec non servum cum ancilla,
fibulam auream cum quatuor ex auro massiunculis art aurificis compositis, and
duos caballos cum cannis duabus, pro praefata terra pretium dedit. I have not
room to examine the meaning of every word in this Deed (some of which I no
where meet withal but here) which concludes as the former did, that this price
being paid, the King in his Bedchamber, at his own Town called Tomtun took a
little clod of earth from the aforesaid Land, with his own hands, and laid it
upon the Sacred Volume of the Gospels, his Queen and Saxalph joining their
hands with his, that none might dare to violate this grant.

The same Hedda, if I mistake not, was Abbot also of other two places before
mentioned, called Wermundshey and Wokinges; for I find a Bull of Pope
Constantine's about the Episcopal Jurisdiction over these places fol. LXXXVI.
directed unto him; which I have not room to set down at large, but only note
that they are both said there to be found in nomine beati Petri Apostoli, in
the name of St. Peter: Which makes it probable they were those belonging to
this Church, under the Government of this great man Hedda. Whom I take to have
been the Author of the Relation above named, concerning the first plantation of
Christianity in these parts of England: and the next Bishop that succeeded
Sexulf, in the Sea of Litchfield: who built that Church as I have already said,
and dyed DCCXXI.

When Cutbaldus dyed I am not able to affirm certainly; but it was between the
year DCCIX. and DCCXVI. For he was alive in the former of those years, I gather
from hence, that Hugo says, Wilfrid dyed in his time at his Manor of Owndle,
etc. his words are In hujus Abbatis, id est Cuthbaldi tempore, Sanctus
Wilfridus Episcopus in possessione ipsius Monasterii ad Vndalum, transivit ad
Dominum: and Ministeriis fratrum deportatus est ad suum proprium Monasterium in
Rypun. Now Wilfrid (the first of that name who was Archbishop of York) dyed An.
DCCIX. as I find in the Chron. Johannis Abbatis. With whom agrees Tho. Stubbs
Chron. Eccles. Eborac.
; whose words are to be corrected out of our Hugo (commonly called Swapham) for
he speaking of the death of Wilfrid says, Defunctus est in Monasterio suo apud
Vndalum, quod est juxta Stamford, and inde Ministerio fratrum delegatus in
Monasterio suo apud Riponum est sepultus An. Domini DCCIX. Where he calls
Owndle Wilfrid's Monastery; which, it appears by all our Records, was as Hugo
only calls it, part of the possession of the Monastery of Medeshamstede.

But as Cuthbald was then alive, so it is certain he was dead before the year
DCCXVI. when, as Mr. G. observes out of Ingulphus, the Charter of King
Ethelbald for the founding of Croyland Abbey, was signed by Egbaldus Abbot of
Medeshamstede.

EGBALDVS,
Concerning whom, and the three next Abbots following, Hugo says no more than
this: ' Egbaldus succeeded Cuthbaldus in the government of this Monastery, and
Pusa succeeded him; after whom came Celredus; to whom succeeded Hedda: But what
they did, and at what time, does not appear unto us in these Ages; all being
abolished, either by the negligence of Writers, or by the times of persecution;
saving only what is written in Privileges, in which their names are found.'

And, particularly, in the Records of the Church, at the end of Hugo's Book
fol. CXI. there is a Charter of Ceadwalla King of Kent, granting to this Abbot
XL. terrae illius Manentes, ubi Hogh nuncupatur, ad Hebureahg insulam. In which
Charter he is called EGBALTHVS: as he is also in one that follows granted by
Suehardus, Honorabili Abbati Egbaltho; wherein he confirms the Donation of
Ceadwalla, and adds more of his own. It would have been grateful perhaps to
some Readers, if I could have represented them at large: but it will not
consist with the bounds to which I am confined in this Supplement; and
therefore I shall only note the same of the next Abbot,

PVSA,
Who by the intercession of a great man called Brorda, obtained of Offa King of
the Mercians, a grant of Land viginti Manentium, for his Church at Woccing
before named. I shall set down the beginning of the Charter, as I find it fol.
CXXX. In Trino nomine Divinitatis individuae Just a nobis pietatis opera
persolvenda sunt: idcirco ego Offa, etc. rogatus a venerabili Abbate meo nomine
Pusa; simul and a praefato meo (it should be praefecto, as appears by the
Subscription) vocabulo Brorda, ut aliquam liberalitatem ejus Ecclesiae quae
sita est in loco ubi dicitur Woccingas concederem; quod and libenter facere
juxta eorum petitionem providi, and pro expiatione piaculorum meorum Domino
devote largitus sum, etc.

BEONNA.
There is a Charter of this Abbot which begins thus, In nomine Gubernantis Dei
monarchiam totius mundi, Ego Beonna Abbas gratia dei, cum conscientia and
licentia fratrum Dominum colentium in Monasterio quod appellatur Medeshamstede.
Wherein he grants to Prince Cuthberth, terram december manentium quae nuncupatur
Suinesheade (or Swineheved) with the Meadows, Pastures, Woods, and all the
Appurtenances: acknowledging that the forenamed Cuthberth had purchased the
same of him for a valuable price; i. e. mill solidis, and every year for
himself and his Successors, unius noctis pastum, aut triginta Oravit (it should
be Orarum, I believe) siclos. Which Territory the Prince purchased on this
condition that after his death it should go to his Heirs, who should hold it
for their lives upon the aforesaid terms, in pastu vel pecunia: but after their
decease, it should return quietly, and without any suit at Law, to the
Monastery. Of which bargain their were many Witnesses, who signed it, in manner
following. Ego Offa gratia Dei Rex Merciorum signo crucis Christi propria manu
roboravi. Ego Egferth Rex Merciorum consensi and subscripsi. Ego Higeberth
Archiepiscopus firmando subscripsi. After two Bishops subscribe, and then Ego
Beonna Abbas hanc meam Munificentiam signo crucis Christi firmavi. To which the
Prior and two other Priests subscribe their consent.

It may be necessary here to note that Ora was a piece of money of a certain
weight; or rather a weight whereby they received money: and is written alsio
hora in the Inquisition made into the Lands of this Church, in the time of
Martin the Second An. 1231. Where, speaking of the Fishery at Walcote, it is
said to have yielded yearly duas horas. The best explication of which that I
can find, is in the Laws of King Ethelred recorded by John Brompton in his
Chronicle N. XXX. which is concerning his Monetarii in all the ports of the
Kingdom: who were to take care, ut omne pondus ad mercatum sit pondus quo
pecunia mea recipitur; and eorum singulum signetur, ita quod XV. Orae libram
faciant. But in the Inquisition now mentioned, which was made through all the
Manors of this Church; it seems to signify a piece of money. For thus the
account is given of the Manor of Walcote juxta Humbram, after other
particulars, ibidem est situs unius Piscariae qui vocatur Holflet, and solebat
reddere duas horas. fol. CLIIII.

CELREDVS,
Besides his name Recorded by Hugo, I find no mention of him, but in Ingulphus,
which Mr. G. has observed; by which it appears he was Abbot here in the year
DCCCVI. and was Brother to Siwardus the third Abbot of Croyland. But I suppose
he is the same CEOLRED who in the year DCCCXLVIIII. subscribed to a Charter of
King Berthwulfus or Beorthwulfus; wherein he granted great liberties to the
Monastery of Breodun (depending upon this Church of Medeshamstede as was said
before) then governed by the Venerable Abbot Swaph. fol. CXXXII.
Eanmundus, or rather Eadmundus, as I believe it should have been written. This
Charter being remarkable for many things, I have represented at large in the
Appendix: by which it will appear, if my conjecture be true, that this Celredus
was advanced to the Episcopal dignity, as Sexuulf had been (though his See be
not named) whereby way was made for Hedda to succeed him here.

HEDDA,
When he entered upon the government of this Monastery, or whence he came, is
not known: but by Ingulphus we understand (as is observed by Mr. G.) that he
was Abbot here in the year 833. and continued so to be, till the destruction of
the place by the Danes: Who began to infest this Kingdom in the year 837. as
John Abbot writes Chron. MS. in Sir J. C's Library.
, DCCCXXXVII. Dani crebris irruptionibus Angliam infestant. And again An.
DCCCXXXIX. Dani passim per Angliam multas caedes agant. And though they were
several times beaten, yet An. DCCCLI. a great Army of them, in 350 Ships, came
up the River Thames, and pillaged Canterbury and London. An. DCCCLIII. the
English fought against them in the Isle of Thanet, magno dispendio. An. DCCCLV.
they wintered in the Isle of Schepie: and in the year DCCCLXIV. in the Isle of
Thanet, having made peace with the Cantuarians. In the year DCCCLXVI. they did
great mischief in the North; took York; depopulated the Country of the
Eastangles; entered into Mercia; and wintred at Nottingham. Three year after An.
DCCCLXIX. they left Mercia, and went back to York, and wintered there. But the
next year (which was famous for the desolation they made of this Church and
many other places) they came and landed on Lyndesay Coast; destroyed the
Monastery of Bardney; killing all the Monks without any pity: and then entering
Kestiven, trod down, killed and burnt all that came in their way. Which Mr. G.
has largely enough related out of Ingulphus; and therefore I shall follow my
Author no further: who has nothing which is not to be found there.

The Monument erected for the slain Abbot and Monks, is here represented in
this draught, which I have caused to be taken of it, as it now appears.



The very next year after the desolation of the Monastery An. DCCCLXXI. Goredus
(so Abbot John's Chronicle calls him, whom Ingulph calls Beorredus) King of the
Mercians, took all the Lands of the Church of Medeshamstede, between Stamford,
Huntingdon and Wisbeck into his own hands: giving those that lay more remote,
to his Soldiers and Stipendiaries. The same he did with the Lands belonging to
St. Pege, at Pegekyrk: some of which he kept himself; and gave the rest to his
Stipendiaries. Which are the very words of Ingulphus, from whom, its likely,
they were transcribed into that Chronicle.

In which we find nothing concerning this place, till almost an hundred years
after. Edredus, he says, in the year DCCCCXLVII. cleared and restored the
Monastery of Croyland, by the instigation of Surketulus: who turning Monk, the
King made Abbot of this place. Which Ingulphus says was done the year after,
An. 948. and sets down the Charter of that King; in which there is no mention
(as in former Charters) of the Abbot of Medeshamstede consenting to it, and
confirming it: though in the boundaries of the Lands of Croyland Ager de
Medeshamsted is there named Ingulphus p 35. Oxon. Edit.
. Nor in King Edgar's Charter to the same Monastery of Croyland An. 966. is
there any mention of his Subscription: though, among other Royal Woods, there
is mention made of Medeshamsted-Wood. p. 42.

For, though Adelwaldus, who by the assistance of King Edgar, restored many
Monasteries destroyed by the Pagans, as Burgh, Eli, and Abenddon (they are the
words of John Abbot) was made Bishop of Winchester An. 961. yet he did not
apply himself to the rebuilding of this of Medeshamstede till nine years after;
if we may credit that Writer; who says it began to be restored just an hundred
years after its desolation. His words are these An. 970. Sanctus Adelwoldus
Episcopus Wint. transtulit de Coemiterio in Ecclesiam, reliquias Sancti
Surthuni praedecessoris sui; and ante altar Sancti Petri honorifice
collocavit. Monasterium etiam de Medeshamstede restaurare coepit, and Burgum
Sancti Petri appellavit. Anno desolationis suae aequaliter centesimo. In
another different hand, there is this Animadversion given, that, in claustro
dicti Monasterii notantur anni desolationis LXXXXVI. the time of its desolation
are noted in the Cloister of the said Monastery to have been but 96. years.
Which account Mr. G. follows; though in Swapham (or Hugo rather) they are
reckoned to be 99 years. For so the Note is in the Margin of the Book (in a
hand of the same age with the Book it self) Restauratio hujus loci a prima
fundatione ejus An. CCCXIII. A destructione vero ejusdem Anno XCIX.

This great man Adelwold was at first a Monk in the Abbey of Glastonberry:
where, as William of Malmsbury relates L. 2. de gestis Pontificum Angl.
, the Abbot had a dream representing to him, how excellent a person this Monk
would prove. For he thought he saw a Tree springing up within the Walls of the
Abbey, which spread its branches, to all the four quarters of the World; and
had all its leaves covered over with Cowles; a very great Cowle being placed at
the top of all. At which being amazed, an old man, he thought, told him, that
the great Cowle was Athelwold; and the rest were innumerable Monks, whom he
should attract by his example. Consonant to which was a vision his Mother had,
when she was with Child of him; with which I shall not trouble the Reader, but
only note that it signified the large extent of his mind in this sort of
Charity: which reached to no less than forty Monasteries, as all our Writers
report. Particularly W. of Malmsbury, who says L. 2. de gestis Regum Angliae.
he built so many and such noble Monasteries, that it scarce seemed credible in
his days, that a Bishop of one City should do such things, as the King of all
England could not easily effect. But he himself in another place makes this
wonder cease, by telling us that he could make King Edgar do what he pleased.
So his words are in the Book before named (of the Acts of the Bishops of
England) it might seem a wonder he should do such things, nisi quod Rex Edgar
omnino ejus voluntati deditus erat, a quo super omnes infra Dunstanum
diligeretur. And therefore the Abbot of Rieval L. de genealog. Regum Angliae.
says expressly that Edgar himself caused forty Monasteries to be built; among
which he reckons this of Burch; as it now began to be called. Which Athelwold
(says Malmsbury L. IV. de gestis Potif. Ang.) built so sumptuously and endowed
with such ample possessions, ut pene tota circa regio illi subjaceat; that
almost all the Country round about was subject to it. And this account also
John Bromton Abbot of Joreval gives of this matter, who having said that King
Edgar built and repaired above forty Monasteries, adds, Inter quae, consilio
and monitione Sancti Ethelwoldi Wintoniensis Episc. Abbatiam Glastoniae and
Abendoniae composuit, and Abbatiam de Burgh prope Stamfordiam stabilivit, etc.

So that the very truth, in short, is this, Athelwold was to Edgar, as Saxulf
had been to Wulferus; a trusty and diligent Servant, who managed his Royal
bounty in these magnificent Works: And therefore is called by King Edgar in his
Charter (as Saxulf was by Wolfere in his) Constructor, the builder of the
Churches before mentioned; particularly of this, formerly called Medeshamstede,
but now sua ac nostra instantia restauratum, Burch appellatur. Which by
Ingulphus is called Burgum; and by Matthew of Westminster ad An. 664. is said
to be Vrbs Regia a Royal City. Which this famous Bishop lived to see
flourishing under Adulphus, about thirteen year, for he dyed not till the year
985. At which I find these words in the Chron. of John Abbot. Sanctus
Athelwoldus Wint. Episcopus, qui Monasterium Burgi restauravit, Kal. Augusti
migravit ad Dominum. There were some relics of him preserved in this Church;
particularly of his Heirs.

ADVLPHVS.
Mr. G. having given an account of the most material things that are in Hugo
concerning this Abbot (whom John Bromton calls Eadrilf) I shall only add that
it is certain he succeeded Oswald in the Archbishopric of York An. 992. So
John Abbot writes Sanctus Oswaldus Archiep. Ebor. 2. Kal. Martii migravit ad
Dominum: cui Adulphus Abbas Burgi successit. But though he call him Abbot of
Burg, which was become the new style, yet other writers still retained the old
one, and call him Abbas Medeshamstudensis. So the Chron. of Mailros lately
printed, page 152. And so Florentius Wigornensis Ad An. 992
Venerabilis Medeshamstudensis Abbas Adulphus successit, pro quo Kenulphus
Abbatis jure fungitur. Roger Hoveden also speaks the same language; and Symeon
of Durham, in his History de gestis Regum Angl. where he calls him Adulphus,
and speaking of Oswald, says, cui Venerabilis Medeshamstudensis Abbas Adulphus
successit. And in that See he sat till the year 1003. Which John Abbot
concludes thus. Adulphus Archiep. Eborac. quondam Abbas Burgi obiit. In the
year before which (1002, as I find in the Chron. of Mailros) he took up the
Bones of St. Oswald out of his Tomb, and honorably placed them in a Shrine. Of
which there is a larger account given by Thomas Stubbs (in his Act. Pontif.
Eboracens.) which explains also what Mr. G. says about his being translated to
Worcester: and therefore I shall transcribe some of it. Vicesimus Eboracensis
Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus fuit Venerabilis Abbas Medeshamstedensis, i. e. Burg,
Adulphus, etc. Who by the favor of King Adelredus held the Bishopric of
Worcester in his hand, as his Predecessor St. Oswald had done. Whom he honored
so much that in the 12th year of his Episcopacy, his Brethren the Bishops, with
the Abbots and many other Religious men being gathered together, he took up the
Bones of St. Oswald out of his Tomb, Anno Regis Agelredi XXV. VII. Kalend. Maii
feria quarta; and placed them in a Shrine, which he had prepared honorably for
them. And not long after dyed himself, 2 Nonarum Maii, and was buried in the
Church of St. Mary at Worcester.

Symeon Dunelmensis says the same ad An. 1002. only he makes this to have been
done not the VII. but the XVII. Kal. Maii. And there is a mistake also in the
year, for it should not be the 12th but the 10th year of his Episcopacy.

And here now, it may be fit to note that, in all probability the Monks of this
Church were brought under the rule of St. Benedict; when it was restored, as
has been said, by King Edgar, and put under the government of Adulphus; and
not till then. For, though there was a famous regulation of Monastical Orders
made before this time, under Cutbert Archbishop of Canterbury An. 747. in
concilio Clovishoviae, in which some things were mended in the Manners and
Habits of Monks, yet there is not the least mention made of the Rule of St.
Bennet, though there was a very fair occasion for it: nor is there one word of
it in Venerable Bede.

It is true Wilfrid, who was ordained 10 or 14 years after the foundation of
this Monastery (An. 664.) as the Chron. of John Abbot affirms, was employed by
Wulfere King of the Mercians to settle Monasteries, as the Author of his life
tells, which is in MS. in Sir J. Cotton's library: whom Malmsbury calls
Stephanus Presbyter, viz. Stephanus Heddius, as he is named by Bid. And after
the death of Deusdedit, was sent for by Ecbert King of Kent; where he went up
and down through his Country (says the same Author, C. 14.) Et cum regula
Benedicti instituta Ecclesiarum been melioravit, and very much improved the
Orders of the Churches, by the Rule of Benedict: which he had learnt beyond
Sea, being so much addicted to foreign customs; that he refused to be
consecrated by our Bishops, and desired to be consecrated in France, when he
was to succeed Colman. This passage is much to be observed, for it appears
thereby the Churches he visited were already under Rules and Institutions
before he came to them: who only bettered them by this Rule of St. Bennet, but
did not bring those Churches under it. And as this was all he did, so what he
did was in the Kingdom of Kent alone, not all England over. And so as the
Chronologia Augustinensis is to be understood in these words Inter December
Scriptores p. 2232.
, Wilfridus Episcopus regulam Sancti Benedicti fecit in Anglia observari ad An.
666. that is, in these parts of England: for in the midland parts, it was
little known for several years after. As appears by the Bull of Pope
Constantine An. DCCIX. (the very year wherein Wilfrid died) to Kenred King of
the Mercians, Offa his Son, and Egwin Bishop of Worcester for the Monastery of
Evesham: which says the Monks were to live under the rule Patris Benedicti,
quae minus in illis partibus adhuc habetur.

And so it continued to be little known for above two hundred years. For Oswald
(whom Adulphus succeeded in the Sea of York) who had been Bishop of Worcester,
before he went to York, was the man who brought it hither from the Abbey of
Fleury in France, where he had been a Monk. So W. of Malmsbury expressly
testifies in his Third Book de gestis Pontif. Angl. where, not far from the
beginning, he says that Oswald, being Nephew to Odo the Archbishop, was bred
up in his Youth apud Floriacum in Gallia, taking upon him the habit of a Monk,
as the custom of that time was for all that were piously disposed, in the
Benedictine Convent. A quo (viz. Oswald) Religionis hujus manavit exordium, as
his words are in the MS. Copy, in Sir J. Cotton's Library. Which are the more
remarkable, because the very same W. of Malmsbury had a little before mentioned
Wilfrid, bragging that he was the first who commanded the rule of St. Bennet to
be observed by the Monks.

But after all this there was no general Constitution for our Monasteries, till
the Second Reformation of the ancient English Monkery, which was in the Council
of Winchester An. 965. under King Edgar the great restorer, as has been said,
of Monasteries. When there was framed a general Constitution; partly out of the
Rule of St. Bennet, and partly out of the ancient customs before mentioned;
which was called Regularis Concordia Anglicae Nationis, and may be found in Mr.
Selden's Spicilegium to Eadmerus, both in Saxon and in Latin. This Rule thus
composed, was called Oswald's Law (as Sir H. Spelman observes) he being then
Bishop of Worcester (to which he was promoted at the instance of St. Dunstan
An. 960 Chron. Mailros p. 149.
; and translated to York not till 971.) and had not long before, as I have
said, brought the Rule of St. Bennet from Fleury. From which Monastery of
Fleury, several Monks also were called and advised withal in the drawing up of
the Constitutions of this Regularis Concordia. So King Edgar himself tells in
his Preface to it: where he relates how that upon his Exhortation to all under
his care, to come under the same Rule, which many Abbots and Abbatisses, with
the Colleges of Brethren and Sisters subject unto them, had taken upon them to
observe; that so there might not be diverse usages in one and the same Country;
thereupon the Bishops, the Abbots and Abbatisses, being wonderfully thankful
that God had bestowed upon them such a Doctor (who is there called Pastor
Pastorum, such was the language of those times, concerning Kings) lift up their
hands to Heaven, and consented to what he proposed. And immediately sent for
some Monks of Fleury and from Gent, to advise withal about this matter: who, as
Bees suck their honey out of several Flowers, composed these Constitutions out
of several former Rules. And more particularly took care about the singing used
in Monasteries V. Seld. ad Eadmerum p. 145.
; that it should not be hudled, nor too swift: but be so distinct, that the
mind might accompany the voice; and they might fulfill that of the Apostle;
Sing with the Spirit, and sing with the Understanding also.

All which considered, I look upon it as highly probable, that this Monastery
of Peterburgh, now became subject to this Rule, being one of those restored by
King Edgar. And yet it was not the very Rule of St. Bennet, which was
established in this Council; but many ancient Orders and Customs, improved by
that Rule and accommodated to his Precepts.

For long after this when there was a Third Regulation of Monasteries under
Lanfranc. An. 1075 in the Council of London, when several things were restored
(as the words are) which had been defined by ancient Canons, the Council (after
consideration of Episcopal affairs) decrees concerning Monks, ex Regula
Benedicti, Dialogo Gregorii, and antiqua Regularium locorum consuetudine, as
Baronius observes: From which Sir John Marsham judiciously concludes (in his
large Preface before the Monasticon) that even in the Norman times, the
Monastical Laws were mixed; and that the Benedictine Rule was not so admitted,
as that the ancient customs of the Monks were thereby abrogated.

I have noted already the day and year when Adulphus dyed; but there is a
mistake I since find in the day; which if the Records of our Church be true,
was June 5. when he was solemnly commemorated in this Monastery: and is the
very first Abbot of whom there is any mention made in the Calendar of this
Church; which is still preserved in the Library of his Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury at Lambeth; of which I shall give an account in its proper place.
Where over against the fifth of June are these Words, Depositio Adulphi, and
Anniversarium Ricardi de Lincolnia and Agnetis uxoris ejus. Of all the
foregoing Abbots, there is not the least memory, little being certainly known
of what passed in the time of the first Monastery, before its desolation by the
Danes. But it is like they were all comprehended in that general commemoration,
which was made in Whitson-Week, Specialium Defunctorum: and was repeated in the
two Ember-Weeks following, in September and December. Where I find the same
Order, with this addition; that there should be a Missa ferialis, cum de
Profundis: and the names of those speciales defuncti were then read.

KENVLPHVS.
The Character which Hugo gives of this Abbot (who was chosen by the unanimous
consent of the Friars, and the favor of King Edgar) is that he was, Flos
literalis disciplinae, torrens eloquentiae, decus and norma rerum divinarum and
secularium; which was the cause of that general concourse from all parts ad
ejus Magisterium; which Mr. G. has observed. And it is likely that he brought
this Monastery into the credit, wherein it continued for several years. For
Ingulphus P. 83. Oxon. Edit.
, tells us that in the Reign of the Conqueror the Monks of Burgh were so
famous, and the World had such an high opinion of them, ut totus mundus abiret
post eos: and many of the great men of the Land, both the highest Bishops, and
other Noble Men, and Lieutenants of the Countries, chose to be Interred among
them.

He procured a confirmation of the Privileges of this Church, and of all that
had been given to it, from King Ethelred the Son of Edgar in these words
Swapham fol. XL.
, Ego Athelredus Anglorum imperio sublimatus, has donationes praedecessorum
meorum, regnante Abbate Cenulfo, solidavi; cum hiis testibus, Dunstano and
Oswaldo Archiepiscopis.

That he surrounded the Monastery with a Wall, is certain: but that it was
thence called Burch or Burgh as W. of Malmsbury writes, Mr. G. justly doubts:
For King Edgar in his Charter calls it upon its restoration, by this name of
Burch. Yet notwithstanding this name Burh, and Burgh, and Byrigh, signifying
any place which was walled about, and particularly a City, or Castle (from the
Saxon word Deorgan, which signifies to defend, or take into safety) W. of
Malmsbury might mean that the place did not deserve the name of Burch till this
time. His words I confess imply more; for he says the place formerly called
Medeshamstede being now encompassed with a Wall by Kenulphus, a similitudine
Vrbis, Burch vocatus est, was called Burch from its likeness to a City.

Upon the translation of St. Elphege to the Sea of Canterbury, Kenulphus
succeeded him in the Bishopric of Winchester, as Abbot John, among others,
remembers ad An. 1006. Who says not a word of his Simony, with which William
of Malmsbury boldly charges him L. 2. de gestis Pontificum Angl.
, Wentanum enim Episcopatum Kenulphus Abbas Burgensis nummis nundinatus fuerat:
Sed non diu sacrilego ausu laetatus, ante duos annos hominem exuit. For which
cause, it is likely, there was no commemoration made of him in this Church: his
name not being in the Calendar before named (as his predecessors and all his
Successors are except one guilty of the same crime, and another guilty of the
like) though he was so great a benefactor, and famed also for his Wisdom and
Learning. Hugo says he governed most admirably and sweetly, till he was
promoted to Winchester.

ELSINVS,
Called also Elfinus, and Alfinus: between whom and Kenulfus, there was another
Abbot, viz. KINSINVS if we may believe the MS. Chron. of John Abbot of this
Church, which I have so often cited. For though he say ad An. 1006. that upon
Kenulphus his removal, Elsinus succeeded him, and was the third Abbot after the
restoration: yet ad An. 1048. speaking concerning the suit which the Abbot of
Peykyrke had for the Lands of his Monastery (which by the judgment of the
Court of Hardecnute, as I shall show hereafter, were given away from him) he
says it was contra Kenulfum and Kinsinum Abbates Burgi. And that this was no
mistake, we may learn from his remark upon the year 1051. where he says
expressly, Elfinus succeeded him in this Monastery. Alfricus Eboracens.
Archiepis. obiit, and apud Burgum sepelitur; cui successit Kinsinus Abbas
Burgi: cui successit Elfinus in Abbatem promotus, Monachus ejusdem loci. And
again ad An. 1060. obiit Kinsinus Eborac. Archiep. quondam Abbas Burgi, etc.

What truth there is in this I am not able to say, from any other record; but
that he was a great man and Archbishop of York, and here buried, it will appear
more hereafter, when I come to that time: and we have gained this piece of
knowledge from John Abbot, that Alfinus was a Monk of Burch; and chosen to be
Abbot, says Hugo, by the unanimous consent of the whole Congregation, whom he
governed fiftyyear. By which account Kinsinus must either never have been Abbot
here; or but for a few days or months.

Mr. G. has related how he labored to enrich this Church with Relics (and
Hugo says, many other ways) but is mistaken I think in his conjecture about
his procuring the Arm of St. Oswald to be brought hither. For Hugo mentions it
among the benefits which the Church received in the time of Leofricus and
thereabouts; when Winegotus apportavit brachium Sancti Oswaldi de Bebeburch.
There it was preserved in Bede's time, in urbe regia, quae a regina quondam
vocabulo Bebba cognominatur, as his words are L. III. Cap. 6. and thence, the
ancient Seat of its rest, it was furtim ablatum taken away by stealth, if we
may believe William of Malmsbury; who relates what was pretended by the Church
of Burgh, which in his days said they had Oswald's Arm: but does not seem to
give credit to it himself.

How they came to have his Arm at Bebbeburch (a place in the North) I cannot
imagine, if it be true which the MS. Chron. of John Abbot says, ad An. MLXV.
that his body was not till then taken out of his Tomb. Agelwinus Dunelmensis,
Episcopus, Ossa beati Oswaldi Regis and Martyris apud Tynemutham, de tumulo in
scrinio cum honor levavit. But perhaps Oswaldi is there false written for
Oswini; for Symeon of Durham says it was Oswin's body that was taken up by
that Bishop.

From the same Chronicle we learn also when it was that Elfinus went into
Normandy, and upon what occasion: and bought there at Bonavalle the body of St.
Florentine pro centum libris argenti. Which was not till the year MXIII. when
Suanus coming with innumerable Danes into England, and exercising unheard of
cruelties, King Ethelred hardly escaped his hands, and sent away his Wife per
Abbatem Burgi and another person, unto Richard Duke of Normandy: he himself
following her presently after. In the same year Ingulphus P. 56. Oxon. Edit.
tells us this Monastery was again burnt by the same Suanus, or Swanus: and
many Lands were taken away from the Church (as Hugo relates) while the Abbot
was with the Queen in Normandy; the English paying a vast Tribute to the Danish
Army, which wasted the Kingdom forty years together. But he procured from
Canutus the confirmation of their privileges in as ample manner, as they had
been confirmed to Kenulphus by King Ethelred. In these words, Ego Cnut Rex
Anglorum, Deo favente and Elfino abbate deprecante; hoc Privilegium cum
optimatibus corroboravi. And in the days of Hardecanutus got a Judgment
against Wolgatus Abbot of Pegekyrke: both for the Seat of his Monastery and all
the Manors belonging thereunto, which Elfinus claimed (as Kenulphus had done)
to be part of the possessions of Burgh. How just a suit this was I am not able
to say; Ingulph condemns it most heavily, as a monstrous piece of oppression:
and it will not be amiss if I not only relate the whole story, but give an
account of this Monastery from its beginning; there being very little said of
it in the Monasticon Anglicanum.

St. Pege, as Ingulphus informs us, was Sister to St. Guthlac, a person
descended of a noble Stock, both by the Father and Mother (as Matthew of
Westminster writes) who being in love with a solitary life, settled himself in
the Island called Croyland, where no body durst dwell: because they were
terrified, as his words are, with fantasies of Devils there inhabiting. This
was in the year DCXCIX as the often named Chronicon of John Abbot tells us.
Sanctus Guthlacus apud Croylandiam vitam Anchoreticam ducere coepit. Anno
aetatis suae XXVI. About XV. year after he dyed, as the same Writer informs us,
DCCXIIII. obiit feria quarta in hebdom. Pasch. Upon whose death, his Sister
Pega settled her self in a Cell about four miles Westward, distant from his
Oratory of Croyland: which afterward improved into a Monastery. The place from
her, was called Pegekyrke, now Peykirk: and had Lands bestowed upon it by
Edmund Athebing (which of them does not appear) who gave for the redemption of
his own Soul, and of his Wives, and of Siwerthus a little Country gift, as he
calls it, of Land in a place called Pegecyrcan, to the new Monastery, of the
Holy Trinity, and our Lady, and all the Saints, viz. one Mansa and a half in
that Village, and three Perches in Waltun, etc Swapham fol. CXXXI.
. It is a very remarkable Charter, both for the Preface, and for the Blessings
and Curses annexed in the conclusion; which therefore I have represented to the
Reader entirely in the Appendix.

What other benefactions they had to that Monastery does not appear; but they
were all seized, as was said before, by Beorredus, in the year 871. after the
first desolation made by the Danes. And it was again destroyed by Swanus the
Dane in the forenamed year 1013. And so lay waste till the time of Wlgatus;
when, in the year MXLVIII. after a long suit with the Abbots of Peterburgh, he
lost the very sight of his Monastery which was adjudged to belong to Burch.
Upon which Ingulph makes this severe reflection, tantum tunc potuit super
justitiam pecunia, contra veritatem versutia, etc. So much could money then
prevail over justice, and craft against truth, and so powerful was the Earl
Godwin in the Court of King Hardecnute. And he shows how several Manors were
recovered by particular persons from this Abbot Wlgatus: so that he and
eighteen Monks had nothing to live upon, but wandered about, till King Edward
the Confessor took him into his Court; and upon the death of Brickmerus made
him Abbot of Croyland.

The same he repeats again when he comes to the Reign of the Conqueror; telling
us how in the times of Suanus, Cnutus, Harold, and Hardecnutus, many
privileges of Monasteries were lost, the limits of their Lands changed, etc.
according as the money of Rich men prevailed in the minds of the Barbarians who
sought nothing but ruins. Of which the erection of the Monastery of St. Pege
was an evidence in the time of Hardecnute when the money of the Abbot of Burgh
prevailed against the right of the Pegelandians, and the power of Earl Godwin
against the simplicity of the Poor. So his words are, praevalente contra
justitiam Pegelandensium Abbatis Burgi pecunia, and super simplicitate pauperum
Godwini comitis potentia.

But if we compare what he says, with the Chron. of John Abbot it will appear
that this suit was commenced long before this, in the time of Kenulphus, and
continued more or less till the time of Leofricus, who dyed just before the
Conquest. I will set down both their words, and so leave it. Chron. Joh.
Abbatis Burgi, MS.
MXLVIII. Wolgatus Abbas de Peykirke amisit sedem Abbatiae suae, cum omnibus
Maneriis dicto Monasterio quondam pertinentibus, per judicium Regis
Hardecanuti, contra Kenulphum and Kinsinum Abbates Burgi, ipsum Monasterium de
P. suam possessionem esse calumpniantes. Which Ingulphus relates in this
manner, Wlgatus diutissimam calumniam passus ab Abbatibus Burgi Elfino, Arwino,
and Leofrico, Abbatiae suae sedem amittens, tandem succubuit, and (proh dolor)
totum situm Monasterii sui judicio Regalis Curiae perdidit.

In the time of Edw. 4. 1477. John Wysbech Abbot of Croyland rebuilt the
Chapel of St. Pege de Paylond, as it was vulgarly called; quae per multas ante
annos solo aequata jacebat; as I find in the Continuation of the History of
Croyland lately printed p. 560. For though the Church of Peterburgh had the
greatest interest in that place (and still has the Manor and Advowson of
Peykyrke) yet the Abbot of Croyland also had some Land there by an ancient
right. Which appears from an agreement made between John de Says Abbot of Burgh
and Godfrey Abbot of Croyland in the year MCXVI. in coemiterio de Peichirche,
in the Churchyard of Peykyrke: where there were complaints on both sides de
Sochemannis. For the Abbot of Croylande had anciently (as the agreement
acknowledges) a certain Court in that Village, in which were his Houses, de qua
nulla soca Ecclesiae Sancti Petri de Burgo reddi debebat. But all the rest of
the Land in the Village, de soca Sancti Petri de Burgo erat, and consuetudines
socae Abbati and Monachis reddebat. Now the Monks of Croylande complained that
some did unjustly intra septa suae curiae hospitari, whereas they ought to have
in that Court, octo hospitum domos quietas, and sine soca. And therefore they
came at last to this conclusion, that it was acknowledged upon Oath, that all
the Land was in soca Sancti Petri (except that ancient Court, and the eight
houses therein) the House of the Abbot of Croyland himself not excepted. So the
words are Swaph. fol. CXVIII.
, Fuit ergo in praedicto coemiterio de Peichirche disraimatum and per
Sacramentum firmatum, omnes esse in soca Sancti Petri: excepta illa antiqua
Curia and octo hospitum domibus. Domus quoque Abbatis de Croylande quam Monachi
in soca Sancti Petri fecerant, sicut justum erat, in soca Sancti Petri fuit
jurata. The names of the Jurates on both parts are set down; and the Witnesses
also. The last of which on the part of Croyland is Robertus, Nepos Abbatis
Ingulphi. There have been more Records belonging to this matter; but a whole
Leaf, concerning it, is torn out of the Book: and other differences between
this Church and that, if I have room, shall be noted hereafter.

Toward the latter end of the government of Elfinus, all our Historians agree
Elfricus or Alfricus (for his name is diversely written as the other is) was
buried in this Church. He had been bred up here, but came to be first Bishop of
Winchester (as Tho. Stubbs tells us Actus Pontif. Eborac.
) and afterward Archbishop of York: who had a Palace at Suthwell, where he died
An. MLI. and commemorated here in this Church of Burgh upon the 23. Jan. over
against which I find in the Calendar these words, Depositio Elfrici
Archiepiscopi. He was succeeded in his See by Kinsinus, or Kinsius, as some
call him (Radulph de Diceto calls him Kinsigius) then Chaplain to King Edward
the Confessor.

Four years after which Elfinus dyed; as, among many others, John Abbot tells
us. Whose words are these ad An. MLV. Elfinus Abbas Burgi obiit, successit
Ariwinus. It happened in January also; for in the forenamed Calendar are these
words, over against the 13. day, Depositio Elfini Abbatis, and Anniversarium
Matthaei Capellani.

I have nothing further to add; but that Elfricus the Archbishop gave to this
Church together with his body, as Hugo writes, two rich Albes wrought with
Gold, two of their best Copes, an Altar with Relics, two Palls, and two great
Silver Candlesticks (which were afterward stolen) and his own Staff, with many
other things.

AREWINVS.
Eruinus, as some call him, or Arnewinus, was chosen by the whole company;
being vir mirae Sanctitatis and simplicitatis, as Hugo Characterizes him. Who
out of too much simplicity changed the Royal Village of Holneie, which was in
the Demean of St. Peter, (as the writings of the Church witness) for that of
Stokes: for no other reason, but because it was a nearer way unto his own Farm,
to go by Stokes. In this private Farm it was, I suppose, that he chose to live,
rather than in this great dignity; wherein he continued a far less time than
Mr. G. mentions. For if W. the Conqueror came into England the XIth year (it
should be the IXth.) of Leofricus, as Hugo says, then Arewynus could not
possibly be Abbot here eight year. For Elfinus dying, as has been shown 1055,
there passed from thence till the coming in of the Conqueror, which was 1066.
no more than Eleven year. He resigned therefore his place after he had been two
year Abbot An. MLVII. (as it is in the Margin of Hugo) and after that lived
eight year. So the words of Hugo run very plainly, Hic in prosperitate vitae
suae voluntary dimisit Abbatiam suam; VIII. postea feliciter vivens annos. And
so I find it in the MS. Chron. of Abbot John ad An. 1057. Arewynus Abbas Bur i
demisit se de Abbatia: cui successit egregius Pater Leofricus. He dyed it
appears by the Calendar on the 30. of May; where are these words, Depositio
Arewyni Abbatis.

LEO FRICVS,
Called in the Kalander of this Church Lefricus, and by Hugo Leuricus, and by
the Annals of Burton Levericus, was chosen by the whole society, with the
consent of the King and of Arewinus, being pulcherrimus Monachorum (as Hugo
describes him) flos and decus Abbatum: descended of the noble Stock of the
Angles, and more Noble for his behavior, most nobly governed and enriched this
Church: and as it is written, ornavit tempora sua usque ad consummationem
vitae. For he purchased much Land, and bestowed diverse Ornaments upon it:
particularly the great Crucifix upon the Altar, of mavelous work, of Silver
and Gold; Gold and Silver Candlesticks, a great Table before the Altar, all of
Gold and Silver and precious Stone, and (besides other things mentioned in
Hugo) Casulam ex purpura optime de auro and pretiosis gemmis ornatam, and alias
multas casulas, and cappas, and pallia, and alia ornamenta: plus quam ullus
ante cum fecit, aut post eum facturus est. In short this place, he says, was
enriched so incredibly in his time, that now it was called not simply Burch,
but Gildinburch i. e. aurea civitas, the Golden City. At his petition Edward
the Confessor confirmed all the Grants of his Ancestors to this Church; and
made him the more able to enrich it by letting him hold four other Abbeys with
it. Which, though mentioned by Mr. G. I take notice of again, because he has
omitted the reason, why the second of them, viz. Coventry was granted to him:
which was because it had been founded and endowed by his Uncle of the same
name. So Hugo relates, speaking of the King and Queen, who out of love to him,
gave to him and St. Peter other Abbeys, viz. Birtune, and Coventre, quam Comes
Leuricus, avunculus ipsius, construxerat, and nimis in auro and argento
ditaverat, etc.

Yet he did not give all he could to this Church, for in an ancient explanation
of Lands (as it is called Swaph. fol. CXXXIII.
) I find that he gave a forfeited Estate to his Brother Leowinus. The words are
these, Reteford occidit quendam Ylkytelum, and pro hac forisfactura, terra and
silva sua Franewude pervenit in manus Abbatis de Burch: Sed Leofricus
praepositus Sancti Petri permisit eam suo fratri Leowino.

He was Abbot of Burton before he was Abbot of Burgh; unless there was another
of that name; for the Annals of that Church say An. MLI. Annalis Monast. Burton.
venit Levericus Abbas. The account indeed they give of this Levericus his
death is so widely different from what Hugo says of Leofricus his, that it
inclines me to think it was another person. For they say MLXXXV. obiit
Levericus Abbas; whereas ours dyed, as I have said, almost twenty year before.

In his time there were three great Benefactors to this place, Egelricus,
Kinsinus, and Wulstanus.

Of the first of which Mr. G. has given some account; but to make his History
more complete, I must let the Reader know how he came to rise to the dignity he
held in the Church. Which Symeon Dunelmensis relates in this manner L. 3. Hist.
Eccl. Dunelm. C. 6.
; Eadmundus being chosen Bishop of Durham, would first be made a Monk, before
he was consecrated by Wulstan Archbishop of York, who was then at Worcester.
From whence returning home, he diverted into the Monastery of Burch: where
being mightly pleased, he requested the Abbot to bestow a Monk upon him,
skilful in Ecclesiastical Offices, and in regular discipline; to be his
constant companion, and teach him the way of the Monastical life; Accordingly
the Abbot appointed this Monk Elgericus, or Algericus (for he is called by all
these names) to wait upon him: who, as Hugo writes, was vir Sanctissimus a most
holy man, and thought fit for the Archbishopric of York, to which he says he
was consecrated. But being there rejected (as Mr. G. out of him relates) factus
est Episcopus Dunhelmiae, he was made Bishop of Durham; and there received with
love of all, both Laics and Monks. This was in the year 1042, as John Brompton
informs us: where he continued twelve years, says Hugo: but it should be
fourteen: for both the Chron. of Mailros, and the Chron. of John Abbot of Burgh
say he resigned in the year 1056. the words of the last named are these MLVI.
quinta feria Kal. Augusti, Monachus factus est Dunelmensis Episcopus Egelricus;
Episcopatu sponte relicto ad Monasterium suum de Burgo, ubi quondam Monachus
erat remeavit. Agelwino fratre suo and Monacho ejusdem Monasterii in locum
suum, consecrato.

John Brompton places this resignation in the year 1057. (the very year
Leofricus was made Abbot) which agrees with Symeon Dunelmensis (who should best
know) who says after he had been Bishop fifteen year, he returned to his
Monastery; whither he had sent his Gold and Silver, and other Goods of the
Church of Durham before. The Gold and Silver, he acknowledges, was found as he
was digging very deep to lay the foundation of a Church of Stone, in honor of
St. Cutberd, which before was of Wood: but he says it had been formerly hidden
there by the Church of Durham, because of the Covetousness and Tyranny of
Sephelmus. And therefore though he did good Works with this money (which he
immediately sent away to Burgh, intending to follow it himself) making Highways
with Wood and Stone in the fenny Countries; building Churches, and other
things; yet in the Reign of the Conqueror he was accused for carrying away this
Treasure, which he would not restore; and being brought up to London and
committed to custody, there he died in captione Regis, as Symeon of Durham
tells the story L. III. Histor. Dunel. Eccles. C. 9.
.

It was in the year 1072. when death delivered him out of Custody: and he was
buried in the Chapel of St. Nicolas in the Abbey of Westminster; but constantly
commemorated here at Burgh on the 15th of October over against which day I find
in the Kalander these words Depositio Domini Eylrici Episcopi and Memoria
Benefactorum. Which no doubt was this Egelricus, or Elgericus: for so names are
wont to be contracted; as the Abbot of Rieval, Adilredus, or Ethelredus, is not
only called Aluredus, but Ailredus also and Eilredus. But besides this, Hugo Or
Swapham, as commonly called, p. 11.
expressly calls him Eilricus; and the rode he made in the Fenns for Travelers,
was called Elrich-rode.

Whence Bishop Godwin has it that he was accused of Treason by the Conqueror I
cannot yet find. Perhaps he was thought to be confederate with his Brother
Agelwinus whom he left his Successor in Durham. Who, as the forenamed Symeon
Dunelmensis relates, not long after the Conquest (viz. An. 1070 L. de gestis
Regum Angliae.
) being weary of the troubles of England, took Ship at Weremuth, with many
other great persons, and went into Scotland. But returned the next year, with
Hereward de Wake and the rest, to the Isle of Eli. Where they were all in a
manner taken (except Hereward and a few others) and Agelwinus being sent
prisoner to Abbandon, there in the Winter ended his days 1071. one year before
his Brother.

The second of these great men, viz. Kinsinus, who had been Chaplain to King
Edward the Confessor, as was said before, and succeeded Aluricus (as Radulphus
de Diceto calls Elfricus) in the Archbishopric of York 1051. after he had sat
there nine years, dyed at Burg, if we may believe John Abbot's Chronicle, in
the year MLX. where his words are Kynsinus Archiepiscopus apud Burgum obiit,
and jacet tumulatus in scrinio juxta magnum Altar in part Boreali. And there
the Scrinium still remains (just above that of Elfricus who lies at his feet)
with these words on the side, Hic posita sunt Ossa Kynsini Archiepiscopi
Eborac. 1059, which by the Characters appear to be a late Inscription, and has
mistaken the year. For all agree it was 1060. though none but he mention his
dying at Burgh, but all suppose he dyed at York. Particularly Roger Hoveden,
who says he was brought from York to this Monastery of Burch to be buried, and
honorifice tumulatus est. They agree also that he dyed on the XIth of the
Kalands of January: and accordingly I find in the Kalander of the Church:
December. 20. Depositio Kynsini Archiepiscopi and Radulphi Comitis. It is
possible that Chronicle may mean another Burgh which was in the North, and
belonged afterward to the Church of York. For Tho. Stubbs says Girardus
obtained of King William the second six Churches: Five of which he gave to St.
Peter's Church of York, i. e. de Dyrfeld, de Kyllum, de Pokelymon, de Pykerynga,
de Burgh: where perhaps Kynsinus dyed.

The same Thomas Stubbs Actus Pontif. Eborac.
says, the vulgar opinion of him was, that he was not born, but cut out of his
Mothers Womb. He gave to this Church the Village of Linewelle as Hugo tells us,
with the textum Evangelii excellently wrought with Gold; and so many Ornaments,
that they were apprised at three hundred pound: which with his Body were all
brought hither: But Queen Edgit he adds took them all away. The Character he
gives of him is this; that he always lived like a Monk, most abstemiously and
Holily. So that when his Clergy, and Family had a splendid Table, he contented
himself with coarse and Barley Bread; and with the viler sort of meat and drink.
And walking on foot from Town to Town, Preaching and giving Alms, he often went
barefoot: and commonly traveled in the nights, that he might avoid
vainglory. Which makes him call him Sanctus Kinsinus.

The last, Wulstanus was also Archbishop of of York; and Successor to Adulphus:
holding the Bishopric of Worcester together with the Sea of York, as he and
St. Oswald before him had done. Who, if we may believe Hugo, gave himself and
all that he had to this place: but going to visit the places where other Saints
lay buried, and coming to Eli; there he fell sick and dyed and was buried; in
the year MXXIII. V. Kal. Junii 3. feria (as Thomas Stubbs relates) after he had
been Archbishop twenty year. He and Radulphus de Diceto differ from Hugo, in
the place of his sickning and dying; for they make him to have been brought to
Eli to be buried, according to his own prediction (as the latter of them
affirms) upon a time when he came thither for devotion sake.

The mention of him puts me in mind of another of that name who was bred in
this Monastery; and therefore ought not to be here omitted. For though he dyed
a good while after this time, yet he was advanced to the Sea of Worcester in
the days of Leofricus, viz. MLXII. So John Abbot, Venerabilis vir Wlstanus
Burgi Monachus, Wigorn. fit Episcopus. Roger Hoveden also; who says that
literis and Ecclesiasticis Officiis imbutus in Nobili Monasterio quod Burch
nominatur. The very same has Symeon Dunelmensis and John Brompton. But the
largest account I find of him is in his Life written in Three Books MS. in Sir
J.C's Library.
, by Bravonius a Monk of Worcester 1170. who relates at large, all that he did
both before and after the Conquest.

He was born at Jceritune in Warwickshire; his Father Athelstanus, his Mother
Wifgena, who put him to School at Evesham, where he received the first Elements
of learning; and then sent him hither to be perfected in it; so his words are,
perfectiori mox apud Burch (which I showed before was famous for learning)
scientia teneras informavit medullas. Here he gave great indications of his
future Virtue; when he had scarce taken the first step out of his Childhood. He
had a Master called Eruentus, who could Write admirably, and Draw any thing in
Colors: Who made Wlstan, when he was but a Boy, Write two Books,
Sacramentarium and Psalterium; and Flourish the Principal Letters in Pictures
with Gold. The former of which his Master presented to King Cnute, the Psalter
to Queen Emma. After this he went from Burch to his Parents; who putting
themselves into Religious Houses at Worcester, he also became Monk. And in a
short time was made Master of the Boys; then Chanter, and then Sacrist; and
afterward Praepositus, ut tunc Prior, ut nunc dicitur, Monachorum constitutus:
and at last made Bishop of Worcester, though against his will, upon the
preferment of Alredus to York. Who presuming upon the simplicity of Wlstan,
committed great rapine at Worcester, and kept from him a considerable part of
the Possessions of that Church; which he could not recover as long as Alred
lived; but, though William the Conqueror seized them at his Death, yet Wlstan
never left till the cause had a fair hearing, and his Church had all restored
to it, which its first Founders had left unto it. The story is told at large by
John Bromton Chron. Williel. primi p. 976. etc.
, who says Lanfranc would have deposed him for insufficiency: but by a Miracle
was moved to restore him his Staff and his Ring, which he had resigned. And
indeed he was not so ignorant as many imagined, but knew all that was necessary
for him to be acquainted withal: only was not learned in the Fables of the
Poets, and in the perplexities of Syllogisms; which perhaps he did not
vouchsafe to know, as not worthy his notice. So Henry de Knyghton, in these
remarkable words L. 2. de Eventibus Angliae C. 6.
, Sed ille magis virtute quam literis fretus, res Ecclesiae defensabat:
Quanquam non it a hebes in literis fuerit, ut put abatur; quippe qui caetera
necessaria sciret, praeter fabulas poetarum and tortiles syllogismos; quae
forsan nec nosse dignabatur.

He pulled down the old Church of Worcester, built by St. Oswald, and made the
new one we now see: Weeping, as Malmsbury says, when they began the Work. For
which he gave this reason (when he was told he ought rather to rejoice at the
erection of a more magnificent Structure) Alas! said he, we miserable sinners
destroy the Works of the Saints, that we may get glory to our selves. That age
of happy men did not understand how to build pompous Temples; but under any
kind of Roof offered up themselves to God, and attracted their Subjects by
their examples: We, on the contrary, neglecting the Cure of Souls, heap up
Stones, and raise goodly Piles, etc.

He lived till he was almost 90 years old; dying in the year MXCV. where John
Abbot writes; Sanctus Wlstanus obiit.

BRANDO,
While he was only a Monk in this Church, he was not only a Coadjutor to
Leofricus in all the good things that he did (as Hugo his words are) but also a
great Benefactor to the Monastery, out of his own Patrimony, and that of his
Brethren. For he and his two Brethren, Askatillus and Syricus, purchased
Walcote de proprio patrimonio; and gave it to the Church, in perpetual
inheritance, together with Scotere, Scotune and other places mentioned by Mr.
G. This was in the time of Edward the Confessor; who confirmed this Grant by
his Charter, rogatus ab Abbate Lefrico, and Monacho ipsius nomine Brand Hugo or
Swap. page 5. f. 2.
. Another writing mentions a third Brother named Siworthus in these words,
Brand Abbas Burgensis and Askilus and Sericus and Sivortus fratres, dederunt
has terras, Deo and Sancto Petro, and fratribus in Burgh, sc. Muscham ex alia
part Trentae, and Scotere, etc. Which is related something more distinctly in
a little Charter Ibid. page CXXII.
, containing the Names of all the Lands and Possessions of the Church (which
was recorded for the honor of their Benefactors, whose names are written in
the Book of Life, etc.) Among which it is said, Askill filius Took dedit
Walcote super Humbram, dum adhuc viveret, and post obitum illius and fratrum
ejus, sc. Scirici and Siworthi, dedit Brand Abbas frater eorum eidem Ecclesiae
Sancti Petri, Muskam, etc. And in the Charter of Edward the Confessor,
confirming this benefaction, it is said that Askil or Askitill, gave this Land,
upon occasion of a journey which he undertook to Rome. Askitillus Romam pergens
dedit Sancto Petro and Ecclesiae suae de Burch, septem carrucatas terrae in
Walcote, duabus bovatis minus, and in Alcheburn unam Carrucatam, and totam
Ecclesiam, and in Normandy unam Carrucatam, quae sunt super fluvium Humbre.
William the Conqueror in his confirmation Ibid. page CIX.
, petente Abbate Brand, says the same, concerning the number of Plough-Lands
in that place, held by the Monastery sub Rege Edwardo. Most of which, it should
seem by a trial, which John Deeping Abbot of this Church had about the Lands in
those Towns in the 13th year of Hen. 4. were part of the possessions of the
Abbey from its foundation: and being alienated perhaps, were again restored or
redeemed by Brand and his Brethren before mentioned. For that Abbot then before
the Kings Judges at Westminster Ibid. page CCCLII.
, declaring how he was destrained by the Servants of Thomas de Lancaster the
Kings Son, pretending that he held a Manor of his in Holderness, and ought to
do him homage and suit at Court, for six Carrucatae of Land in Walcote juxta
Humbr, and one in Normanby (which they said he held of the aforesaid Thomas)
alleged against all this, that Wolferus, King of the Mercians, long before the
Conquest gave and granted by his Charter (which he there produced and laid
before them) to God and the blessed Apostle St. Peter, and the servants of God
in Medhamstede, which is now called by another name Peterburgh, in puram and
perpetuam eleemosynam praedictas sex Carucatas terrae cum pertinentibus, in
Walcote juxta Humbr, and praedictam unam carucatam terrae cum pertin. in
Normanby in Lincoln, etc. Of which Land he and his Predecessor were seized, and
held as parcel of the first foundation of the Abbey from the King, and not from
the aforesaid Thomas; of whom he held no Land at all, nor owed him any service,
etc. And accordingly it was adjudged for the Abbot.

This Estate was in danger to be lost again after the Conquest, being got into
the hands of Yvo Talbois; but restored by him to the Monks, as I shall observe
in my Remarks upon the next Abbot Turoldus.

The Character which Ingulphus Page 70. Edit. Oxon.
gives of Abbot Brand is, that he was a very Religious person, and, as he had
heard from his Predecessor and many others, very much addicted unto Almsdeeds,
wherewith he relieved the poor; and, in short, adorned with all Virtues.

They that have a mind may in the same Author, find the form and manner, after
which this Abbot made Hereward a Knight; which was a thing forbidden afterward,
in the Synod of London held under Anselm, as Eadmerus informs us, p. 68. Where
Mr. Seldom calls this Abbot Brand Coenobiarcha Edmundoburgensis Spicileg. ad
Eadmerum p. 207. N. 5.
; not attending I suppose, to those words of Ingulphus, where he mentions
Abbatem Burgi the Uncle of Hereward, which he construes as if he spoke of the
Abbot of St. Edmundburgh.

There is mention of Brand as witness to a Charter of William the Conqueror, in
the second year of his Reign (1068.) wherein he settled the Collegiat Church of
St. Martins le Grand, in the City of London, endowed by Ingelricus and Girardus
his Brother out of their own Revenues: as may be seen in the third Tome of the
Monasticon Anglicanum De Eccles. Collegiatis. p. 26.
. But the next year after he dyed; as not only Hugo, but John Abbot of this
Church tells us in his Chronicon. Where An. MLXIX. having spoken of the death
of Aldredus Archbishop of York, he adds, Obiit etiam Brando Abbas Burgi,
Patruus dicti Herewardi de Wake, and ex Regis collatione successit Turoldus.
Brando dedit pro Fyskyrton XX. marcas auri, and alias XX. pro Quametis, and pro
ibidem..... VIII. marc. auri. Our Writings also mention his redeeming Burleigh,
as well as the forenamed places: which shows how studious he was of the
prosperity of this place. Where he dyed 2. Kaland. Decembris, says Hugo,
agreeable to the Kalander which says 30. November. Depositio Brandonis and Will.
de Waterville Abbatum, etc.

TVROLDVS,
Or THVROLDVS (as he is called in a Chater of King Henry the First) was no
sooner settled in the Monastery, but all manner of evils (as Hugo's words are)
came to it. For that very year (1069) the Danes returned to infest England,
under the conduct of Suenus (Abbot John says the Sons of Swane) their King,
with a very great Army. Part of which under Osbern came to Eli, and was
presently reinforced by Hereward de Wake and his associates, who came and
joined with them. He was a very great man, called by one of our best
Historians, vir Serenissimus Walsingham.
; who at his return out of Flanders (where he had been for a while) hearing how
much his Family and Kindred had suffered by the Normans, and finding Ivo
Talbois the Conqueror's Sisters Son, possessed of his Estate (the Conqueror
having given Ivo large possessions in Holland) was extremely enraged thereat:
and resolved by force of Arms to recover his own, though with the havoc and
spoil of other people. I cannot say that this place felt the first effects of
his fury, but here he discharged it after a most terrible manner, as Hugo
relates the story. For he it was that invited and incited also Osbern and his
Danes to go and plunder this Abbey: where he heard the Abbot his Uncle was dead,
and the place filled with a Norman (whom he accounted an intruder) and he a
very severe man; who lay then with some Soldiers at Stamford. They came
therefore with great speed; though not so hastily, but the Monks of Burgh had
some notice: so that the Sacrist, called Ywarus, by the Counsel of the Monks
carried away all that he could, viz. the Texts of the Gospel, with the
Chesibles, Copes, and Albes, etc. and went with them to the Abbot Turoldus at
Stamford. The very same morning came Hereward and his company in Boats; against
whom the Monks maintained the Close so stoutly (as is observed out of him by
Mr. G.) that he had no way but to set fire to the Houses near the Gate; by
which means his Forces entered, and burnt all the Offices of the Monastery and
the whole Town, except the Church and one House.

The Monks therefore besought them to be favorable to it; but they, not
regarding their cries, entered armed into it, and endeavored to carry away the
great Cross, but could not. Yet they took the golden Crown from the head of the
Crucifix; with the precious Stones, and the Footstool under its feet, made of
pure Gold and Gemms: together with duo aurea feretra (two golden or gilded
Bears whereon they carried the Saints Relics and other such like things in
Procession) and nine Silver ones, and twelve Crosses, some of Gold, some of
Silver. And besides all this, went up into the Tower and took away the great
Table, which the Monks had hidden there; which was all of Gold and Silver and
precious Stone, and wont to be before the Altar: with abundance of Books and
other precious things, which were invaluable; there being not the like in all
England. And they pretended to do all this, out of faithfulness to the Church;
for the Danes, they told them, would preserve these things for the use of the
Church, better than the Franks would do. Nay, Hereward himself was Homo
Monachorum a lover of Monks, and therefore some believed what they said; and he
also afterward swore, that he did all this with a good intention; because he
thought William the Conqueror would get it all. Away they went therefore with
their Booty, and made all the have they could to their Ships; fearing the
Normans might fall upon them: and coming to Eli, they committed all their spoil
into the hands of the Danes themselves.

What became of it, Mr. Gunton has largely enough related out of Hugo. Which
does so little agree with what I find in the life of Hereward de Wake, that we
must suppose all this to have been done (if he was not mistaken in his story)
in the year 1070. and that he came again and spoiled this Church after the
Goods, which remained were restored; as I shall show presently, when I have
finished the foregoing History. Which says that Turoldus came to the Abbey the
very same day the Danes went away, with an hundred and sixty Normans well
armed; hoping to meet with the Enemy, before they carried off their prey: but
found no body there, and the place laid desolate; all being burnt both within
and without, except the Church. Insomuch that the City not long ago, called
aurea, was now made pauperrima. But the Abbot being come, the Monks, who had
been scattered, returned; and performed divine Offices, which had been
discontinued seven days. He strengthened himself also by Stipendiary
Soldiers, upon whom he settled threescore and two Hides of Land; that they
might defend him from Hereward. So John Abbot ad An. 1069. Turoldus vero lxii
hidas terrae de terris Ecclesiae Burgi, dedit Stipendiariis militibus qui eum
contra Herewardum le Wake tuerentur. He built a Castle also hard by the
Monastery (as I shall note anon out of the same Chronicle) and had the pleasure
to see Hereward the next year, 1071. hardly escaping out of the Isle of Eli,
where most of his accomplices, as I have said were taken: And yet
notwithstanding that great man rallied again, and came into these parts with
Forces, against which a great Army was raised out of Northamptonshire,
Cambridgshire, Linoclnshire, Holland, Leicestershire, Huntendone and
Warwickshire: while Hereward lay with a few Soldiers, in comparison, skulking
in the Woods nigh unto Burch.

This I learn out of a Treatise at the end of Swapham, entitled de gestis
Heruuardi inclyti militis, gathered out of such fragments as could be found of
a Book written in the English tongue, by Alefricus Diaconus, who was Hereward's
Priest at Brun. Who says this great Army gathered out of those severai
Counties, was lead by Turoldus Abbot of Burch, and Yvo Talbois; who encompassed
Hereward and his men so strictly, that they greatly distressed them. But he,
nothing terrified, placed all his Sagittarii and balistarii among the Trees,
which they had there for their security: and from thence issued out, as he saw
his opportunities, and having made great slaughters, retreated under their
shelter again. This he continued to do, after several manners, all the day
long, till he had tired the opposite Army, and made them raise their Siege. And
then Hereward, with all his men, rushing out upon their Rere all at once, put
them into such a confusion, that he took many of them Prisoners; and among the
rest Abbot Turoldus. Whom he kept in Custody till he redeemed himself, and
other considerable persons with the sum of three thousand Marks of Silver. So
that writer says Fol. CCCXXXVI.
with whom John Abbot agrees; but mentions a far greater sum. Nihilominus
tandem cum multis aliis magnatibus (speaking of Turoldus) ab Herewardo captus
quousque pro sua redemptione XXX. marcas argenti solveret, cum aliis suis
conductitiis in custodia detentus est.

But after this ransom of himself and his Nephew and others, whom he received
from the hand of a Cousin of Herewardus, called Siwardus Albus, who had
honorably entertained him out of reverence to the Abbot; he forgot both his
Covenant, and the benefits he had received; renewing the War against Hereward.
For the carrying on of which, he gave away more Goods of his Church, and many
Possessions to Soldiers; ut haberet semper militare auxilium ad expugnandum
Herewardum. Which coming to the Ears of Hereward, who saw he was like to suffer
for his kindness, he made no delay; but the same night marched with all the
force he could make to Burch; and burning the whole Town (which it seems by
this story, began to be built again) carried away all the Treasure of the
Church; and pursued the Abbot himself, licet latitando cum suis evaserit.

But the next night (if we may believe this Writer) Hereward thought he saw in
his dream an old man, of inestimable beauty, and in brighter habit than he had
ever beheld or imagined, with a terrible countenance, threatening him (with a
great Key he held in his hand, and with a dreadful voice) that he should
immediately restore all he had taken out of the Church, if he loved his life.
Whereupon he rose up the very same hour, and carrying back all that he had
pillaged, immediately departed from Burgh. But lost his way in the night, and
wandered up and down in the Woods, not knowing whither he went; till a vast Wolf
appeared, who marched before them like a household Dog, and led them into their
right way: As they saw by lighted Candles which appeared upon every man's
Shield; which none of them could pull off or blow out. But when morning
appeared, both Wolf and Candles vanished, and they came whither they desired
beyond Stamford.

He relates many other wonderful achievements of this famous Warrior (who was
accounted the Hector of his time) and at last shows how he was reconciled to
the King, and served him faithfully: having all his Fathers Lands and
Possessions restored to him; and living comfortably and peace ably with his
Countrymen and Friends, dyedin peace, after he had lived many Years. Other
Writers say, he having taken Ivo Talbois in Battle, would not deliver him,
until the King (to have his Nephew preserved) promised by Oath unto Hereward
Reconciliation, Pardon, his former dignity, with full restitution of all that
had been his. Which was done in the year 1076. Until which time from the death
of Brando, not only this Monastery but others also suffered very much. For in
the year 1070. many Abbots as well as Bishops by the Kings procurement, were
deposed or ejected, upon slight surmises, that the English might be deprived of
all dignities. So John Abbot; who after he had related how Stigandus was
deposed, to make way for Lanfranc, adds, Plures eo anno tam Episcopi quam
Abbates vel nullis vel levibus suspitionibus deponuntur, aut ejiciuntr;
procurante Rege, ut Angli nullis dignitatibus potirentur.

In the year 1072 the Monks of Eli were Outlawed, having afforded succor to
some Great men who were in Rebellion against the King. I suppose to those, who
in the year before were in that Isle, and in that Church in open rebellion,
with Hereward. So Abbot John MLXXI. Hereward le Wake Ecclesia intra paludes
Heliensi, cum multis aliis Anglis exlegatis resistit. And then it follows, An.
MLXXII. Monachi Helienses, quibusdam Angliae Magnatibus contra Regem
rebellantibus succursum praebentes, exlegati sunt. Et multi Monachi Anglici per
totam Angliam male tractati and plurimum vexati. Multa Monasteria tam de
propriis pecuniis quam de aliorum apud ipsos depositis ad quadrantem ultimum
spoliata. Walsingham Hypodigm. Neustriae p. 418.
writes much to the same purpose; telling us the Conqueror made all the Abbeys
in England to be searched, and caused all the money, which the Richer people
had there deposited, to be brought into his Coffers; only he places this in the
year 1070.

In the year MLXXV. Comes Northampt. Sanctus Walterus apud Wynton decollatus,
as the same Abbot John writes. Which was done he says, notwithstanding that
Lansranc pronounced him innocent, and that if he was put to death he would be a
Martyr. And accordingly he was honored by Wlfketulus Abbot of Croyland: who
gave him an honorable Burial, and thereupon was violently deposed. As indeed
all the Bishops and Abbots were, if they were Angligenae, (as he again repeats
it) introductis in eorum seeds Normannis

Which I the rather mention, because this Wlfketulus had been bred up in this
Church of Burgh; as we learn from what follows. For that Coronicle says, that
Ingulphus succeeding Wlfketulus (for though he was an Englishman born, he had
lived long among the Normans) interceeded with the King for his predecessor,
that he might come from Glastonbury, where he was shut up in the Cloister, ad
Ecclesiam suam de Burgo. Which was granted, ubi post paucos dies morbo correpto
in Domino requievit. Ingulphus P. 78, 79. Oxon. Edit.
himself, says he was taken with a Palsy; and that having been kept ten Year
at Glastonbury, he dyed 1085, after he had been (not a few days) but four
Months at Burgh. While he was here, Ingulphus had frequent conversation with
him; for he procured leave that Wlfketulus might come from Burgh to Croyland as
often as he thought good to call him. Who informed Ingulphus of the Estate of
the Church of Croyland; and brought back to it many rich things: but some, he
says, still remained at Burgh. He was the more acceptable; because there were
Lands concealed from that Monastery; in the discovery of which he thought
Wlfketulus might assist him. For one Alsford Bailiff of the Church of Croyland
had been notoriously guilty of it; and was called to an account for it by
Ingulphus presently after he entered upon his Government. But as he was in the
way to appear before the King's Justices at Stamford, he broke his neck by a
fall off from his Horse: and was carried to be buried at Burgh; according to
the order he had taken about it in his life time. They that delight to read
wonderful things, may look into Ingulphus Page 77.
and find a story he tells of a miraculous cloud about the Sun, as they were
carrying his body thither.

But it is time to return to Turoldus: who, as Hugo writes, was a mischief to
this Church eight and twenty years. Which is not to be understood so
rigorously, as if he did no good; for first as he gave away much Land, so he
got some back again: particularly the Manors that had been granted to Ivo
Talbois; which he was persuaded to restore to the Monks in his life time, so
that after his decease they should return ad dominium Sancti Petri. This I find
in a Charter of William Rufus, which runs thus, Gulielmus Rex Anglorum Roberto
Lincolniensi Episcopo (by this it appears this was William the second, for he
made Robert Bishop of Linc. in the 6th year of his Reign 1092) and Oswino
vicecomite and omnibus Baronibus suis and fidelibus salutem. Sciatis me
concessisse Sancto Petro de Burgo, and Thuroldo Abbati and Monachis ejusdem
Ecclesiae ad victum eorum, terras illas quas Ivo Talbois de praedicto Abbate
tenuit, and ipse idem Yvo eisdem Monachis in vita sua reddidit: ita sc. ut post
decessum ejus, ad dominium Sancti Petri redirent. Testante Cyrographo ab eodem
Yvone and Thuroldo Abbate conscripto. Haec autem sunt terrarum nomina, scil.
Scotere and Walcote, cum omnibus appendiciis, etc.

And secondly, all these Soldiers who had feods given them out of the Estate of
the Church for its defense, were bound by the original grant to serve the King
also, when there was occasion, in his Wars. This I understand out of a
description of all the feoda militum, still remaining in the Book called
Swapham Fol. CCLXX.
: where this account is given, why they were granted. Quia omnes milites
praedicti pro defensione domus facienda, in exercitu Domini Regis, and alibi
cum necesse esset, de dominico Abbatis and conventus feodati fuerant. There
also it appears how they sewed in King John's time, and before that in Henry
the seconds, nay from the time of their first Infeoffement. So the words are,
Et ante tempus ejusdem (Henrici) postquam feodati fuerunt, and a tempore dicti
regis, usque ad praesens; and hac ratione, quia, etc.

And Thirdly, He and his Soldiers, not only built Towns in those wast places
which Adulphus had cleared from Wood, and let the Lands out to Farm at a
certain Rent, etc. (some of which Towns were called by their names, and remain
to this day, as Gunthorp, Melton, Walton, Barnak, etc.) but also Churches and
Chapels, the profits of which the Monastery received entirely for many years,
till the time of Ernulphus. So the words are Ibid. fol. CCXCV.
eodem vero tempore construebatur tam Ecclesiae quam capellae per praedictos
Abbatem (sc. Thuroldum) and milites, quarum proventus Monasterium Burgi
totaliter recepit, per multos annos; usque ad tempus bonae memoriae Domini
Roberti Lincoln. Episcopi and Abbatis Ernulphi Burgensis Ecclesiae Anno, viz.
Domini MCXII.

The names of those Milites who were first infeoffated, and did these good
things are there set down fol. CCXCVI. There were but nineteen of them; the
first of them called Azelinus de Watyrvil. I shall not trouble the Reader with
the rest: but end this account of Turoldus, who dyed says John Abbot MXCVIII.
Obiit Turoldus Abbas Burgi, qui milites feodavit de terris Ecclesiae, and
Castellum juxta Abbatian constraxit, and alia multa mala secerat. Hic erat
alienigena. The Hill whereon this Castle stood (called now Touthill) is on the
Northside of the Minster. Notwithstanding all which, he had an honorable
memory perserved in this Church upon the XIIth of April, upon which was,
Depositio Thoroldi (so he is called) and Guidonis Abbatum, and Anniversarium
Roberti de Hale, and Agnetis Matris ejus. Who Guido was I have not yet found.

GODRICVS.
He is called by Roger Hoveden, Bodricus de Burch: who was not deposed in that
Council mentioned by Mr. G. but only removed; for he was barely elected to the
place, but not blessed, or consecrated. So Eadmerus informs us, who tells this
story more exactly than any following Writers; except William of Malmsbury, who
to a little agrees with him; and says that in the year MCII. in the 4th year of
Pope Paschal and the third of King Henry, there was a Council held by Anselm
with all the Bishops of England in the Church of St. Paul. Where in the first
place, simonicae haeresis surreptio dampnata est. In qua culpa inventi
depositi, sc. Guido de Perscora (called by others Wido) and Wimundus de
Tavestock and Aldwinus de Ramesei. Et alii nondum sacrati remoti ab Abatiis
suis, sc. Godri cus de Burgo, Hanno de Cernel, Egelricus de Mideltune. Absque
vero Simonia remoti sunt ab Abatiis, pro sua quisque causa, Ricardus de Heli,
and Robertus de Sancto Edmundo, and ille qui erat apud Micelneie. Many other of
our Writers tell this story (though not so distinctly) particularly Florentius
Wigornensis; and Gervasius Monk of Canterbury (in the life of Anselm) who calls
Goderick Electum de Burgo, agreeable to what Eadmerus says. And yet,
notwithstanding this deposition, they tell us that Anselm, going to Rome the
next year (1103) had two of these Abbots in his company; viz. Richard of Ely,
and Aldwinus of Ramsey; as both Florentius and Symeon of Durham report: which
would make one think, he did not take them, upon further inquiry, to be so
guilty as was pretended. And as for our Godrick it is very strange he should be
touched with this crime, who was chosen Abbot against his Will, if we may give
credit to Hugo: and had been before Elect to an Archbishopric in Little
Britain, but refused the dignity. And therefore this is all he says, of his
being thrust out of this place, that when Richard of Ely and Alduinus of Ramsey
and others were deposed in Council for purchasing their Abbeys, he also was
deposed with them. Neither does Abbot John mention his crime, but only says ad
An. MCII. Anselmus Archiepiscopus Concilio convocato apud Land. Rege
consentiente plures deposuit Abbates, vel propter Simoniam, vel propter aliam
vitae infamiam. Depositi sunt ergo Burgensis, Persorensis, Heliensis, de Sancto
Edmundo, Ramesiensis, Cervel. Midleton. Tavestock. Micheln. And so Symeon of
Durham, plures Abbates Francigeni and Angli sunt depositi and honoribus
privati, quos injuste acquisierunt, aut in eis inhoneste vixerunt, etc.

What became of him afterward I do not find. He has no memorial in the
Kalander of this Church; as all the rest since the Restoration of it, but
Kenulphus and another have, till the time of Henry Morcot. John Abbot adds, at
the end of the year 1098. that the Church wanted an Abbot five years, Vacavit
Ecclesia quinque annis: That is, from the death of Turoldus, to the coming in
of Matthias, which was in the year 1103. So he makes Godricus to have been but
a Cipher; by whom the place was not filled at all. This vacancy began in the
time which Eadmerus speaks of (p. 26.) when W. Rufus kept many Abbeys in his
hands: and making no Abbots, the Monks went whither they list.

The robbery Mr. G. mentions, was committed in Whitsunweek, by climbing up to a
window over the Altar of St. Philip and Jacob, where those Vagabonds broke in.
While they were taking the things away, one of them stood with a drawn Sword,
over the head of the Sacrist Turicus, who was fast asleep: that if he waked, he
might instantly dispatch him.

MATTHIAS.
John Abbot of Burgh, comprehends the most that can be said of this Abbot in
these words Chron. M. S.
MCIII. Matthias Abbas factus est post Godricum Abbatem, qui uno anno praefuit
Ecclesiae Burgensi. Et eodem die quo receptus est, anno revoluto ex hac vita
decessit. Hic concessit fratri suo Galfrido Manerium de Pyetislee ad firmam.
Only we understand from Hugo, that he dyed at Gloucester, and was there buried:
and that the day of his reception and death, was XII. Kal. November. (the
Kalander says 22. October. Depositio Domini Matthiae Abbatis, etc.) and that he
granted this Manor of Pichlee unto his Brother, to Farm, but for one year: but
after the Abbot's death, he kept the Village by force. And yet he swore, when
he was accused before the King, for himself and for his Heirs, upon the high
Altar and the Relics of St. Peter (promising he would compel his Wife and
Children to make the same Oath) that he would restore the said Manor with all
belonging to it, unto the Church (without putting them to the trouble of a
suit) and for the time he had held it, pay four pound a year Rent.

This Oath he made to Ernulphus. But in the time of the next Abbot John de Says
An. 1117. Godfrey came to him in his Chamber, and by importunity procured a
grant of it for his life; at the yearly Rent of four pound: provided that when
he dyed, it should without suit at Law, return to the Monastery. Unto which he
swore upon the Gospel, before many Witnesses; whose names, Hugo says, were
written super textum Evangelii, and therefore he did not mention them. Three
years after this agreement (viz. An. 1120.) he was drowned, as he was crossing
the Sea with the Kings Son; and the same Abbot seized on the Manor, according
to the forenamed agreement. But fearing some suit, he gave the King Sixty Marks
of Silver, to confirm the possession of this Manor to the Monastery for ever,
per suum Breve. The Chron. of the other Abbot John says he gave but XL. Mark:
ipse dedit XL. Marcas (perhaps it should be LX.) pro Pichlee. Which he held as
long as he lived; but after his death all this little profited.

This Story is told more largely in other records; which say that forty
shillings of that 4 l. Rent, reserved upon Pithesle (as it is there called) was
for the use of the Monastery, and the other half for the use of the Abbot. They
say also his Wife and Children swore, as well as he, upon the Text of the
Gospel, that the above named condition should be performed. And the Witnesses
to these Covenants are named, Herveus Bishop of Ely, Reginaldus Abbot of
Ramsey, Robert Abbot of Thorney, Hugo Vicecomes; and of the Abbots Tenants,
Willelmus de Lusoriis, Azelinus de Gunethorp, Rogerus de Torpel, Richardus de
Sancto Medardo and many others.

Hugo tells us in another place Fol. XII.
that this Matthias, would not believe, what was commonly said by the Monks,
that the Arm of St. Oswald was entire, without corruption. And therefore the
Savrist was commanded, for his satisfaction, to open the Capsuld wherein it was
kept, and show it to him. The Sacrists name was Eilricus Cnorti, who not being
expert in handling such things, incautiously took hold of the Scapula of one of
the Holy Innocents (which with some other Relics were kept in the same Chest
with St. Oswald's Arm) and it breaking between his fingers, blood issued out
and fell upon the Cloth wherein it was wrapped. Which he relates as a great
miracle, as indeed it was if it were true: but we have reason to think there
was some trick in the business, whereby they imposed upon Hugo's credulity, who
says he saw this, Quod and oculis nostris vidimus.

ERNVLPHVs,
Or Arnulphus, after four years vacancy, was promoted to the Abbey 1107. and
most willingly received, because he was known to be a good and wise man, and a
Father to Monks. In his days says, Hugo, all went well, and there was joy and
peace; because the King and the Nobles loved him, and always called him Father.
He was by his Country a Frenchman, bred a Monk in the Monastery of St. Lucian,
at Belvacum: where seeing some things, very full of insolence, which he could
neither amend nor endure, he resolved to leave the place. But sent first to
Lanfranc for his advice, (with whom he had studied a long time at Becc) who
knowing the industry of the man, persuaded him to come over hither: because,
where he was, he could not save his Soul. He came therefore, and all Lanfranc's
time remained a Monk at Canterbury: but was preferred by Anselm to be Prior of
the Convent there; and presently after to be Abbot of this Church: and then by
Radulphus to be Bishop of Rochester. All which I have transcribed out of
William of Malmsbury L. 1. de gestis Pontif. Angl. C. ult.
, who gives the most distinct account of him; and says it is not easy to tell,
quantae probitatis and prudentiae in omnibus Officiis fuerit. In Kent, the fore
part of the Church, which Lanfranc built, being fallen down, he raised so
splendidly, that nothing like it could be seen in England; both for the light
of the glass Windows, and the brightness of the marble pavement, and the
variety of Pictures in the Roof of the Church. At Burgh Monachorum numerus
auctus, Religio bonis moribus confota, aedium veterum ruderibus deturbatis nova
fundamenta jacta; culmina erecta; eaque omnia, cum vorax ignis absumpsisset,
meditanti reficere, honos Pontificalis impactus.

Mr. G. has given an account of his buildings, (out of Hugo) which
sufficiently explains what Malmsbury writes: and there is one more which he
has omitted, for he began the Refectory, and did many other good things,
(says Hugo) in that seven years wherein he governed. The Chronicon of John
Abbot mentions one; XX l. dedit Conventui ad Capas and alia ornamenta emenda.
But this was not strictly his gift, if we may believe Hugo, who tells this
Story. That one Robertus de Castre came in Ernulphus his time, and (being weak)
gave to St Peter, the Abbot and Monks, Fifty pound of Silver, and turned Monk
with his Son, a very towardly youth. Out of which money the Abbot appointed
twenty pound, to be employed to buy Palls and Copes, by the hands of the
Sacrists Wictricus and Remaldus. Two very able men, who for thirty year
together served the Monastery faithfully, and did abundance of good. Wictricus
was the Elder, and growing infirm resigned the place: but Remaldus (whom they
called Spiritualis, because he was a little man) continued in it till his
death, for they would not suffer him to leave it. He was thought to have the
Spirit of Prophecy; being able to tell before hand when any of the Monks would
dye, and having had other things to come, shown him by Visions, which they took
to be from God. Particularly, one night he thought he was in the Porch of St.
Andrew (adhuc stante vetere Monasterio) and that two honorable persons
appeared to him, and sat down there; clothed in Albes, and Chisibles, and
having on Episcopal Palls, and Miters upon their Heads. Who called to him, and
named themselves Kynsinus and Elfuricus (who as I noted before lie buried
together) bidding him call thither several of the Seniors of the Church;
Adelwoldus the Prior by name, and then diverse other, all honorable persons:
(whom Hugo says he himself had seen) who being come before them, they bad
Remaldus go out, for he could not yet come to them. And all those who were thus
called, dyed, one after another, in the same order wherein he had seen them
come to them.

Other Stories he tells of like nature, and then returns to Ernulfus, wishing
he had not been so much beloved: for by this means they lost him, and he was
preferred to the Bishopric of Rochester, in the year 1115. Abbot John in his
MS. Chron. says 1114. and they agree well enough; he being chosen one year and
Consecrated the following. So I learn out of Symeon Dunelmensis De gestis Regum
Angliae.
; who says, ad An. 1114. that on the day of the Assumption of St. Mary,
Arnulphus Abbas de Burh, ad Hrofensem Ecclesiam eligitur Episcopus (where, by
the way, it may be observed, that this way of writing Roffensem, caused the
mistake in the printed History of Hoveden, which says he was chosen in
Herefordensem Episcopum). And then An. 1115. the same Symeon says, the
Archbishop of Canterbury ordained this Arnulphus Abbot de Burh, ad Hrofensem
Ecclesiam die Sancti Stephani Martyris, in Christ's Church at Canterbury.
Eadmerus speaks of the same Consecration, and calls him Abbatem Burchorum P.
110, 111.
, and Abbatem de Burcho. And by comparing this with what was now said by
Symeon, we may observe that Burh, and Burch, and Burg, are used indifferently
when Writers speak of this place.

In this year wherein he left this place, 1114. it was that he got a Charter
from King Henry, I. for the holding a great many Lands therein specified; and
in the same right, and with the same Customs and Liberties, wherein they were
held, die ipso quo Thuraldus Abbas vivus fuit, and mortuus habuerit: from whose
time little had been done by any Abbot till now. This was seconded with many
other Grants full of great Privileges: and at last in a distinct Charter he
gives to the Abbot, Manerium suum de Pichelee, quod Galfridus Ridellus de eo
tenuit, cum tota instauratione quae in manerio erat, die quo fuit vivus and
mortuus.

This was confirmed by King Stephen (that I may put all belonging to this
matter together) in following times; that they should have their Manor de
Pichelle, quod Henricus Rex eis reddidit and concessit, and charta sua
confirmavit, quod oculis meis vidi, etc. And afterward Hen. 2. confirmed the
same in these words, Sciatis me concessisse Ecclesiae and Abbati de Burgo
Manerium suum Pihtislea, quod Galfridus Riddel de eo tenuit, sicut Charta
Henrici Regis avi nostri testatur, etc.

Two years before this, there was an alteration made in the Churches and
Chappells built by the Milites in the time of Turoldus. For now, in the year
1112. some of them (whose profits had hitherto been received entirely by the
Monastery) were assigned to the use of those that ministered in those Churches,
and served in the Chapels. Who were there appointed to administer the
Ecclesiastical Sacraments to the people; it being too far for them to come to
Burg, and the ways also dangerous. But there were referred to the Church of
Burg, two parts of the predial Tithes of those Milites; and saved to the same
Church the Sepulture of the aforesaid Milites, their Wives and their Children,
and a certain portion of their Goods thereupon: saving also to the Church of
Burg, from some of the Churches so endowed, certain Pensions which had been
paid to it from the Foundation.

Then followed the Convention made before Robert Bishop of Lincoln between
Ernulphus and the Monks, and the Milites of the same Church, that every Knight
should give two parts of his Tithes to the Sacristry of Burgh: and when he
dyed, tertia pars substantiae suae ad sepulturam, cum militaribus indumentis,
tam in equis quam in armis; which were to be brought to his Funeral with him.
And then a Solemn Procession was to be made by the whole Convent before him;
and a plenary Office celebrated, for him by all; and he was to partake, both
himself, and his Wife, and their Children, of the benefits of the place for
ever: viz. in Eleemosynis, in celebratione Missaram, in jejuniis, in vigiliis,
in Psalmodiis, and in caeteris bonis quae, Deo annuente, usquequaque in
Ecclesia Sancti Petri fiant. In like manner their Wives and their Children, it
was agreed, should be brought, with their substance belonging to them, to the
same Church in the end of their life: And the Divine vengeance they desired
might light upon them, who made void this agreement.

In the same year the dedication of the Church of Turleby mentioned by Mr.
Gunton, was made by the same Bishop: In whose presence and in the presence of
the whole Parish, Bencelina, Mother of Ralph de la Mare, granted to that
Church, for the health of her own Soul and of her Parents, dimidiam bovatam
terrae, and unam acram prati, etc.

He lived after he went to Rochester some days above Nine years, and dyed
leaving many Monuments of his virtue, in the 84. year of his age. So Malmsbury
writes Vixit in Episcopatu aliquot dies super Novennium, decessitque quatuor
and octoginta annos natus; multa probitatis suae monumenta relinquens. Which
does not disagree with Abbot John (if we remember he was elected the year
before he was enstalled) who says he was Bishop Ten years, and dyed An. 1124.
So John Bromton also

JOHN of SALISBVRY.
This Abbot (whom our Writers call John de Sais, or Says) was no sooner
appointed by the King to succeed Ernulphus, but he was immediately dispatched
to Rome by the Archbishop of Canterbury (Radulphus) to fetch his Pall from Pope
Paschal. So Hugo (or Sawpham, as it is commonly thought) expressly tells us; and
names two persons who were sent with him, Guarnerius, and Johannes
Archidiaconus, Nephew to the Archbishop: which makes it the more strange that
Mr. G. should overlook this passage, so as not to find to what end he was sent.
Eadmerus also relates the same, from whom we learn also why he was called John
de Says: for he calls him Johannes Monachus Sagii, who being elected and
Consecrated Abbas Burchorum, was sent to Rome with Warnerius a Monk of
Canterbury, and Johannes Clericus Nephew to the Archbishop, upon the business
before named. Which they effected in little more than a years time; for
Radulphus was Consecrated (as Radulph. de Diceto informs us) on the 6. of the
Kal. of May, and received the Pall on the 5. Kal. of July. Agreeable unto
which, Hugo says, the Abbot returned to the Monastery the next year after he
went to Rome, upon the Feast of St. Peter. One reason I believe why he was
chose to be sent upon this errand, was, that he had been an old acquaintance of
the Archbishops, bred in the same Monastery; where Radulphus had been Abbot, as
John had been Monk. For so I find him called by Gervasius Actus Pontif. Cantuar.
, Radulphus Abbas Sagiensis: and by Symeon of Durham also ad An. 1104. Where he
speaks of the body of St. Cutbert being found incorrupt (after he had been
buried above 400. years) a Radulfo Sagiensi Abbate, postmodum Hrofensi
Episcopo, and deinde Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo De gestis Regum Angliae.
. From this place, I doubt not that is from Say or Says in Normandy he had the
name of Says or Sais: and is by mistake called John of Salisbury, which they
fancied was contracted into Sais. This must be corrected therefore in Mr. G.
for Sagiusn is not Salisbury, but Say: where he was bred, and perhaps born. And
it is very likely was the Author of that contract of mutual Friendship, which
was between this Monastery and that of Sais. For so I find in our Records fol.
CCLXXIV. among diverse Conventions which were made between the Friars of St.
Peter of Burch, and a great many other Churches, there is one cum fratribus
nostris de Sais. Wherein they engaged when any Monk dyed in either Church,
three plenary Offices should be said for him by the other Church; and every
Priest should sing three Masses for him: and they that did not sing Mass,
should say the whole Psalter.

The next year after his return, An. 1116. I find he cleared the Abbey of the
yearly payment of forty shillings, which Azeo Wardeden had long unjustly
claimed from it. For upon a full hearing of the difference between them, before
King Henry at Bramton, the Bishop and Barons then present in Court, judged that
Azeo had no right to the aforesaid forty Shillings; and so Abbas Johannes
disraisniavit (as the word is) apud Bramtonam in curia Regis, quadraginta
solidos quod Azeo Wardeden (called also Wardede) diu injuste habuerat, etc.
Swaph. fol. CXII.
One of the Witnesses to this was Galfridus Ridel before named; who herein I
suppose, endeavored to serve the Abbot; and the next year after, as I have
showed, got of him the Manor of Pithesle for his life. I have observed before,
in the life of Elfinus, how the same year 1116. he made an end of a
controversy with the Church of Croyland: where there is the same phrase
disrainiatum fuit, for disproving; and by showing the contrary to clear the
Abbey from pretended claims.

But before this year ended, that dreadful fire happened, which is mentioned by
Mr. G out of Walter of Witlesea: who does not tell the story so exactly as it
is in Hugo. From whom we learn that it burst out upon the second of the Nones
of August (as the Chron. of John Abbot also relates) in the Vigils of St.
Oswald, King and Martyr after this manner.

The Friars having been in the Refectory that morning to mend the Tables, the
Abbot not liking what they had done, fell a Cursing; and straightway went out
ad placitum apud Castre, to keep a Court at Caster. And one of the Servants in
the Bakehouse making a Fire, which he could not kindle so soon as he desired,
in an angry fit, cursed also; and said, Come Devil and blow the fire. Whereupon
the flame instantly broke out and ran to the very top of the house, and through
all the Offices, to the neighboring Town: which Hugo says was wholly
consumed; but Abbot John in his Chronicon says, only a great part of it, Magna
pars villae adjacentis, etc. And thus was fulfilled the second prediction of
Elricus (mentioned by Mr. G. in the life of Leofricus) who said the Church
should be set on fire. Let us all therefore, says Hugo (in whose time these
things happened) deprecate the Divine displeasure, that the third may not come to
pass. And let every one of us walk circumspectly, and bridle his anger, and
contain his hands, that he do no evil: not calling the Enemy to do any thing,
nor commending any thing to him, for he is always ready to do mischief, etc.
After which pious reflection, he proceeds to relate how the fire continued
burning in the Tower of the Church Nine days: and on the night of the ninth
day, a furious wind arising, blew the fire and live coals upon the Abbots
houses: so that we thought, says he, all the remaining Offices would have been
consumed. Dies tristitiae and doloris erat dies ille.

But the next year upon the eighth of the Ides of March, the Abbot laid the
foundation of a new Church MCXVIII. An. ab incarnatione Domini Millesimo
centesimo octavo, says Hugo. It should be MCXVII. even by his own computation;
for he brought the Pall from Rome 1115. the next year the Monastery was burnt;
and the next he began to build it. And so the Chronicon Johannis Abbatis
expressly says, that he began to build it again 1117.

In which year also he recovered duos sochemannos apud Castre, which were
unjustly detained from the Church by one Leofwine: who came into the Chapter
house, and openly acknowledged that they belonged to the Demeans of St. Peter
of Burch, and accordingly quitted to God and St. Peter and Abbot John the two
aforesaid Sochemans (whose names were Willielmus filius Leoffi Lickadisc and
Leofricus avunculus ipsius) with all that they held in the aforesaid Village:
and from thence forward held them of the Abbot.

The same Leofwinus requiring from this Abbot five Shillings from the houses
beyond the River of Stanphord, which he pretended to have a grant of from Abbot
Ernulphus and other Abbots; he came into Court the next year 1118. and it was
adjudged that he should lose these five Shillings. Unto which the names of the
Judges and Witnesses are set Swaph. fol. CXIII.
.

What other good Acts he did I do not find, but Hugo says, he labored much in
the restoration of the Church, though he could not finish it: and governed the
Church and the Abbey well all his time, and purchased Lands. After all which he
was struck with an incurable disease, viz. the Dropsy, which put an end to his
life 1125.

Immediately upon which the King sent his Justitiaries, Richard Bassed and
Walter Archdeacon and many others; to search the Abbots Treasures and Goods:
but found nothing, he having spent all in his life time. But they then took an
account of all that belonged to the Church and the Abbey, and carried it to the
King; who kept the Abbey in his hand two year. Thus Hugo.

This account of all its Manors, and Goods, I find among the records at the
end of that History, whose Title runs thus Ibid. fol. CXXXIV. etc.
. Haec est descriptio Maneriorum Abbatiae de Burch, sicut Walterus
Archidiaconus eam recepit, and sei sivit in manu Regis Henrici I. post obitum
Johannis Abbatis. By which it appears, there were at that time LXXII. Monks;
who had the full diet of Monks. In the Bakehouse, there were duo pistores who
had victum militis: and unus vanator, who had the same: and two other Bakers,
who had every day two White loaves and two Brown loaves (which he calls panes
bisos) with Beer: duo caratores (I suppose he means laborers, for afterward in
the Brewhouse, mention is made of Caratores ligni, Carriers of Wood) who had
four brown loaves and bear; two Servants that grinded in the Mill, who had the
same. Every one of which had a yearly salary of Twenty four Shillings and four
pence.

Then follows the number of Servants and their allowances, in the other
Offices, in Bracino, in Coquina Monachorum, in Sartrino, in Ecclesia, in
Infirmario. In the last of which (the Infirmary) there were no less than forty
Servants.

In the diet of the Monks there was spent every week in Bread XII. achersetos
de frumento, and VIII. achersetos de brasio, and IV. de grud, and 2. achersetos
de fabis, and in denariis 2. Marcas argenti; as the words are fol. CXL. Where
achersetos I suppose signifies that which we now call a quarter, but I cannot
find its Original, nor mention of it in any Glossary: unless it come from
Chirchset (or Chirchsed) which Fleta L. 1. c. 47.
says was a certain measure (but he does not tell us of what quantity) of
Wheat; which in old time, every one both Britains and Englishmen paid to the
Holy Church at Martinmasse. After the Normans came hither many great men gave
it under the name of first fruits: as appears, he observes, in a Brief of King
Knute, sent to the Pope; wherein this Contribution is called Chirchsed, as much
as to say, Semen Ecclesiae, the Seed or Corn of the Church. Which I find word
for word, in very old French, in a short Glossary upon unusual English words,
in the ancient Charters or in the Laws of King Alred, Alfrid, Edward and Knute.

Chirchesed, vel Chircheomer, vel Chircheambre un certain de ble batu R checun
hume devoyt au ceus de Bretuns, e de Englis. a le Eglise le jur seint Martin.
Mes pus le venue de Normans, etc. donewint sulum la velie ley Moysi, and
ratione primitiarum, sicun lein truve en le lettris Cnut Kilenveya a Rome c'
est dit Chirchesed, quasi semen Ecclesiae.

The Letter it self is in Ingulphus; but it was not sent adsummum Pontificem as
Fleta says, but to the Archbishops and Bishops, and all the Nation of England,
as he was coming from Rome 1031. wherein he desires them, that before he
arrived in England, all the dues which by ancient Laws were owing to the Church
might be paid, and after the rest he mentions the tenths of the fruits in
August, and in the feast of St. Martin the first fruits of the seeds called
Kyrkset: So his Letter concludes, Et in Festivitate Sancti Martini primitiae
seminum, ad Ecclesiam, sub cujus parochia quisque degit, quae Anglice Kyrkeset
nominatur, Ingulph. p. 61. Edit. Oxon.
etc.

This description of their Lands and Goods, concludes with a Customary of their
Tenants, Villani, Cottarii and Sochemanni, in every Manor belonging to the
Church. Which while the King held in his hand, he gave away as Mr. G. observes,
the Manor of Pithtesle for the same sum of money, which the late Abbot had
given him to confirm it, Deo and Sancto Petro and Monachis sigillo and
authoritate regia. And the person to whom the King granted it, (it may be
further observed) was one employed to take the forenamed account of the Estate
of the Church, viz. Richard Basset, or Bassed.

This Abbot was commemorated upon the 10. of November, on which, it appears by
the Kalander, was Depositio Johannis de Says Abbatis, and Anniversarium Henrici
Talbot, etc.

HENRICUS de Angeli.
His story is told more perfectly by Hugo in this manner. He was first of all
Bishop of Soissons and afterward made a Monk and Prior of Cluni; and then Prior
of Savenni. After which, because he was Cousin to the King of England and the
Count of Aquitain, the same Count gave him Abbatiam Sancti Johannis Angeli,
from whence he took his denomination. And he being crafty, cunning and
ingenious, afterward got the Archbishopric of Besenscun: but staid there no
more than three days. For he had not yet enough, but got the Bishopric de
Senites: where he staid about seven days. And out of this preferment as well as
that of Besenscun, the Abbot of Cluni got him expelled. He got therefore, being
never quiet, to be Collector of Peter Pence in England. Where he obtained this
Abbey of Burch; by pretending he was very old, past labor and toil, unable to
bear the Wars and Troubles of his own Country, and would quit his Abbey there
of St. John de Angeli (and that by the advice of the Pope and the Abbot of
Cluni) and would here take up his rest. There was another thing also that had a
great stroke in his preferment, for besides he was near of kin to the King, and
that the forenamed discourse seemed to have truth in it, he was the principal
Witness to make Oath, in a difference between the Kings Nephew, the Duke of
Normandy, and the Daughter of the Count of Anjoy. Upon all these scores the
Abbey was bestowed upon him in the year mentioned by Mr. G. So John Abbot also
in his Chron. MS. An. MCXXVIII. Henricus Abbas Andagavensis, precibus optinuit
a Rege Henrico Abbatiam Burgensem.

What Walter of Witlesea says of Specter seen that year he came to the Abbey,
he had out of Hugo, who says: Hoc non est falsum: quia plurimi veracissimi
homines viderunt; and audierunt cornua. He staid one year in the Monastery, and
received homage and money of the Milites, and of the whole Abbey, but did not
the least good: for he sent and carried all to his Abbey beyond Sea, whither he
went by the Kings license. And having staid there a whole year he returned
hither; and said he had absolutely quitted his other Abbey, for good and all,
as we speak. The same year came Petrus Abbot of Cluni into England, and was
honorably received by the Kings command in all the Monasteries. Particularly
here at Burch, whither he came to see Henry: who complemented him highly, and
promised he would procure the Abbey of Burch to be made subject to that of
Cluni; with which hopes Peter went home. The next year Henry got together a
great sum of money, and went beyond Sea again; where the King then was. Whom
he made believe that he was commanded by the Abbot of Cluni to come and resign
his Abbey of St. John de Angeli to him: and then he would return free from that
care into England. So he went thither, and there staid till the Feast of St.
John Baptist. And the next day after the Monks chose another of their own body
into his place, and installed him; singing Te Deum, and doing all other things
necessary for that end: expelling Henry, by the help of the Count of Anjoy*
with great disgrace, and detaining all that he had there. Where he had done no
more good, than in other places, all the five and twenty years that he had
governed them.

Being thus cast out he went to Cluni, where they kept him prisoner; the Abbot
and Monks being very angry with him; saying he had lost the Abbey of St. John by
his folly. Nor would they let him stir out of Doors, till by his craft he again
deceived them, with promises and Oaths; that if they would permit him to return
into England, he would subject the Abbey of Burch to them, and, as Hugo's words
are, ibi construeret Priores, and Secretarios, and Cellerarios, and Camerarios,
and omnia commendaret in manibus eorum, intus and foris. By which agreement he
got into England, whither the King also returned out of Normandy. Unto whom
Henry came, and accused the Monks of Burch to him very heavily (though with out
any truth) in order to his end of subjecting them to Cluni. The King in great
anger sent for them to Bramtun; where a Plea was managed against them with so
much art, that the King was almost deceived. But God stepped in to help them, by
the Counsels of the Bishops there present (particularly Lincoln) and the
Barons; who understood his fraud. Yet he would not desist; but being thus
defeated, endeavored to make his Nephew Gerardus Abbot of Burch: that what he
could not do by himself, might be effected by him. All which made the lives of
the Monks very uneasy, till the King at last understood his knavery; and,
sending for him commanded him to surrender his Abbey and be gone out of his
Realm. Which he did in the year MCXXXII. So John Abbot, Henricus Abbas de Burgo
quem dimisit, ad Andegavenses redit. With which Hugo agrees; who says he
recovered his Abbey of St. John de Angeli: and that notwithstanding all his
faults, bonus Eleemosynator omnibus diebus fuit, he was good to the poor all
his days. And therefore he made a good end; not living long after he returned
thither.

There is no memory of this Abbot in the Kalander of the Church; no more than
of Kenulphus, and Godricus.

MARTINUS de Vecti.
Henry being gone, the King gave this Abbey (by the consent of the Monks, says
Hugo) to a religious Monk, Martinus de Bec, the Prior of St. Neots: who was
here installed upon the Feast of St. Peter, with great honor, and with the joy
of the whole Convent, and all the people: An. MCXXXIII. Where Chron. M. S.
Johannis Abbatis says: Martinus de vecto in Abbatem Burgi est electus, and in
die Sancti Petri receptus. The next year, the day after the Feast of St. Peter
ad Vincula, the King crossed the Seas again: when about six a clock, the
Heavens were on a sudden so darkened, that the Sun, says Hugo, looked like the
Moon (I suppose by a great Eclipse) and for three or four hours the Stars
appeared: which many took to portend some great thing. And so it did; for that
year the King dyed; and all ancient and wise men of the Land fell with him: and
so the Land was darkened, because peace and truth and righteousness were taken
away from it. The same year 1135. King Stephen, Nephew to the former King, a
Prince of a mild and low Spirit, got the Crown: and with him, (as Hugo goes on)
Young men, who were very wicked also, got into power; and troubled the Land.
The Church especially was in great tribulation all England over: and among the
rest this of Burgh; whose Abbot suffered very much, and kept his Abbey with
great difficulty. And yet, for all that, he provided all things necessary for
his Monks, and for Strangers: there being great love among them, and the Monks
being assistant to him.

He went on also with the building of the Monastery, and of the Church: the
Chancel of which he finished; and brought in cum magno honor, the holy
Relics and the Monks into the new Church, upon the Feast of St. Peter; in the
year of our Lord One thousand one hundred and forty; three and twenty years
after the burning of the place. It should be twenty seven years after, if we
may belive the MS. Chron. of John Abbot; which says, MCXLIII. Conventus Burgi
hoc anno intravit in novam Ecclesiam, that they did not go into the new Church
till 1143.

At this great solemnity of bringing the Relics and Monks into the new
Church, the Arm of St. Oswald was produced, before Alexander Bishop of Lincoln,
the Abbots of Ramsey, Thorney, Croyland, many Barons, and a vast number of
people (as it had been once before brought forth to satisfy Matthias Abbot)
and shown entire, in its slesh, skin, Nerves, and every thing else. The story
of this Arm is in short related by Mr. Gunton, where he speaks of the Relics
of this Church. To which Will. of Malmsbury gives no great credit: for though
he says there was shown here at Burgh the hand of St. Oswald with the Arm, and
devoutly worshipped by the people, being kept loculo argenteo and deaurato in
Ecclesia Beati Petri; yet he adds that too much credit is not to be given to
it, for fides dictorum vacillat, ubi nihil auditor visu explorat L. 4. de gest.
Pontif.
. Which he does not say, he pretends, because he doubted of the thing; but he
would not too hastily affirm that his Arm was in this place.

But waving this doubt of his, Hugo says he saw it, and kissed it, and handled
it with his own hands, at this time: and relates a great many wonderful cures,
which were performed merely by the water wherein it was washed; with which I
shall not trouble the Reader. He says it had been shown before this to
satisfy Martin himself; who desired to see it either out of curiosity, or
because he doubted of its being uncorrupted. And a Third time, he adds, it was
shown to King Stephen, who came to Burgh: and offered his Ring to him, etc. as
Mr. G. has observed. In like manner it was again shown (that I may put
together what belongs to this matter) to King John, in the time of Abbot
Akarius: as I learn from the Chron. of John Abbot An. MCCVI. Brachium Sancti
Oswaldi Regis and Martyris ostensum est Johanni Regi apud Burgum. It was
ordered also, by a Statute of Abbot Walter, to be carried in solemn procession
every year, upon the Feast of the Dedication of the Church: unless it had been
carried about, on the Feast of St. Oswald Swaph. fol. CCLXXIII.
.

But leaving this, let us take some account of his benefactions to this Church,
which were very many. Hugo says indeed that by the instinct of the Devil, and
by ill Counsel, he was guilty of imbezzling the Treasure of the Church, in the
beginning of his Government: but he made amends afterward, giving a whole Town
called Pilesgate to the Church, with all the Tithes and Offerings, and many
possessions, etc. By his Charter also in the time of King Henry (I suppose the
first, for he dyed just after the second came to the Crown) he gave with the
consent of the King a great deal of Land, and Rents and Services in several
Towns (which are therein named) for the use of the Sacrist, and for the
Building and Repairing of the Monastery Ibid. fol. 100.
. This was in the beginning of his Government: when Richard Priest of Castre,
having a mind to change his life and take upon him the habit of a Monk,
prevailed with this Abbot, by his own and others entreaties, to receive him
into the Monastery of Burch. Accordingly he came on a day appointed 1133 (which
was the first year of Martin) into the Chapter House and there before the Abbot
and all the Monks made it his humble Petition, that they would receive all he
had, viz. the Church of Castre, which he then held: with all belonging to it,
both in Lands and in Tithes, and in other things, which he gave to God and to
St. Peter for ever. Whereupon the Abbot granted what he desired, on condition,
that he should come into Court, coram Baronibus suis, and there confirm what he
had now done in the Chapter House, which he performed accordingly. For the
aforesaid Richard Priest, came into the Abbots Chamber, and there, before the
Abbot of Thorney, and Will. de Albeni, and Richard Basset, and many other
Barons of the Abbey, and diverse other persons who came with William and
Richard, restored his Church of Castre to the Church of St. Peter de Burch, de
quo prius exierat. Which his Brother Galfridus hearing, contradicted it;
affirming that Church was de feodo suo, and servitium, sicuti de alio feodo suo
in se habuisse. Whereupon the Abbot impleaded him about this and about other
forfeitures: and he fearing the penalties, if judgment went against him, came
and made the same surrender his Brother had done: and disclaimed all interest
in this Church, which he had pretended to be his Fee, and as Hugo's words are,
clamavit solutam and quietam de se and haeredibus suis in perpetuum: ac in
manum Abbatis per quandam virgam reddidit and dimisit. His heirs also, Turoldus
and Robertus did the same in open Court, which was very full: and the aforesaid
Galfridus begged the Abbots pardon, which he obtained. The Abbot also, before
the above named persons, freed him from the service dimidii Militis; and
pardoned him seven Marks of Silver de relevamine suo. All which was done on the
day that the Abbot Martin received the Homages of his Tenants: which shows it
was in the entrance of his Government.

The same year Pampelina, Wife of Osbern, holding certain Lands unjustly, in
Burch, Withrington, and Glinton, for which she could show no right, came into
the Abbots Court at Castre, and surrendered them all into his hands; declaring
them to be free from her and her Heirs; and begging with many prayers the
Abbots pardon. Who took compassion upon her, when he understood her poverty,
and restord her the Land of Wither de Witherintona (which she said her Husband
Osbern had bought) to hold it of him for sixpence a year Rent, instead of all
services owing to the Abbot. And because she was Niece to his Predecessor John,
he pardoned her ten shillings she owed him, for the service of her Land.

There are several other such Acts of his, of the same year: which show he was
not unmindful of the good of the Church in the very entrance of his Government.

The Church of Castre after this was supplied by a Chaplain, whose name was
Robert: as I find in a Grant made of this Church (but it does not appear in
what year) by the Abbot and the Convent to the Archdeacon of Northampton in
Eleemosynam, with all its appurtenances in Tithes and Lands, either Wood or
Pasture, Meadow or Arable; For which he was to pay every year one Mark of
Silver, for the service of the Altar: and if he either dyed, or took upon him a
Religious habit, it was to return to the right of the Monastery freely and
quietly, salva Episcopali dignitate. They granted him also plenariam societatem
in capitulo: So that they would give him the habit of a Monk, if he would live
among them; or if he dyed in another place and in another habit, obsequies
should be made for him, as for one of their Monks. Whereupon Robert, Chaplain
of Castre, proclaimed with a loud voice in the Chapter House, the Church of
Castre to be free and quiet from all claim that he had hitherto had unto it,
and delivered the Charter which he had received, to the Archdeacon.

I do not find what was done in the following years till 1140. when Radulphus
filius Arconbi de Glinton, being mindful of the salvation of his Soul, and
repenting of his sins, came to Burgh, and standing before the great Altar (many
standing about him) offered to God and St. Peter, for the salvation of his Soul
and forgiveness of his sins, unam culturam terrae de suo dominio in Peychirche
quae jacet pro sex acris. In testimony of which Donation, he demised his Knife
in the very Church, laying it upon the Altar: and Martin the Abbot, on the
other side, gave, from the Charity of St. Peter one Mark of Silver to the
aforesaid Radulphus; desiring to make him the more cheerful in this Donation.

That form of confirming a grant, by the donors laying his Knife up on the
Altar, was usual in those times. For in the year wherein King Stephen was taken
Prisoner (the next I think after that now mentioned) upon the Feast of the
invention of the holy Cross, Guido Malfet, with Adelize his Wife, came into the
Chapter House of Burg; and there restored to God and to St. Peter and the Monks
of the Church, ad luminare Altaris, two parts of all the Tithes of the Land he
held of St. Peter: for the Souls of his Father and Mother; and for his own
Soul, his Wives and Childrens: which Tithes he had, in part, formerly kept
wrongfully from the Church. And after he had done this in the Chapter House, he
went to the Altar of St. Peter; and there finally granted and confirmed what he
had done in the Chapter House per cultellum super altar ab eodem positum.

In the year 1150. also I find that Ingelramus Wardeden came to Burgh with his
three Sons; and there made a solemn acknowledgment, that the thirty shillings,
which he yearly claimed from the Abbey, had been unjustly and to the peril of
his Soul received by him. And therefore before the High-Altar, in the presence
of the Convent, he both promised amendment of his fault (which he acknowledged)
by laying his Knife on the Altar, and also disclaimed all right in the premise,
by the same Knife, etc. so the words are, Et de culpa sua quam timuit and
recognovit cultellum super illud pro emendatione posuit; and omne rectum quod
in eisdem triginta solidos hactenus clamaverat, de se and haeredibus suis,
natis and innatis, and de omni progeny sua, per eundem cultellum, reddidit,
and quietum clamavit. After which they all took their Oaths also upon the
Altar, that they would never pretend to these thirty Shillings, in time to come.

There were more memorable things than these done in the year before mentioned
1140. When King Stephen granted a great many Charters to this Church. The first
of which directed to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Chancellor, Justices,
Barons and all his Subjects, declares that he had granted in perpetuum
Eleemosynam, to God and St. Oswald and the Church of St. Peter de Burgh* etc.
for the Soul of King Henry his Uncle, and other Kings his Ancestors, and for
the health of his own Soul, of Matildis his Wife, and Eustachius his Son, and
his other Children, omnia assarta quae Abbas and Monachi de Burgo and homines
sui fecerunt, etc. i. e. all the Woods grubbed up (which was a great offense)
by the Abbot, Monks and their Tenants, in the Lands of the Abbey of Burgh,
until the day that he came to Burgh, in his return from Lincolnshire when he
had newly finished his Castle at Castre in Lindsey, viz. Septimo idus Junii An.
MCXL. and a passione Oswaldi Regis and Martyris quingentesimo primo.

Another Charter he granted about the Liberties of the Village of Pilesgate; a
second concerning Land in Northorp; a third about Essarts in Nasso de Burgo:
with three more, which I shall not mention.

In the year 1145. Ivo Monk and Sacrist of this Church, being desired by his
two Brethren William and Walter Sons of Alswarchus de Burch, came together with
them before the great Altar, on the Feast of the Chair of St. Peter, ante
introitum Majoris Missae, and there gave to God and St. Peter, in the presence
of the Relics of the Saints, for the use of the Church and the service of the
Sacrist, the inheritance of their Father: which was twenty Acres of Arable
Land, and four Acres of Meadow.

The next year, or in the end of this, he went to Rome and was there honorably
received by Pope Eugenius; who was newly advanced to the Chair of St. Peter. So
MS. Chron. of John Abbot tells us, ad. An. 1145. obiit Lucius Papa, cui
successit Eugenius Secundus. Whose Bull (mentioned by Mr. G.) is directed to
Martin Abbot 1146. the next year after his preferment: wherein he granted and
confirmed all the Tenements and Possessions of the whole Abbey, and the Fees of
Knights, and the Liberties of the Church, etc. To which he added a second
concerning the Goods of the Sacristry. The first of them is to be seen in Mr.
G's. Appendix: and the very Original, signed by Pope Eugenius his own hand, and
attested by the Cardinal of St. George and another whose name is eaten out,
came to light about 13 year ago, upon this occasion. Some Workmen employed
about mending the Roof of the Church, in the upper Ceiling, taking up a board
(fast nailed down just over the High Altar) which it was necessary to remove,
found this Bull under it: much defaced indeed by time, and worm-eaten in many
places, but with a very fair Seal to it, which I have caused to be represented
in this Figure of it.



How it came there; has been the inquiry of several persons ever since it was
found. My conjecture is that in the Insurrection of Jack Straw, and his
partakers, some Monk, fearing all their Records might be destroyed, resolved to
secure this, which was of great value, by hiding it on the top of the Church;
where, by his sudden death perhaps, or by forgetfulness, it ever after
remained. For some of those Miscreants (our Historians observe) ravaged as far
as the Isle of Ely: So Henry de Knyghton informs us L. V. de Eventibus Angliae.
, that the Tenants of the Abbot of Peterburgh and their compatriots, rose up
against that Abbey, intending to destroy it. Which they had done without
remedy; if God had not unexpectedly stretched out his resisting hand. For Henry
le Spencer Bishop of Norwich coming to the assistance of the Monastery, with a
strong power, forced the Villains to desist from their enterprise: Nay,
dispersed them, and took some of them, and killed others. The rest taking the
Church for Sanctuary, which they intended to have destroyed, were there run
through with Lances and Swords: some of them hard by the Altar, others by the
walls of the Church, both within and without. The like did this valiant Bishop
in diverse places in the Counties of Cambridg and Huntingdon. And thus, says
he, God returned to them, according to what they designed against others: they
came to destroy the Church and Churchmen, and they deserved to perish in the
Church, and by a Churchman.

Which, by the way, may satisfy the doubt which Mr. G. raises (in the life of
Henry Overton) about the manner of the pacification of those commotions: which
he might have found in the Author he there quotes. The cause of them also it is
visible, was their hatred to Churchmen; whose riches they envied, and desired
to get to themselves.

When Martin returned from Rome he was received by all the Convent with great
honor and joy. And presently after Richard the Prior of this Church (a very
wise and provident person, to whom Martin commended the care of all things in
his absence) was chosen Abbot of Whitby; Benedict their former Abbot being
deposed. The Archbishop proposed him with two other Monks of St. Albons to the
choice of the Convent, that they might take which they pleased. In which they
remained doubtful a great while, till one night a little Boy had a vision;
wherein such things were represented to him, that when the Brethren heard it,
they immediately concluded this Richard was the man they ought to choose: which
accordingly they did; and sent to the Abbot and Convent of Burgh that they
would part with him. Which they did unwillingly; but being overcome with
prayers and reasons, they condescended to it: and he was received there with
wonderful joy, in a great procession not only of the Monks, but of the Canons,
and Clergy, and Laypeople, Noble and Ignoble. The Archdeacon also, and the
Legates of the Archbishop attended him; and placed him in his Seat. Where he so
governed their affairs, that they who were very poor before, became now very
rich: till God who suffered Job to be tempted, tried him also. For on a sudden
a Navy arrived from Norway in the port of Whitby, which spoiled them of all,
and left nothing behind them. But God who restored to Job double for what he
had lost, so blessed the Abbot (who comforted them in their distress, and
beseeched them with patience to give God thanks, and hope for better) that in a
short time they abounded with all things, and he lived in great splendour.

In the next year after his return from Rome 1147. Rob. de Torpell, being very
weak, came to the Hospital of the Infirm in Burch, apud Capellam Sancti
Leonardi, and there before many Witnesses, gave himself, Body and Soul, to God
and Saint Peter and the Church of Burch, with all his Lands in Codestock, and
Glapetorp, both in Wood and Arable and Meadows Swaph. fol. CXV.
, etc. And for the confirmation of this Donation misit vadimonium suum ad
Altar, ramum sc. viridem bis in die, per quendam Monachum Ecclesiae. Upon this
condition, that he for his life should have the diet of a Monk, and four
Servants of his the diet of a Miles from the Church: and that at his death they
should receive him in the habit of a Monk.

The year before he dyed 1154. Galfridus Chave, and Jol. his Brother gave two
shillings a year, for the light on the Altar: half to be paid upon All Saints,
the other at Easter.

Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury at the desire of this Martin confirmed the
Charter of Robert formerly Bishop of Lincoln, concerning the Church of Karlton
with all its appurtenances: but in what year I cannot find Ibid. XCII.
. The Charter runs thus, To the Archdeacon of Northampton and all others.
Sciatis me consecrasse Ecclesiam de Carltona, quae fuit capella subjecta
Ecclesiae de Cottingham; and hoc feci requisitione dominorum Carlton, and
proborum virorum ejusdem villae. Et Osbertus de Cottingham concessit ut
praedicta Ecclesia Carlton cum suo coemiterio consecraretur, etc. The condition
of this was, that Robert Son of Richard should give to the same Church one
Oxegang of Land; Walter Ponhar another; Ralph de Pippewell, half an Oxegang;
and the people of the Village XV. Acres, and a dwelling house for the Priest.
Which conditions if they were not fulfilled, the Chapel was to return to its
former subjection unto Cottingham. Osbert was to have the right of Patronage;
and to find a fit Clerk to serve God, and the Parishioners there.

The same Robert Bishop of Lincoln made a composition between the Church of
Burch and of Spalding; about the Church of Haltbarge, viz that the Monastery of
Spalding should pay yearly to the Abbot of Burch sixteen shillings and four
pence, out of the Church of Haltbarge, and out of the Lands they had in that
Parish, and out of one Oxegang of Land in Walcote. And the same Monastery
consented that the Abbot of Burch might erect a Chapel in Walcote, and
consecrate a burying place belonging to it: yet so, that the Monks of Spalding
should present the Priest, that served in that place; and none should be buried
there without the consent of the Prior and Monks of Spalding. The Abbot of
Burch also stood bound to assign and give in a commodious place, unam mansuram
terrae, for the dwelling house of the Priest which there officiated.

It would be too long to mention all the Lands which he recovered, that had
been held by rich and potent men from the Church; some of which are taken
notice of in Hugo: and all the Ordinances he made, among which this was one;
that in the principal Festival of the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, seven
Wax Candles should be lighted before the Altar, and four upon it, a principio
matutinorum ad finem Swaph. fol. CCLXXIV.
. I shall only note that Hugo, concluding his story, gives this Character of
him; that all loved and feared him too, for his honesty and his holiness: and
that in all the time he governed, which was twenty (it should be one and
twenty) years, six months and eight days, neither Monk nor stranger wanted any
thing, but rather were provided for in abundance. He fell sick and took his Bed
upon the Sunday before the Nativity of our Lord; and died not long after on the
fourth of the Nones of January, as he reckons (in the Kalander it is Jan. 3.
when he was commemorated) in the year 1155. So the Chron. of John Abbot MCLV.
obiit Martinus Abbas Burgi, successit Willielmus de Waterville.

WILLIHELMVS de Waterville.
The same day that Martin dyed, all the Monks met together, that they might
choose one of their own body, to be their Pater, Pastor and Custos: fearing
lest, by delay, some stranger might get in by money, and domineer over them.
The manner of it was this; they chose twelve of the Seniors and Wisemen out of
their whole number, to make an Election for them; it being very hard for a
multitude to agree in one man. But they first made them swear upon the holy
Gospels and the holy Relics, that they would act sincerely; and be moved in
their choice neither by love nor hatred, etc. Which they all did; Hugo the
Eldest (whom I take to have been the Author of this History) beginning to take
the Oath; and all the rest following: after which the whole Convent swore that
they would choose him in whom those 12 should agree. This being done the 12 went
into the Abbot's Chamber; and the Prior, with the rest that remained in the
Chapterhouse, sung the Seven Psalms, and prayed God to direct them by the grace
of his holy Spirit: which the 12 also begged by singing Veni Creator Spiritus:
and then conferred among themselves. And it was agreed that Hugo the Eldest of
them, should hear every one of them confess, and tell what God had put in their
heart: Which being done he asked them if they would know what every man's
opinion was singly. They said no, but he should declare in whom the Major part
of them agreed: to which he replied, that they were all in a manner agreed in
one man, William de Waterville; and if any one were against it, he had liberty
still to contradict it. But they were so far from opposing it, that they all
consented: and entering into the Chapterhouse, and there declaring what they
had done, the whole company praised God. And the day after, having performed
the Obsequies of the deceased Abbot, Remaldus the Prior, and Hugo, with the
Abbot Elect went to the King (Henry II.) then at Oxford. Who upon inquiry
finding the Convent really desired it, confirmed the Election by his Charter.

After which Te Deum being sung, and prayers made, the Abbot did his homage to
the King; and then repaired to Robert Bishop of Lincoln: who prefixing him a
day and place, gave him his benediction; and thereupon he was installed at
Burch on the Sunday called Sexagesima, with a solemn procession of Abbots,
Monks, Clergy and Laymen.

In the beginning of the ensuing Lent he found there was a great want of
Provisions in the Monastery: which he presently began to buy, and continued so
to do, both Wheat and Malt, Oats and Beans, Flesh, Cheese and Wine, with all
other things necessary till the Feast of St. Bartholomew. This was a very great
expense: and yet he moreover discharged all the Debts of his Predecessor; which
were 300 Marks of Silver; besides 60 more owing the King for interest, which he
got him to pardon. He recovered also the fee and the service of Galfridus de la
Mare, for a hundred Mark, which he gave the King, To whom he also gave an
hundred Marks more, for the confirmation of Nine Knights Fees, which had been
held by Earl Simon. At the same time he built a Nunnery at Stanford in honor
of God and St. Michael; and both founded and built the Church there: in which
he placed no less than forty holy Virgins. Who were to pay yearly to the
Chantery of Burgh, a Noble of Silver as an acknowledgement: with ten Shillings
to the Sacristry out of the Church of St. Martins, which this Abbot purchased.

It would be too long to mention particularly all the Land, Rents, or Pensions,
which this Abbot bought, at London, Irtlingborough, Hargrave, Easton,
Warmington, Paston, Walton, Cambridg and several other places. I will name only
one; he purchased all the Village on this side the Bridge of Stanford: and
redeemed for a sum of money, fourteen houses, with the ground belonging to
them, beyond the Bridge: which a certain Knight claimed as his Inheritance. He
increased the Rents of the Market and Town of Burgh, and built useful Offices
in all the Manors belonging to the Church; and did a great many other good
things (besides those mentioned in Mr. G.) and had done more and greater; if he
had not been hindered, by great misfortunes and disturbances which were given
him; both by false domestics, and by some other rich men. Who accused him to
the King, and to the Archbishops, Theobald, Thomas a Becket, and Richard (who
succeeded them) so that at last he was, by the anger of the King, deposed in
the Chapterhouse of Burgh by Robert Archdeacon; before a multitude of Abbots
and Monks: being neither convicted of any crime, nor confessing any, but
privily accused to the Archbishop by some Monks.

This is all that Hugo (if he lived to write the end of this great man) says
concerning his deposition. Gervasius in his Chronicon says more, that the
Archbishop himself came to the Abbey of Burgh and deposed Will. manifestis
culpis accusatum and convictum; but says not what they were. Nor does
Radulphus de Diceto give any account of them, but only says multis impetitus
notoriis, being charged with many notorious crimes and convicted of them, in
the presence of the Archbishop, he received the sentence of deposition 3.
Kaland. Novembris. Nay Gervase in another place (in the life of Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury) says not so much, but only that he deposed the Abbot
of Burgh certis ex causis, for certain reasons. John Bromton indeed (who says
the Archbishop came hither a little before Christmas) and Roger Hoveden, (as
Mr. G. has observed) assign the reasons; which I cannot contradict: though it
seems something strange that a man, who was brought in with such an Universal
kindness of the society, and did such abundance of good, should be guilty of
the violence which the first of them mentions; and of such Sacrilege also as
is scarce credible. And it is less credible that he who enriched the Monastery
so vastly as it has been already said, should impoverish and oppress it, as he
is accused to have done, in the account they gave to the Pope of this business.

For I must let the Reader know that William thinking himself wronged by this
sentence, appealed to Pope Alexander: Who, upon mature hearing of the Cause,
confirmed the deposition and commanded him silence for ever. So we are told in
a Bull of his Successor Pope Urban, still exstant Swaph. fol. LXXVI.
; directed to Benedict (who succeeded this William) confirming the aforesaid
deposition of W. de Watervilla; by whose malignity the Monastery, says the
Bull, was much attritum and gravatum, and he himself also de prava
conversatione graviter infamatus. Which damage done to the Monastery, if he was
truly accused, arose it is likely from borrowing money, to carry on all those
great works which he did and attempted. For in the same Bull it is said, that
William Norman Procurator for the Abbot, having taken up great sums of money
in the Abbots name, for which he stood bound, desired satisfaction. But the
money appearing to have been borrowed, non pro utilitate, sed pro gravamine
Monasterii, Pope Lucius absolved the Monastery, ab impetitione tam creditorum,
quam fidejussorum, freeing them from all obligation to pay the money so
borrowed; as appears, the Bull says, by the writing of Pope Lucius. Whereupon
Urban, being induced by these reasons, and moved by the desire of King Henry,
again confirmed the deposition, as Alexander had done: and again absolved them
from that debt, of which they had been acquitted in the judgment of his
Predecessor Lucius. Thinking it but reasonable that a debt which was remitted
them communis juris aequitate, should be relaxed also, speciali Apostolicae
sedis indulgentia.

But whatever his crimes were, for which the King was incensed against him, he
had been once very much in his favor; and procured from him a confirmation of
all the privileges granted by the Kings Grandfather. Two of his Charters are
very remarkable, which run in the form of precepts. One is, omnibus militibus
Abbatis de Burgo; whom he commands without delay, quod faciatis Abbati de Burgo
servitium suum quod ei facere debetis: and that not only in the present summons
to serve in the Army in Wales but in all other entirely and fully. Which if
they did not do, he tells them his Sheriffs should proceed against them
according to Law, Vicecomites mei, in quorum balivis terras habetis,
justificent vos, etc.

The other is to all his Justitiaries, Sheriffs, and Ministers, Praecipio quod
Willelmus Abbas de Burgo teneat been and in pace, and libere and quiet and
just and honorifice. Octo Hundreda sua, cum omnibus libertatibus, and liberis
consuetudinibus suis; and justitiam suam de octo Hundredis suis, sicut aliquis
antecessorum suorum, melius and liberius and quietius and honorificentius
tenuit, etc.

I find an agreement made in his time between the Sacrist of Burgh, and
Reginaldus Capellanus his Vicar, that the same Reginald should serve honorably
two Chapels, viz. de Eea and de Thorp, and pay all duties Swaph. fol. CCXXIX.
to the Bishop, Archdeacon and Dean: for which he should have the diet of a
Knight in the Abbots Hall, and the third part of all the profits, which
belonged to the Altar; together with the panis cum companagio altari oblatus,
which was to be his entirely. And upon every Michaelmas-day, inter tertiam, the
whole Convent being present, he was to bring the Key of the Chapels, and lay it
upon the Altar, from whence he received it: there to receive it again from the
Sacrist, if he had well behaved himself. Besides all which, William the Abbot
and the Convent of Burch, granted and gave to the same Reginald another Chapel;
which was that I shall hereafter mention, belonging to the Hospital of St.
Leonard Capellam infirmorum, quae sita est prope villam de Burch, cum omnibus
quae ad eam pertinere noscuntur: and custodiam infirmorum, ananutim reddendo
infirmis 2. Sol.

This Domus infirmorum Hugo says was built by William Waterville, who did so
many other worthy things that I have not room to insert them. All agree he was
deposed in the year MCLXXV. where Chron. MS. Johan. Abbatis has these words,
Ricardus Cantuar. deposuit Will. de Waterville Abbatem Burgi. He was
commemorated in this Church (notwithstanding his deposition) on the last of
November where I find these words in the Kalander; Depositio Brandonis and
Will. de Walterville Abbatum, and Anniversarium Adae de Walkote.

BENEDICT.
It appears from the Bull of Pope Urban before mentioned, that it was two year,
after the sentence given against William, before Benedict was promoted: all
which time the King kept it in his hands. And the truth is, there were a great
many Abbeys void in his time, as Hoveden tells us, viz. Grimsbie, Thornei,
Croyland, Westminster, Holm, St. Austins in Canterbury, Abendune, Abbotsbury,
Battle, Hide, etc. But at last the Archbishop (who four year before had been
Prior of Dover and elected to the Sea of Cant. 1173.) prevailed with the King
for the advancement of his old Neighbor and acquaintance Benedict; who at this
time was Chancellor to the Archbishop, and also Prior of the Church of
Canterbury; that is, of the Church of the Holy Trinity. So Gervasius calls him
Chron. ad Ann. 1176.
, Benedictus Domini Cantuariensis Cancellarius, etc. who promoted him, he says
in another place, by the consent of the King; Deposuit certis ex causis
Willielmum Abbatem de Burgo, and eidem, ex assensu Regis, supposuit Cancel
larium suum Benedictum Actus Pontif. Cantu.
. That is, Richard the Archbishop obtained the place for him, as John Bromton
explains it ad An. MCLXXVII. eodem anno Rex concessit Benedicto Priori Sanctae
Trinitatis Cantuariae Abbatiam de Burgo, etc. Our Historian (whom, from this
time forward I take to be Robert Swapham; for by the very writing it appears a
new man begins to carry on the story where Hugo left) says he was Prior
Ecclesiae Christi Cant. (which is the same it will appear presently) and was
elected Abbot at Winchester.

All agree he was made Abbot in the year MCLXXVII. in the beginning of which I
find him still Prior of Christs-Church. For William Thorn in his Chron. has
set down a composition made between the Monks of St. Austin in Canterbury, and
the Church of the Holy Trinity: which begins thus. Benedictus Prior and
Conventus Ecclesiae Christi Cant. universis Christi fidelibus salutem, etc. and
then, relating how he and Roger Elect of the Monastery of St. Austin had
changed certain Lands one with another (which are there particularly mentioned)
it concludes thus, Facta est autem haec compositio vel conventio, anno ab
incarnatione Millesimo CLXXVII. seven year after the Murder of Thomas a Becket
in his Church. Where, by the way, it may be observed, that this Roger had
himself been a Monk of the Church of the Holy Trinity (where Benedict now was
Prior) and was keeper of the Altar, where Thomas was slain.

As soon as Benedict was here settled, he straightway endeavored to destroy the
ill Customs, which had crept into the Monastery; to restore regular discipline;
and then to free the Church from the debts left by his Predecessor: of whom the
Romans and many in England had exacted 1500. Marks. The Ornaments of this
Church also were dispersed and pawned in several places: which was such a
burden to this Abbot, that, out of the load of grief he had upon his mind, he
went to Canterbury with one Monk alone, and there staid many days.

When he had a little eased, and freed himself, not without much labor, from
those demands and vexations, he returned hither and gave his mind to Meditation
in the holy Scripture. They are the words of Swapham, who says he composed
himself unum egregium volumen, one most excellent volume (as they then
accounted it) de passione and miraculis Sancti Thomae: and caused a great many
others to be transcribed for the use of the Monastery; which are those set down
by Mr. G. out of Wittlesea, who did in this but transcribe Swapham. Who tells
us of a great many benefactions besides those named by Mr. G. especially in
precious Ornaments bestowed upon the Church; which made his memory deserve, as
his words are, to remain in benediction for ever. The principal were three rich
Palls, and six Chesibles: the last of which were black Embroidered with Golden
Trees before and behind; and full of precious Stones from the top to the
bottom. He acquired also many Relics of Thomas a Becket, viz. his Shirt, his
Surplice, and a great quantity of his Blood, in two Crystal vessels; with two
Altars of the Stone upon which he fell, when he was murdered. Whose Chapel
begun by William de Waterville, he finished, together with an Hospital,
adjoining to it. From whence I gather that Mr. G. is mistaken in his opinion,
about the place of it; which was not in the middle Arch of the Church Porch,
but at the gate of the Monastery; and is now, as I conceive, the School-house.
For thereabout the Hospital was, as I learn from a Charter of King Richard I
Swaph. fol. XLIX.
. Wherein this benefaction of Benedict's is remembered. It contains a grant of
all the Lands sometimes belonging to Thuroldus de Sutona, unto his beloved and
faithful Clerk Magister Damianus; to have and to hold them de Hospitali Sancti
Thomae Martyris, juxta portam Ecclesiae de Burg, which Land was the purchase of
Benedict Abbot of Burgh, and assigned by him to the aforesaid Hospital, in
perpetuam Eleemosynam: Upon this condition, that the aforesaid Damianus should
pay out of it yearly to the Almoner of the Church of Burgh, one Mark of Silver;
and after his decease the whole Land to return to the aforesaid Hospital. It is
dated at Spire 20. of November. in the fifth year of his Reign, per manum Will.
Eleyensis Episcopi Cancellarii.

But this is more fully cleared by the Chron. MS. of John Abbot who says
expressly that this Chapel of St. Thomas was at the Gate of the Monastery. Ad
An. MCLXXV. Solomon Prior Eliensis factus est Abbas Thorneyensis, and
Benedictus Prior Cantuariensis factus est Abbas Burgi. Qui fecit construere
totam Navem Ecclesiae Burgi ex lapide and ligno a Turri usque ad frontem. Et
Capellam in honorem Sancti Thomae Martyris ad portam Monasterii.

He begun also that wonderful work, as Swapham calls it, juxta bracinum; but
did not live to finish it. The Abbey in his days was full of all good things;
in the Convent there was joy and peace; in his house nobleness and exaltation;
among the Servants in the several Offices, jocundness and mirth; the greatest
plenty of meat and drink; and at the Gate a gladsome reception without any
murmuring of the Guests or Strangers.

He procured a large Charter from Rich. I. in the first year of his Reign,
dated at Canterbury, confirming to them all their Lands and Possessions in the
several Counties of the Realm (which are particularly enumerated) in perpetuam
Eleemosynam. And thereby it appears that Benedict recovered the aforesaid Lands
in Sutton, with the Mill and appurtenances, from Thorald Son of Anketillus, who
restored them to the Church, as part of its Demeans. And afterward also
purchased of the Nephews and Heirs of the same Thorald, Pilesgate, Badigtune
and Bernack and other Lands, which Gaufridus Son of Gaufridus gave to the
Monastery: with a great many other things, worth the remembering, if I had room
to insert them. I will name only the last, Concedimus etiam pro amore Dei and
Sancti Petri, and ob reverentiam beati Oswaldi Regis and Martyris, quod
praedicti Monasterii Milites, qui Guuardam suam faciunt in Castello nostro de
Rokingam sint quieti; solvendo singulis annis tempore pacis de feodo militis 4.
solidos, sicut facere solebant tempore Henrici R. avi nostri, etc.

There is a Charter of the same year, bearing date 22. March from Roan,
confirming all their Liberties, particularly the 8. Hundreds (for which he
afterward granted a special Charter by it self) Which Charter being lost when
he was Prisoner in Germany, he renewed it and in some things enlarged it, in
the Xth year of his Reign.

Many others there are of his, but I shall name only one more concerning their
Woods in Nasso Burgi: with free liberty of hunting the Fox, the Hare, the Cat
in all their Manors (saving to the King his other game) and that they should
have, Canes non expedatos, Dogs not lawed, as they called it, by cutting off
the three fore Nails, or paring the ball of the foot. There was this privilege
also in the same Charter, that they should not answer for any offense in this
kind, but before himself, or his Chief Justice de Foresta: because his pleasure
was, that they should be quiet from all other Bailiffs.

The Charter mentioned by Mr. G. granted by King John, while he was only Earl
of Mortaing; runs thus: Karissimo amico meo Benedict. Abbati de Burgo and
omnibus successoribus, etc. wherein he grants tres cervos and sex damas
singulis annis capiendas, whenever they pleased; between the feast of St.
John Baptist, and the Exaltation of Holy Cross; either in his Forest de
Siruuod or in Clay.

I must omit the Compositions made by him with several persons. Among his
Ordinances this was one that the Sacrist should find a Cope, and an Albe every
year, for the blessing of Fonts and Wax, in the Vigils of Easter Swaph. fol.
CCLXXIV.
. Statutum est per venerabilem Abbatem Benedictum, etc. quod Sacristia inveniet
singulis annis in perpetuum unam cappam novam and bonam ad benedictio nem
fontium, and unam albam bonam and bullatam, ad benedictionem cerae in vigiliae
Paschae.

There was a great controversy in his time between Baldwin Archbishop of Cant.
and the Monks of the Holy Trinity (where Benedict had been Prior) about Roger
de Norreis, whom the Archbishop had made Prior against the will of the Monks,
and some other things. About which the Pope sent over a Cardinal a latere; who
with King Richard, his Mother, and a great many Bishops and Abbots, made peace
and a final agreement between them, unto which they all set their Seals, and
among others, Benedictus Abbas de Burgo, An. 1189 Rog. Hoveden p. 662.
.

Three years after Hugo the Bishop of Durham being Excommunicated by Gaufridus
Archbishop of York, and appealing to Pope Celestine he sent his Letters
directed to the Bishops of Lincoln and Rochester, and dilecto suo Abbati de
Burgo; requiring that in their Churches they should declare the Excommunication
to be void. Which Letter John Bromton has set down at length ad An. 1192.

The next year this Abbot dyed, as the Chron. Johan. Abbatis tells us An.
MCXCIII. obiit Benedictus Abbas Burgi, cui successit Andreas. So he did not
live to see King Richard return from his Captivity, which was not till the next
year, as the same Writer says. MCXCIV. Rex Richardus liberatus a carcere venit
in Angliam.

The Counsel he gave about the Kings redemption is thus related by Swapham.
Many of the Nobles being of opinion that ten of the best Cities of the Kingdom
should be sold, and with that money his Ransom paid, this Abbot being
extremely afflicted to think of the disgrace and damage it would be to the
Realm, humbly advised them to have all the Chalices in England prized; and
gathering their price, as his words are, into one sum, that should be given
for his redemption, sine gravamine alicujus. Which Counsel was approved and
confirmed by all present; and it was done accordingly. But Walsingham reports
it thus, that the greater Churches promised their Treasures which had been
heaped up from ancient time; the Parish Churches their Silver Chalices; and by
common consent it was agreed that the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors of
Conventual Churches, Earls and Barons, should give the fourth part of their
Annual Rents.

Swapham says he dyed on Michaelmas-day. But the Kalander says on the 25. was
Depositio Domini Benedicti Abbatis.

ANDREAS.
The Character Swapham gives of him is, that he was a man of great Religion and
Authority, as well as age: and being very mild and peaceable, made it his
endeavor to plant and establish peace and tranquillity in his flock. He gave
(as Mr. G. observes) the two Towns of Alwalton (or Athelwoltone) and Fletun to
the Kitchen of the Convent, but with exception of the auxilia ad festum Sancti
Michaelis. Which his Successor remitted, and assigned also to the Monks Kitchen
by his Charter. He gave also to the Infirmary 6 Marks a year, de furno Burgi,
as appears by his Charter, fol. 102. which gift remained till the time of Abbot
Walter: who assigned those 6. Marks to the pitanciary; to find as much Wine as
should be sufficient. But afterward, the Pitanciarius being negligent, they
were brought into the Treasury, by the order of the Abbot and Convent, to be
employed for the above said use. This Andrew first assigned forty shillings de
Alebode, for the Anniversary of his Predecessor Benedict: who had recovered
that Man nor of Alebode from the Canons of Berlinges. I do not read of any
Anniversaries observed before this; and therefore suppose those words primo.
assignavit, are to be understood, as if he had said, that Andreas first brought
up the Custom of Anniversaries: with such solemnity, that is, as shall be
hereafter mentioned

Fol. CCLIII.
He gave also two Windmils at Paston, and six pound per an. from Tinewell, and
forty shillings from Castre, as appear by his Charters: which I find about
other matters, but have not room to give a particular account of them. Among
the innumerable gifts to the Eleemosynary (the time of whose grant is not
specified) I find one in this Abbots days: by Willielmus de Witerinton with the
assent and will of his Wife and his Son William and his Heirs, of IIII. Acres
of Arable Land, sub Estwood, which lay between the tillage of the Abbot and the
Land of Solomon fratris piae memoriae B. quondam Abbatis Burgi. Which four
Acres he offered upon the great Altar of St. Peter, to God and the
Eleemosynary, coram Dominis meis Andrea tunc Abbate Burgi, and toto conventu
ejusdem, etc. as the words of the Charter are. Immediately after which follows
a gift of David de Beggevile of all his Land in the same place: in
consideration of which the Abbot and Convent received him and all his, whether
living or dead, into their Fraternity, in vigiliis, jejuniis, orationibus, and
in missarum celebrationibus and in omnibus aliis beneficiis, quae fient in
praenominata Ecclesia in perpetuum.

Not far from which there is a Deed of William Vicar of Burgh (it is not said
in what time, which in an exchange of Land mentions a Chapel of St. Botulphs,
which I know not where to find. It is in these words, sciant presents and
futuri quod ego Willielmus Vicarius de Burgo ad petitionem Parochianorum meorum
dedi and concessi in Escambium, Deo and Sancto Petro and Eleemosynarie Burgi
unam dimidiam acram terrae arabilis, quam adquisivi; sc. illam que jacet inter
terram Thome Speciarii, and terram Agnetis quondam uxoris Henrici, in cultura
que jacet inter boscum de Westwoode, and Capellam Sancti Botulphi, pro quadam
placia pertinente ad ortum Eleemosynarie Burgi, super q. cancellum capellae
Sancti Johannis Bapt. constructum est, etc.

Which Chapel also of St. John Baptist seems to be distinct from the Church of
that name.

Swapham does not tell us when he dyed: But the often mentioned Chron. of John
Abbot says An. MCC. obiit Andreas Abbas Burgi, cui successit Acharius Sancti
Albani. So he governed (not about 5. but) about seven year. His memory was
celebrated on the twenty first of February: when, I find in the Kalander was,
Depositio Domini Andreae Abbatis.

ACHARIVS.
As King John gave the Abbey of Burgh to this Prior of St. Albans, so in the
same year he gave the Abbey of Ramsey. to the Prior of Burgh. They are the
words of Rog. Hoveden Ad An. 1200. p. 802.
in that place where he calls this Abbot Zacharias as Mr. G. observes. But he
did not put him in presently, upon the death of Andreas: for Swapham tells us
he received the Abbey in Rogation week: and found it so bare of all manner of
Provisions, that there was not food enough for one day. The reason was, the
Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, to whom the King had given the custody
of the Abbey, while it was void, had left nothing; but carried all that he
could away with him. Notwithstanding which, this good man in a short time was
able to furnish the place not merely with necessaries, but superfluities. For
besides a great many rich vestments, he gave to the Church Silver Basins for
the great Altar; with a case of Gold and Silver, set with precious stones
(opere pulcherrimo and subtilissimo) for the Arm of St. Oswald. A yearly Rent
also to the Refectory, and the Pittancia: to the former of which he gave
likewise two excellent Cups de Mazaro, with great Silver feet richly gilt, and
Covers to them; one of which had the three Kings, offering their gifts to our
Savior, in the bottom of it. He gave moreover to the said Refectory, Nine
great drinking Cups de Mazaro, and four Table Knives with Ivory hafts. He
assigned Thurleby also to the Chamberlain; from whence, says Swapham we have
XII Coverlids of St. Alban, and as many Coats. He assigned also to the Chamber,
the house which Richard Crookman offered to St. Peter, when he was made a Monk;
which yielded the yearly Rent of a Noble. And when the Celleraria, upon a time,
wanted Provision, he fed the whole Convent, from the Feast of St. Peter and St.
Paul to the Feast of St. Andrew, at his own charge. And caused the Mill of
Athelwalton to be repaired, the Land to be ploughed and Sown, and the Corn
gathered: which he caused to be brought into the Cellerary. And out of his
pity to the infirm Monks, who had no where to take the comfort of the air, he
gave them, of his own accord without asking, a part of his Vineyard: where
Rich. de Scoter afterward planted a garden.

He also bought houses, hard by St. Paul's London, which cost him above two
hundred and fifty Marks; and in several of the Manors belonging to the Church,
caused Halls, Chambers, and other edifices to be built: as the Hall at
Scottere, the Hall at Fiskertune, and diverse other places which Swapham
mentions. He gave two hundred Marks to King John for his Charter of Liberties,
which is still remaining: and discharged the house of above a thousand Marks,
in the Exchequer. He recovered the Manor of Walcote from Peter Son of
Radulphus (who had held it long, and got many confirmations of it from the
Kings of England) as well as the Marsh between Singlesholt and Croyland
(mentioned by Mr. G.) from which he received yearly, by the consent and
agreement of the Abbot of Croyland, four Stone of Wax: which he appointed to be
employed for Wax-Candles, on the Feasts of the Saints of this Church.

They that have a mind, may read the whole story of this recovery in the
continuation of the History of Crowland, lately put out at Oxford, with
Ingulphus, etc. P. 471, 472.
which tells us it was in the year 1202. not long after he came to the
Abbotship. But though the King himself then, after many meetings and treaties
and great expenses made a final end, as they speak; yet the controversy was
renewed again not long after, as shall be showed in its place. His
Constitution, wherein with the consent of the Brethren, he orders how the four
Stone of Wax should be yearly spent, is as follows. That it should be delivered
to the Keeper of the Altar of St. Mary: who was to take care that in each of
the 3. Festivals of St. Peter one Wax Candle of five pound weight should burn
continually before the great Altar, from the beginning of the first Vespers,
till after the completorium of the Festival. In like manner in the four
Festivals of St. Mary, and in those of St. Oswald, St. Kyneberge, St.
Kyneswithe, and St. Tibbe. What remained of the four Stone of Wax, and was left
after the completorium of those Festivals, he was to take care should be spent
every day ad missam Sanctae Mariae.

There is another agreement between him and the Abbot of Crowland, which I find
at the very end of the Book called Swapham, whose title is this, De bunda de
Fynfet.
Be it known to all that be olyve, and to all that shall come here after that
the Bound of Fynfete, which is made mention of in the Fine betwix Akary Abbot
of Peterburgh and his Covent, and Henry Abbot of Croyland and his Covent, it is
set in an Angyl beside a Plot that is called now a days Nomansland betwix the
waters of Weland and of Nene. Which water of Nene has its course directly from
thence until Croyland-Brig, after the course of water be the which men row from
Croyland unto Dowesdale, on the South side of a Cross set there. And the water
of Weland has his course directly from Croyland Brig unto Nomansland Hyrum, by
a water called Twandam Dyke: And there the water of Weland fallyth into Nene.
And the seid Hyrum is set at a bar, and an Old Welow, anens the Dyke by the
which men go to a place called Tutlakisland.

He bought Land at Stowe near Simpringham, where Abbot Robert afterward built
houses: and the custom being that the Abbot should have the Auxilia Sancti
Michaelis before mentioned, from Alwallon and Flettune, viz. twenty Mark; he
gave 15. to the Convent, and left only 5. to his Successors: which Abbot Robert
also assigned to the Convent. This goodness therefore of his, says Swapham,
deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance: and yet it would be tedious to
tell the persecutions he endured. Which were exceeding great, from a hard King,
and from untamed Tyrants, from Forresters, and other Ministers; the days then
being very evil; because there was great discord inter Regnum and Sacerdotium,
between the Civil and the Ecclesiastical power. For they that should have
defended the Church took Arms against it; and they who seemed to be friends of
Religion endeavored to destroy it.



There had been a Petition preferred by the Almoner of Burgh (in his
Predecessors time) to Pope Clement; showing that he having no Ecclesiastical
benefice belonging to the Almonry, whereby he might be able to keep good
hospitality, was willing to assign the Church of Makeseia to that use, if the
Abbot and Convent, who had the right of presentation would consent. Whereupon
the Pope moved Hugo Bishop of Lincoln to use his Authority to persuade them to
grant the said Parsonage, to that use: which Hugo did, and Pope Celestine
afterward confirmed the Grant of the Church of Makeseia and Normanby with all
their appurtenances unto the use of the Almonry. After which Acarius, by the
Petition and advice of the Convent settled all the Tithes of all their Lands,
for the maintenance of Hospitality; except of those two Manors de Stanewig,
and de Irtlingburgh. Which was afterward confirmed by William Bishop of
Lincoln, who recites the whole Charter of Akarius in his Fol. XCIII.

He granted also, out of reverence and respect to this Church of Makeseia, and
at the Petition of Galfridus Son of Radulphus de Halone, one of the Milites of
Burgh, and at the desire of the Parishioners, that they would hereafter have no
passage through the Churchyard of Makeseia, for their Horses, Oxen, Cows,
Hoggs or other Animals; nor by themselves nor Servants lay any thing in the
Churchyard, which might discolor, or dishonor it; saving to themselves only
the herbage of the Churchyard and liberty to mow it, etc. Galfridus, on his
part giving the Eleemosynary of the Church of Burgh two Acres of Arable Land in
the field of Makeseia; so that the Church yard might be freed from all that
filth, which was caused by the Carriages of the Procurators of the
Eleemosynary. Both these Charters are remaining Swaph. fol. CIII.
.

In another Charter this Abbot granted to the same Eleemosynary, the offerings
of the Chapel before mentioned of Tho. a Becket (called there Capella Sancti
Thomae ad Portam) for the use of the Hospital, which belonged to it. Yet so, as
that on Festival days, when the Parishioners of St. John Baptist were bound to
make their Oblation at that Church, none should be admitted to hear Mass in the
Church of the Hospital, to the prejudice of the said Church of St. John
Baptist. But if any man were so weak in Body, that he could not go so far as
the Parish Church, and therefore made his Oblation in the aforesaid Chapel, two
parts of three of such Oblation should be given to the Sacrist, and the
remaining third, to the Chaplain of St. J. Baptist. Upon other days, if any
body came out of devotion, to this Chapel, and made his offerings here, they
should be wholly applied to the use of the Hospital. In like manner if
Strangers came to pray there, whether on Festival or other days, and offered
any thing, or if any Legacy were given to the Hospital, all should be entirely
applied to the uses of the poor people there Fol. CIV. and fol. CC.
. And accordingly an agreement was made and drawn in writing, between the
Sacrist, the Chaplain of St. John Baptist, and the Almoner. In which the
Festivals are expressed, on which the Parishioners of St. J. Baptist were wont
to offer, and might not be admitted, unless in case of weakness, to hear Mass
in the Chapel of the Hospital, viz. All Saints, All Souls, Christmas,
Circumcision, Epiphany, Purification, Good Friday, Easter, Ascension,
Whitsunday, St. John Baptist, the Assumption and the Nativity of the Blessed
Virgin, and Saint Giles.

This Abbot did many other memorable things, for the benefit of the Infirmary,
and of the Monks Chamber: and many things were done by others in his time
(particularly Robert de Tot, by the will and assent of Akarius, whom he calls
his Lord, gave seven acres of Arable Land in Paston, to the Chapel beatae
Mariae de Parco) which I cannot set down; without enlarging this Supplement too
much beyond the bounds, to which I am confined.

One thing done in his time I must not forget: which is a Bull sent from
Gregory the IXth. to the Bishop of Lincoln, and him (the Abbot of Burgh)
importing that the Abbot had represented to him, how some Monks of his Church
had incurred the sentence of Excommunication, for laying violent hands one upon
another, and upon other both Secular and Religious persons, and Secular Clergy,
and other Monks were under the same sentence for denying due obedience to the
Abbot, when they were corrected by him; others because they had entered the
Monastery by Simony; and how some of these Excommunicated Persons, had presumed
to celebrate divine Offices, not having obtained absolution; For whose
Salvation, the Abbot being solicitous, had petitioned the said Gregory, that it
might not be necessary for them to come to the Apostolical See for the benefit
of absolution and dispensation; he, in confidence of his discretion, granted
him power to absolve them in all the forenamed cases (except such enormous
excesses in laying hands on any body, as might seem fit to be referred to the Sea Apostolic) after satisfaction made to those who had been injured: And
that he should proceed against the Simoniacal Monks according to the
constitution in a General Council; and suspend those who, in contempt of
Ecclesiastical discipline, had officiated in the Church during their
Excommunication, for two years a suorum executione ordinum. Which being
finished, he might mercifully dispense with them, if they were of an honest
Conversation and a better life.

Several compositions also made by him I must omit; and conclude as R. Swapham
does, that this good man governed the Monastery for about X. years; and was
such an example to all of order, honesty, kindness, and bounty, that from him
posterity might learn how to behave themselves, both in the cloister and in the
World. And particularly he was extroardinary kind to the Convent; unto whom he
sent meat every day from his own Table, for the consolation of the Brethren:
which the Prior divided among them. The like he did to the domus infirmorum;
sending flesh-meat to those who were weak: and would often say in the Convent,
Domini, Domini, nisi per quosdam vestrum stetisset, etc. My Masters, my
Masters, had not some of you hindered, I had done much good to you. Which saying
(says Swapham, from which we may gather he lived in this time) was not
understood by us then; but after his death we perceived why he said this, and
knew of whom it was meant. But it is no matter, says he, they are gone; they
lifted up themselves, and the Lord has cast them down. As for this good man,
he never rendered evil for evil to any man; but studied more to be loved than
feared: and out of mere respect to piety took in two and twenty Monks: by whose
merits, and the merits of all the Saints, he prays the Lord to grant this
Abbot pardon, and eternal joy.

Chron. MS. Johan. Abbatis says MCCX. obiit Akarius Abbas Burgi, cui successit
Robertus de Lyndesey. He was commemorated on the 13th of March, which was
Depositio Domini Akarii Abbatis.

ROBERTUS de Lyndesey.
When ad An. 1210. John Abbot says that Rob. de Lyndesey succeeded Akarius, it
must be understood thus; that four year after he came into his place: till
which time not only this Monastery, but many other Churches were kept by King
John in his own hands. So the same Writer tells us, at the year 1214. Vacabant
seeds Cathedrales, etc. 'The Cathedral Sees of York and Durham were void, with
the Abbey of Wytheby. In the Province of Canterbury, the Bishoprics of
Worcester, Exeter, Chichester; the Abbeys of St. Edmund, St. Austin apud Cant.
Redyng, St. Bennet de Holme, St. Martin de Bello, Ramsey, Burgh, Cirencester
and Evesham. All which were in manu Domini Regis: but this year, libenter
concessit ut istis Ecclesiis vacantibus Pastores providerenter. Only he desired
it might be secundum formam and consuetudinem Regni: the Bishops on the other
side contradicting and desiring, it might be done according to the Canons. Thus
he; who adds that hereupon the Interdict which had continued upon the Kingdom
VI. year, III. months and XVI. days was taken off: viris Religiosis non facta
restitutione bonorum, but without any care that the Religious should have their
Goods restored to them. So much did Pandulphus favor the Kings inclination.

This Abbot, with whom this Church was happily provided (but whether by the
Kings Nomination or no I find not; for the Chron. before named says, some
Abbeys proceeded immediately to choose their Abbots, that the King might not
obtrude one upon them) was a wise, discreet, and honest man; in all things very
provident; as Swapham has delivered his Character to us. Who relates a great
many worthy things he had done, and gifts he had bestowed on the Church, while
he was only Sacrist. Among which that of making thirty glass Windows, which
before were stuffed with Reed and Straw, was one of the least. He made one
Window also of Glass in the Regulare Locutorium; another in the Chapterhouse;
on the side where the Prior sat; nine in the Dormitory; and three in the Chapel
of St. Nicolas. He made the whole Chancel of Oxney and a Table with the Image
of the Blessed Virgin upon the Altar. He augmented also the Dormitory, and made
private Chambers: and then built a Larder hard by the Kitchen, for the use of
the Celerarius. Which solicitous goodness of his, moved the Convent with one
consent to raise him to a higher station, by choosing him for their Abbot: whom
they presented to King John at Winchester, upon the day of the Assumption of
St. Mary. Being kindly received by him, he went to Northampton, and there on
St. Barnaby's day received from Hugh 2. Bishop of Lincoln, ordinationis suae
benedictionem.

As soon as he returned home, he offered a rich Cope and a Pall: and then made
it his business to deliver the Country from that grievous slavery and bondage
they were in, by the Forresters and the Beasts; which at that time domineered
over men. Mr. G. has given some account of it; I shall only add that this
deafforestation was made in the year 1216. as appears by the agreement made
between this Abbot, and the Milites and Francolani, who had any interest in the
Nasse of Burgh: which is annexed to the Description of all the woods, and their
names, and the names of those to whom they belonged, when it was disafforested.
In the year before which (1215.) King John had granted his Charter confirming
all the liberties of the Church: which was confirmed by Pope Innocent the
Third, as may be seen in Matthew. Paris; and there is the very same in our
Records at the end of Swapham.

Besides the benefactions mentioned by Mr. G. (the first of which was only
covering the Abbots Hall with lead versus claustrum, in that part next the
Cloister) I find diverse others, no less memorable. For he gave four Marks of
Silver to the Infirmary: and eight Shillings custodi Hospitum, to buy Matts and
other necessaries for his Office: and got a Bond out of the bands of the Jews,
for five and thirty Mark; upon which they demanded a vast sum of money, it
being an old debt. He freed also the Tenants of this Church in the Manor of
Stanwig, a secta Un. dredi de Hecham, for a sum of money which he gave to the
Earl of Ferers. He purchased likewise the Advowson of the Church of Clopton,
and gave two Marks of Gold, and his own Silver Cup, ad feretrum Sanctae
Kyneburgae. He made the new inward gate, and the new Stable for the Abbots
Horses; and the Vivarium near the Churchyard. He built not only the Hall of
Collingham, but of Stowe; which Martin Abbot afterward changed: and a Chamber
at Tinewell, another at Cottingham, a Summer House at Stanwick; with a Chapel,
and almost finished the Chapel at Kettring. Barns he built in several places,
and erected the great building beyond the Bakehouse and Malthouse: and by a
plea against the Abbot of Croyland obtained the power of enclosing as much as
he pleased of the common Pasture, in the Marsh of Pykirke, and made it
separate: and, finding the Churchyard too strait, he gave to the honor of God
and of his Church, a part of his own Vineyard to enlarge it; for the Burial of
the Monks, and of their Parents and Friends: which he surrounded also with a
strong and high Wall.

Anciently the Abbot and Convent received 60. Marks of Silver yearly from
Fiskertune and Scoter, for their Clothes and Shoes: which he finding to be too
little, added 20. Mark more. And twenty shillings also for the celebration of
three Feasts in Copes; viz. the Transfiguration of our Lord, the Translation of
St. Thomas, and the birth day of St. Hugh. For Hugh Bishop of Lincoln who dyed
in the year 1200. was canonized a Saint by Pope Honorius 2. in this Robert's
time An. 12200. The Bull is at large, in the Records at the end of Swapham Fol.
LXXXVII.
; directed to the Bishop, Chapter, Clergy and people of the Diocese of Lincoln:
bearing date from the same place, and the same day and year, with that in
Matthew Paris, who has set down but a little scrap of it.

In his time the Monastery petitioned Pope Gregory the 9. representing the
danger they were in, to lose some Tithes, which they had held from the very
Foundation of the Church; because some Deeds concerning them were lost, or
could not be found: and therefore desiring that he would command some very old
men to be examined about this matter, before they dyed; lest they should lose
all possible proof of their right. Whereupon the Pope sent his Apostolical
Letters to the Priors of Deeping, and St. Leonard in Stamford, and to the Dean
of Stamford, that they should hear and examine such Witnesses as the Abbot and
Convent could produce; and cause their testimony to be Recorded, and to make a
public Instrument thereof. Datum Laterani 7. Kaland. April. Pontif. nostri
Anno 7.

And here it may be fit to mention the Council of Laterane, unto which there
was a general citation, says Swapham, thoughout Christendom: in so much that
there were assembled 400. Bishops, above 800. Abbots and Priors; and
Procurators without number. So John Abbot MCCXV. Romae Concili um Lateranense
secundum celebratum est, ubi Episcopi CCCC. Abbates and Priores DCCC. and
ultra; Procuratorum non erat numerus. Here it was provided among other things,
that all Convents of Monks should fast (that is, eat no Suppers) from the Feast
of the exaltation of the Holy Cross, till Easter. Which order the Abbot when he
returned from this Council, prevailed with his Convent to observe as they did
at Rome. But not without many entreaties; for it had been the custom, not only
here at Burgh but in other places, for the Monks to eat two meals a day at
certain times; for instance, from the exaltation of Holy Cross till the first
of October; from the Nativity till the Octaves of the Epiphany; and many other
days, within that compass of time forementioned: on which the Convent was wont
to have one dish at Supper with Cheese. And therefore propter integrita. tem
Eleemosynae, that their constant allowance might not be diminished, the Abbot
ordained, that what was wont to be provided for their Supper they should have
at Dinner.

While the Abbot was at Rome King John demanded the whole military service of
the Abbot. Whose Attorneys complaining that they could not justitiare milites
libertatis Burgi (make these men do their duty) the King commanded their fees
to be destrained. Which when the Attorneys said they could not do, the King
gave away the Land of Nic. de Bassingburn to Baldwinus de Gynes; and the Land
of Roger de Torpel, to Will. Blome; and the Land that was Rad. de Dyve in
Vpton, to Rob. de Nevile of Scottone: and the Land of Richard de Watervile to
Will. de Palms; and the Land of Will. Andegavensis in Chirchefeild, to Ade
Furneis; and the Land of Hugo Wac in Deeping with the appurtenances to Will. de
Bruere; and so he disposed of the rest of the Lands. And commanded Will. de
Aundres Constable of Rockingham that he should destrain all the military feods:
and that he should not meddle with the demesne of the Abbot, but let it be
undisturbed, utpote liberam Eleemosynam Domini Regis.

These feods I suppose were restored, upon their submission, for I find in a
Marginal Note Swaph. fol. CCLXX.
, that Rog. de Torpel refused to serve unless the Abbot paid his expenses: upon
which his Estate he held of the Abbot being ordered to be seized, he scarcely
obtained the favor to serve upon his own proper charges.

Before his time there had been great discord and murmuring, contention and
envy frequently happened among the Brethren, propter minutionem, about
blood-letting (which was very necessary some time to those sedentary people,
who were subject to repletion) And no wonder, because no body could, accipere
minutionem, be let blood, without an Order from the Prior: who let some have it
oftener, others more rarely; some after five weeks, others after 6. and others
not till after 8. or 10. or 15. or perhaps half a year. To take away therefore
all trouble out of their minds about this matter, this Abbot ordered that the
Convent should be divided into six parts, and upon the day of letting blood, he
that was the Senior of that part, whose turn it was to have the benefit of it,
should ask licentiam minuendi (and that under his hand) for his Brethren from
the Prior.

In the Margin of the Book there is this Note. That in Abbot Walter's time this
mode of minution, was thus far altered; that they should be divided into five
parts, and then minuerentur modo supradicto. For Robert Grosteste Bishop of
Lincoln in his Visitation had forbidden the eating of flesh altogether, unto
the Monks every where; except only in the Infirmary, or in the Abbots Chamber:
which was accounted by them an unsupportable burden. It is further also noted,
that the Convent in former times, had liberty at three seasons in the year, to
eat as much flesh as they pleased, in a house deputed for that purpose; and in
the domus Hospitum, house where they entertained Strangers; and in all places
where they eat out of the Refectory, they might eat flesh. Which liberty was
quite taken away by the above named Inhibition of the Bishop. They who were
minuti let blood, were formerly refreshed in the Refectory three times a day,
with a regular diet; as appears by the ancient Customary of this Church.

Swapham observes, that he found LXXII. Monks here when he came to the Convent:
and so many, I have noted before, King Henr. I. found here, when he took an
account of all belonging to the Monastery, upon the death of John de Sais. And
therefore what is said of Akarius his taking in XXII. Monks, must be
understood, I think, of supernumeraries, whom he maintained for his time at his
own charges, ex intuitu pietatis, as the words there are.

For the maintenance of these, the Lands in Alwalton and Flettun had been given
by Andreas: but were not sufficient to supply the Kitchen with provisions,
though it had other Rents besides; which are all distinctly mentioned in a
Charter of his Swaph. fol. CV.
, wherein he gives those Manors entirely to the Celerary, with all that had
been reserved out of them to the Abbot, at the Feast of St. Michael. This Abbot
Robert therefore gave other Revenues, not only for the recreation, as the word
is, of those 72 Monks; but for the increment of eight Monks more: whereby the
whole Number was made LXXX. And particularly Belasise, as Mr. G. observes, to
find those 8. with Bread and Beer. Which Corn and Malt was afterward changed
into money, in Abbot Walters time, because the Celerarius of the Abbot and his
Servants, would receive none but the very best; which was the occasion of great
quarrels.

In the Charter wherein he settles those Lands, he makes mention of the
observation of his own Anniversary: the expenses of which were to be born out
of them. Andreas I noted before began this custom, as far as I can find,
assigning an annual Pension for the celebrating of the Anniversary of Benedict
his Predecessor. After which I find no mention of it till this Abbots time; who
took care not only of his own, but both of Andreas his, and of his Successors
Akarius. For after the Constitution of Akarius directing how the sour Stone of
Wax from Croyland, should be employed; there follows immediately a Statute of
this Abbot Robert; ordaining that upon the Anniversaries of Andreas and
Akarius, the Celerarius should provide four good dishes of meat for the
Convent, together with Wine if it could be had, or else good Beer; and that the
Eleemosynary should distribute to the Poor that came on those days, a
convenient portion of Bread and Ale.

What the Religious part of the observation of these days was in this Church, I
have not yet found: but in other Churches it appears to have been very solemn
and great. Particularly in that of Westminster (where they were of the same
Order with the Monks of this Church) Anniversaries were about this time kept in
all regards, very magnificently. For example, Abbot Walter (who dyed not long
before Rob. Lyndsey's days An. 1191.) gave the Manor of Padington to that
Church, and totally deputed it, to this use, for the celebration of his
Anniversary, on the Feast of St. Cosmas and Damianus. On which day he requires
the Almoner to provide for the whole Convent, Simnella, Gastella, Canastella,
Brachinella and Wafras: and to every one of the Brethren one Galon of Wine, cum
tribus bonis pitanciis, with three good dishes of Meat (called pitancias from
the word Piety, and thence also called Misericordias, now called in the
Colleges exceedings) and also good Ale in abundance before the Brethren at all
the Tables, as upon other Feasts and Anniversaries it was wont to be found by
the Celerarius, in the great Tankard of five and twenty Galons. For the
ordinary guests, who should that day dine in the Refectory, he requires him to
provide two dishes of Meat, with Bread and Wine, and Ale honorably and
abundantly: and for the more honorable persons make the same provision, as for
the Convent. And besides, find for all comers whatsoever, from the hour that
the Table concerning the Anniversary was read in the Chapterhouse, until the
Completorium of the next day, both in Meat and Drink, Hay and Oats all things
necessary: nor was entrance to be denied to any person, whether Footman or
Horseman. He was to make provision also for the Nuns of Holborn, for the
Servants of the Monastery, and for three hundred poor; every one of which was
to have a loaf of Bread, (of the same weight with the Bread of the Convent) and
a pott of Ale: and they who had no Vessels might drink pro voluntate, as much
as they pleased. And, to omit the rest, there was after all, Mede to be
provided, for the Convent ad potum charitatis.

As for the Religious part of the Ceremony, it was after this manner. On the
vigils of the forenamed day, the Prior and the Convent sang, Placebo and
Dirige, with three lessons; as on other principal Anniversaries they were wont,
with ringing of Bells: two Wax-Candles burning continually at his Tomb (which
was on the South side of the Cloister) from the said Vigils, to the end of the
Mass da Requem, which was sung the next day.

On the Anniversary of Richard de Crokesley, who dyed as long after this time,
as the other did before it (1258.) there was a far greater solemnity: for which
he gave the Manors of Hampestede and of Stoke with other Rents. It began with
ringing of Bells, the evening before, for which they received xiii s. iiii d.
and the next day after Mass, there were Alms given to a thousand poor people:
and for six days following to five hundred every day; to every body a penny,
etc. And he ordained that four Monks should every of those days say Mass for
his Soul at four several Altars: four Wax Candles burning at his Tomb, during
the Mass, if he was buried in the Monastery; if without it, then two of the
Candles were to burn at the Altar of the Holy Trinity, the other two at the
Altar of Edward the Confessor. Provided that upon his Anniversary four
Wax-Candles should burn all day about his Tomb, or before the Altars now named,
for which he assigned three pound, etc. This was agreed in the Chapterhouse on
the Friday after the Feast of St. Barnaby 1256. and he got a confirmation of it
from Alexander 4. But ten year after his death they obtained a Modification of
this Anniversary from Pope Clement IV. according as the Abbot of Waltham and
other Delegates appointed for this business, should think fit to moderate it. I
omit many others, which are in a MS. History of that Church written by John
Fleet a Monk of that Church: which he collected out of better writers than
himself.

After some such manner no doubt, Anniversaries were observed in this Church of
Burgh: for I find that in Akarius his time, Hugo de Longo Campo, Son of Henry
de Longo Campo, out of respect to God and the Salvation of his Soul, granted
all his Land in Eyliswurthe, viz. quadraginta sex solidatas terrae in liberam
puram ac perpetuam Eleemosynam, for the making of his Anniversary, cum debita
ac solita solemnitate, with due and with usual solemnity. Which Charter of his
was afterward confirmed by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury Swaph. fol. XC.
.

Immediately after that Statute about the forenamed Anniversaries, there
follows a Constitution (which I suppose therefore was made by this same Abbot
Robert) directing what was to be done when any part of the Body or Blood of our
Lord in the Sacrament, by negligence fell upon the Ibid. Fol. CCLXIII.
Ground, or upon a Matt, Carpet, or the like. Concerning which two other
Constitutions follow; with verses comprehending the sense of them: which I have
transcribed and put in the Appendix.

This Abbot lived in evil days (which makes the many good things he did besides
these the more commendable) there having been great discord, as Swapham
observes, between the King and the Church, insomuch that the Kingdom was
interdicted for above six years: after which followed cruel and most shameful
Wars between the King and his Nobles; in which Charches were broken down and
destroyed, and what was in them was pillaged and carried away. After he had
governed Nine year and ten months he dyed, in the Feast of Crispinus and
Crispinianus. It should be eight year, for he began to govern in the year 1214.
and all agree he dyed in the year 1222. So the MS. Chron. Johan. Abbatis. An.
MCCXXII. obiit Rob. de Lyndesey Abbas Burgi, cui successit Alexander Abbas. And
so Swapham himself.

In which year, I find in the same Chronicon there was a Council held at Oxford
in the Church of Osney, by Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, where the Bishops
and other Prelates being generally present, some of the Institution made in the
forenamed Council of Lateran, with some additions, for the reformation of the
Clergy and people, were recited. Two of the most Noble of which (as he calls
them) he sets down. The first concerning the Prelates; that all of them both
Bishops and Abbots should be bound to change every year, those that waited on
them in their Chambers; ut plures haberent testes suae Sanctimoniae and
castitatis. The other belonging to Subjects; that all Monks and Nuns who were
under a Rule, should every year, openly in the Chapterhouse, recite their
profession before the whole company; ut semper illius memores siant ad Deum
devotiores.

He was commemorated here on the day after Simon and Jude, as appears by the
Kalander: where over against that day, I find Deposuio Domini Roberti de
Lyndsey: which does not agree with Swapham's account, who places his death on
the 25th of October.

ALEXANDER de Holderness.
So named from the Country where he was born; which also gave the preceding
Abbot the name of Lyndesay. He was a man much beloved by his Convent, because
he was a good Pastor: who gave many very rich Vestments to the Church
(mentioned particularly in Swapham) and built, not only the Halls Mr. G. speaks
of, but the solarium magnum at the door of the Abbots Chamber, and a
Cellerarium under it: and furnished the Church also, with that precious Crystal
Vessel, as Swapham calls it, wherein the blood of Thomas a Becket was kept, and
with diverse Reliquer^^. And the was about many other works, in which death
stopped him; after he had governed four years complete. For he dyed on the same
day he was chosen Abbot: which was the Feast of St. Edmund King and Martyr: or,
(as he says a little after) the Vigils of that day. An. 1226. And so it is in
the Kalander Nov. 17. (it should be 19.) Depositio Alexandri Abbatis and
Anniversarium Reginaldi de Castre and Matildis Vxoris ejus. The Chron. Johan.
Abbatis; agrees to the year, beginning An. MCCXXVI. with these words. Ob.
Alexander Abbas Burgi, cui successit Martinus.

In his time the fifteenth part of all the Goods in England, were given to the
King Hen. 3. as appears by his Charter. The Friars Minors also came into
England, as Abbot John bewails with many deep sighs and groans, at the end of
An. MCCXXIV. Eodem Anno, O dolor and plusquam dolor, O pestis truculentissima,
fratres Minores venerunt in Angliam.

He made this composition with Baldwin de Ver of Thrapestone, from whom the
Abbot and Convent claimed many payments, de auxiliis Vicecom. and sectis
Hundredorum and visu franciplegil, etc. that he should he be free from those
and all other demands, upon the account of his Lands in the Abbots VII.
Hundreds, paying yearly on the Feast of St. Michael, half a Mark of Silver, etc
Swaph. fol. CCIII.
.

He made also a friendly confederacy with Hugo the Abbot of St. Edmund, and
their respective Convents: who by this league were tied in a Bond of special
affection, for mutual Counsel and assistance for ever. It is set down at large,
in Swapham Fol. XCIX.
; but I shall only give the Reader a taste of it. They were so linkt together,
as to account themselves one and the same Convent: so that if one of the Abbots
dyed, the survivor being desired, was immediately to go to his Convent; and
there before him they were to make a Canonical Election; or if already made,
they were to declare it in his presence. If the Friars of either place were by
any necessity driven from their Monastery, the other was to receive them, and
afford them a familiar refuge and aid: with a place in their Quire,
Chapterhouse and Refectory, secundum conversionis suae tempus.

This Abbot among others signed the confirmation of the great Charter of
England, and the Charter de Foresta in the 9th year of Hen. 3. unto which the
great Bishops and Abbots and Earls are witnesses, and among the rest Abbas de
Burgo Sancti Petri (but he is not named) in the Annals Burton ad An. 1224.

But that which was most memorable concerning this Abbot is, the care he took
about the VIII. Monks augmented by his Predecessor, which I find in a Charter
by it self, in these terms, Vniversis Sanctae Ecclesiae filiis ad quos presens
scriptum pervenerit; Alexander permissione Dei Abbas de Burgo, salutem in
Domino, etc.

Wherein, out of his paternal care to provide well for those eight Monks, which
Robert his predecessor had added to their wonted number, and at the Petition of
the Convent, he granted and confirmed to the Celerary, all the new assarts
belonging to the Monastery in Nasso Burgi sc. Belasis with all its
appurtenances, Glintonhawe, and the assart of Estuude and Franehawe, of the
purchase of the forenamed Robert Abbot, of Will. de Ginniges, and all the
Meadow in Norburch, to find fifty seam of Wheat and threescore of Barley; and
80. of Oats, for the drink of those VIII. Monks. He grants also to the Chamber
of the Monastery, for the increment of those Monks X. Marks of Silver, to the
wonted Rent of LXX. Marks from Fiskerton, Collingham and Scottere, to be paid
yearly, at the 4. quarters, viz. XX. Marks at the Feast of the Nativity, etc.
And besides he grants to the same Chamber, all his Land in Thurlbey with all
the appurtenances, etc.

His Successor Martin confirmed this Charter in the very same words Fol. CVI.

MARTINUS de Ramsey.
Alexander dying on the Viglis of St. Edmund and being buried the next day
after, Martin was chosen on the fourth of the Nones of December, that is on the
second day of that month: and was received by King Henry on the Octaves of St.
Andrew: and the same day confirmed by the Bishop of Lincoln, after the
examination of the Prior and three Monks About his Election, in St. Katherines
Chapel at Westminister: and received his Bendiction, as Mr. G. observes, on the
Feast of St. John Evang. apud Tinghurst: and then was installed at Peterburgh
on the Sunday after the Octaves of Epiphany. Thus Swapham (who lived in his
time) who tells, he immediately discharged the Abbey of a debt remaining to the
Exchequer from Abbot Robert for the disafforestation of Nassaburgh: which was
fifty Marks. And so the Chron. Johan. Abbatis relates ad An. 1227. Martinus
Abbas Burgi solvit ad scaccarium Regis pro disafforestatione Nassa de Burgo 50.
Marcas argenti. The same year he got their Charters confirmed by King Henry,
for sixscore Marks of Silver, to his own use; and eight and twenty more to the
Chancellors; besides many other gifts. The Story of Brianus is related by John
Abbot, as belonging to the same year 1227. with very little difference from the
account Mr. G. has given of it. The Inquisition made before the Kings Justice
was, whether Brians Predecessors held of the Monastery or of the Forest, utrum
prius fuerunt Predecessores dicti Briani feoffati de domo Burgi, an de foresta.
The Inquisition was taken apud Bernack per XII. legales homines, and Regi
transmissa. Adjudicata est Warda dicti Briani Abbati de Burgo and suis
successoribus in perpetuum.

The next year 1228. the same Chronicon tells us the Pope summoned a Council at
Rome, but the ways were stopped by the Emperor, both by Sea and Land, to hinder
any from coming to it. Two Cardinals, many Prelates, both Bishops and Abbots,
and other Clergymen, especially those that went by Sea, were taken by the
favorers of the Emperor. Whereupon the Pope Excommunicated him, and absolved
all the Barons of Germany from their Allegiance. Thus that Chron. of John
Abbot. Whether Martin got thither or no I do not find, but it was in this year,
as Mr. G. has related, that Gregory the Ninth granted to this Monastery that
which they have entitled Magnum privilegium, bearing date Anno gratiae
Millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo octavo, quarto idus Januarii. In which besides
that privilege mentioned by Mr. G. there are these among others remarkable;
that he frees them from paying any Tithe of the Land which they kept in their
own hands, and Ploughed or Fed themselves. And that there should be libera
sepultura in this place, for any that desired in their last Will or otherwise
to be here buried, which none should presume to hinder, except he were an
excommunicated person, or interdicted, or exercised public Usury; and saving
also the rights of other Churches, from which the dead bodies were brought.

In the year 1230. he asserted the liberties of the Church in Alwalton and
Fletton against the pretenses of the Abbot of Thorney, as I find in an old
record; which begins thus, Anno ab incarnatione Domini MCC. XXX. in Crastino
Apostolorum Philippi and Jacobi, dirationavit Abbas Martinus libertates suas de
Alwalton and Fletton, contra Abbatem de Thorney, apud Westminster. coram Justic. de
Banco, sicut in eorum rotulis continetur, and infrerius scriptum est, etc.

The next year as Mr. G. observes, the Bishop of Lincoln, visited this Church,
the next day after the Feast of St. Laurence: where a great many things were
agreed on by the common consent of the Abbot and Convent, and confirmed by the
Episcopal authority, under pain of Excommunication. One was that the Abbot
should not borrow any money upon Usury, of the Jews; nor of any Christians, cum
aliqua poenae adjectione, without the consent of the Convent: nor, in that
case, ever engage the Monastery, or the Goods of the Monastery moveable or
immovable. Another was, that the Sacrist of the Church should have, as had been
accustomed, the Horses and all other things, with the bodies of the Milites
deceased. With this moderation, that if any Horse of a deceased Knight was
worth more than four Mark, the Abbot should have him: and his Arms, or the
price of them, should be laid up in some safe place, by the Abbot with the
privity of the Convent, for defense of the Country, and of the peace of the
Church; and with the money, Arms should be mended and sustained.

In this year also an Inquisition was made by his Order, into all the Manors
belonging to the Church: and the Lands, Tenements, Tenants, Customs, etc. are
particularly set down, belonging to every one of them. It begins thus, Ad
festum Sancti Martini and ad Pentecost. per Chartam Domini Martini Abbatis,
Haec Inquisitio facta fuit per Maneria Domini Martini Abbatis secundi, anno
quinto, anno ab incarnatione Domini M. CC. XXXI. etc.

Two years after this he dyed, as John Abbot tells us in his Chron. An.
MCCXXXIII. Martinus Abbas Burgi ob. cui successit Abbas Walterus.

The day on which he dyed was the 26th of June; where I find in the Kalander,
Depositio Martini Abbatis.

I have not room to insert several compositions and agreements made by him. One
in the year 1230. between him and Richard de Midelton about a Pond and a Mill
in Cotingham and other things. fol CLXXIIII. Another 123. between him and the
Rector of Bernake de decimis Lapidicinae, Fol. CC. Another between him and John
Earl of Huntendune, in the same year, about the Fishery and other things Fol.
CCIII.

There was a Bridge then in Burgh called Pons Martini, Martins Bridge, which
was sometimes called Bruni: nigh unto which Hugo Fluri of Dodicthorp had a
Message, which he released unto the Abbot. Which Hugo by the consent of his
Wife Dionysia was a Benefactor to the Abbey in Martin's time many ways; as
appears by several Charters of his at the end of Swapham Fol. CCXXI. etc.

WALTER de S. Edmundo.
This man though born at St. Edmundsbury, was bred up here, as Mr. G. relates;
and as Swapham tells us (who gives a large account of his life) was chosen
Abbot by the unanimous consent of the Monks. At his installation, he offered a
great Pall Flowred with Peacocks; with a rich Cope, and many other things of
value. And then applied himself to enlarge both the Buildings and the Revenue
of the Church: for he made the entrance of the new Refectory with great
expenses; and many great buildings below his Palace: especially that great
House, in which were two Horse Mills and a Barn for Hay: and the Kitchen of the
Abbot apud Grangias Burgi, one new Grange, and Boveriam novam covered with
Stone. He renewed the Grange at Thorp, and made a new Bovaria at Castre, at
Warmington and at Owndle; and a great many other places which Swapham mentions:
where he says he built an incredible number of Barns, or Granges, or Oxstalls,
or Summer-houses; besides Lands which he purchased.

He augmented the Revenue of the Infirmary with the increase of fifty seven
Shillings, out of a certain Rent at Stamford which he bought. The Rents also of
the Hospitalary he increased: and both procured several grants of Lands from
other devout people, and settled those that had been formerly given. For I find
that Henry Rector of Paston, for the health of his Soul, and in gratitude for
the Benefice he had received from Walter Abbot of Burgh, and the Convent there,
gave, with his body, all the Lands he had in Paston, in Burgh, in Wermington,
etc. to this Church Fol. CCI.
. Henry of Wermington his Nephew, gave likewise a great deal to the same
Church. And Galfridus de Northbruc made a very great gift of a Capital Message
of his, with all the Lands, Rents, Tenements, and all appurtenances, in
Norbruc, Makesheye, Nunton, and all other places where he had any estate; which
are particularly mentioned in his Grant Fol. CCXIX.
.

He took an account of all the expenses of the Granary, and of the stipends of
Servants and Officers; and especially the expenses on the several great Feasts
of the Church: which still remain under this Title; explanatio liberationis and
expensae de granario Burgi per annum, and de diversis mensuris ejusdem, and de
sol. Servientium curiae in tempore Abbatis Walteri and ante.

There arose in his time a great controversy between this Church, and the
Canons of Landa about the Church of Pithesle: and after a long suit the Canons
yielded it to Burgh; whereupon Pope Urban confirmed the Church of Burgh in the
possession of it. I find agreements made between him and Rich. de Dumar about
Woods, and the bounds of them in Eston; and between him and Rob. de Burnebu,
and others about Essarts in the same Woods; which I can but just mention.

He was one of the Witnesses to the great Charter of the Liberties of England,
granted by King Henry in the XIX. year of his Reign, upon the Kal. of January.
After the mention of which, there follows in our Records that solemn
Excommunication (which was made eighteen year after 1253.) of all those that
infringed this Charter. It is in Matthew Paris Page 866.
: only in our Book there are these words added, which are not in him. Qui omnes
testes audierunt cum Dominus Rex, non coactus, sed propria voluntate petiit
quod omnes Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and Abbates excommunicent ipsum Henricum
nomine, si ipse unquam veniret contra aliq' articulum istius Chartae, and omnes
alios venientes contra eandem chartam. Et idem Rex tenuit candelam dum
sententia fuit promulgata. Whereas Math. Paris says he refused to hold the
Candle. P. 887.

Two years after 1237. followed the solemn dedication of this Church of Burg:
Which Matthew. Paris places in the next year 1238. when he says that several
noble Monasteries in the Diocese of Lincoln, within the Fens were dedicated, by
the venerable Bishop of Lincoln, viz. Ramsey, Burgh and Sautrei, and that the
Church of Burgh was dedicated quarto Calendar' Octobris. But the Chron. Johan.
Abbatis Burgi makes this to have been done, as I said, the year before, and not
on the 4th of the Kalends, but of the Nones, and by two Bishops. An. MCCXXXVII.
quarto Nonarum Octobris, dedicata est Ecclesia de Burgo, a duabus Episcopis,
viz. a Sancto Roberto Lincolniensi and Exoniensi Episcopis. And so says
Swapham, not naming the Bishops, Ipse etiam dedicare fecit Ecclesiam Nostram a
duobus Episcopis, magnis sumptibus, and propriis. This Robert Bishop of Linc'
was Rob. Groseteht, who was consecrated Bishop of that Dicocese, the year
before. Whose Sanctity as the Chronicon before mentioned celebrates, so it
gives this Character of his learning, Iste er at in omnibus VII. artibus
liberalibus eruditissimus.

What this dedication meant Mr. G. doubts: but it is explained by a passage in
Matthew of Westminster, who follows M. Paris and uses his very words about this
business of the dedication of these Churches; but then adds that it was done,
juxta Statuta Concilii London celebrati, in obedience to certain Constitutions,
which had been made in a Council at London. Which extended further than to the
Churches before named, for he says the Church of St. Paul London was dedicated
1240. die Sancti Remigii. What the ground of that constitution was I have not
now opportunity to search: but it was so famous a thing, that the day of its
Dedication was made an Anniversary, and this Abbot gave the sum of forty
Shillings a year, ad festum dedicationis Ecclesiae nostrae annuum uberius
procurandum, for the making more plentiful provision upon the Feast of the
Dedication of this Church; as the words are in his Charter about it, which
still r^mains. And this Feast is mentioned in another Charter of his, in which
for Gods sake, and with respect to peace, as his words are, he grants, that
instead of the assise of Corn which the Celerarius was wont to pay him, out of
Belasise, he should hereafter pay him ten Pound six Shillings and three Pence
per annum, quarterly, viz. instead of 28. Seam and one Sceppe of Corn, 4 l. 13
s. 9 d. and instead of 33. Seam of Barley and 6. Sceppes 3 l. 7 s. 6 d. and
instead of 45. Seam of Oats 2 l. 5 s. Which Seams are called Summae Regiae
Fol. CVI.
. And there is this Note in the Margin, that before the time of this Abbot,
till the making this Charter, the Abbots were wont to pay the Celerarius for
the celebration of the principal Festivals eight Pound; to which this Abbot
added forty Shillings, for celebrating the dedication of the Church, which was
in his time: in all ten Pound. So that the ten pound before mentioned, the
Celerarius received back again: and it is to be noted, that this Assise of Corn
was first granted, because of the increment of eight Monks augmented by Abbot
Robert.

To which eight Monks this Abbot Walter added thirty more: which made the
number in all an hundred and ten. But I suppose it was an act like that of
Acharius (who maintained two and twenty besides the usual number) which lasted
for his own time only. Swapham's words are that he received them out of
Charity, by divine Inspiration, to serve Christ perpetually. Recepit itaque
Domino inspirante, Caritatis intuitu XXX Monachos, Jesu Christo perpetue
famulandos. The Bishop of Ossory, I must add, to make this Feast of the
Dedication the more solemn, granted an indulgence; wherein ten days of Penance
enjoined are relaxed to all those, who confessing their sins and being truly
penitent, should come to visit the Church of St. Peter of Burgh, on the Feast
of Dedication, for devotion sake. It is in the end of the Appendix.

In the next year all the Abbots of this Order were summoned to appear at
London in order to their Reformation, as the Chron. Joh. Abbatis tells us. An.
MCCXXXVIII. Otho Cardinalis ad reformationem ordinis Sancti Benedicti, omnes
Abbates Nigri Ordinis London. convocavit.

In what year he took his first journey to Rome I do not find: nor shall I add
any thing about it or the other two, but what Mr. G. has omitted. In his first
journey he procured certain privileges for the Church, which Swapham only
mentions, but tells not what they were. When he returned from his second, in
which he went no further than Anvers, he offered two pieces of rich Silk; Of
which two Copes were made by John of Holderness, the Subsacrist. The third time
he was called by a special Mandate, to answer the contempt with which he was
charged, of granting the Church of Castre according to the Kings commandment,
contrary to the Provision of the Pope. For which he was not so shent as Mr. G.
relates, if we may believe Swapham; but procured his favor by that gift of ten
pound a year out of his Chamber to the Popes Nephew: insomuch that he got a
great privilege at that time for the liberties of the Church, which begins
thus; Innocentius Servus, etc. and another, that none belonging to the
Monastery, should be forced to go ultra duas dietas above two days journeys, in
any cause before the Judge-delegates: and some others. At his return he offered
a precious Pall of Baldekine, with the Image of the blessed Virgin, and her Son
in her Arms. This was in the year 1244. for then that large Charter of Pope
Innocent the IVth bears date, called Magnum Privilegium Fol. LXXXII.
. The Council at Lions was held the year after 1245. as the Chron. of John
Abbot informs us. Therefore all that Mr. G. has out of Matthew Paris, belongs
not to this time.

In that very year which he mentions, the eighth year of his Abbotship (which
was 1241.) the milites of the Abbey were summoned to Saropesbury, to go to Wales
Fol. CCLXX.
: whither the Abbot himself went; and some Knights with him. Who earnestly
insisting to have their expenses, Horses and Arms from the Abbot, he would by
no means grant it: but commanded them, by the Fealty they owned to the King and
to him, to follow the King to Chester; which they did. The Abbot also came
thither, where they again made the same demands; pretending that Stephen de
Segrave had given judgment for them apud Lehayetayle. Of whom when the Abbot
had diligently inquired, he declared before him, and his family, that it was
false; and said the Knights ought to defend the Abbot at their own charge, with
Horses and Arms. Then they complained to Hugh Earl of Hereford, Marshal of the
Army, who determined the matter against them: and the Abbot commanded them,
that at the summons of the Marshal, they should be enrolled; which they
refused. But the Abbot ad cautelam caused Radulph. de Ayston and Hugo de
Bernack to be enrolled, and two Servants of his family pro uno milite: And so
the Abbot returned with good grace from the King; and his Knights, neither
going nor coming could recover one farthing of him. The Steward of the Bishop
of Lincoln, and other Prelates did the same. And by the diligence of the Abbot,
he received from the Kings Exchequer, plenarie scutagium suum, sc. de quolibet
scuto X L. Sol.

In like manner, in the time of John de Calceto he had scutagium suum plenarie
de dictis militibus: And when they complained to the King and the Magnates,
that the Abbot ought to pay that scutagium out of his own Chamber, the Abbot
made it appear that he ought not.

In that grand Privilege of Innocent's, there is the same grant, which is
mentioned in Greg. the IXths; that they might say divine Service with a low
voice, in the time of a general Interdict; the gates being shut, no Bells rung,
and all Excommunicated and interdicted persons excluded. Many other Bulls there
were of his, as I noted out of Swapham, some of which remain. One of them
imports, that by his Mandate they stood bound to pay to Opizomus Archdeacon of
Parma, a Pension of fifteen Mark yearly, until they had provided him with some
Ecclesiastical Benefice, worth forty Mark of Silver yearly o^ more. But he now
granted them this indulgence for the future, that they should not be bound to
provide any person with a benefice for the future, against their wills; nor
receive any Letters Apostolical to that purpose; unless they made express
mention of this Indulgence, and said that notwithstanding any Apostolical
Indulgence they must do it. Afterward Letters Apostolical were directed from
another Pope, to several Priors therein named, to see his Absolution executed,
which he had granted to the Abbot and Convent of Burgh, from the payment of
such Pensions; when the person who received them would not accept of the
Ecclesiastical Benefices, to which they offered to present them, when they
fell. Which some refused; because they had benefices already, but no
dispensation to hold another: and so would have kept their Pensions, when a
Benefice was provided for them, to the great grievance of the Monastery.

Another of Innocent's, is dated from Lions on the Kal. of Sept. the seventh
year of his Pontificate, which was a little before his death. Wherein, they
having represented their Monastery to be built in a cold place, so that they
could not without danger, in Winter time especially, perform divine Offices
with heads uncovered; he grants them a license, utendi pileis ipsorum ordini
congruentibus, to use Capps suitable to their Order; according as the Abbot in
his discretion should think fit.

Another is, that they having represented to him how great a disturbance it was
to their devotion, to have causes frequently referred to them by the Sea
Apostolical, he grants them this Indulgence, that they should not be bound,
against their wills, to take Cognizance of any cause committed to them, by the
same See for the future: unless in the Letters of Reference, express mention
were made of this Indulgence.

There is a Statute made by this Abbot, but I do not find in what year, with
the consent of the Chapter, that on the Feast of the Dedication of their
Church, (as upon the principal Feasts of St. Peter and St. Paul) seven Candles
should burn before the Altar, super baccas, and four upon the Altar, a
principio Matutinorum, usque ad finem totius servitii: and that the Arm of St.
Oswald, as I noted before, should be carried in procession on this festival,
unless it had been carried on his own day.

Out of a Meadow in Peykirk, which he bought of Roger Son of Paganus de
Helpstona, he gave forty Shillings, to the celebration of his own Anniversary,
viz. twenty Shillings for the recreation of the Brethren, and the other for the
refection of the Poor, upon the day of his death. This Meadow William his
Successor, made over to the Convent entirely, and warrants it to them; that he
and his Successors might be freed from the payment of that forty Shillings.

At the last time of his crossing the Seas, he gave several precious things,
feretris trium Virginum (viz. Kiniburge, Kiniswith, and Tibbe) and a great
number of Vessels and Jewels, when he dyed; which were all brought into the
Chapterhouse, and there disposed according to the pleasure of the Convent. He
was not well before he went; and the infirmity of his body was increased by his
journey: so that he dyed not long after his return, An. 1245. For whom Swapham
makes this prayer; The Lord grant he may enjoy eternal life and joy in the Land
of the living; by the merits of the Mother of God, and of St. Peter, and St.
Benedict, and all the Saints.

He was pious and merciful to all; did nothing without the advice of his
Brethen of the better sort; exacted nothing unduly of his Tenants, whether rich
or poor: But if any poor Man or Woman made their necessities known to him, he
would burst out into tears and take compassion upon them.

In some things he acted tepide, which he bewailed all his days: but he left
the Abbey abounding in all good things; stored with Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and
all Cattle in great multitudes, and Corn in some places for three years. But
after his decease, Magister R. de Gosebek, to whom the King committed the
custody of the Abbey, wasted, and sold, and, in a manner, carried all away.

There were found in his Chamber when he dyed, a great many Cupps of Gold and
Silver; whose weight and worth are set down in Swapham, with six silver Plates,
twenty nine Spoons, thirty gold Rings; and a great deal of Riches besides.
Which is the more wonderful since he was so very charitable, and frequently
gave Presents, and Jewels of Gold and Silver, to King Henry, and Eleanor his
Queen, and Prince Edward their Son, and to the Nobles and great Men of England
(besides what Mr. G. mentions) and all for the peace and tranquillity, and
defense of the Liberties of the Church.

He dyed in the latter end of the year, as the MS. Chron. of Johan. Abbatis P.
690. N. 30.
says. Matthew. Paris says, 1245. 29 Hen. 3. obiit Walterus Abbas de Burgo 2.
Kaland. Januarii. Which does not perfectly agree with the Calendar of the
Church, where is placed on the 26. December. Depositio Domini Walteri Abbatis.
Here Swapham's History ends.

WILLIAM de HOTOT.
The controversy that had been between this Church and Croyland in the time of
Akarius, was now revived between this Abbot, and Richard Bardenay Abbot of
Croyland: contrary to the agreements, made before, between their Predecessors,
as the words are in the Continuator of the History of Croyland Lately Printed
at Oxon. p. 478.
. Who lays the blame upon this Abbot; because he hindered the Abbot of Croyland
in their Fair time, from taking Toll, or making Attachments upon Crowland
Bridge, etc. This he says was in the year 1240. Which cannot be, for then
Walter was Abbot: it should be therefore 1246. in the very beginning of
William's time. Who the next year made a composition about this matter 1247. as
I find in our Records, at the end of Swapham Fol. CLXX.
where there is an agreement between Richard Abbot of Croyland, and Robert
Abbot of Burgh about the Fen between Singleshould and Croyland, and this
agreement, made in the Kings Court at Northampton, before the King Justices
between these two Abbots Richard and William, de villa de Croyland and ponte
tempore Nundinarum: which is too long to be inserted. It is called finalis
concordia, but the quarrel was renewed in the time of William of Ramsey.

In the same year 1247. Robert de Taterhille Physician made his last Will and
Testament, and thereby gave to the Church of St. Peter his Body, with his
Palfrey; to the Fabric of St. John's Church V. Shillings, and to the Church of
St. Mary de Oxney two Shilling, etc. and four Acre of Arable Land apud Rumpele
to find two Wax-Candles before the Altar of the blessed Virgin, in Ecclesia
majori de Burgo, as long as the said Robert lived. And if his Wife Ailice
outlived him, she was to enojoy that Land, and the house he also gave, etc.
for her life, if she remained a Widow, and to find four Wax-Candles: After both
their deaths, all to go to the Custos luminaris beatae Virginis, to find so
many lights before her Altar as that Land, House and Meadow would furnish.

In the same year likewise (An. 2. Will. 2di. Abbatis, as the words of the
Record are) there was a Subsidy given to Pope Innocent, according to an
Estimation that had been made of the Estate of the Abbey in the time of Stephen
Nuncio to Pope Gregory: of which subsidy the Obedientiaries (as several
officers in the Church were called) paid the fourth part; being taxed seven
Pence for every pound of yearly Rent; as follows, Estimatio Cellerariae 121
l. Contributio 70 s. 7 d. Estimatio utriusque Sacristiae 106 l. 10 s.
Contributio 72 s. Estimatio Eleemosynariae 63 l. 6 s. Contributio 36 s. 2 d.
Estimatio Pitanciariae 115 s. Contributio 40 d. Estimatio Infirmariae 7 l.
Contributio 3 s. 10 d. Estimatio Precentoriae 36 s. Contributio 12 d. Estimatio
Refectoriae 20 s. Contributio 7 d. Estimatio Camerae praeter portionem Abbatis
4 l. Contributio 28 d. Estimatio auxilii de Pylesgate 100 sol. Contributio 35 d.

Notandum quod Dominus Willielmus Abbas solus fecit hanc taxationem One half of
which was paid at the Feast of St. Martins, the other half at the Purification.

Here a fit occasion offers it self to mention the several donations bestowed
upon the forenamed Offices of the Monastery (which they called Obedientias) and
the Names of their benefactors, which were very many, especially to the
Sacristy; and to the Altars, Sanctae Mariae, and Sanctae Crucis, in particular:
but it would prolong this work too much, and swell it beyond the designed
proportion.

Fol. CVII.
This William in the year 1248. obliged himself and Successors, to several
things very profitable for the Convent. For instance, that no composition
should be made for the future about their possessions and liberties, no Wards
granted, no Woods sold, without the consent of the Convent: no nor any thing of
weight attempted, without their advice. And moreover that one or two Monks,
should without intermission, be Custodes of the Manors of the Abbot; and two
receivers of all the profits of them (one of them a Monk residing in the house,
and one of the Chaplains of the Abbot. And lest in process of time, the
condition of the Convent should be worsted, he granted and promised, that
neither he nor his Successors, would diminish their allowances, nor procure
them to be diminished. And that the Parents, and acquaintance of the Monks
should be competently and sufficiently provided, with better bread and beer
than ordinary, out of the Celerary of the Abbot, etc. To which he set his Seal,
and the Chapter theirs.

In the same year he granted out of his mere liberality to the Celerary of the
Church, his Manor of Gosdkirk, with all the appurtenances; and all the
Tenement called Belasise, with the appurtenances, for the eight pound Sterling,
in which he and his Predecessors stood bound at the four quarters of the year,
for the celebration of the principal Feasts: and for the forty Shillings which
Walter his Predecessor gave, for celebrating the Feast of the Dedication of the
Church. Yet so that he and his Successors, should pay the increment of Wheat
and Malt for the augmentation of the VIII. Monks, throughout the whole year
without substraction, every week, out of their own Granary.

Then follows the assignation of the Capital Message in Northbruch, for the
increase of the Chamber.

In this year, as the Chron. of John Abbot tells us, the King demanded a
Subsidy of all the Prelates, and this William gave him an hundred Pound of
Silver: presently after which he resigned his place; but he does not tell us
any reason, why he left it. His words are ad An. MCCXLVIII. Henricus Rex petiit
subsidium a Prelatis. Willielmus Abbas Burgi dedit ei C. marcas argenti. Cui
cedenti successit Johannes de Kaleto. The cause which Matthew. Paris (who places
this the year after 1249) assigns of his receding is something strange; he
having been so compliant, as I have related, with his Convent, and so studious
of their good. And the damage they complained of was not so great, but he had
an honorable commemoration in the Church after his death, which was on the
sixth of January. Which was Depositio Willielmi de Hotot Abbatis, and
Anniversarium Richardi de Watervill, and Johan. filii ejus. And such was the
regard that his Successor John de Kaleto had to him, that he ordained there
should be a distribution to the Poor sine impedimento, after Mass was said for
them, on this day: and the like on all Anniversaries.

There was a family of his name, Hotoft or Hotot, which held half a fee at
Flintham in Nottinghamshire (as Dr. Thoroton in his History of that County
tells us) from which its likely this Abbot came.

JOHANNES de Caleto.
He is as often called Joh. de Calceto, as de Caleto: and it appears by a Charter
of his concerning his Anniversary wherein he relates what good deeds he had
done for this Church) that the Abbey was kept vacant for some time, before he
was promoted. It begins thus, Omnibus Christi fidelibus praesens scriptum
visuris vel audituris, Johannes de Kaleto Divina permissione, etc. And the
sense of it follows thus in English. Be it known to all, that we, though
unworthy, being entrusted by the providence of the Divine goodness, with the
Government of the said Church, found it in Debt: the moveable Goods of it, in
the hands of the Kings Bailiffs, who had the custody of it, in the time of the
vacancy, being in danger to be confiscated: In so much that it lay upon us
entirely to provide both for our selves, and for our Brethren, and for the
Servants, and for all Strangers, all things necessary from the Feast of the
Purification of the blessed Virgin, till the time of the next Harvest. For
which reason, and because we endeavored with all our might to preserve the
liberties of the Church (for the renewing and acquiring of which liberties
contained in a Charter of King Henry, Son of King John, we paid to the King and
his Courtiers five hundred and seventy Marks, besides Jewels given, by the by,
to the Kings Ministers) and because we discharged the Church of a Debt of 520
Mark, wherein the Bishop of Hereford engaged our Church to the Court of Rome;
and in a manner freed the Church from all Debts whatsoever, as much as was
possible in such a time; Therefore our beloved Children the Prior and the
Convent of the said Church devoutly and humbly desiring to give some reward,
according to their ability to our labor and diligence; and not willing that
these nor other our benefits, though small, should be hereafter forgotten, but
be called to mind perpetually by our Successors, serving God in the same
Church, have unanimously granted that the day of our Deposition, shall be made
an Anniversary; and be kept curialiter out of the goods of the Church. We
therefore have given and assigned to the Celerarius of the Convent for ever,
that Land which de Biffleto near Castre Wood, we have caused to be turned into
Pasture and Ploughed: that he who is in that office for the time being, may, as
far as that Revenue will extend, feed and refresh the Poor, who come hither on
that day; giving every one of them Bread and Beer: and provide three good
dishes of Meat, more large than ordinary, for the Convent, that they may do
their devotion more cheerfully, and assist more vigorously in divine Service.
The Pitanciarius also shall find Wine, as on other principal Feasts, for the
Convent that day, out of those five Hogsheads of Wine, which we have given to
the use of the President in the Refectory, and of the Priest that attends
Weekly, etc.

In what year this Charter was made it does not appear, but it was after the
year 1256. when, on Palmsunday, he made that Grant of the five Hogsheads of
Wine: as I find in a particular Charter, confirmed in Chapter, which he made,
he says, out of his Pastoral care of the Poor and Strangers, and for the
honor of St. Peter and of the Saints whose Relics lay in this Church, etc.
Wherein he provides that the President of the Refectory, whosoever he was,
should have of his gift one galon and a half of Wine every day in the year, to
be distributed among the Brethren and Guests, who eat there that day: and this
both when the Abbot was absent, and when he was present: And in like manner the
Priest who said high Mass should have one galon of the same Wine. Which that it
might be abundantly provided, he gives the ten Pound out of the Manor
mentioned by Mr. G. which was purchased in his time. Which Land he therefore
requires should be kept in the hand of the Abbot, that without any delay or
difficulty the money might be paid on the Octaves of St. John Baptist to the
Procurator, who should be especially deputed by the Prior of the Convent: So
that out of the aforesaid ten Pound he should buy five Hogsheads of Wine; to
make the aforesaid pittance in the Refectory and no where else. And he adds
that out of this Wine provision should be made for the whole Congregation, and
for all Religious Strangers, according to the custom, on his Anniversary as on
the Anniversary of Benedict it was to be more plentifully. Unto which Deed his
Seal, and that of the Chapters was set. How the Church of Polebroke out of
which that ten Pound was paid, came to be his shall be shown in its due place.

I have mentioned this about his Anniversary in the first place, because it
recites many of his benefactions, from the beginning of his Abbotship: which I
do not know how to place in the particular years wherein they were done.

There is a Charter of his in the year 1251. in this Style, Joh. de Calceto Dei
gratia Abbas de Burgo Sancti Petri, etc. which I do not meet with before, for
they are wont to say divina permissione. But afterward I find some other Abbots
imitated him. He grants therein the annual Rent of sixteen Shillings a year,
out of his houses in the Suburbs of London, in Parochia Sancti Sepulchri. Eight
Shillings of which were for the Refectory; the other half for the Hospitalary.
Other houses this Church then had in London; for William de Colonia granted him
and the Convent (I find not in what year) all his Land in London, in the Parish
of St. Gregory, over against the houses of the Dean of St. Paul; they paying
yearly five Florins to that Church, etc.

There is a bond of Peter de Howm to him, for the payment of five Shillings
Rent yearly unto Burgh, for a house in Lincoln, in the Parish of St. Peter, in
the Skin-market: lying between his own house on the North, and the house
sometime belonging to Leo Judaeus, on the South part, etc.

In the year 1253 Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury granted an Indulgence to
this Church, relaxing to those who out of devotion to St. Oswald came to offer
in this Church, and were truly penitent and confessed, forty days of Penance
that had been enjoined them. And he also confirmed such Indulgences as had been
granted by any of his Suffragans. It bears date from Croyland the Thursday
before the Feast of St. Michael.

There had been the like Indulgence granted a little before by Hugo Balsom
Biship of Ely, to those who out of devotion went piously to visit the Arm of
St. Oswald and other Relics in this Church, etc. To whom he grants 30. days
relaxation of Penance. Dated 11. Kalend. Sept. 1253. Another there is of Will.
Bishop of Ossory granting ten days Indulgence, as I noted before to those that
visited this Church on the Feast of the Dedication before mentioned. All which
show the true nature of Indulgences, which were only relaxations of Penance:
and that other Bishops granted them as well as the Bishop of Rome: as they also
sometimes canonized a person for a Saint. I have transcribed them all, and set
them down in the Appendix together with an Indulgence of Oliver Sutton some
years after, wherein he grants a merciful relaxation to all those that on
certain times, should devoutly come to the Altar of the blessed Virgin, in her
Chapel in the Monastery of Burgh, which he had newly consecrated.

The same Boniface on the same day and year directed his Letters to the Bishop
of Lincoln, mentioning a Constitution of the Council held at Oxford, which
Excommunicated all those, who either violated or disturbed the Ecclesiastical
rights and liberties: which he being desirous to maintain, by these presents,
commands that all the disturbers or violaters of the rights and liberties of
the Church of St. Peter de Burgo (which had been granted by the Kings of
England, or any other persons) should publicly and solemnly, in general and by
name be Excommunicated; when it appeared they were guilty of such disturbance
or violence.

About this time I suppose, it was that Polebroke before mentioned (out of
which the ten pound for finding the five Hogsheads of Wine was paid) was
purchased by this Abbot. The whole History of which is related in the
Monasticon, out of a Register of this Church in Sir Joh. Cotton's Library.
Which says that Eustachius Vicecomes, Founder of the Church of St. Mary de
Huntingdon, held two Fees de Honor Burgi, in Clopton, Polebroke, Catworth,
etc. Which Estate came afterward to one Will. de Lovetot; and then to his Son
Richard, who held these two Fees in King Richard the first's time: as appears
by his Charter in the first year of his Reign, which confirms to the Abbot of
Burgh, among other Lands, duo feoda in Clopton and pertinentiis, which were
held by Richard de Lovetot. Who had two Sons William and Nigell; and three
Daughters, Amicitia, Rosia and Margeria. William dying without Issue, the
Estate came to Nigel; who being a Beneficed Clergyman, it came upon his death
to the three Sisters. The two Eldest of which, though married, had no share in
these Fees; but they fell to the youngest, who was married to Richard Patrick:
and by him had a Son and a Daughter; William, and Margery. She married to Will.
de Vernon; and her Brother William gave all his share in the Estate (which was
in the hand of Hugo Fleming and Tho. Smert and their Heirs who did homage to
Will. Patrick for it) to his Sister Margery. Who after his death, in her free
Widowhood gave and granted all the Homages and Services of the aforesaid
Fleming and Smert and their Heirs to John de Caleto Abbot of Burgh, by her
Deed. And afterward Rob. Fleming feofavit praedictum Johannem Abbatem, de
omnibus terris and Tenementis quae habuit in Polebroke per Chartam.

Which Charter I find in our Records here remaining; wherein Rob. de Flemenk
gives to John de Caleto his Tenement in Polebroke, and the Advouson of the
Church.

In this year King Henry granted the very same Charter to this Church, which
Richard the first had done; confirming all their Lands in the several Counties
of the Realm by name. It bears date at Windsor 12 Junii, Anno Regni sui 37.

The like for their Liberties (in which is the Fair for eight days and the
eight Hundreds, etc.) and for their Woods.

In the next year 1254. three neighboring Abbots dyed as I find in the Chron.
of John Abbot, viz. Thomas de Wells Abbot of Croyland, David Abbot of Thorney;
and William Abbot of Ramsey. Pope Innocent the IV. dyed also. And in this year
there was an aid granted to the King ad primogenit. fill. suum Militem faciend.
for the making Prince Edward a Knight An. Regis Hen. 38. sc. de quolibet scuto
de Honor Burgi XL. Sol. every Knights Fee of the Honor of Burgh paying forty
Shillings: which was received by one of the Friars Rich. de London. So the
Title of this account runs in our Book. fol. CCCLXXI. Recept. fratris R. de
Land. de denariis Auxilii Domini Regis H. etc. And then follow the names of all
the Knights and their payments: the first being Galfridus de Sancto Medardo who
paid twelve Pound, and therefore had six Knights Fees: the second Radulph. de
Kameys, who paid as much, etc. I have not room for the rest; who are two and
fifty in all: some of which had but half Fees, and others less.

In this year it was also, that the King sent his Justices into many places in
England, to do right to every man, and to free the Country from Thieves and
Highwaymen, Quorum unus fuit Abbas de Burgo, says Matthew Paris, one of which
Justices was the Abbot of Burgh; as Mr. G. has observed.

In the year 1257. there was a power granted to this Abbot, to distrain both of
his Knights and of all other Freeholders, who owed him service, but had not
done it; that he might be able to perform the service wherein he stood bound to
the King; for his assistance in his War then in Wales* For the Abbot stood
bound to the King; for Sixty Knights Fees, which he had not performed: and
therefore a distress was granted against him, upon all the Land he held of the
King in that service, without any prejudice to what the Church held in
perpetuam eleemosynam.

In the next year I find a final agreement made between him and Ralph
Crumbwell, Son of Rob. Crumbwell; about sixty Acres of Meadow in Collingham: A
confederation also between him and the Prior of Worcester, whereby they engaged
their Churches in such a mutual society and Friendship, as I mentioned before
between Alexander and the Abbot of St. Edmunds: and several other things which
I cannot find in what year they were done. Particularly a Charter made by
Steven de Horbiling, wherein he gives to him and the Convent a Capital Message
in Burgh, in the Street called Tugate: and another hard by it, and three Acres
of Arable Land, etc.

Mr. G. says p. 34. that he found no mention of the Rule of St. Benedict in
this Monastery, till this Abbots time. Which is something strange, when in the
life of Martin de Ramsey P. 30. he takes notice of the Grand Privilege granted
by Gregory the IXth to this Church. For in that Bull there is an express
command for the observation of it for ever: Nay, it is the very first thing in
it after the Preface. Imprimis siquidem statuentes, ut Ordo Monasticus qui
secundum Deum, and beati Benedicti regulam in eodem Monasterio esse dignoscitur
institutus, perpetuis ibidem temporibus inviolabiliter observetur. Where he
speaks of it as a Rule already instituted in this Monastery, before that time;
which was in the year 1228.

And the only thing I have yet met withal, to make one think this Rule was here
introduced sooner than I have before said (viz. in King Edgar's time) is the
mention of it in the Charter of Ethelbaldus (which I have since taken notice
of) Founder of the Church of Croyland An. 716. Where he calling it the
Monastery of Black Monks serving God sub norma Sancti Benedicti Ingulphus p. 3.
Edit. Oxon.
: it may thence be probably conjectured, that this Neighboring Monastery,
(then called Medeshamstede) was under the same Rule at that time: which was
when Egbaldus was Abbot here; who is one of those that signs that Charter of
Croyland.

There is no account given in the MS. Chron. Johannis Abbatis Burgi, of the
time of this Abbot's death, nor when Rob. de Sutton was chosen: though the
memorable things are set down, which happened in the following years: which makes
me think John de Kaleto was the Author of that Chronicon. But W. of Wittlesea
has informed us, when he dyed, which Mr. G. has noted. And the Calendar, I
have often mentioned, tells us he departed this Life on the first of March:
which was Depositio Joh. de Calceto Abbatis and Anniversarium Ivonis
superioris. On which day they were to pray for the Souls of the Father and
Mother of this John Abbot.

There are two memorable Statutes of this Abbots which ought not to be omitted,
because they explain the customs of this Church.

One is that when a Monk had been four years complete in the Monastery (which
in their Language is quatuor annos conversionis suae impleverit) he should from
that time receive out of the Chamber, coopertorium and tunicam; and similiter
caputium and stragulam: which it seems he provided before at his own charges.

The other is, that every Monk should have coradium suum plenarie for a whole
year after his decease; as if he had been alive, except only the pitanciae.
Insuper Pelliciam, Soculares, Caligas and Pedules, together with his Pilch (or
Shirt) his Boots, Breeches, Socks (or Stockings) which the Prior, Camerarius
and Eleemosynarius, were to see done, and faithfully distributed to the Poor.
Both these were enacted in Chapter, with the full consent of the Convent.

ROBERTUS de Sutton.
The year before he dyed he made a Deed like that of John de Caleto's,
beginning after the same manner; wherein he grants to the Convent one Mark a
year, out of certain Lands of John de Sermoney, and forty Shillings of annual
Rent, for the making the day of his death an Anniversary: But he does not
express how he would have it kept. He set only his own seal to it, datum apud
Burgum An. 1273, upon the Monday before the Feast of the Chair of St. Peter the
Apostle.

In which year, on the 11. of the Kal. of March I find an agreement made
between the Abbot of Burgh and the Abbot of Sawtry, concerning Secta Curiae de
Castre, which the Abbot of Burgh challenged from him of Sawtry, from three
Weeks to three Weeks, for certain Tenements which he held in Fee of the Abbot
of Burgh in Catteworth and Wynewick. Which the Abbot of Sawtrey acknowledged to
be due from him and his Convent, to the Abbot and Convent of Burgh: who
remitted the same suit for the future, upon payment of five Shillings Rent
yearly, to the Abbot of Burgh, etc. which if it was not paid he had power to
distrain upon the Tenements by his Bailiffs, etc.

Alicia de Scotere Widow gave a great deal of Land to the Church in his time,
which she had in Burgh, Dodestorp, Paston, etc. Nicolaus de Cutyller renounced
all his right and claim in a Message of twelve acres of Land, etc. And a great
many more Grants I find, made to the same Rob. Sutton; but it is not said in
what year: nor have I place for them in this Supplement.

The Chron. of John Abbot, as its title bears, being carried on by some other
hands: and having related how a Council was held at Lions by Gregory X. in the
year 1274; wherein was determined what Order of Mendicants should continue, and
what should cease; adds: obierunt ibi multi Praelati in redeundo de Concilio.
Obiit Dominus Robertus Abbas de Burgo, cui successit Dominus Richardus de
London. The Calendar says that on the 22. of March. was, Depositio Roberti de
Sutton Abbatis, and Anniversarium Henrici Aurifabri, and Johannis de Trikingham
Prioris. Which last I conceive may be the same man, whom Mr. G's. Authors call
Elias Trickingham.

RICHARDVS de London.
There were two Agreements, I find, made by this Abbot at his very entrance:
one between him and the Abbot of Thornholm; another with the Abbot of
Swinshened (neither of which are named) dated at Burg 1275. on the Feast of the
Purification.

After which follows in our Records, Fol. CLXV.
a Deed of Galfridus de Suthorp Knight, which he made Richardo de London Abbati
de Burg Sancti Petri, etc. Of which Galfridus he bought the Manor of Gunthorp,
and settled it upon the Eleemosynary, an. 1277.

In the same Year, upon the Feast of All Saints, died Rob. de Wremerest:
whereupon Will. de Wodeford, then Sacrist of Burg. St. Reter, came and claimed
his Body to be buried in the Church of Burgh. But the Friends of the deceased
being very instant with him, that with his leave it might be buried in the
Church of Vengirst; and the forenamed Sacrist considering, the inundation of
Waters which then was, and many other dangers in the ways, and moved by their
Prayers, buried the Corpse himself in the aforesaid Church, de gratia sua
speciali of his special grace and favor; as the words are in the Memorandum
left of it in our Book Fol. CLXI.
.

Nor far from which I find another Memorandum, of a thing of like nature, which
happened two year before. When there was a controversy arose between the Abbot
and Convent of Burgh on the one part, and Rober a'e Nevile of Scottun on the
other part: about the burial of the Body of Philip de Nevil, Father to the said
Rob. and the Mortuary which the Monastery challenged, as due to the Church from
one of their Knights. Which was thus at last composed, viz. the aforesaid Rob.
humbly petitioned the Abbot and Convent that they would permit the burial of
his Father, which had been already made at Scottun, hac vice, for this time:
and that in like manner they would be pleased hac vice to remit the Mortuary
due to them. And accordingly the Abbot and Convent, with respect to the love
which the aforesaid Robert bare to them, did for that time allow the Burial and
release the Mortuary, de gratia and liberalitate sua. Dat. apud Burgh in
Crastino Sancti Barthol. An. Dom. MCCLXX. Quinto.

In the Year MCCLXX Octavo there was the like case with the first, only with
this difference, that Emma the Wife of Galfridus de Sancto Medardo died about
Michaelmas at the Manor of Osgoteby, and the same W. de Wodeford Sacrist of
Burg, presented himself: being ready to defend the right of the Church to have
the Body of the said Woman, to be buried at Burgh; according to an agreement
made long before between the Monks and the Knights of the said Church, before
the Bishop of Lincoln: but she having desired to be buried at Stanford, at
their devout request, the forenamed Sacrist out of special grace and favor
condescended for that time (saving the rights of Burgh) to let her desire be
fulfilled.

This Abbot recovered many Rents belonging to the Church; and many grants were
made to it in his time; but I do not find in what years, nor have I room to
mention them particularly. But one must not be forgotten, which was the Gift of
a whole Street in Burgh, by Will. de Wauton or Walton, Son of William, Son of
John de Wauton: who says, dedi and concessi, and hac presenti carta mea
confirmavi, Dominis meis Richardo Abhati de Burgo Sancti Petri, and ejusdem
loci convent. totam illam plateam, cum domibus super aedificatis in villa Burgi
sitam in Market stead, etc.

There is a grant which John Gowke of Stowe also made of a Meadow to him, which
runs in this Style, Dedi, concessi, and hac presenti Charta mea confirmavi
Domino Ricard. Dei gratia Abbati de Burg. Sancti Petri, and ejusdem loci
conventui totum pratum meum, etc. But Richard himself I find writes himself
Abbot only, permissione Divina.

There was an agreement made between him and Oliver Bishop of Lincoln about
some things in difference; but they are not mentioned in the MS. Chron. Johan.
Abbatis ad an. 1282. where there are these words, Dominus Rex Edwardus Walliam
adiit, and David novum principem cepit. Facta est etiam concordia inter Dominum
Oliverum Episcopum Lincoln. and Ricardum Abbatem Burgi. But four years after
they were at difference again, perhaps about the same thing, for in the
fourteenth of Edward the First Dr. Thoreton's Hist. of Nottingham, p. 190.
, the Bishop of Lincoln complained of the Abbot of Peterburgh for setting up a
Gallows at his Manor of Collingham, and there hanging a Thief, to the
derogation of the liberty of the Wapentack of Newark, which the Bishop held of
the grant of the Kings predecessors. To which the Abbot answered, That the
Kings Father in the 37th year of his Reign granted him and his successors,
Infangthef and Vtfangthef in all his Hundreds and Demeasnes, and so he avowed
his Gallows: and complained against the Bishop for taking two Horses and six
Cows at Newark, and driving them to his Parc or Pound, and there detaining
them. To which the Bishop replied, That he held his Wapentak of the gift of the
King, within which were the two Towns of Collingham, which the said Abbot held,
and for which he ought to make suit at the said Wapentac, by three Men of each
Town: which he not doing, therefore he took the Horses and Kine. The Cause went
against the Abbot: and he was constrained to submit, and pull down his Gallows.

It was this Abbot, I suppose, who bound himself and whole Convent, and all
their Goods to certain Merchants for a sum of Money for the Kings use: who made
over to them his Manor de Graham and all the Appurtenances, until the Debt was
satisfied, with all damages and expenses. For I find Letters Patents of this
King Edward the First, unto the Abbot and Convent of Burgh making mention of
this, and of the Writings on each part under their Hands and Seals: and how the
Debt being paid, the Abbot and Convent had restored to the King his part with
his Seal; but he could not find their Counter-part. Which therefore he declared
by these Letters to be cassa and vacua and penitus nullius valoris in
perpetuum, and should be restored to the Abbot when it could be found.

There is a Petition also to this King from the Abbot that they might enjoy the
right they had, per cartas omnium Regum Angliae a tempore Williemi Bastardi
usque ad nunc, to the Tithe of all the Venison (decimam totius venationis)
taken in the County of Northampton, by whomsoever taken: in possession of which
they had always peaceably remained. Which the King confirmed by two Charters:
and the Queen also sent her Letters about it.

In this Year (14 of Edw. 1.) William Paris died, who built, as Mr. G.
observes, the Chapel of the Blessed Virgin, adjoining to the Church on the
North-side of the Quire. So the MS. Chron. ascribed to John Abbot. MCCLXXXVI.
obiit Dominus Willielmus Paris Prior Burgi. Successit Dominus Ricardus de
Bernewell.

This Chapel was finished six year before, being consecrated, as I observed
before, by Oliver Sutton in the year 1290. There was a Chapel of the blessed
Virgin belonging to this Church before, called Capella beatae Virginis de
Parco, as I noted in the life of Akarius: because it stood I suppose in the
Park, belonging to this Monastery. But I find no other memory of it.

The same Chronicon of John Abbot notes ad An. MCCXCV. obiit Dominus Ricardus
Abbas Burgi. Cui successit Willielmus de Wodeford. He departed this Life on the
first of August, after he had been Abbot one and twenty year. For on that day
the Calendar says was Depositio Ricardi de London Abbatis.

WILLIHELMVS de Wodeford.
He was born I suppose at Wodeford in this County, where this Church had a
great deal of Land, as appears from many Records: but more particularly from a
Transcript of all the Manors and Tenements of the Abbey of Burgh in the several
Counties of the Realm, as they are contained en le domes dai in Tesauraria
Domini Regis apud Westemon. tempore Regis Edwardi primi: which was made about
this time, and remains in our Book Fol. CCXCII. etc.

The most memorable thing that I can find done in his time, was the Taxation of
all the Manors of the Abbey, for their Goods Temporal and Spiritual, by
Apostolical (i. e. the Papal) authority: which was done I find by 24 Jurates.
12 Clergymen and 12 Laymen in the first year of this Abbot 1296. It remains
still at the end of the Book called Swapham, Fol. CCCXLV. bearing this Title.

Plena Taxatio Maneriorum Abbatis and Conventus de bonis eorum temporalibus and
spiritualibus, facta per venerabiles Patres Wynton' and Lincoln' Episcopos,
Autoritate sedis Apostolicae, per XXIV. Juratos. Quorum XII Clerici and XII
laici Anno Domini M. CC. Nonagesimo sexto.

Then follows the value of the several Manors, and the Tenths to be paid out
of them, after this manner.

Manerium de Burbury taxatur ad 20 l. 5 d. Reditus villae Burgi taxatur ad 22
l. 6 s. 8 d. Gunthorp taxatur ad 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. Eye taxatur ad 9 l. 6 s. 5 d.
ob. Baelasis cum Appendiciis taxat. ad 4 l. and 6 d. Manerium de Sutton taxatur
ad 6 l. 2 s. Cujus Decima est 40 s. ob. Decimae 44 s. Decima 8 s. 4 d. Decima
18 s. 7 d. ob. q. Decima Decima

And so it proceeds with the rest; several of which, as Botolbrigg, Fletton,
Alwalton, etc. have no Tenths rated.

There had been one before this in the 53. of Henry 3. which is styled Taxatio
Magistri Constantini and Domini Gydonis de Maneriis Burgi facta, etc. In which
Burghberry, the Town of Burgh, the Market and Fair is taxed at one hundred and
eight Pound, eight Shillings; cujus Decima est 10 l. 16 s. 9 d. ob. And so the
rest are higher rated than in the foregoing, and the Tenths both of Fletton and
Alwalton are put in. Then was granted, as I find in another place Fol. CCCLXIX.
, a tenth of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, Rents and Profits, by the whole
Clergy for two years, by the license of the Pope, and the consent of the
Archbishops to the use of Prince Edward, for his expenses apud Acon or
Ptolomais, which he went to relieve. There was another four years after in the
year 1273. When by the command of the Pope the Churches of England were taxed
according to an equal value by the Bishop of Norwich. Here particularly is an
account of what he did in Nasso-Burgh, under this title. Estimationes
Ecclesiarum and Vicariarum in Nasso-Burgi facta per Domin. Norwicens. Episcopum
An. M CC. LXXIII. This is quoted out of the Chronica Domini Will. Paris Prioris
An. D. 1273 and from thence we may gather that he who built the Chapel before
named, was a writer also; and composed the Annals of this Church; if not of
England and perhaps other Countries, as Abbot John did.

I can find little more of William de Wodeford, besides that which. Mr. G. has
collected: only it is said in an old Record that An. 27. Edw. 1. and An. quarto
Domini Will. de Wodeford, Robert de Watervil, and John Spournel, did homage and
fealty to him on the Feast of St. Stephen; for Land held by them in Overton,
Wodeford and Kynesthorp.

Nor do I meet with more than the mention of the Hospital of St. Leonard's:
which it appears had Friars and Lands belonging to it, by a Deed of Agnes
Pudding Fol. CCXLI.
, who for the health of her Soul, gave to God and St. Peter, together with her
body, eight acres of arable Land; two of which she held de fratribus Hospital.
Sancti Leonardi de Burgo: to whom she reserved one penny to be paid out of that
Land in die Apostolorum Petri and Pauli annuatim, pro omni servitio. Which
whether it was different or no from the Hospituarium Burgi, which had the
Chapel of All Saints belonging to it, I do not know. But I find that Will. de
Saresbury Son of Simon de Saresbury (or Salesbury) granted and confirmed
sixpence. per an. which his Father had given to that Hospital, to maintain a
Lamp in that Fol. 287.
Chapel, ad sustinendam ibi Lampadem in Capella omnium Sanctorum ad honorem Dei
perpetuo duraturam. I take this to be the same with Hospital. Leprosorum extra
Burgum; mentioned in the foregoing Taxation: which was taxed at six pound, and
paid no Tenths. There is still a Well near the Spittle, which is called St.
Leonara's Well, whose water has been thought Medicinal.

He dyed this year, as the MS. Chron. Joh. Abbatis tells us, in which there is
a magnificent Character given of his Successor Godfrey of Crowland. An.
MCCXCIX. obiit Dominus Willielmus Abbas Burgi, Cui successit Dominus Godfridus,
vir magnificus, and ingentis industriae in temporalibus tractandis.

His memory was celebrated on the second of September; which is noted in the
Calendar to be the day of his death, and the Anniversary of John of Gresham.

GODEFRIDVS de Croyland.
The most memorable thing that I meet with in the beginning of this Abbots
Government; is a Grant made by the Abbot and Convent of Burgh to the Abbot and
Convent of Sulebi; that the said Abbot and Convent of Sulebi, might without any
impediment enter into the Manor of Adington parva and its appurtenances; to
have and to hold the said Manor to themselves and Successors for ever. Which
Manor Richard Son of Gervase de Bernack sometimes held of Humfrey de
Bassingburn, who held it of the Abbot of Burgh per servitium feodi unius
militis. For which Grant, the Abbot and Convent of Sulebi, granted on their
part, that they would pay to the Abbot and Convent of Burgh the yearly Rent of
six Shillings and eight Pence of Silver, at the Feast of Easter, in their
Manor of Castre: and that they would facere soctam ad curiam from three Weeks
to three Weeks at Castre, etc. They also granted that every Abbot of Sulebi
after this present, however he succeeded, should pay upon every vacancy to the
Church of Burgh ten Marks of Silver, in the name of a relief; within eight days
after he was made Abbot of Sulebi. The Abbot of Burgh also notwithstanding this
grant and agreement, was to receive homage, scutage, and all Royal services
from the aforesaid Tenement for ever, etc. Dat. apud Burg. S. Pet. die Sabbati
in vigilia Paschae An. Domini Millesimo Trecentesimo. Et anno Regni Regis
Edwardi filii Regis Henrici vicesimo Octavo.

I find also many homages done to him An. 28. Edwardi I. and An. ejus primo, on
the next Sunday after the Epiphany, for Lands held of him in several places.
And the like in the following years: one or two of which I think fit to set
down. On the Feast of Thomas the Martyr (as he is called) An. Edw. 33. Rob.
Domer did him homage for an Estate he held of him in Eston near Rockingham: and
the Acquietance the Abbot gave him is Recorded at large, in these terms. Pateat
per presents, quod nos Godfridus, Abbas de Burg Sancti Petri pardonavimus, ad
instantiam Johannis de Hotot, de gratia nostra speciali, Roberto fill. and her.
Domini Joh. Domer milit* quinquaginta solidos pro relevio suo de morte dicti
Domini Johannis Vxoris suae, pro dimid. feodi mil. quod idem Dominus Joh. de
nobis tenet in capite, in villa de Eston juxta Rockingam, and viginti sol.
nostro auxilio ad primogenitam fill. Domini R. maritandam, and 20. sol. de
scutagio nobis a Domino Rege concessa de an trigesimo primo. In cujus rei
testimonium has literas nostras eid. Rob. fieri fecimus Patentes. Dat. apud
Burg. S. Pet. die lunae in Septima Paschae, etc.

In the 4th year of Edw. II. which was the 12th of Godfrey, on the Sunday
before the Feast of the Ascension, Joh. fill. Domini Rogeri de Hegham, did
homage and Fealty to the said Abbot in his Hall at Burgh, for Land he held of
him in Helpston; in the presence of Robert de Thorp, then Steward of the
Liberties of Burgh. In which year (4. Edw. 2.) it was that of his own Charity,
he built the Bridge over the River Nen.

In the same Register I find this Record, that in the very first year of his
Abbotship he bound himself in the sum of five hundred Marks for the redemption
of John St. John taken Prisoner, and kept so by the King of France: Dominus
Johannes de Sancto Johanne Capitivus, in Carcere Philippi Regis* Franc.
remanens, Abbas de Burgo Sancti Petri obligatus pro 500 Marcis de redemptione
sua. An. 1299. Which agrees with what Tho. Walsingham says of this Gentleman,
whom he calls Johannes de Sancto Johanne de Baiona: who was taken Prisoner in
the year 1298, going to the relief of Bellagarda, together with the Earl of
Lincoln, who commanded one half of the Army, but would not fight. By which
means it came to pass, that this J. St. John, and Will. de Mortuomari and Will.
de Bermanglen and eight other Knights were made Prisoners; and carried to Paris
in Triumph.

How this Abbot came to be engaged for him, or what relation he had to him I do
not find; nor have I room for any further account of him: but only this. That
in his sixth year there happened a difference between him and the Abbot of
Thorney, about a certain Highway (de quodam chimino) from a place in the River
Neen called Herlotefforth; unto the Town of Eye. And at last this agreement was
made, at the instance of Walter Bishop of Coventry and Litchf. then Lord High
Treasurer, and other friends to them both, viz. that the aforesaid Abbot and
Convent of Burgh, of their own mere will, and special benevolence, for the
cherishing of mutual love and charity between them, granted for them and their
Successors, that the Abbot of Thorney and the Convent and their Servants,
Friends, or Strangers coming thither, might hereafter use that Highway, ad
latitudinem quindecim pedum, with their Carts, Wagons, Carriages, Horses,
drift of Cattle, to Fairs or Markets, without any disturbance, etc. Dat* apud
Stamfordiam die Martis proxima post festum Sanctorum Tiburtii and Valeriani.
Anno Reg. Edw. Tricesimo quarto. He dyed after he had been Abbot one and twenty
years. So MS. Chron. Johan. Abbatis ad An. MCCCXX. obiit Dominus Godefridus
Abbas Burgi; cui successit Adam de Botheby, etc. And the day was on the 9th of
August, as we learn from the Calendar; which tells us then was Depositio
Godfridi de Croyland Abbatis.

ADAM de Botheby.
The Character which the forenamed Chronicon gives of him is this, that he was
vir magnae innocentiae and simplicitatis, a man of great innocence and
simplicity. In whose time the Controversy between this Church and the Bishop
of Lincoln, in the 10th of Edw. the Third, was revived. When the Bishop
impleaded diverse men of North and South Collingham, for breaking his Pound, and
taking away some Cattle which his Bailiff had seized: being the Goods of
several condemned and Outlawed persons of the same Towns, some whereof were
hanged. Which he said belonged to him, in the right of his Wapentac of Newark:
but they said belonged to the Abbot of Peterburgh, as Lord of the Manor of
Collingham. But the judgment before mentioned in the 14 Edw. I. ended the
strife, and the Bishop prevailed.

In his first year An. 1321. there were seen in many places of England,
nocturnae acies armatae invicem militari more dimicantes in aere: and maxim
super Castellum Comitis Lancastriae, as the MS. Chron. of Joh. Abbatis writes.
Who makes no doubt they predicted what followed in this year: wherein he and
many other Barons were put to Death. Sanguinem illustris Comitis, ac aliorum
nobilium, qui postea nequiter effusus est, effundendum indubitanter
praemonstrantes.

The same Chron. ad an. 1338. says, Hoc anno 7. Kal. December. in festo Sanctae
Katherinae, obiit piae memoriae Dominus Adam de Botheby nuper Abbas de Burgo
Sancti Petri. Cui successit -- -- -- -- Here a line is scraped out; and this is
the last Abbot mentioned in that Chronicon, though it does not end till the
year 1368. Which shows it was carried on by some other hand that was not much
acquainted with this Church, or did not regard it. And it speaking here of Adam
de Botheby as lately dead, was the thing that deceived Pitseus: who (as Mr. G.
observes) took John Abbot to have lived now; because he found he that wrote
this latter part of the History (which bore the name of John in the Title) was
alive about the year 1340. who says the same year that Adam Abbot dyed, per
multa Angliae loca, salices Rosas germinaverunt.

The day of his death the Calendar also places upon the 23. of November: which
was Depositio Adae Abbatis de Botheby and Anniversarium Domini Joh. de Aysby,
etc.

HENRICUS de Morcot.
In this Abbots time, as I take it, Edward the Third granted his License for
the turning the Parochial Church of St. Peter de Irtlingburgh, into a Collegiat
Church of six Secular Canons (one of which to be the Dean) and of four
beneficed Clarks; to be nominated by the Abbot and Convent of Peterburgh: who,
and John Pyel had the Advowson of the Church, alternis vicibus. The said John
Pyel on his part engaging to assign such a portion of his own Estate, as might
be a sufficient maintenance for the said Dean, Canons and Clerks; together with
the other profits belonging to the said Church: and having obtained a Bull also
from Pope Gregory the XI. to the Bishop of Lincoln to permit this College to
be erected, if it were so endowed by John Pyel as to pay all Episcopal duties
and other burdens: And the said Abbot and Convent also having after sufficient
deliberation, consented to this unanimously; provided their right of presenting
alternately to those Canonries, or Prebends, and other benefices were
preserved; and the aforesaid Dean, Canons and Clerks said divine Service, in
that Church every day, for ever.

John Pyel indeed dyed before this could be effected: for the Bishop of Lincoln
had deferred to execute his intention. But his Wife Johanna, Executress of his
last Will and Testament, petitioning King Richard the II. that it might be
fulfilled, and representing how she had obtained a new Bull from Pope Urban
directed to the Archdeacon of London for that purpose; the King thereupon
granted his License, quod ipse Archidiaconus ad erectionem hujusmodi Collegii
faciendam procedere valeat, juxta vim, formam, and effectum dictarum literarum
Apostolicarum. For which license she gave the King 20 Marks, as is expressed in
the Letters Patents. V. Monast. Anglicanum, 3. Tom. De Ecclesiis Collegiatis p.
108.

There are some Acts of this Abbot mentioned in a MS. Register formerly
belonging to this Church, now in Sir John Cotton's Library, and others in our
Records at the end of Swapham in the 18, 19, and 21. of Edward III. to which I
cannot be allowed to give a place in this History, without wrong to the
Undertaker. I can find no memory of him in the Calendar of the Church (though
there is of his Successor) because, it is likely, he left nothing for the
celebrating of his Anniversary, as several foregoing Abbots did.

ROBERTUS RAMSEY.
There is a memorial of him, as I said, in the Calendar which tells us he dyed
upon the sixth of October: which was Depositio Roberti de Ramsey Abbatis, and
fratris Thomae de Burgo. And a Memorandum of a gift bestowed upon the Church in
the first year of his Government, by the Heir of William Everard de Dodestorp:
but so defaced by time, that it cannot all be read. I suppose it was written in
his time; sor it follows after an account of the years that every Abbot from
John de Caleto till his time, lived in the government of this place; but says
nothing how long he continued.

Abbas Johan. de Caleto vixit annis 13. Abbas Robert de Sutton an. 12. Abbas
Ric. de London an. 22. Abbas Willielmus de Wodeford an. 4. Abbas Godefrid de
Croyland an. 22. Abbas Adam de Boyeby an. 17. Abbas Henricus de Morkote an. 14.
HENRY de Overton
Born I suppose at Overton, now called Orton; on the other side of the River
Neen: and made Abbot here in the year 1360. As appears by an old record of a
Fine paid by William Cole (Nativus Domini Abbatis de Burgo) for a license in
his Court at Thurleby, in the forty seventh year of Edward the Third; (that is
1373) which is said to be in the Thirteenth year of this Abbot.

In his second year, the 37. of Edw. III. 1369. all the Monks of the black
Order held a General Chapter at Northampton (where Thomas Abbot of St. Alban
presided) in which it was decreed, among other things, that they should make a
perpetual and continual memory, throughout their whole Order, for the Quick and
the Dead, every hour of the day and night: as Walsingham P. 180.
informs us, in his History of these times. Who also tells us that in the year
1379 (which was the 2. of Rich. II.) there was a great Tax laid upon the whole
Clergy: wherein every Mitred Abbot paid as much as an Earl, viz. six Marks; and
a Noble moreover pro singlis capitibus Monachorum Pole money, for every Monk in
his Monastery. Of which he complains heavily, as an unreasonable thing: that
the poorest of them should pay as much as the richest, Earl or Bishop; and over
and above for his Friars Ib. p. 221.
.

I have give an account already (in the life of Martine de vecti) of the
Insurrection in the fourth year of King Rich. 1381. Which the said Walsingham
ascribes to the sins of men of all sorts, not excepting the Mendicant Friars:
who contrary to their profession, he faith, were grown such flaterers and
deceivers, that it was thought as good an argument, both for matter and form,
to say, This is a Friar, therefore he is a Liar, as to say, This is White,
therefore it has a Color.

P. 302.
Two years after 1383. The King and his Queen spent their time in visiting the
Abbeys of the Kingdom: which, the same Historian says, was no small burden to
them; because they came with an excessive number of attendants, and non
offerre, sed auferre, not to offer, but to carry away. I do not find whether
they were here or no, but he mentions the Abbey of St. Edmunds-Bury (with which
this was in a confederacy) where they were entertained ten days: which cost the
Monastery eight hundred Marks.

There is no memory of this Abbot, nor of any that follow, in the Calendar, I
have often mentioned: they living not long before it was written; and in those
tumultuous times that insued, having no power, its likely, to do more than
preserve what their ancestors had acquired: and scarcely that neither, for in
Rich. Ashton's time (when the Calendar was written) I find but 64. Monks.

NICOLAVS.
It is not known where this Abbot was born or bred; and there is very little to
be found, either of what he did, or what was done, in his time. The only thing
I meet with, besides that which Mr. G. mentions, is an ordinance of his about
the observation of the Feast of St. Kyneburgh, in the last year of his
Abbotship 1396. Which Feast, it appears by the Calendar, was on the 7. of
March: whereon was Translatio Sanctorum Kyneburgh and Kyneswith. Whom Malmsbury
L. IV. de gestis Pontif. Angl.
calls Kinedreda and Kines wida, the Daughters of King Penda; the Relics of
whose Ashes, he says, were here kept and worshipped: who both of them having
dedicated themselves to God in their Infancy, preserved their noble purpose
till old age. The younger of them also, not being content with her own
resolution, prevailed with Offa King of the East Aagles, who courted her in
marriage, to consecrate himself to Virginity. They were first buried in
Ecclesia Kyneburgensis Castri (called now Castre, as I suppose) which being
very ruinous in the time of Elfinus Abbot, the Monks of Ramsey (as Hugo tells
us) endeavored with all their might, night and day, to carry their bodies away
to that Monastery. But it was neither the will of the Lord, nor their pleasure
(as his words are) to rest any where but under the power of St. Peter (sub
Clavigeri potestate) who brought them to Christianity. And therefore they heard
the prayers (as he goes on) of Leof. winus Sacrist of Burch, who was a devout
Servant of theirs, and earnestly beseeched them to have their bodies lie in
this Church (promising to do them the greatest honor) as is more fully
declared in Translatione earum, in the Narative of their Translation; which was
too long, he says, to set down in every particular. After the like manner also
the same Abbot with Leofwinus his assistance, translated the most pious Virgin
Tibba, de riale Burgi: She herself commanding it, and by great miracles showing
that she desired to rest there among her holy Friends. Upon which occasion Hugo
relates not only all the Relics in this Church (as has been before shown)
but tells also where the bodies of all the English Saints lie; that he who
desired to address himself to any particular Saint, might know where to find
him or her. And speaking of Tibba, he says, she was cousin to the two forenamed
Sisters, Kyneburgh and Kyneswith: whose Relics here were in such high esteem,
that Ingalphus reckons the treading of their precious pledges under Feet, as
one of the principal profanations, when this Monastery was demolished by the
Danes in the year 870. when Altaria omnia suffossa, etc. Sanctarum Virginum
Kyneburgae, Kyneswitae, and Tibbae, pretiosa pignora pedibus conculcata P. 23.
Edit. Oxon.
.

Henry of Bolingbroke, then Earl of Derby (afterward Duke of Hereford, and at
last King of England) lay for some time in this Monastery, with a great train,
in the beginning of this Abbots Government. Particularly in the year 1392, when
his Courtiers (as my Author calls them Hist. Croyland. Continuatio p. 489.
) threatened to destroy Depynge and its inhabitants, as enemies to him and his
Father, as well as injurious to Croyland (which had suffered much by them) and
the neighboring people of Holland. Which put them into such a fright, that the
Steward of the Courts of the Earl of Kent, Lord of Depynge, and four and twenty
of the best of the Town, came with all speed to Burgh St. Peter, and submitted
themselves to the mercy of the Earl of Derby. Whose Treasurer interceded for
them, and procured their Pardon; upon promised (confirmed by their Oath) that
they would keep the Peace hereafter with all Hollanders, and most strictly
punish all disturbers of it, that could be found among them.

WILLIELMUS GENGE.
If he were the first Mitred Abbot of this Church, as Mr. G. says, Sir H.
Spelman's notion is not true; that they put on Miters in token they had
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and being advanced to the dignity of Barons sat in
Parliaments; which no other Abbots did. For the Abbot of Burgh St. Peter sat
in Parliament, in the 4th year of Edw. 3. as appears by the summons to the
Parliament at Winton. And there is little truth also in what is commonly said,
that Mitred Abbots were not subject to any Bishop: for after this Abbots time,
I shall show presently, the Bishop of Lincoln kept both the Abbot and Convent,
for some time, under his Visitation.

There are certain Constitutions I find made by him 1398. and others in the
years 1401. and 1406. which I can but mention.

JOHANNES DEEPING.
The first of Henry 5th was the fifth year of his Abbotship, as a memorandum
still remaining tells us: and thence we learn he was made Abbot 1407.

All that I find of him, are some Statutes which he made 1409. about the right
observations of certain Festivals: and others made by him in the year 1420.
Which he calling the eleventh year of his Abbotship: from thence it appears he
was not made Abbot till the year 1409: He defended also the right the Church
had to the Manor of Walcote in Lincolnshire (as I have observed already) in
the 13 year of Henry the 4th (an. 1314. against Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings
Son: making it appear that it had been part of the Demeasnes of the Abbey from
the first Foundation, and had never held of the aforesaid Thomas his Manor in
Holderness.

In the year 1421. which was the eighth of Hen. 5. a complaint being made to
the King of grievous excesses and abuses among the black Monks of the Order of
St. Benet, all the Abbots and Priors of that Order were Hist. Croyl. Contin. p.
513.
summoned to appear before the King at Westminster. Where in the Chapterhouse
on the 7th of May, the King being personally present, the charge against them
was read, by the Bishop of Exeter: and he, with several persons on both sides,
were appointed to consider it and to make a reformation; which they all
promised the King hereafter faithfully to observe.

RICHARDVS ASHTON.
In his time, about the year 1448. the controversy between this Abbey, and
that of Croyland revived again; the Metes and Bounds of the several Fens
belonging to each (which had been limited in diverse places, which the History
mentions, by crosses and other marks) being so worn Hist. Croyl. Continuatio P.
525. etc.
out by carelessness, in length of time, that a very obscure and confused
knowledge was the most that was left of them. But by the consent of parties,
and the supervising of the Bishop of Lincoln, the business was referred to four
indifferent Arbitrators: the Abbots and their Convents binding themselves under
their Seals, in an Obligation of a thousand Marks, to acquiesce in what they
should Decree. Who met several times, and inspected the Evidences on both
sides, but after much time and expenses, could not agree to determine any
thing: but resolved to throw the matter upon the Abbots themselves, to make an
end of it. Who met at Ibury a Manor of the Abbot of Burgh, with the Priors of
each Monastery; and heard from one of the Arbitrators, what it was which they
would not determine, without the express consent of both parties: but after much
discourse between them, they could come to no agreement; nor was the
controversy settled till many years after.

But the most remarkable thing in this Abbots time, is the pains he took in the
regulation of Divine Service in this Monastery: about which he made many
Ordinances, with the consent of all the Convent: and drew up a Gustomary, out
of the ancient usages of the Church, for all the Sundays from the Octaves of
Whitsunday, to the first Sunday in Advent. All which are yet extant, in his
Grace's, the Lord Archbishop of Canterburie's Library at Lambeth in two
Volumes: One written by Simon of Yarwell, as he tells us in six verses at the
beginning of the Book: the other by John Trentam; who concludes it with the
like verses. By this Customary they were directed how to sing their Offices,
longer or shorter, every day: as is expressed in the last Rubric of it. Before
these Books is prefixed the Ecclesiastical Calendar (which I have had occasion
frequently to name) at the side of which, are set down those Festivals, or
Anniversaries which were peculiar to this Church and their neighbor; as
follows.

January.
3. Depositio Domini Martini Abbatis, viz. the first of that name.

6. Will. de Hotot Abbatis, and Anniversarium Richardi de Waterville, and
Johannis filii ejus.

13. Depositio Elfini Abbatis, and Anniversarium Matthai Capellani.

23. Depositio Domini Elfrici Archiepiscopi.

February.
21. Depositio Domini Andreae Abbatis. Abbas missam celebravit.

26. Commemoratio fundatorum and omnium benefactorum*

March.
1. Depositio Joh. de Caleto Abbatis pro anima Patris and Matris ejus; and
Anniversarium Ivonis Supprioris.

The Abbot was to say Mass himself, and the Prior read Divine Service usque ad
dirige. Quia ista Depositio est in Albis.

One Ivo de Gunthorp gave all his Lands in Witherington to this Church (as
appears by the Charter of Rich. 1.) who perhaps is the person here named.

7. Translatio Sanctorum Kynesburgh and Kyneswyth*

13. Depositio Domini Akarii Abbatis.

The Abbot said Mass himself.

22. Depositio Roberti de Sutton Abbatis and Anniversarium Henrici Aurifabri
and Joh. de Trikingham Prioris.

The Abbot said Mass.

In this month there was Missa matutinalis cum cappa for the Souls of the
Fathers and Mothers, etc. of all the Monks of this Monastery.

[Of the celebration cum cappis I shall give an account, at the end of the
Calendar.]

April.
11. Sancti Guthlaci

Who was Confessor to King Ethelbald: who founded the Abbey of Croyland in
memory of him.

12. Depositio Thoroldi and Guidonis Abbatis. Et Anniversarium Rob. de Hale,
and Agnetis Matris ejus.

May.
In the first Week of May, Legenda and facienda est Conventio inter Ecclesias
Burgi and de Sancto Victore, and habebunt missam ferialem. In which they sung
de Profundis, and cibus ea die ponatur ad mensam.

[I shall explain this at the end].

In Whitsun-Week was, Commemoratio specialium Defunctorum.

[That is in some of the Ember-days. For so I find in our Records fol. CCLXXIV.
Statutum est in capitulo per Dominum Robertum Abbatem communi conventus
consensu, quod quater in anno fiat commemoratio omnium Defunctorum, quorum
debitores sumus per specialem conventionem, sive societatem. sc. aliquo die
quae vacaverit in Ebdomada quatuor temporum.]

30. Depositio Domini Arewyni Abbatis.

June.
5. Depositio Adulphi Episcopi, and Anniversarium Richardi de Lincolnia, and
Agnetis Vxoris suae.

26. Depositio Martini Abbatis.

July.
13. Depositio Episcoporum Gamalielis and Huberti.

August.
1. Depositio Domini Richardi de London Abbatis.

The Abbot said Mass. And they were in Albis, the Prior reading the Service (as
before upon John de Caleto's day) and praying for the Souls of his Father and
Mother, without naming them.

9. Depositio Godfrid. de Croyland Abbatis

In Albis, the Abbot saying Mass, and the Prior reading as before. After Mass
the whole Convent made a Chorus with the Praecentor, Succensor, and the Senior
Masters.

28. Depositio Will. Landavensis Episcopi, and Anniversarium Domini Reginaldi
Presbyters.

September.
2. Depos. Domini Will. de Wodeford Abbatis, and Annivers. Johannis de Gresham.

The Abbot said Mass.

In Ember Week Commemoratio specialium Defunctorum as before in Whitsun-Week.

25. Depositio Domini Benedicti Abbatis.

The Abbot said Mass; the Prior read as before. In Albis.

October.
6. Depositio Domini Roberti de Ramsey Abbatis, and fratris Thomae de Burgo.

The Abbot said Mass.

15. Depositio Domini Eylrici Episcopi, and Memoria Benefactorum

22. Depositio Domini Matthiae Abbatis; and memoriae Wynegoti Monachi.

This Wynegot, I observed before, bought St. Oswald's Arm hither from Bebeburch.

29. Depos. Domini Roberti de Lyndsey Abbatis

The Abbot said Mass; the Prior read ad tertiam: and they were in Albis.

November.
1. Depositio Lefrici Abbatis.

4. The Abbot said Mass for the souls of all the faithful departed this Life.

10. Depositio Johannis de Says Abbatis, and Annivers. Henrici Talbot, and
Richardi de Spaldynge.

19. Depositio Alexandri Abbatis. Et Anniversarium Reginaldi de Castro, and
Matildis Vxoris suae.

23. Depositio Adae Abbatis Botheby, and Anniversarium Domini Joh. de Aysby,
and Magistri Joh. de Hacwedone.

30. Depositio Brandonis, and Will. de Waterville Abbatum, and Anniversarium
Adae de Walkote.

December.
1. A Commemoration of the Fathers, Mothers, and Parents of their Benefactors
of Burgh.

In Ember week, as before at Whitsuntide, a Commemoration Specialium
Defunctorum.

20. Depositio Kynsini Archiepiscopi and Anniversarium Radulphi Comitis.

26. Depositio Walteri Abbatis.

The Abbot said Mass.

There is once mention made, the Reader may observe, in this Calendar, of
celebrating cum Cappis, or Capis; that is in Copes: which added very much to
the solemnity. As appears by what I find in a MS. History of the Church of
Westminster, written by John Fleet a Monk thereof. Who tells us that Radulphus
Papilyon who was made Abbot 1201. obtained the consent of the Chapter, for the
celebrating the Feasts of four Saints, whom he much loved, in Capis, viz. St.
Laurence, Vincent, Nicolaus, and Translatio Sancti Benedicti. And he sets down
the Charter wherein this was granted, at his instance, for the keeping these
Feasts, in Capis, processionibus, cum vinis and pitanciis honorabilibus. That
is, formerly they were observed only with Ale, and a simple pitance; but after
this with Wine, and more honorable allowances; as the Charter it self explains
it. Richard of Berking afterward ordained that on three days following the
translation of King Edward, Mass should be said still in Capis: for the greater
honor of that Saint. And Richard de Crokesly ordained out of reverence to the
blessed Virgin, that the Annunciation should be celebrated at her nativity, in
quinque Capis. And thus, I observed before, it was in this Church of Burgh:
where Rob. Lyndesay ordained, the Feasts of our Lords Transfiguration; the
Translation of St. Thomas, and the birth of St. Hugh to be celebrated in Copes.
Much more, if it were proper in this place, I could add to this purpose. But I
hasten to explain the meaning of the Convention or agreement between this
Church, and that of St. Victor, which was to be read the first week in May.

I have already observed that Friendship was wont to be contracted, between
some Churches with others; as John de Kaleto I showed made confederationem
inter Ecclesiam Burgi and Wigorn. the particulars of which are set down, in the
Charter yet remaining Fol. CLXXV. Such was this with the Church of St. Victor;
which I find expressly mentioned afterward, Fol. CCLXXIV. where an account is
given of the Churches with whom this Church had made Confederations, and what
they were. At the bottom of which Page, there are these words; Eadem Conventio
facta est item inter nos and Canonicos de Sancto Victore, etc. that is, the
same that was between this Church and the Canons of Gisburn: which was this:
That in the first Week of Lent, there should be an Office performed in the
Church of Burgh, for all the Brethren of Gisburn, who were dead. And on the
morrow a Mass in the Convent; every Priest celebrating one Mass, and the rest,
who were in inferior Order, singing 50. Psalms. The like to be done at Gisburn
for those of Burgh: Et Cibus ea die ponatur ad mensam; though it was the
beginning of Lent. The same was done for those of St. Victor on the first
vacant day, in the first week of May.

The Abbey of St. Victor de Caleto in Normandy, had several Manors in England,
with great Liberties, confirmed by the Charter of King Henry II. as I find in
the Monasticon. Vol. 2. P. 1002. A Relic of this St. Victor I find also given
to the Church of St. Paul, by Radulphus de Diceto Dean of that Church: who
enriched it with many others also; particularly of St. Oswald King and Martyr,
vid. 3. Vol. p. 332.

It would be too long here to name all the other Churches, with whom this of
Burgh made the like Confederations: which shall be put in the Appendix: having
this further to note; that it appears by the forenamed Customary, a piece of
the Cross was presented to them all to kiss, in Passionweek; and that there
being Sixty four Monks in this Richard Ashton's time, there happened so great a
mortality among them, that thirty two or more, of the best Monks in the
Monastery died. So that Divine Service could not be performed according to the
Statutes then made: but they were forced to omit some things, which in those
Books were appointed.

WILLIELMVS RAMSET.
It appears by a Record at the end of those Lambeth Books, that in the year
1483. John Russel Bishop of Lincoln summoned the Convent to come and attend him
at Bugden, in his Visitation adhuc pendente: and there gave them Injunctions
about their behavior, one toward another, and toward the Abbot William. Who
was still subject to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, notwithstanding his Mitre; as
all his Predecessors had been. For there had been anciently a Decree in a Synod
held near Cloveshom, in the year 747. (and that in obedience to the Letters of
Pope Zachary which were publicly read in the Assembly, for the reformation of
Manners) that the Bishops should visit their Dioceses every year, and admonish
both Abbots and Monks to live regularly; as William of Malmsbury informs us. In
pursuance of which this Monastery had been often visited, and Injunctions given
to them: as I could easily show, had I room for such Discourses. I shall
content my self only with the account I find in our Books, of the Visitation of
that famous Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Grosthead: who visited tam domus
Religiosas, quam Ecclesias Parochiales. And among others required the Abbot and
Convent of Burgh, to show what Right they had to the Monastery of St. Michael
in Stamford; and the Hospital of St. Thomas there upon the Bridge; and the
House of the Lepers: to all which they pretended. And they making it appear,
that they were Patrons of them, and that their Consent was requisite to the
choice of a Prioress of St. Michael, and that they were in the quiet possession
of appointing Custodes to hear the Confession of the Nuns in that place (a
Presentation being made of them to the Bishop) and of placing Custodes also in
the Hospital, and in the House of Lepers; and that the Nuns in the Monastery,
and the Friars in the Hospital, and in the House of the Lepers, were not
received but by consent of the Abbot, who had right to enter into the Monastery
of St. Michael, and to make Moniales professas (which Possession he showed he
had time out of mind, by Witnesses, and by Letters of Hugh Bishop of Lincoln,
who had also here visited, and by Letters of the Nuns themselves) thereupon the
forenamed Robert Grostehead, having sitting by him for his assistance, his
Official R. de Cadencia, and many other persons, pronounced that the Abbot (who
was there present) was in the quiet possession of all the aforesaid, salvo jure
uniuscujusque.

The contention about the Fenn de Alderlond was renewed in the same year 1483.
between Richard Abbot of Croyland, and William Ramsey Abbot of Burgh; which had
hung long, as the Continuation of Croyland's History observes, Page 569.
but was comprimised by Thomas Rotheram, formerly Bishop of Lincoln, and
Ordinary of the Place, now Archbishop of York. Yet it was not finally
determined and settled till two or three years after; when, both parties
submitting themselves to the Archbishop, he Decreed, under the penalty of a
thousand pound, that the Abbot and Convent of Croyland, should pay an annual
Pension of ten pound a year to the Monastery of Burgh: until they had at their
own charge purchased Land of that yearly value to be delivered in perpetual
possession to the Monastery of Burgh; or had at their own like expense
appropriated and united to the said Monastery of Burgh the Church of
Brynkehurst, or Eston in the County of Leicester, which belonged to the
Patronage of the said Monastery. Whereupon Edmond Thorp then Abbot of Croyland,
chose to do the latter: and accordingly the Church of Brynkehurst was
appropriated for the perpetual uses of the Monastery of Burgh; and Letters
Patents from the King were obtained for License to do it Ib. 577.
.

And by another Continuation of the same History it appears that John Russel
Bishop of Lincoln before mentioned, came to Croyland, and staid there a whole
Month, with twenty other persons (for whom as well as himself he gave them such
satisfaction, as contented both Parties) in which time, after conference with
the Abbot of Burgh at Singlesholt, the Union and Appropriation, was made
judicially by the Episcopal Sentence, which is there at large set down Page
582. and 587.
: with all other proceedings in that Business. The broad Seal also was procured
for the confirmation of it: which was to put an end to all Controversies,
whereby both Abbeys had received much damage; as the Reader may find p. 588,
589, 593. to which I must referr him.

It was in this Abbot's days also that John Wysbeck Abbot of Croyland, by his
industry, and gentle management; procured an exchange of that 4. Stone of Wax
which was yearly paid by them to the Church of Burgh on St. Peter's day, in the
nature of a Service, not to say Homage (as the Continuator of that History
speaks p. 560) into a yearly Pension of twenty shillings in money, that more
sincere Love might be preserved between the Brethren of each Monastery for the
future. This was in the year 1477.

ROBERT KIRKTON.
The Contention which Mr. G. mentions, between him and the Inhabitants of
Peterburgh makes me think he was the Abbot who Petitioned the King against
certain of the Townsmen, who seditiously opposed his Jurisdiction, and his
appointment of Officers there. Which Petition was among our Records concerning
the Manor of Peterburgh (as I find in a Note of the Titles of them, which is
all that remains) till in the late great Rebellion, it with the rest was torn
in pieces or burnt. There is another Note whereby it appears the 14th of Henry
8. was the 26th year of his Abbotship: and therefore he was made Abbot not in
the year 1496. but 1497.

JOHN CHAMBERS.
There is this traditional story goes, concerning the preservation of this
Church at the dissolution of Abbeys; that a little after Queen Katherine's
Interment here (which Mr. G. mentions) some Courtiers suggesting to the King,
how well it would become his Greatness, to erect a fair Monument for her; he
answered, Yes, he would leave her one of the goodliest Monuments in
Christendom; meaning this Church, for he had then in his thoughts the
demolishing of Abbeys, which shortly after followed.

John Chambers also preserved himself in favor, by making a Resignation of his
Abbey, as many did, under the common Seal, into the Kings hands. Which though I
cannot find in the Augmentation Office, yet there is a Grant there made by King
Henry to Abbot Chambers, which confirms me in this opinion. It bears date 1
March, An. 31 Hen. 8. which was 1540. (before the Bishopric was erected) by
which it is expressed, that the Monastery of Peterburgh being dissolved, the
King out of his Grace and Favor did grant to the said late Abbot Chambers Two
hundred and sixty pound, thirteen shillings and four pence per annum, during
his life: with an hundred Load of Wood, out of the Woods called, Eastwood, and
Westwood.

There were Letters (which are now lost) sent from the Duke of Somerset and
others of the Council 1548. to examine the matter in Controversy between the
Bishop of Peterburgh, and one Acton; concerning words pretended to be spoken
against the Sacrament; and concerning Images in the Church undefaced, with
Plate sold out of the Town-Church. How it ended I cannot find: nor have I any
thing to add about David Pool, who was made Bishop in Queen Mary's time.

Of Bishop SCAMBLER I might say much more than is in Mr. G. but have not room
for it. For before those Articles mentioned by Mr. G. there were Injunctions or
Ordinations given to the Dean and Chapter by Thomas Yale Dr. of Law, and Edward
Leeds Licentiate, and John Porey, Dr. in Divinity, being Visitors and
Commissaries authorized by the Archbishop of Canterbury to exercise his
Metropolitical Visitation, etc. They were in number, Nine, publicatae and
traditae octavo die Januarii 1560. in domo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Petriburg. The Injunctions also, and Articles of Inquiry in several Triennial
Visitations of Bishop Scambler are still remaining in the years 1561, 1564,
1567. (in which year I find 21 Injunctions of his to the Dean and Chapter and
other Ministers) and 1570.

In the next Visitation 1573. he delivered no Articles to be enquired of, nor
more Injunctions, but only commanded them to keep their Statutes, which were
not against the Queens Majesty's Proceedings, nor her Visitors, etc. In the
last of these Visitations but one, it was that the Tabernacles were taken down
in the Ladies Chapel, which was not done till the 12. of Elizabeth.

How this Bishop passed away the Lands of the Bishopric, wherewith King Henry
had endowed it, Mr. G. has related in part. Others have told us more; and that
he obtained his Translation to Norwich as a Reward of one of these Grants to a
great man at Court.

RICHARD HOWLAND, Bishop.
They that would read more of the History of Mary Queen of Scots, may find a
great many memorable things, in the Memoires of Sir James Melvil a faithful
Servant of hers and of his Country; not long ago brought to light.

Bishop Morton in his Protestant Appeal L. IV. Cap. I. has given the best
account, I meet with, of that passage (which the Apology of the Roman Church
took out of Martin Prelate) in the Bishop of Lincoln's Sermon at her Funeral;
which made a great noise among factious people: who reported, that he prayed
his Soul, and the Souls of all there present, might be with the Soul of the
Queen deceased. But the truth of the Story he says was this; that the Reverend
Bishop now mentioned, understanding how that great and honorable personage, in
the last act of her life, renounced all presumption of her own inherent
righteousness, and wholly affianced her Soul unto Christ, in belief to be
justified only by his satisfactory Justice; did therefore conceive hope of her
Salvation, by virtue of that Cordial prescribed by the holy Apostle, viz. that
where sin abounds, the grace of God does super-abound. Which the Apostle has
ministered for the comfort of every Christian, who erring by Ignorance, shall
(by sincere repentance, especially for all known sins) depart this mortal life;
having the heel, or end of it shod with this preparation of the Gospel of
peace: not of the new Romish, but of the old Catholic Faith; which is the
faith of all Protestants. And this consideration of that our Preacher, cannot
but worthily condemn the Apologists of partial prejudice, who chose rather to
be informed concerning that Sermon, by (as they confess) a reproachful traducer
and libeller, than (which they might easily have done) by testimony of a
thousand temperate and indifferent hearers, then present.

I referr the Reader to Sir John Harrington's brief view of the State of the
Church, etc. for an account of Dr. Fletchers advancement from the Deanery of
Peterburgh, to the Bishopric of Bristol, and so to London: which he himself
could not justify, but was forced to cry, Herein the Lord be merciful to me.

THOMAS DOVE.
The same Sir John Harrington says, he had known this Bishop to have been
greatly respected and favored by Queen Elizabeth: and no less liked and
approved in the more learned judgment of King James. When the Queen first heard
him, she said she thought the holy Ghost was descended again in this Dove: for
he was a very eloquent Preacher.

In his time there was a Font erected in the Body of the Church, where none had
been before: whereof there is this Memorial in the Register Book.

Baptisterium in Nave Ecclesiae Cathedralis de Burgo Sancti Petri, Anno Salutis
MDCXV. gravissimorum virorum Georgii Dean Meriton.
merito istius Ecclesiae Decani, reliquorumque tunc temporis Paerbendariorum
consilio extructum (nam antea nullum in Ecclesia extiterat) Reverendissimus in
Christo Pater Dominus Thomas de Burgo Sancti Petri Episcopus, in magna hominum
Corona solenni processione illuc adductus, consecravit: scilicet, Psalmo
LXXXIV. prius a Choro and coetu decantato, tum demum pia, eleganti, and fervida
precatione Deo suppliciter invocato, ut servis suis and Baptizantibus, and
Baptizandis, omnibusque aliis infantes ad hoc sacrum Christi lavacrum
adducentibus, spiritu suo in perpetuum adesse velit. Hac finita solennitate mox
ad Baptismum allatus est venerabilis viri Mri. Jo. annis Bridgeman sacrae
Theologiae Doctoris, ac serenissimo Jacobo Regi a sacris (in ista Ecclesia
primam tunc Prebendam occupantis) filiolus. Qui, imposito Henrici nomine
(sponsoribus praedicto Domino Episcopo, and Humfrido Orme milite, and
Elizabetha Vxore D. D. Walter Waley) in Christi familiam ascriptus est. Cui and
omnibus in posterum baptizandis benedicat Deus. Amen.

I must omit all the rest, and only take notice of two or three things of later
date, which ought not to be forgotten.

Bishop Laney his benevolence mentioned by Mr. G. was this. He gave an hundred
Pound toward the repairing one of the great Arches of the Church Porch, which
was fallen down in the late times.

Dr. Cosins, Dean of this Church, and after the Kings Restoration made Bishop
of Durham, by his last Will and Testament gave forty Pound for a Monument to be
erected in memory of his Wife, buried here in the beginning of the Wars: and
one hundred Pound to the Dean and Chapter; the Rent thereof to be by them
yearly distributed to the Poor.

Dr. Duport, late Dean of this Church, besides many sums given elsewhere to
pious and charitable uses, settled twenty Pound a year on Magdalen Coll. in
Cambridge, to be paid to the Dean and Chapter of Peterburgh: ten Pound for the
Augmentation of the Schoolmasters Salaries there: and ten Pound for two
Scholarships in Magdalen College, belonging to that School.

There being wanting in Mr. G. an account of the defaceing of this Church, by
the Soldiers in the late Rebellion, Mr. Francis Standish the present worthy
Chanter of it, has at my desire drawn it up in the following Narrative. Which
may be the more credited, because he then lived in this place (where he was
born and bred) and was a spectator of most things that he relates.

A Short and True NARRATIVE of the Rifling and Defacing the Cathedral Church of
PETERBURGH in the Year 1643.
THE Cathedral Church of Peterburgh was very famous formerly for three
remarkable things; a stately Front, a curious Altar-Piece, and a beautiful
Cloister. The first of the three does still remain, a very goodly Structure,
supported with three such tall Arches, as England can scarce show the like. The
two last are since destroyed by Sacrilegious hands, and have nothing now
remaining, but only the bare memory of them. In this place, I think I may say,
began that strange kind of deformed Reformation, which afterward passed over
most places of the Land, by robbing, rifling and defacing Churches. This being
one of the first which suffered in that kind. Of which you may take this
following account, from an eye witness, and which, I suppose, is still fresh in
the memory of many surviving Persons.

In the year 1643, about the midst of April, there came several Forces to
Peterburgh, raised by the Parliament in the Associated Counties, in order to
besiege Croyland, a small Town some seven miles distant, which had a little
before declared for the King, and then was held a Garrison for Him.

The first that came was a Foot-Regiment under one Colonel Hubbart's command:
upon whose arrival, some persons of the Town, fearing what happened afterward,
desire the Chief Commander to take care the Soldiers did no injury to the
Church: This he promises to do, and gave order to have the Church doors all
locked up. Some two days after comes a Regiment of Horse under Colonel Cromwell,
a name as fatal to Ministers, as it had been to Monasteries before. The next
day after their arrival, early in the morning, these break open the Church
doors, pull down the Organs, of which there were two Pair. The greater Pair
that stood upon a high loft, over the entrance into the Quire, was thence
thrown down upon the ground, and there stamped and trampled on, and broke in
pieces, with such a strange furious and frantic zeal, as cannot be well
conceived, but by those that saw it.

Then the Soldiers enter the Quire, and there their first business was, to
tear in pieces all the Common Prayer Books that could be found. The great Bible
indeed, that lay upon a Brass Eagle for reading the Lessons, had the good hap
to escape with the loss only of the Apocrypha.

Next they break down all the Seats, Stalls and Wainscot that was behind them,
being adorned with several Historical passages out of the Old and New
Testament, a Latin Distich being in each Seat to declare the Story. Whilst they
are thus employed, they chance to find a Great Parchment Book behind the
Cieling with some 20 pieces of Gold, laid there by a person a little before, as
in a place of safety, in those unsafe and dangerous times. This encourages the
Soldiers in their work, and makes them the more eager in breaking down all the
rest of the Wainscot, in hopes of finding such another prize.

The Book that was deposited there, was called Swapham, the Lieger Book of the
Church, and was redeemed afterward of a Soldier that got it, by a person
belonging to the Minster, for ten Shillings, under the notion of an old Latin
Bible.

There was also a great Brass Candlestick hanging in the middle of the Quire,
containing about a Dozen and half of Lights, with another Bow Candlestick about
the Brass Eagle: These both were broke in pieces, and most of the Brass carried
away and sold.

A well disposed person standing by, and seeing the Soldiers make such spoil
and havoc, speaks to one that appeared like an Officer, desiring him to
restrain the Soldiers from such enormities. But all the answer he obtained,
was only a scoffing reply, to this purpose, See how these poor People are
concerned to see their Idols pulled down.

So the Inhabitants of Peterburgh at that time, were accounted by these
Reformers, both a malignant and superstitious kind of People.

When they had thus defaced and spoiled the Quire, They march up next to the
East end of the Church, and there break and cut in pieces, and afterward burn
the Rails that were about the Communion Table. The Table it self was thrown
down, the Table-Cloth taken away with two fair Books in Velvet Covers, the one
a Bible, the other a Common Prayer Book, with a Silver Basin gilt, and a Pair
of Silver Candlesticks beside. But upon request made to Colonel Hubbert, the
Books, Basin and all else, save the Candlesticks, were restored again.

Not long after on the 13th day of July 1643 Captain Barton and Captain Hope
two Martial Ministers of Nottingham or Darbyshire, coming to Peterburgh, break
open the Vestery and take away a Fair Crimson Satin Table Cloth and several
other things, that had escaped the former Soldiers hands.

Now behind the Communion Table, there stood a curious Piece of Stone-work,
admired much by Strangers and Travelers; a stately Skreen it was, well
wrought, painted and gilt, which rose up as high almost as the Roof of the
Church in a Row of three lofty Spires, with other lesser Spires, growing out of
each of them, as it is represented in the annexed draught. This now had no
Imagery-work upon it, or any thing else that might justly give offense, and yet
because it bore the name of the High Altar, was pulled all down with Ropes,
laid low and level with the ground.

Over this place in the Roof of the Church, in a large Oval yet to be seen, was
the Picture of our Savior seated on a Throne, one hand erected, and holding a
Globe in the other: attended with the four Evangelists and Saints on each side,
with Crowns in their hands; intended, I suppose, for a Representation of our
Saviors coming to judgment. Some of the company espying this, cry out and say,
Lo this is the God these People bow and cringe unto; This is the Idol they
worship and adore. Hereupon several Soldiers charge their Muskets, (amongst
whom one Daniel Wood of Captain Ropers Company was the chief) and discharge
them at it: and by the many shots they made, at length do quite deface and
spoil Picture.

The odiousness of this Act gave occasion (I suppose) to a common Fame very
rife at that time, and whence Mercurius Rusticus might have his relation, viz.
That divine Vengeance had signally seized on some of the principal Actors, That
one was struck blind upon the place by a Re-bound of his Bullet; That another
dyed mad a little after; neither of which I can certainly attest. For, though I
have made it my business to enquire of this, I could never find any other
judgment befall them then, but that of a mad blind Zeal, wherewith these persons
were certainly possessed.

And now I am engaged in telling the story of their impiety and profaneness at
Peterburgh, 'twill be no great excursion to step out to Yaxley a neighboring
Town, and mention one thing done there. Which was This: on the 10th of June
1643. some of Captain Beaumont's Soldiers coming thither, They break open the
Church doors, piss in the Font, and then baptize a Horse and a Mare, using the
solemn words of Baptism, and signing them with the sign of the Cross.

But to return to our reforming Rabble at Peterburgh, when there was no more
painted or carved work to demolish, Then they rob and rifle the Tombs, and
violate the Monuments of the dead. And where should they first begin, but with
those of the two Queens, who had been there interred: The one on the North
side, the other on the South side of the Church, both near unto the Altar.
First, then they demolish Queen Katherin's Tomb, Hen. the Eighth his repudiated
Wife: They break down the Rails that enclosed the place, and take away the
black Velvet Pall which covered the Hearse: overthrow the Hearse it self,
displace the Gravestone that lay over her Body, and have left nothing now
remaining of that Tomb, but only a Monument of their own shame and villainy. The
like they had certainly done to the Queen of Scots, but that her Hearse and Pall
were removed with her Body to Westminster by King James the first, when He came
to the Crown. But what did remain, they served in like manner, that is, her
Royal Arms and Escutcheons which hung upon a Pillar near the place where she
had been interred, were most rudely pulled down, defaced and torn.

In the North Isle of the Church, there was a stately Tomb in memory of Bishop
Dove, who had been 30 years Bishop of the place. He lay there in Portraicture
in his Episcopal Robes, on a large Bed under a fair Table of black Marble, with
a Library of Books about him. These men that were such Enemies to the name and
Office of a Bishop, and much more to his Person, hack and hew the poor Innocent
Statue in pieces, and soon destroyed all the Tomb. So that in a short space,
all that fair and curious Monument was buried in its own rubbish and Ruins.

The like they do to two other Monuments standing in that Isle; the one the
Tomb of Mr. Worm, the other of Dr. Angier, who had been Prebendary of that
Church.

In a Place then called the new Building, and since converted to a Library,
there was a fair Monument, which Sir Humphrey Orm (to save his Heir that charge
and trouble) thought fit to erect in his own life time, where he and his Lady,
his Son and Wife and all their children were lively represented in Statues,
under which were certain English verses written, mentioned before in this Book.
Mistake not Reader I thee crave,
This is an Altar not a Grave,
Where fire raked up in Ashes lies,
And hearts are made the Sacrifice, etc.


Which two words Altar and Sacrifice, it is said, did so provoke and kindle the
Zealots indignation, that they resolve to make the Tomb it self a Sacrifice:
and with Axes, Poleaxes and Hammers destroy and break down all that curious
Monument, save only two Pilasters still remaining, which show and testify the
elegancy of the rest of the Work. Thus it happened, that the good old Knight who
was a constant frequenter of Gods public Service, three times a day, outlived
his own Monument, and lived to see himself carried in Effigy on a Soldiers
back, to the public Marketplace, there to be sported withal, a Crew of
Soldiers going before in Procession, some with Surplices, some with Organ
Pipes, to make up the solemnity.

When they had thus demolished the chief Monuments, at length the very
Gravestones and Marbles on the Floor did not escape their Sacrilegious hands.
For where there was any thing on them of Sculptures or Inscriptions in Brass,
These they force and tear off. So that whereas there were many fair pieces of
this kind before, as that of Abbot William of Ramsey, whose large Marble
Gravestone was plated over with Brass, and several others the like, there is
not any such now, in all the Church, to be seen; though most of the
Inscriptions that were upon them, are preserved in this Book.

One thing indeed I must needs clear the Soldiers of, which Mercurius Rusticus
upon misinformation charges them with, viz. That they took away the
Bell-Clappers and sold them, with the Brass they plucked off from the Tombs.
The mistake was this: The neighborhood being continually disturbed with the
Soldiers jangling and ringing the Bells auker, as though there had been a
scare-fire, (though there was no other, but what they themselves had made) some
of the Inhabitants by night took away the Clappers, and hid them in the Roof of
the Church, on purpose only to free their ears from that confused noise; which
gave occasion to such as did not know it, to think the Soldiers had stolen
them away.

Having thus done their work on the Floor below, they are now at leisure to
look up to the Windows above, which would have entertained any persons else,
with great delight and satisfaction, but only such Zealots as these, whose eyes
were so dazzled, that they thought they saw Popery in every Picture and piece of
painted Glass.

Now the Windows of this Church were very fair, and had much curiosity of
workmanship in them, being adorned and beautified with several Historical
passages out of Scripture and Ecclesiastical story; such were those in the Body
of the Church in the Isles, in the new Building and elsewhere.

But the Cloister Windows were most famed of all, for their great Art and
pleasing variety. One side of the Quadrangle containing the History of the Old
Testament; another, that of the New; a Third the Founding and Founders of the
Church; a Fourth, all the Kings of England downward from the first Saxon King.
All which notwithstanding were most shamefully broken and destroyed.

And amongst other things thus demolisht in the Windows, there was one thing
Fame had made very remarkable, and that was the story of the Paschal Pickeril.
The thing was this; Our Savior was represented in two places, in the Cloister
and in the great Western Window, sitting at his last Supper with his twelve
Apostles; In one place there was a single Fish, in the other three Fishes in a
Dish, set before him. This occasioned that discourse and common Talk, I
remember, I have often heard, of the Paschal Pickeril at Peterburgh.

Now what should be the meaning of this conceit, is left to every one to
conjecture. The Account that I have had from some was this, That it was the
device of some devout and ignorant Artist, from a Notion he had of the time
this last Supper must needs be in, that is of Lent, and that our Savior
himself was a strict observer of Lent, and eat no Flesh all that season: and
therefore He took liberty, to substitute a Fish instead of the Paschal Lamb.

Whatever it was, the matter of Fact was certain: and that particular piece of
Glass wherein the Three Fishes are portray'd happend to be preserved in the
great Devastation, and was committed to my trust by the Author of the foregoing
History, from whom I had this Relation, and is yet to be seen.

But to proceed; notwithstanding all the Art and curiosity of workmanship these
Windows did afford, yet nothing of all this could oblige the Reforming Rabble,
but they deface and break them all in pieces, in the Church and in the
Cloister, and left nothing undemolisht, where either any Picture or Painted
Glass did appear; excepting only part of the great West window in the Body of
the Church, which still remains entire, being too high for them, and out of
their reach. Yea to encourage them the more in this Trade of breaking and
battering Windows down, Cromwell himself (as 'twas reported) espying a little
Crucifix in a Window aloft, which none perhaps before had scarce observed, gets
a Ladder, and breaks it down zealously with his own hand.

But before I conclude the Narrative, I must not forget to tell, how they
likewise broke open the Chapterhouse, ransacked the Records, broke the Seals,
tore the Writings in pieces, specially such as had great Seals annexed unto
them, which they took or mistook rather for the Popes Bulls. So that a grave
and sober Person coming into the Room at that time, finds the Floor all strewed
and covered over, with torn Papers, Parchments and broken Seals; and being
astonished at this sight, does thus expostulate with them; Gentlemen (says He)
what are ye doing? They answer, We are pulling and tearing the Popes Bulls in
pieces. He replies, ye are much mistaken: for these Writings are neither the
Popes Bulls, nor any thing relating to him. But they are the Evidences of
several men's Estates, and in destroying these, you will destroy and undo many*
with this they were something persuaded, and prevailed upon by the same person,
to permit him to carry away all that were left undefaced, by which means, the
writings the Church has now, came to be preserved.

Such was the Soldiers carriage and behavior all the time during their stay
at Peterburgh, which was about a Fortnights space: They went to Church duly,
but it was only to do mischief, To break and batter the Windows and any Carved
work that was yet remaining, or to pull down Crosses wheresoever they could
find them: which the first Founders did not set up with so much zeal, as these
last Confounders pulled them down.

Thus in a short time, a fair and goodly Structure was quite stripped of all its
ornamental Beauty and made a ruthful Spectacle, a very Chaos of Desolation and
Confusion, nothing scarce remaining but only bare walls, broken Seats, and
shattered Windows on every side.

And in the time of this public Confusion, two other things happened not
unworthy of relating. The one for the strangeness, the other for the sadness of
the Accident.

The first was this; when now the Church doors lay open to all comers, without
locks and bars, and none to look after them, those specially that lead up to
the Leads above.

Two young Children not above five years old, had got up the Steeple by
themselves, and having lost their way down, come to the place where the great
Bells hang. Here there was a large round space left purposely in the Arch, when
first built, for the drawing up Bells or any other things, as there should be
occasion. This place used to be safely closed before, but now it lay wide open,
and was between thirty and forty yards off from the ground. The two children
coming hither and finding this passage, One, out of his childish simplicity was
for jumping down: No, (says the other) let us rather swarm down, there being a
Bell rope then hanging down through that place to the Clockhouse below. Now
this last they did; And a Gentlemen walking there beneath at that time, sees
two children come with that swiftness down the Rope, like Arrows from a Bow,
who were both taken up for dead, on the place. This happened on a Sunday in the
afternoon, in Sermon time. The news coming into the Parish Church, that two
children falling off from the Minster were slain, The Congregration was
exceedingly disordered, so that the Preacher could not go on for a time, every
Parent fearing it might be their own childrens case; till at length they
understood the truth and certainty of all. For it pleased God by a strange and
wonderful providence to preserve both these children, having no hurt but only
their Hands galled by the Rope, and their Feet a little stunted by the fall
from the Clock-house, where they were thrown off, the Rope being fastened there,
and this some four or five yards high. The Persons, I suppose, are both living
still; and one of them, (whose Father was then one of the chief Tradesmen of
the Town) since a grave Minister, and Rector of a Parish in Northamptonshire.

The other thing that happened of more fatal consequence was this. It being that
time of the year, when young Lads are busy in rifling Jack-Daws Nests to get
their young, a Scholar of the Free School, son to a Parliament Officer, was got
upon the Top of the Minster about this employment; who going along the Cieling
in the Body of the Church, and treading unwarily on some rotten Boards, fell
down from thence, upon the Loft where the Organ now stands, having his Pockets
filled with those inauspicious Birds, and with the Fall from so great a height,
was slain outright and never stirred more.

These two things hapened much about the same time, and in the time of that
public Confusion and Disorder. But to proceed in our intended Narrative.

These things I have related before, were indeed the Acts of private persons
only, men of wild intemperate zeal, and who had no Commission for what they
did, but what was owing to the Swords by their sides. Yet notwithstanding all
these things seemed afterward to be owned and approved by the Powers then in
being, when they sold all the Churches Lands, and many fair Buildings adjoining
to the Minster, were likewise pulled down and sold by public Order and
Authority, such were the Cloisters, the old Chapterhouse, the Library, the
Bishops Hall and Chapel at the end of it: The Hall was as fair a Room as most
in England, and another called the Green-Chamber, not much inferior to it.
These all were then pulled down and destroyed; and the materials, Lead, Timber
and Stone exposed to Sale, for any that would buy them. But some of the
Bargains proved not very prosperous; The Lead especially that came off the
Palace was as fatal as the Gold of Toulouse: for to my knowledge, The Merchant
that bought it, lost it all, and the Ship which carried it, in her Voyage to
Holland.

And thus the Church continued ruined and desolate and without all divine
Offices for a time: till at length by the favor of a great Person in the
Neighborhood, it was repaired and restored to some degrees of decency again;
and out of the ashes of a late Cathedral, grew up into a new Parochial Church,
in which way it was employed and used ever after, until the Kings happy
Restoration.

For Mr. Oliver St. John Chief Justice then of the Common Pleas, being sent on
an Embassy into Holland by the Powers that governed then, requested this Boon
of them at his Return, that they would give him the ruined Church or Minster at
Peterburgh; this they did accordingly, and he gave it to the Town of Peterburgh
for their use, to be employed as a Parochial Church, their own Parish Church
being then very ruinous and gone to decay.

Now the the Town considering the largeness of the Building, and the greatness
to the charge to repair it, which of themselves they were not able to defray,
they all agree, to pull down the Ladies Chapel, as it was then called, an
additional Building to the North side of the Minster, (being then ruinous and
ready to fall) and to expose the materials thereof, Lead, Timber and Stone to
Sale, and to convert the money that was made of them, toward the Repairs of the
great Fabric.

All this they did, and appointed certain persons to oversee the Work, and
expended several sums thus in Repairs, mending the Leads, securing the Roof,
Glazing several Windows, and then fitting up the Quire, and making it pretty
decent, for the Congregation to meet in. And this they did, by taking the
Painted Boards that came off from the Roof of the Ladies Chapel, and placing
them all along at the back of the Quire in such manner, as they continue to
this day.

When the Place was thus fitted up, and the Devastations which the Soldiers
had made, in some measure repaired, one Mr. Samuel Wilson School Master of the
Charter House in London, was sent down by the Committee of Plundered Ministers,
as they were then called, to be Preacher, with a Sallary of 160 l. per an. in
which employment he continued until the Kings Return.

Then Dr. Cousin the ancient Dean of the Church, after almost 20 years Exile in
France, returned and reassumed his Right again, in the year 1660 about the end
of July. He then after so long an Interval renewed the ancient usage, and read
divine Service first himself, and caused it to be read every day afterward,
according to the old Laudable use and Custom, and settled the Church and Quire
in that order wherein it now continues.

But though the Church was thus delivered from public Robbers and Spoilers,
yet it was not safe from the injuries of private hands. For some ten or twelve
years after, certain Thieves in the dead of the Night, broke into the Church
and stole away all the Plate they could find, viz. a fair Silver Basin gilt,
and the Virgers two Silver Rods, and a Linen Table-Cloth to wrap them in,
which were never heard of to this day.

This was the same Basin that had been plundered by the Soldiers, and
recovered again, but irrecoverably lost now. Yet both these losses were soon
repaired, one by Dr. Henshaw Bishop then of the Place, who gave a fair new
Silver Basin gilt: the other made up by Dr. Duport then Dean; who furnished the
Virgers again with the Ensigns of their Office, by buying two new Silver Maces,
for the Churches use.

And thus is this History brought down at length within our own knowledge and
remembrance; where we have seen what various fortunes this Ancient Church has
had, which now reckons at least 1000 years from its first Foundation. It has
been often ruinated and as often reedified. Once it was destroyed by Danes,
twice consumed by Fire; It escaped the general downfall of Abbeys in Hen. the
Eighth's time, though not without the loss of some of her fairest Manors; And
yet what that King took away in revenues, he added to it in Dignity, by
converting it, from an Abbey into a Cathedral Church. But the worst mischief
that ever befell it, was that in the late Rebellious times, when the Church it
self was miserably defaced and spoiled, and all the Lands for the maintenance
thereof quite alienated and sold. And yet through Gods especial goodness and
favor we have lived to see, the one repaired, the others restored, and the
Church it self recovering her ancient beauty and luster again.

And that it may long thus continue, flourish and prosper, and be a Nursery for
virtue, a Seminary for true Religion and Piety, a constant Preserver of Gods
public worship and service, and free from all Sacrilegious hands, is the
earnest and hearty Prayer, wherewith I shall conclude this Discourse.

Ex Libro Memorandor. Oliv. Sutton Episc. Lincoln. Anno Pontificatus sui XI. A.
D. 1290.
OLiv. etc. Archidiacono Oxon. etc. Ad Audientiam nostram nuper certa relatione
pervenit, Quod nonnulli juxta suarum mentium inconstantiam quasi vento agitati
a cultu fidei temere deviantes, locum quendam in campo juxta Ecclesiam Sancti
Clementis extra Municipium Oxon. fontem beati Edmundi vulgariter nuncupatum,
veluti locum sacrum venerari, illumque sub simulatione sacrorum Miraculorum
quae perpetrata confingunt ibidem causa devotionis erroneae frequentare, ac
populum non modicum illuc attrahendo hujusmodi figmentis dampnatis decipere imo
pervertere noviter presumpserint, errorem Gentilium inter Christicolas
introducere superstitiose conando. Nos vero hujusmodi incredulitatis perfidiam,
veluti contra fidem Ecclesiae and Doctrinam Apostolicam ne corda renatorum
caligine haereticae pravitatis obducat temporis per processum, si forte
radicari and germinare zizania permittatur, tortuose serpente virus sui cautius
ministrante, fomentum eliminare and prorsus amputare deo propitio volentes,
Vobis firmiter injungendo mandamus quatenus in singulis Ecclesiis intra
Missarum folempnia, and locis aliis Archidiaconatus vestri in quibus videritis
expedire per vos and alios firmiter inhibeatis ne quis ad dictum locum causa
venerationis ejusdem de cetero convenire and illum superstitiose frequentare
presumat sub pena Excommuncationis Maj. omnes and singulos contra hujus
inhibitionem scienter temere venientes dicta sententia comminata solempniter in
genere innodantes, donec de culpa contriti beneficium absolutionis meruerint
obtinere. Val. Dat. apud Ludam 8. Kal Sept. Pontif. nostri Anno XI.

OLiv. etc. Archidiacono Bucks vel ejus Offic. salutem, etc. Ad nostrum certa
relatione pervenit auditum, quod nonnulli fidei inconstantis ad fontem quendam
in campo de Lincelad existentem sub color devotionis confictae causa
peregrinationis ex diversis partibus confluentes, ibidemque miracula sanitatum
fieri pretendentes, oblationibus and modis aliis locum venerantur eundem, and
ad haec facienda per eos qui regimen Parochialis Eccl. de Lincelad optinere
noscuntur non sine capiditatis vitio temere admittuntur in animarum suarum
periculum and aliorum perniciosum exemplum. Cum igitur propter assertionem
temerariam miraculorum quae non sunt ab Ecclesia approbata, locus aliquis
prophanus non debeat causa venerationis a populo frequentari; nos errorem
praedictum prout ad nostrum spectat officium tollere cupientes, Vobis firmiter
injungendo Mandamus, quatenus in singulis Ecclesiis Archidiaconatus Bucks
singulis diebus dominicis ac festivis usque ad festum Assumptionis virginis
gloriose prox. futurum intra Missarum solempnia frequentationem hujus dicti
loci and confluentium ad illum admissionem sub pena Excommunicationis faciatis
solempniter and public interdici, omnesque quos contra interdictum hujusmodi
comperietis facientes taliter castigare curetis, quod eorum pena consimilibus
sit praesumptoribus in exemplum. Et quod Vicarius Ecclesiae de Lincelad
pretextu emolumenti quod ex oblationibus consequitur antedictis errantem in hac
part populum in suo dicitur errore fovere, plus lucris inhians quam animarum
saluti procurandae ut videtur intendens; vobis Mandamus quatenus eun them
Vicarium citetis peremptory quod proximo die juridico post festum S.
Margaretae Virginis prox. futur. ubicunque in nostra diocesi tunc fuerimus
personaliter propter Excessus sui vehementiam compareat coram nobis, auditur'
factur' and receptur' pro demeritis quod justitia suadebit. Et quid super hiis
duxeritis faciendum, nos dicto die certificetis per Literas vestras Patentes
harum seriem and nomen dicti vicarii proprium continentes. Dat. apud Bucks VI.
Kal. Julii An. Dom. 1299.

UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis ad quos praesentes Literae
pervenerint, Oliverius permissione divina Lincolniensis Episc. salutem in
omnium salvatore. Decorem domus Dei emulatione condigna Zelantes devotionem
fidelium ad ejus venerationem sinceram juxta conditiones Locorum and motus
peculiares ex animi sinceritate surgentes nonnunquam decrevimus excitare. De
Dei igitur Omnipotentis misericordia, gloriosissimae Virginis Mariae, Beati
Hugonis, confratrum ac omnium Sanctorum meritis confidentes, Omnibus
Parochianis nostris and aliis quorum Diocesani hanc Indulgentiam nostram
ratificarint, de peccatis suis vere contritis and confessis qui causa
Devotionis and venerationis Capellae Beatae Mariae in Monasterio de Burgo
Sancti Petri nostrae dioces. cujus Altar X. Kal. Julii An. Domini Milles.
ducentes. nonages. consecravimus Ministerio Pontificali, diebus Sabbati and
praecipue ad Missam memoratae Virginis gloriosae accesserint in futurum, pro
sua and omnium tam vivorum quam morte functorum pie oraturi salute, december dies
de injuncta sibi penitentia misericorditer relaxamus. In cujus rei Testimon'
etc. Dat. die, Anno Domini and loco praedictis.

Berthwulfi Regis, de Liberate Breodunensis Monasterii.
IN Nomine Almi agye Sophie. Qui Monarchiam mundi totius accelsitudinem
celorum, abditamque profunditatem turgentis Oceani in altis and minimis omnia
cum suo Majestatis imperio. Qui in primordio mundi creavit and nunc in aevum
gubernat and regit summus pater Omnipotens Deus. Status hujus mundi in
velocitate deficiet, and rotunda seculorum volubilitas fatiscet, sic alternando
creaturarum qualitas decrescet; sic mutando mortalis vitae fragilitas fatiscit.
De qua miserrima humani Status vicissitudine Ecclesiastes coelesti afflatus
spiritu competentem protulit summam. Generatio, inquit, venit, and generatio
vadit. Alii nascuntur and alii moriuntur. Ita universa divitiarum facultas and
temporalis gaze possessio quod precessorum anxia sollicitudo per indefessa
laborum emolumenta lucratur, proh dolor, incertis heredibus, interdum optatis
interdum exosis relinquitur. Quemadmodum Psalmista in profundam humani generis
socordiam conquerens increpitet. Thesaurizat and ignorant cui congregat ea. Ideo
sunt omnes nostras serie and sermocinationes litterarum apicibus confirmandas,
ne unquam ullo oblivione tradantur, sed pro perpetua memoria servantur,
Quicquid reges, ac precedentes patres firmiter constituerunt. Qua de re Ego
Berthwulfus divino fultus suffragio Rex Merciorum cum consensu and consilio
Principum ac Magistratuum Merciarum gentis donans donabo venerabili Abbati
Eanmundo and ejus familiae Sanctae congregationis Breodunensis Monasterii istam
libertatis gratiam illius Monasterii apud Breodune mihi and omnibus Mercis tam
pro Deo, quam pro seculo in Elemosinam sempiternam. Id est ut sit liberatum and
absolutum illud Monasterium ab illis causis quas cum feorme and eafor
vocitemus. Tam a pastu ancipitrorum meorum omnium quam etiam venatorum omnium
vel a pastu equorum meorum omnium sive Ministrorum eorum. Quid plura, ab omni
illa incommoditate afres and cum feorme, nisi istis causis quas hic nominamus.
Precones si trans mare venirent ad regem venturi vel nuncii de gente
occidentalium Saxonum vel de gente Northanhymbrorum si venirent ad horam
tertiam diei vel ad medium diem dabatur illis prandium, si venerint super nonam
horam tunc dabatur eis noctis pastum and iterum de mane pergent in viam suam.
Ob hujus ergo rei gratiam. Ipse vero supradictus Eanmund Abbas ac illius supra
nominata familia aput Breodune ad commercium hujus Libertatis cum testimonio
obtimatum gentis Merciorum dederunt Berthwulfo Regi Merciorum CLXXX. Mancupas
in auro puro, and terram quindecim Manentium in duabus locis aput Stanlege and
aput Bellanforde. Ut ista libertatis gratia cum Dei testimonio and omnium
Sanctorum in celo and eorum hominum in terra qui Dei precepta custodiunt and
tremendum diem Judicii metuunt and honorem Sancte crucis Christi colunt, ac
illorum baptismatis donam firmiter perenniterque firmata nullo homine
interdicente sed Deo favente, etc. angelis ejus stabilis permaneat tamdiu fides
Christiana ac Baptismum Christi apud Anglorum gentem in Britannia maneat.
Insuper etiam ego Humberht princeps optinebam a domino meo Berhtwulfo rege
Merciorum cum consensu optimatum illo Abbati Eanmundo and family illius
supradicto on Breodune hanc Libertatis gratiam pro eorum venerali pecunia quod
mihi impendebant in uno vase pretioso potatorio quod fuit de nobili genere
pulchraliter factum and expert cum auro ornatum. Hoc est ut sit illud
Monasterium on Breodune liberatum and absolutum ab omnibus Causis magnis vel
modicis notis ac ignotis quae mihi aut principibus Tonsetorum unquam antea
pertinebant ex illo Monasterio, tamdiu voluerit Deus ut Baptismi gratia and
recta fides cum regibus ac principibus Christianis in populo fideli firmiter
fideliterque permaneat in evum. Et ut memeria Regis Beorhtwlfi ac Humberhti
principis and omnium optimatum gentis Merciorum Sacris orationibus diebus ac
noctibus memoretur. Et nullus homo alicujus personis rex aut princeps magnis
sive modicis in aliquo tempere diabolica potestate fretus per satanicam
phylargiriam vel gastrimargiam hanc nostram Statutionem fringere presumat, sed
semper stabilis and indiscussa haec donatio conservetur in perpetuum. Et ut
merita ac elemosynas nostra ante Deum florescant ac nomina nostra coram throno
Domini scribentur in libro viventium, Amen.

Haec sedula scripta est anno dominicae incarnationis DCCCXLIIII. Indictione
vero XI. in venerabili Monasterio primum aput Hrypadune and iterum karaxata
atque confirmata fuit cum ista testimonia quorum subter nomina notata sunt. Ego
Berhtwlf domino disponente rex Merciorum hanc nostram divi and meam donationem
michi and omnibus Mercis in Elemosinam sempiternam firmiter donabo atque cum
signo Sancte crucis consignabo. Ego Sethryth regina consensi and subscripsi.
Ego Humberht Episc. consensi and subscripsi. Ego Crolred Episc. consensi and
subscripsi. Ego Berhtred Episc. consensi and subscripsi. Ego Althun Episc.
consensi and subscripsi. Ego Cuthulfus Episc. consensi and subscripsi. Ego
Edmund Abbas consensi and subscripsi. Ego Withred Abbas consensi and
subscripsi. Signum Muceli principis. Signum Humberhti principis. Signum
Ethelhardi principis. Signum Aldberti principis. Signum Dudan principis. Signum
Sigredi principis. Signum Wiglafi principis. Signum Muceli principis. Signum
Alfstani principis. Signum Hunstanis principis.

Edmundi Atheling Reg. de Peykirke and Waltun.
IN nomine Alme Trinitatis and individue unitatis, patris and filii and
spiritus S. quibus est una Essentia, par Deitas and indivisa Majestas, communis
apex, Trinitas in nomine, unitas in Deitate, eternus ante omnia secula. In fine
seculi homo factus ex Virgin, ut nos redimeret quos creavit. Ideoque necesse
est ut in istis transitoriis ac fugitivis opibus adquiramus nobis in celis
manentem substantiam quam nec oculus vidit nec auris audivit nec men's percipere
potuit humana. Cujus predestinatione idcirco Ego Edmundus Atheling Rex pro
amore redemptoris nostri and propter nomen sanctum ejus qui dixit Date and
dabitur vobis, Ideoque nunc donabo deo omnipotenti exiguum munus ruricule in
loco qui ab incolis vocitatur aput Pegecyrcan in perpetua hereditate ad locum
qui dicitur novum Monasterium Sanctae Trinitatis ac genetricis domini nostri
atque omnium Sanctorum pro redemptione anime me and conjugis me and pro anima
Siuerthi. Id est unam mansam and dimidiam in supradicta villa and tres perticas
in villa quae dicitur Wealtun. Ita habeant sicut Siuerthus habebat in vita in
longitudine and in latitudine in magnis and in modicis rebus, campis, pascuis,
pratis, silvis, theloneum aquarum, piscationem in paludibus. Sit autem
predictum rus liberum ab omni servili tributo seculariumque serviciumque
exinanitum tribus exceptis, rata videlicet expeditione and pontis arcisve
restauratione. Precipioque in nomine Sancti salvatoris tam vobis viventibus
quam etiam qui Christianitatis nomine and individue agnitionis fide censentur,
ut hujus libertatis Statuta ad irrita deducere quispiam minime presumat.
Quisquis autem benevola mente hanc nostram donationem and Eleemosinam
amplificare satagerit, in hoc presenti seculo vite illius prospera felicitas
augeatur, and eterne vite gaudia Eterna succedant. Siquis igitur diabolica
illectus pravitate and hoc donum in aliud quam quod constituimus pervertere
molitus fuerit, maneat eternaliter retrusus inter flammivomas estuantis gehenne
incorruptiones lugubre sibi solium vendicans inter tres nefandissimos
proditores Christi, Judam, Annam and Caiphan. Et in Satane faucibus maneat
degluciendus omnium infernalium morsibus Carnificum sine fine laceretur. Nisi
hic digna satisfactione emendare curaverit quod contra nostrum decretum inique
commisit.

Quid agendum sit cum aliqua negligentia de corpore aut sanguine domini accidit.
Cum de corpore vel sanguine domini tanta negligentia aliquo casu accidit ut
cadat deorsum, sive in alium locum ubi plene percipi non possit quo ceciderit
and utrum ad terram inde aliquid venerit; quam citius fieri possit indicetur
res Abbati vel Priori, qui adjunctis sibi aliquibus Fratribus prope veniat ad
locum ubi hoc contigerit. Et si corpus ceciderit vel sanguis effusus fuerit
super lapidem aut terram aut lignum aut mattam aut tapetum aut aliquid
hujusmodi, pulvis terre colligatur, pars illa lapidis radatur, pars ligni matte
tapeti and si quid aliud est hujusmodi abscidatur and in sacrarium projiciatur.
Quod si locus ubi ceciderit manifest deprehendi nequierit and tamen deorsum
cecidisse constiterit, in loco and circa locum in quem maxim cecidisse
crediderint, similiter colligatur, radatur, abscidatur and in sacrario
recondatur. Hi vero quorum negligentia hoc evenerit, in proximo capitulo
humiliter culpam suam dicant, judicium nudi suscipiant and injungatur eis
penitentia vel de jejunio vel judiciis vel Psalmis vel aliquid hujusmodi.
Quibus de judicio ad loca sua reversis, omnes Sacerdotes qui tunc presents
erunt surgant and ad judicia suscipienda cum omni devotione se offerant. Tunc
ille qui capitulum tenet septem tamen quos voluerit de ipsis ad suscipienda
judicia retineat, and ceteris ire cessum precipiat. Finito capitulo, omnes
simul prostrati dicant septem Psalmos in Monasterio, incipientes eos psallere
cum exeunt de capitulo. Quos sequatur Paternoster, cum his capitulis and
collecta. Et veniat super nos misericordia tua domine: Ne memineris iniquitatum
nostrarum. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. Exaudi domine preces nostras and
confitentium tibi parce peccatis, ut quos conscientie reatus accusat,
indulgentia tue miserationis absolvat. P. aut alia collecta. Deus cui proprium
est misereri semper. Aut aliam pro peccatis. Si vero super corporale vel super
aliquem honestum pannum sanguis ceciderit, certumque fuerit quo ceciderit, pars
illa panni in aliquo calice abluatur, and prima ablutio a fratribus absumatur,
Relic due in sacrarium projiciantur. In primo autem capitulo dicta culpa hi
soli tamen quorum negligentia hoc evenit supradictam disciplinam, fratres vero
omnes septem Psalmos cum capitulis and collecta sicut superius dictum est in
Monasterio dicant. Si ipsa die brevis pro defuncto in capitulo lectus fuerit,
prius canant verba mea pergentes in Ecclesiam. Postea feptem Psalmos sicut
superius dictum est. Si vero alio aliquo modo de hoc Sacramento levior
negligentia evenerit ex judicio Abbatis vel Prioris leviori vindicta frater
cujus culpa hoc contigerit puniatur.

Item alia constitutio de eodem.
SI aperta quod absit negligentia de corpore aut sanguine domini acciderit,
frater per quem hoc contigerit quam citius poterit indicabit Abbati vel Priori;
and venientes propere ad locum ubi hoc contigerit, sieffusus fuerit sanguis
super pannum, abscidetur quantum aspersio sanguinis comprehendit, qualiscunque
vel quodcunque sint panni: Dehinc abluentur vino in aliquo calice usque tertio;
Ablutionibus vero utatur unus frater aut plures. Panni reponentur cum Reliquiis
ut serventur perhenniter cum eis. Si vero super lapidem aut terram aut lignum
ceciderit, abscidetur pars aliqua lapidis aut ligni, vel colligetur pars terrae
quam melius poterit fieri; and eodem modo sicut sanctissima res servabitur cum
aliis Reliquiis. Si vero non poterit locus manifest deprehendi ubi ceciderit,
vel ubi effusus fuit, abluent tamen vel radent aut colligent de terra pulverem
ab illo in quo vel circa quem maxim crediderint effusum sanguinem fuisse aut
corpus cecidisse, condentque in sacrario. Subinde tabula percussa vocabit omnes
in capitulum, and omnibus ingressis and sedentibus, prosternet se frater in
medio indicaturus culpam. Et si propere and visibiliter acciderit vel in casu
de corpore aut in Effusione de sanguine aut alio quolibet modo aperte, (sicut
de vino quod primum post assutum sanguinem ponitur in calice, aut de illo quod
super digitos aut in patena pro minutis particulis) dictis paucis ab Abbate que
tunc dici debuerunt, surgentes ibunt omnes cantantes 7 Psalmos usque in
oratorium. Et ibi prostratis omnibus sedebit frater super gradum ante alios and
habens faciem versus Altar suscipiet nudus judicium coram aliis dum dicentur
Psalmi. Et si super aliut altar quam super ipsum majus fuit facta negligentia,
non ibi suscipiet judicium, sed ante illud super quod evenerit ductus ab aliis
duobus fratribus. Et finitis Psalmis dicetur Kyrieleson and dominica oration,
and capitula ab Abbate. Ne reminiscaris domine delicta nostra. Fiat
misericordia tua. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. Deus cui proprium. Ineffabilem.
Deus qui just irasceris. Postea Abbas in proximo sequenti capitulo indicet
Orationes and jejunia communiter omnibus and maxim ipsi fratri secundum quod
sibi and discretis fratribus visum fuerit and quantitas culpe monuerit. Et haec
sententia teneatur hoc ordine pro illa negligentia de qua frater cui acciderit
dubitare non poterit. Si vero levior fuerit culpa neque sic aperta, ex judicio
Abbatis addetur levior sententia fratri: imprimis avertetur asperitas judicii
quod ante altar debere suscipi diximus. Suscipietur tamen si pervisum fuerit
in capitulo. Si autem perviderit aliquis bonus circa tantam rem merito
solicitus ut quolibet alio quam supra descripto modo possit corrigi sanctius
qualis vel quantacunque videatur offensio tam sanctissime rei, illum melius
corrigentem imitari non dedignamur. Sed interim qui melius nesciet, teneat
istud quod diximus.

Bonifacii Cant. Archiep. de relaxatione XL. dierum ad Ecclesiam Burgi.
UNiversis Christi fidelibus presents literas inspecturis, Bonifacius
permissione divina Cantuariensis Archiep. totius Anglie primas, salutem in
domino sempiternam. Quum ut ait Apostolus, omnes stabimus ante tribunal Jesu
Christi recepturi prout in corpore gessimus sive bonum fuerit sive malum,
Oportet nos diem messionis extreme misericordie operibus prevenire, ac
eternorum intuitu illud seminare in terris quod reddente Domino recolligere
debeamus in celis firmam spem fiduciamque tenentes. Quoniam qui parce seminat
parce and metet, and qui seminat in benedictionibus de benedictionibus and
metet vitam eternam. De Dei ergo omnipotentis misericordia and Beat Marie
semper Virginis, beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, beati Thomae
Martyris, omniumque Sanctorum meritis confidentes, omnibus de nostra provincia
vere penitentibus and confessis qui ad Ecclesiam beati Petri de Burgo causa
devocionis and ob venerationem beati Oswaldi Regis and Martyris, cujus
sanctissime Reliquie continentur ibidem accesserint, and de bonis a Deo sibi
collatis grata caritatis subsidia loco tam pio gratiose duxerint conferenda,
Quadraginta dies de injuncta sibi penitentia misericorditer relaxamus.
Indulgencias insuper suffraganeorum nostrorum Monasterio ipsi concessas ratas
habentes and acceptas ipsas auctoritate Metropolitica confirmamus. Datum apud
Croylandiam die Jovis proxima ante festum Beati Michaelis, Anno Domini
Millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo tertio.

Hugonis Eliensis Episcopi de relaxatione XXX. dierum.
UNiversis Christi fidelibus presents Iiteras inspecturis, Hugo miseratione
divina Eliensis Episcopus salutem in Domino sempiternam. De Dei omnipotentis
misericordia and gloriose genetricis Marie, Sancti Oswaldi Regis and Martiris
omniumque sanctorum meritis confidentes, omnibus parochianis nostris and aliis
quorum Diocesani id ratum habuerint, qui brachium Sancti Oswaldi and alias
Reliquias apud Burgum Sancti Petri devotionis causa pie visitaverint vel
aliquid de suo ibidem optulerint, de peccatis suis vere contritis and confessis
triginta dies de injuncta sibi penitentia misericorditer relaxamus: Concedentes
hanc nostre relaxationis gratiam perpetuo duraturam. In cujus rei testimonium
presentibus literis sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Datum ad.... apud Ely undecimo
Kal. Septembris anno gratiae Millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo tertio.

W. Ossoriensis Episcopi de Indulgentia X. dierum.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum inspecturis vel audituris, W.
permissione divina Ossoriensis Ecclesie Minister humilis eternam in Domino
salutem. Quoniam omnes, ut ait Apostolus, stabimus ante tribunal domini
recepturi prout in corpore gessimus sive bonum fuerit sive malum, oportet nos
diem messionis extreme operibus misericordiae prevenire ac eternorum intuitu
seminare in terris quod cum fructu multiplicato recolligere debeamus in celis.
Recolentes quod qui parce seminat parce and metet, and qui seminat in
benedictionibus de benedictionibus and metet vitam eternam. Nos igitur de Dei
misericordia and Beatae Mariae Virginis and beatorum Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli omniumque sanctorum meritis and precibus consisi, omnibus Ecclesiam Beati
Petri de Burgo in festo dedicationis causa devocionis visitantibus confessis
and vere penitentibus X. dies de injuncta sibi penitentia in nomine domini
relaxamus.

Confederationes inter Ecclesiam Burgi and alias diversas Ecclesias.
HAec est conventio inter Monasterium Sancti Petri de Burch and inter fratres
Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, ut pro quolibet fratre defuncto, fiant septem
Officia plenaria in conventu; and unusquisque sacerdos dicat privatim tres
missas, and q' missam non cantant, Psalterium integrum. Eandem conventionem
habemus cum fratribus nostris de Gloucestre, and cum fratribus nostris de
Abendone; and cum fr. nostris de Sancto Edmundo; and cum fr. nostris de Sancto
Albano; and cum fr. nostris de Hely; and cum fr. nostris de Thornei; and cum
fr. nostris de Crulande; and cum fr. n. de Dunhelm; and cum fr. n. de Eboraca;
and cum fr. n. Cantariae de Sancto Oswaldo; and cum fr. n. de Waltham; and cum
fr. n. de Fescam Et cum fr. n. de Monte Sanctae Trinitatis; and cum fr. n. de
Grestem; and cum fr. n. Beccensibus; and cum fr. n. Sanctae Mariae Divae; and
cum fr. n. Carnotensibus; and cum fr. n. Sancti Benedicti super Legerim. Pro
sororibus nostris de Multonia VII. officia faciemus. Illaeque pro fratribus
tria Psalteria persolvent.

Inter Ecclesiam Burgi and Ecclesiam de Leuues.
HAec Conventio inter fratres Sancti Petri de Burch, and fratres Sancti
Pancracii de Leuues; ut pro monachis defunctis utriusque loci, fiat unum
officium plenarium in conventu; Et unusquisque sacerdos cantet privatim 1.
Missam, and q'missam non cantat, Quinquaginta Psalmos: and conversi quinquagies
Miserere Mei Dominus. Pro Abbate de Burch, and pro Priore de Jews cantabuntur
XXX. Missae; non a singulis, sed in conventu.

Item inter Ecclesiam Burgi and alias diversas Ecclesias.
HAec est Conventio inter fratres Sancti Petri de Burch, and inter fratres
Sancti Petri novi Monasterii: ut pro Monachis defunctis utriusque loci fiant
tria officia plenaria in conventu, and unusquisque sacerdos cantet privatim
III. Missas, and q' missam non cantant Psalterium totum. Eandem Conventionem
habemus cum fratribus nostris Sancti Nicolai Andegav. Et cum fratribus nostris
Norwicensibus; and cum fratribus nostris de Bardneia; and cum fratribus nostris
de Bertunia; and cum fratribus nostris de Wincelcumbe; and cum fratribus
nostris de Sancto Pancratio; and cum fratribus nostris Sanctae Mariae
Longiledi; and cum fratribus nostris Cadomensibus; and cum fratribus nostris
Troatensibus; and cum fratribus nostris de Sais; and cum fratribus nostris
Sancti Ebrulfi; and cum fratribus nostris de Bernai; and cum fratribus nostris
de p'jecto de Virmandensi; and cum fratribus nostris de Bermundei; and cum
fratribus nostris Pratensibus, and cum fratribus nostris de Witely; and cum
fratribus Nostris Cantariae de Gecldeurt.

FINIS.

