MEMOIRES OF HENRY D. of Guise, Relating his Passage to NAPLES, And heading
there the SECOND REVOLT Of that PEOPLE, Englished.

Tu nisi ventis
Debes ludibrium cave.
Horat. l. 1. ode 14. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Sign
of the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1669.

PREFACE.
THe illustrious Author of these Memoires devoted his Actions to the service of
his King and Country, and his Book to Fame, and the obscure Translator as free
from design on the later, as any pretense to it by so mean a work as making
them speak English, comes not short in his Zeal for the former, but unprovided
for those more elevated ways toward it which are successfully trodden by
happier and better qualified persons, and believing these Memoires as worthy
the view of the whole World, so more particularly of such of his Countrymen,
as are confined to the Contemplation only of English, (or perhaps Latin and
Greek Authors, for the most part averse to Monarchy, because too much affected
to the forms of their own times and Countries) satisfies himself in laying them
before them, and this the rather, because he supposes that from those men arise
the greatest part of the Disputes between Authority and Liberty, and such
plausible but false Principles, as they (well versed in domestic Customs and
pretended Privileges, but ignorant of the nature of Government in general)
interpose between King and people, sometimes eclipsing the Sovereign, but never
failing (sooner or later) of a ruinous precipitation on the heads of the
Subjects: for limitations of regal authority, though they may possibly prevent
some irregular pressures on part of the people, by disabling the supreme power,
expose the whole to foreign invasion or domestic sedition. Though we might
suppose Englishmen by too dear experience sufficiently convinced of this
truth, yet the contrary so evidently appearing by the too frequent and public
discourses of such whose malice, avarice, ambition or folly is still desirous
of Novelty, I thought it possible the Extravagancies of others, and miseries
attending them, might be more moving, because out of reach of the deceitful
Optics of our own Pass^ons and Interests, and therefore pub^ish this part of
the Revolutions of Naples, never equalized by any but those of England, and by
them exceeded, which though they came short of the swift Rotation of the other,
and some sudden bloody and inhumane actions were of much longer continuance and
taken entirely more fatal, and particularly, no less barbarous; for besides
that our War on the unjust side destroyed several persons of quality in cold
blood, our illegal tribunals cut off our Sovereign and many of his Nobles with
formalities of Justice, to the highest profanation of that sacred name,
murdering with its sword in a Country where the laws put so great a
difference, between depriving a man of his life in a sudden passion and after a
considerate designing of it; besides all which if we compare the imaginary
pressures of the people of England with the real and indeed insupportable ones
of the Neapolitans, and these though imposed by a legal yet by a foreign
authority, we cannot but look on the later as more excusable, who were
continually oppressed by strange ministers, and their wealth exhausted to be
transported to a remote Country without any hope of the least return; whereas
^he English flourished under the mild Government of their native Lord, and all
that was raised for the public use descended in fruitful showers on the place
that exhaled it, or (which is the worst that can be objected) if only to the
advantage of some particulars, it was yet by such a mediation dispersed at last
amongst the rest of the people and returned to its first Proprietors.

But if we be necessitated to grant the people of England (generally speaking)
to have been more too blame than the Neapolitans, we are assured it will be
allowed us to raise the fidelity of our Gentry above that of theirs (though
very commendable and remarkable) who having no such aversion for the
Commonaltie adhered not to their King in order to its suppression, but out of a
sense of their own duty, which was so prevalent that many eminent Persons and
Families which might have been accepted by the overcoming party with great
advantages, persisted to a voluntary sinking with their King and Master, after
having acted so highly and honorably, and suffered so constantly in his
Service, as might have made them seem excusable, if they had at last taken some
care of themselves, of which were the History extant (whose want is one of our
great misfortunes) as well for eternizing the memory of very many transcendent
Actions, as giving Examples and Cautions to Posterity, it would pass for no
less Romantic to other Nations than this of Naples does to some of ours, how
justly I know not, for to question the truth of matter of fact, written by a
Person of such Quality is very uncivil, and he had been as injurious to his
discretion as honor, should he have given any other than a true account of
what passed before the eyes of so many malicious witnesses that could and would
have evinced the falsitie.

This granted, the Objection of being Romantic seems to its advantage, for as
such Romances are most acceptable that are moderated to the Probability of
History, so such Histories are most considerable whose truths are so eminent
that they rise near the fables of Romances: but if it be meant of the manner of
his Style and freedom of his Expressions, I think we ought to excuse him if
they were suitable to his actions, and if as Ben. Johnson says of Caesar, He
wrote with the same Spirit that he fought.

For the Pretense of forming a Republic he seems nothing serious in it, but to
have held it out as a Lure both to Nobility and People, and indeed he could
not but understand (what the Duke of Andria told him at the Conference) how
little the natures of the Neapolitans suited with it, and whoever goes about to
raise such a Structure without this consideration will fail of his end, and we
may remember how often the like attempt came short to the Innovators of our own
Nation; for when Rebellion had effaced the entire form of our ancient
Monarchy, and laid white Paper before them to design their Republic, they
could never give it any shape, and this appearing so difficult in the model,
how much more would it have proved so when it should have been put in practice
in the vast extent of three potent Nations (as he said of the Neapolitans) born
for Monarchy.

And if we consider the few changes from Monarchy that have been transferred to
our Knowledge, as of the Romans of old, and the Switzers and Low Country men
of late, we shall find a temper most suitable, their moderation, industry,
frugalitie, and unanimitie which are not the virtues of our Nation in these
times) so regulating private manners that a slack rein in the public
Government was sufficient, whilst on the contrary, where faction, pride,
hypocrisy, sloth and luxury predominate even Commonwealths have recourse to
the power of a single person, as the Romans to Dictators in particular
disorders and difficulties, and those arriving at greater heights to the
continued Government of Emperors, which several successions of vicious Princes
could not interrupt, till the monstrous and unparalelled excesses of Nero not
easily put an end to the Family of Caesar: the changes that happened afterward
are not to the present purpose, mention here being made only of Hereditary
Monarchy.

This was also most remarkable in the Republic of Florence, obliged on account
of perpetual factions and tumults to give an absolute and arbitrary power to
one of its private Citizens, by which it obtained that Repose and Settlement,
it could by no other ways arrive at. And that the English are no less than the
Neapolitans incapable of an establishment on a popular basis is apparent
enough, all endeavors having been used toward it, and all such forms of
Government produced, yet it was found by experience that even the tyranny of
Oliver, notwithstanding the injustice, blood, hypocrisy and atheism on which
its foundations were laid, was less offensive than any of the other, because in
the hands of one alone; our Nation being so far from a capacity of receiving
the other impression, that it may be rationally concluded that had we lived in
form of a Republic as many ages as we have done under Monarchy, the present
condition of our affairs and customs would oblige us to cast our selves into
the arms and protection of a single person; for evil manners produce not only
good laws but good forms of Government; we ought therefore to suspect all that
hang out this bait, and assure our selves it is not the Government but
Governors they design against, since all architects of popular fabrics, after
acquisition of sufficient credit for it, have been easily persuaded to take the
Authority into their own hands.

And now let us take a short review of the whole, and we shall see a people
groaning, not under pretended but real oppression, endeavor to shake off a
yoke, heavy indeed, but yet their Masters, and erect a Babel of their own
contrivance, and having considered the plunderings, devastations and massacres
that attended the acting toward it, pass through its so many appearances of
Establishment, and at last (when probably so near perfection, by the Dukes as
firm Settlement in the hearts of that people, as so uncertain a foundation was
capable of) see it by Divine Providence reduced to where it first began, and
then I doubt not but we shall be so far from seeking pretenses of Innovation,
that we should neglect real occasions were they offered us, and rather suffer
the extremest violences of a legal power (from which yet we are secured not
only by experience of our present Sovereign, but confidence in the hereditarie
Justice and Moderation of his Family) than by attempting alterations expose our
selves and Posterities to eternal confusion and disorder, in which the best
that can be hoped will be to return to where we first set out, after having
given sufficient cause to have all the burdens, creatures formerly of our
imaginations, laid really on our shoulders.

I conclude with consideration of the Neapolitans condition after their
redaction to the obedience of their Master, when heavier Chains were imposed
upon them to prevent the like extravagancies, whereas we, by indulgence of the
most gracious Prince of the World, are treated with the wonted clemency, his
Goodness having obliged him to omit making such provisions against the like
disorders for the future, by firmlier establishing and stronglier guarding his
Authority, as (if we become not shortly wiser) will appear to be wanting both
to King and People: In the mean time let all such as on pretense of freedom
incroach upon the Roial Power contain themselves and understand, that the
Prerogative (unlimited by corrupt o^ pedantick Comments) is the true and only
maintainer of the Subjects liberty. Reader, if thou will excuse the freedom of
this Preface it shall be accepted as a Recompense for my confining my self to
the drudgery of a Translator.

CHARACTER OF THE DUKE OF GUISE. By a Person of Quality.
I Present Posterity the Encomium of a Prince of virtue equal to his Birth, and
though it may s^em superfluous in a Preface to a Book, that will it self
sufficiently publish his Merit, cannot omit this testimony, so justly due to
his memory, that never any man received greater endowments from Heaven, nor
better manifested them to the World.

I will not in it be guided by Maxims of Rhetoric but duty, and my Pen shall
less express the Conceptions of my Brain than the inclinations of my Heart. I
have too many things to say in praise of this Prince to say them well. And
since it is not my business here to display mine own Abilities, but to make him
appear such as he really was, I shall be satisfied in the Picture because very
like. I will say nothing to the advantage of his name, all History abounds
with the fame of those that have born it, and confining my self to his Person,
acquaint such as do not already know it, that Henry of Loraine Duke of Guise
was handsome without pride, curious without affectation, affable without
neglect of his quality, valiant without transport, and liberal without
profusion. His Civilitie was equal to his Courage, both which eminently
appeared in a Duel, where the condition of his adversary might have given
pretense for an excuse had he been capable of seeking one. He hurt and was
hurt, but concluded it with immortal honor.

All the Nobility of the Kingdom of Naples have with Astonishment seen him (in
a manner alone) resist, and with his sword in his hand pierce through
whatsoever opposed. History vaunts the Actions of Caesar and Alexander, for
ones swimming cross an arm of the Sea, though in a manner covered with the
darts of his enemies, and the others passing the River Granicus, and attaquing
an Army drawn up in Battalia on the other side. Both these seem to me equalized
in the passage of the Duke of Guise to Naples. He braved the Sea and the Winds,
and in a Feluque, with only three in his Company, contemned a fleet of
enemies to succor his Friends.

As his Valor was infinite so was his Goodness. None ever went dissatisfied
from his presence, he, as well as Titus, was the Favorite of Mankind: His
natural Kindness obliged him to sympathize with others in their misfortunes.
His modest Mirth inspired it self into all his Company. The diversions where
address, Gallantrie and Magnificence usually signalize themselves, seem all
faint and languishing now he appears no more. And though we have a Master most
eminent in all, yet when from his incomparable Person we descend to his Court,
we quickly miss its principal Ornament.

None could ever blame him unless for excess in that which to be without is
imputed a vice. He loved (they will say) with too much Passion. If
Insensibility be a blemish to the beauty of a mind, why should not tenderness
augment its value and luster. With an unequalled Zeal he embraced the interests
of those that depended on him. His Credit, his Sword, his Estate were ever at
the devotion of his Friends. But above all he loved the King with a respect
beyond expression. In his sickness he confirmed me in this which I had before
observed on several occasions, and the unhappy Conclusion of it manifested to
me how much our great King was concerned. For it was to me he discovered those
glorious marks of his sorrow, when he heard of his death, because he knew how
highly I honored him in his life.

What rests there yet due to his memory? He was reconciled to God and lamented
by his King, deplored by his friends, adored by his servants, extolled even by
those that envied him, and admired by all. He has left behind him a Successor
worthy of him. And to complete his felicity we cannot but be confident that
although his glory was most eminent amongst men, it is yet incomparably more so
in Heaven.

MEMOIRES OF HENRY D. of Guise. Book I.
AN unfortunate accident, which, do what I could to the contrary, became but
too public in Europe obliged me to ask leave of the Queen Mother, who then
governed, to make a journey to Rome, by it to free my self from the
inconveniences lay on me as prejudicial to my reputation as to the
Establishment of my Fortune, and the Zeal I ever had to render the Crown all
manner of Services, as I am engaged by Honor, Birth, and particular
Inclination, forced me to a Continuance there a year or more.

Pope Innocent the Tenth expressing great Kindness to me, I thought I ought to
manage it, so as to make my self (if possible) the Instrument of his
Reconciliation with France, though sensible of my own weakness in order to so
great a work. And knowing that Cardinal Mazzarin did with passion desire a
Cardinals Hat for his Brother, then Archbishop of Aix, being firmly engaged in
his interests, having promised him my friendship, and devoted him my Services,
I did with all imaginable industry endeavor to find out for what reasons his
Holiness was so little inclined to it, and after a long discourse with him one
day about the present condition of the affairs of Europe, insensibly engaged
him to discover the occasion that obliged him to continue a division so
prejudicial to all Christendom, and which it lay in his power to end with much
facility, for I was certain that if he would make the first step toward it,
he should find the Court entirely disposed to a good understanding.

Immediately he assured me of his love to the French Nation, which he would
ever justify to such as pretended any favor from him; but that he had too
many causes of Complaint against Cardinal Mazzarin ever to forget them. He
particularised all his grievances, That his election was disapproved, That the
Kings Ministers in Rome on all occasions forgot their respect to him,
threatening and affronting him in his Person and Family; and in this discourse
he was so far transported, that I thought it best to let him cool before I
returned any answer. He seemed surprised at my silence, telling me he perceived
I found his Complaints so just that I wanted a Reply. I walked with him the
length of the Gallerie twice, without making any, and when (interpreting my
silence to his advantage) he pressed me to speak, I smiled and told him, That I
wanted not Reasons to oppose his, but that as yet I found him not in a
condition to relish them, though they were so powerful, that I was assured they
would convince him, and oblige him to grant all I should demand, and do
absolutely all I should desire, though at the present he were of a contrary
opinion: He assured me nothing could be able to alter him, that his Resolution
was too well grounded: I smiled again, telling him I durst swear the contrary.
To this he briskly replied, he could not imagine from whence I should derive
such a hope. From the consideration, said I, of your Prudence, which on a
serious reflection will oblige you to cast off all Prejudice, and discern your
true interest and the conduct you are to observe, which you will infallibly
follow, because you ought to do so, and would too much injure your self should
you stray from it. In order to this I begged of him to hear me patiently
without interruption, because intending not to exasperate or displease him, I
should retire as soon as I found him moved, and defer my discourse to another
time; which yet should not be till he sent for me, resolved to give me a
favorable audience, and credit what I should say, which he ought not to
suspect, I acting without Commission moved only by my Zeal for his reunion
with France, in free acknowledgement of the Kindness he had for me, and (if it
might be permitted me to say so) out of the affection I had for his Person. He
yielded to the Conditions I demanded, promised a confidence in me, and to hear
me patiently, and thanking me for my affection to him, with an embrace told me;
what he should refuse me, he would not grant to any person in the World: that
he should be glad I could find Reasons to persuade him, and that, if his
Reconciliation should ever be made, it might be by my interposal, that the
honor and advantage of it might be mine.

I gave him account in few words of the affairs of France, and posture of the
Court, letting him discern the impossibility of separating the interests of the
Nation from those of its chief Minister: that since he had not at present any
party in France, he could not hope to make any there by disobliging it. That
though, having the Dispensation of Graces, all men depended on and had recourse
to him, yet with all the Authority of the Papacy he could oblige no body there,
unless by the Courts concurrence: that the difference being no point of
Religion, none would side with him. The Devout and Zealous (though inclined to
it) wanting pretense of Conscience to engage the people in his quarrel. That
Persons of Quality would as Neuters be indifferent Spectators of what might
happen, and condemn him for refusing a Hat, which could not be so important to
him, that on its occasion he should reject the friendship of a Crown. That
obstinacy ill becomes a Father, that this Quality obliges to greater
Moderation, and that all Christendom would blame him for drawing on (by a
capricious refusal) the unhappy consequences for which he should be
responsible, and lament when it would be too late to remedy. That the same
censure would fall on Cardinal Mazzarin, should he stand off, after so obliging
an offer; That he ought to give an example to all Christians of suppressing
Passion; and that if he would believe me in this particular, I would engage,
that all he could demand should be granted him, being assured that Cardinal
Mazzarin desired nothing more than to enter into his good opinion, and fix a
steady friendship with him; that his Election should be no more mentioned but
with acknowledgements and approbations, that he should be treated with all
Honor and Compliance, that all Discourses dis-respective or menacing should be
disavowed, that so pressing and positive Orders should be sent to such as
should negotiate with him, for giving him all that belongs to him, that for the
future he should have as great cause of Content as he formerly thought he had
of Complaint.

He seemed very much calmed and in a manner convinced; and embracing, told me,
I had very much satisfied him; That if I had been sooner at Rome, I might have
prevented the heats and differences passed, that he would seriously reflect on
our Discourse, which he desired me another time to prosecute, and that the
first day of his leisure he would send for me to that purpose, giving me withal
some light that would not be useless to my conduct. That in the mean time he
was sorry for the trouble I must suffer by the endeavors of the Cardinals of
the Faction, and the Kings Ministers, to discover the subject of our
interviews: that I should be careful not to trust them much, that he was
assured the greatest part of them were against an Accommodation, that they
might continue necessary and make advantage by the division.

The same things were treated on in two or three other Conferences, and I every
time returned with something more of hope, still observing the Popes aversion
to slacken, and receiving answers more favorable. At last being sent for one
day, finding him in a very good humor, after he had expressed a great deal of
Affection and Kindness for me, and that he had no greater satisfaction than in
my Company, which he would enjoy oftener, and send for me at all times when his
Affairs permitted, did he not apprehend my prejudice by it, and that his
friendship might prove contrary to my interest, the great aversion of Cardinal
Mazzarin for him considered. I replied, it was in his power to put an end to
that aversion, repeating all the Reasons I formerly instanced; these he now
found more valid, and seemed convinced: The Discourse held with him by Cardinal
Grimald, the manner of the Negotiations of the Marquis de Fontenay, and of the
Abbot of St Nicholas touched him very sensibly, and were indeed insupportable.
They giving out (as he said) that he was so great a dissembler that none ought
or could depend on his word, and this he expressed with so much Passion that
rage drove tears from his eyes: at which yet I was not much concerned, Knowing
well enough he could shed them at his pleasure, and was an excellent Actor.
However I persuaded my self I gained upon him, and confidently told him, that
having discovered where he was attacquable, I had brought about my design, and
that he must yield, having no more defenses against me; then I asked him, if
his predominate Passion were not revenge, as is usual with all Italians? and
whether he would not thank me if I ruined at Court such as he was dis-satisfied
with, making their conduct to be disapproved, and them to pass for malicious or
undiscerning persons; and in fine cause them to loose their employments, which
should be bestowed on such as were more agreeable to him? He cast his Arms
about my neck, promising if I could effect this, there should be nothing in the
World he would refuse to do for my sake. You must then, said I, make the
Archbishop of Aix Cardinal, with assurance, that you had done it sooner but for
the ill conduct of those you had to deal with, that you will oblige all the
Mazzarin Family, and enter into a near friendship with it: that you desire not
to treat any more with the Ministers that have hitherto been entrusted in the
Kings affairs, whom you have discovered to be little affected to his Service,
and then demand they may be put into the hands of the Archbishop of Aix, when
he shall be Cardinal, who being your Creature will have a particular care to
continue his brother in a good understanding with you. That Cardinal Grimaldi,
the Marquis of Fontenay, and the Abbot of S. Nicholas, apprehending to become
useless, and consequently little considerable, have always embroiled matters,
as soon as they imagined this business near Conclusion. Give me order to make
these assurances in your name, and continue to treat with them as if your mind
were still unaltered, bestowing the Cardinals Hat when they appear confident
you intend never to give it, by this means you will credit me, ruin their
reputation and deprive them of all trust, by discovering to the Cardinal, they
have not a true friendship for him, that they sacrifice him to their particular
interests, and deal not franckly, but mis-report your intentions to profit
themselves by the mis-intelligence. He walked twice the length of the Gallery
ruminating on what I had said, and looking pleasingly on me, told me I had
touched him in the part that was most sensible, that I obliged him in the
highest, and that unable to deny me any thing, he consented to the Hat for the
Archbishop of Aix, that I should give notice of it to his brother, and write to
him to come to Rome, that I should insert all the particulars of our
Conference, and give some part of them to Cardinal Grimaldi, the Marquess of
Fontenay, and Abbot of S. Nicholas, who would think me ridiculously weak in
crediting his fair Promises for want of Knowledge of him, he in the mean time
still expressing himself to them after the old manner, by which means they
would yet engage themselves further by giving intelligence that he promised
what he never intended to perform, and that I suffered my self to be abused by
his flatteries; that this would infallibly bring about their ruin.

What he and I foresaw failed not to happen. I dispatched an express to
Cardinal Mazzarin, to acquaint him what passed, but he gave little credit to
it, the Ministers making it appear so doubtful; and after the acknowledgements
of his Obligations to me for concerning my self so far in the interests of his
family, he advised me to distrust the Popes proceedings, to observe him
nearer, and not credit lightly, lest at last I received the displeasure of a
disappointment. That for his Brothers journey to Rome, he could by no means
approve it, since it would be too dishonorable for him to go thither, and
return not made a Cardinal. The Lord Peter Mazzarin prepossest with former
impressions could never be persuaded of this good news, but the Archbishop of
Aix (as men are easy to believe what they desire) received my Letter with much
content, and the vivacitie of his temper not permitting much reflection,
entertained great hopes, and suffering himself to be transported with joy,
prayed me to assure the Pope of his acknowledgements, that he would very
suddenly cast himself at his feet, and in his brothers name ratify all
particulars of our agreements for which himself would be the security, and
after the reception of such a favor, procure from France whatever could be
desired on his behalf. In the mean time I sought to make sure of the Lady
Olympia, in which I found little difficulty, being well with her, and she
already gained by the money of the Earl of Ognate, ambitious to be a Cardinal,
who doubtful of a nomination from Spain, saw no readier way to his end than
this occasion. He opened himself to me, and we joined our forces to make a
stronger battery, pressing on the business at one and the same time with united
forces; Cardinal Paucirolle was the only person likely to thwart us, but the
other undertook the bringing him about.

And knowing him a professed enemy to Cardinal Mazzarin, I thought the mediation
of Cardinal Sforza, my Cousin and particular friend necessary: He was desirous
to engage himself in the interests of France, from which he expected a
treatment suitable to his Birth and Merit, and to obtain considerable Pensions
and Benefices; but Cardinal Grimaldi probably opposed him, with all his power,
apprehending he might step into his place, to the loss of a considerable part
of his credit. I undertook to reconcile him with the Mazzarin Family, to which
he had ever been contrary: And he on his part contrived a meeting between me
and Candinal Pancirolle: Now as in Rome all enmity gives way to the ambition of
obtaining the Papacy, upon the assurance I gave him of removing the Exclusion
he feared from France, which alone might be destructive to his pretense (being
already secure of Spain and a strong party in the Conclave) he promised in
stead of opposing to second me: this removed all difficulties by the great
Ascendent he had over his Holiness inclinations. This negotiation was managed
with so much diligence and secrecy that it was not discerned by the French
Ministers, who continuing obstinate in their opinions dispatched to court
advices of very little certainty.

Having brought things to this pass, I visited Father Serroni a friend of the
Archbishop of Aix, and now Bishop of Mandes, to oblige him to go to the
Archbishop and hasten his coming. I writ also to Cardinal Mazzarin to send him,
making my self responsible for the success of his journey, to which yet he
would not consent, not trusting these fair appearances, nor the Popes humor,
which he took to be close and deceitful.

There needed not many persuasions to move the Archbishop of Aix to the
journey, in this particular not being swayed by his brothers Council, so
vehemently desirous of what he pretended, that for it he would have run all
hazards: He set on therefore immediately, and giving me notice by post, I
instantly gave account of it to his Holiness, well perceiving the joy it gave
him: At the Archbishops coming near Rome the Pope commanded me to meet him, and
before he spoke with any of the Kings Ministers, assure him of his Promotion,
and that without consideration of such discourses as might be made him, he
should credit me alone, who would be responsible for all I had pretended, which
at his first audience should be confirmed; and that he had had his satisfaction
long since, if I had been sooner at Rome, or if none but my self had interposed
in his business, being the best and faithfullest of his friends. After his
thanks he conjured me to press the completing of what I had so well begun,
which I neglected not. But whilst I continued my solicitations, there
intervened a difficulty by a post from Spain, bringing news that the Catholic
King approved not the promotion of Count Ognate, who desired of the Pope some
little time to endeavor by mediation of friends to remove the obstacle, to
which the Pope consented. And some apprehending that the Pope himself was
craftily the occasion of this, so to dis-engage himself of his promise to me
without imputation, I proposed to him as an expedient, that he should go on,
reserving the Spaniard in Petto, whom he might afterward nominate at his
leisure, when this d^fficulty should be removed, and they at Madrid had made
choice of a more agreeable subject: But he continued resolute to send an
express, that he might give no pretense for Complaint of Precipitation. After
much contestation I was forced to submit, yet with assurance from him that he
would by no means fail of performing what he had promised me, and that in six
weeks (what answer soever he received, or in case they maliciously detained his
Express) he would give me satisfaction. There was a necessity of so long
patience, and the time being expired the Archbishop desired me to challenge the
promise, I did it, and his Holiness so positively confirmed me that I found no
grounds for further doubt; But yet deferring the Consistory from time to time,
the party concerned falling into a greater distrust, told me he could not be
eased of it, unless his Holiness would positively appoint the day he should
receive the advantage he so much coveted: I went and desired this favor of him
as necessary to my repose and credit, he made many difficulties, the like
having never been practiced. But representing to him that if he had the
kindness for me he pretended, he should testify it in passing by, for my sake,
the ordinary formalities. He promised me, and performed it in the most obliging
manner, with which I presently acquainted the Archbishop, who received the news
with all the joy imaginable. The next morning, which was Saturday, the Pope
sent one of the Secretaries of his Chamber to acquaint the Archbishop that on
Monday without farther delay should be a Consistory. They that desired not
this, as being engaged to maintain that the Archbishop as well as my self was
deluded, and that the Pope would find some new pretense for delay, were
sensibly moved, and on Monday surprised, when they heard the Consistory was
assembled, and the Archbishop had received the Hat. His Holiness immediately
sent me the good news, as principally concerned, for which in the afternoon I
went to give him thanks: and afterward to Complement the new Cardinal, who
gave me a thousand embraces, protesting that his whole Family as well as his
Brother and himself had so sensible an obligation to me, that I might depend on
whatever was in their power, of which I should see effectual proofs on all
occasions, and for which he would be my Security all his life.

That night he went incognito, to give his Holiness thanks, who told him he
owed his Promotion to me alone, wishing him to go and acknowledge it, and
withal advised that it might never be forgotten by himself or brother. In order
to which he hasted to me, transported to admiration, which yet will not seem
extraordinary to such as understand what it is in Rome (unless in the Families
of Popes or Sovereign Princes) to see two Cardinals of one Family. I am not
able to repeat the terms of his Complements, nor what he said to demonstrate
how far he held himself obliged, for having (contrary to the opinion of all
the world,) obtained for him that, which the power of France and credit of his
brother had failed in, and of which he had despaired. At his taking leave I
proffered to wait on him to his Coach, which he conjured me not to do, desiring
to avoid all ceremony, because incognito; but perceiving me follow, he set
himself on a run, and not observing a well that was in a little Garden through
which he passed, having turned toward me to take his leave, as he retreated he
fell into it, from whence I helped him out, not able to forbear laughing: He
went home to dry himself, and to bed, where (though he wanted rest) I believe
he slept not, lest at his waking he should impute his good fortune to the
illusions of a dream.

The same night he sent an express to acquaint his brother Cardinal Mazzarin
with his good success, and taking upon him to make known the obligation he had
to me, and my conduct in effecting an enterprise of so much difficulty, I
thought it best to leave all to him, this being more becoming than to be my own
trumpet, and so contented my self to send only a Letter of Complement and
Congratulation. The answers we received were such as might be expected in
return of so welcome a Message.

The Pope became very well satisfied with the Orders that were sent relating to
his particular, and the Ministers began to negotiate with him in a manner so
respective and obliging, that he well perceived all former resentments were
forgotten, and that the Mazzarin Family was most straightly addicted to his
interests, which the two brothers would ever solicit. He made also very
obliging acknowledgements to me, and I had some reason to believe, that what
pretenses or occasions soever intervened, I might depend on the Protection and
support of France, as well as on the Person of his Holiness. The Kings
Ministers alone loosing as well at Rome as at Court a great part of their
credit and trust, nettled to the quick, that even in their sight, and against
their sense, so important a negotiation had been brought to effect, conceived
an irreconcilable hatred against me, so much the more dangerous, in that (not
daring to give it vent) they concealed it in order to an opportunity of making
me feel its fatal effects, decrying all the important Services I afterward
rendered the Crown, which they blemished what they possibly could, and not
contented with their vain attempts against my reputation, at last deprived me
of my Liberty by a long and hard imprisonment, and as much as was possible for
them brought my life into danger, that they might not apprehend in me an
irreprochable witness, of their having been too much led by their passions and
interests, and to them sacrificed the glory and advantages of Cardinal Mazzarin
and his Family.

In this very instant I met an occasion to discover what fruit I was to expect
of so much pains and hopes (so justly grounded) to have the protection of
Cardinal Mazzarin, the good Offices and Solicitation of the late Bishop of
Aix, now Cardinal of Saint Cecilia, and the Popes favor, by the surprising
news which came to Rome of the tumults in Sicilie, and revolt of Naples; where
Masaniello was head. I will not enlarge my self to the particulars of a
business so fatal to Spain, and so extraordinary; All Europe has been
sufficiently informed, and I resolved in these relations to speak of no more
than I am my self concerned in, lest I should be obliged to too great a Volume,
not pretending to the Historian, which would be as troublesome, as unsuitable
to my humor and quality: In these Disorders I supposed I might find fair
Opportunities of acquiring glory, and contributing to the advantages of France,
which has ever been my prevailing Passion, being naturally ambitious and
zealous (as I ought) for that Crown to which I have the honor to be born a
Subject, persuaded I could no ways better employ my life than for the good of
my Country, and prejudice of its enemies. Being one Evening retired with the
Baron of Modene, in whom I had very much confidence, and who was at that time
Gentleman of my Chamber, I discovered my thoughts to him, ordering him to seek
out Captain Peronne, brother of Dominico Perronne the famous Bandite, and chief
of the Confidents of Masaniello, whom he brought to me in the Morning; Him I
desired to find out his brother, and persuade him that in stead of the
Cruelties he exercised in Naples, burning the houses, and goods of Monopolists,
demanding Exemption from Customs and Imposts, he should rather think of ruining
the Spaniards, naturally vindicative, and under whom the revolters would never
find security or pardon, that he ought therefore to seek the succor and
protection of some powerful Stranger; That there was not any in the World so
confidently to be depended on as France, who ever gloried in assisting the
oppressed that had recourse to her, without any other interest than the
reputation acquired by so generous actions. That the Catalonians were faithful
witnesses of this, as well as a great part of the Princes of Germany. That he
could not doubt of her power by Land and Sea, which made her redoubted and
respected through the World. That I would undertake to negotiate in behalf of
the Neapolitans all Supplies and Assistances they should desire, and for
effecting this, would render my self into their hands an Hostage. Besides I
would labor reuniting the Nobility with the people, (without which all
attempts that could be made for Liberty would prove vain) so depriving their
Enemy of all possibility of continuing in that Kingdom, his principal Support
consisting in the Nobility; That my name and the Family of which I descended
would contribute much to so great a design, I engaging my self in the interests
of the whole Kingdom as entirely as if I were a Native.

He went away (satisfied and won by my Discourse) cheerfully to undertake this
important Negotiation, as well affected as instructed for what he was to do.
But as misfortune would have it, his brother being slain, at his arrival he was
suspected, and consequently imprisoned: nothing discour^ged by this cross
accident, I employed two other persons to Naples, who were also m^de Prisoners,
or (as the Spaniards gave out) perfidiously put into their hands the
instructions wherewith I had discharged them.

These unlucky beginnings in stead of deterring, animated me to an enterprise
that appeared more glorious in the prospect of so many perils and difficulties.
The arrival at Rome of Don Pepe Caraffa, brother to the Duke of Metalone, with
some other Gentlemen that had made their escape from the Castles of Naples
where they had been long detained Prisoners with great rigor and ill ^s^ge,
gave me hopes of making use of their resentments, for effecting that with the
Nobility (whom I know to be incensed by continual grievances) which so many
accidents had hindered me from bringing about with the people: My endeavors
proved not successless, and having entirely gained him, he resolved to hazard
his return, there to speak with his brother, and the rest of his friends and
kindred, and oblige them to embrace the occasion of serving me, and revenging
themselves. But the peoples aversion for the Nobility increasing by artifices
of the Spaniards, he became an unhappy victime as well to it as to the hatred
of Cardinal Filomarini: Soon after his arrival, having perceived his hopes and
mine frustrated, he was massacred with unheard of cruelties, his body torn and
dragged through all the Streets: Masaniello having been treated in the same
manner. After this I sent a young Captain, Grandchild of Cicio Arpaia, the
peoples Elect, to treat with him, who was absolute Master, and of greatest
credit in the City. This unhappy Messenger met the same fortune with the
former, falling into the hands of the Spaniards, whose distrust augmenting by
discerning my persistance in endeavoring by all ways to concern my self in
their disorders, kept so strict a guard on the Passages, that a French man
servant to Monsieur Dessinay a Gentleman of Avignon, who had applied himself to
me during my stay at Rome, a Youth witty and resolute, (whom I sent by Land,
under pretense of listing himself in their service as a Bourgundian, to give me
account of those I had dispatched formerly, of whose sad fates I was yet
ignorant) was taken near Gaeta, whither he was brought, though after a cunning
discharging himself of his Papers, from whence (having suffered the torture
ordinary and extraordinary) he was released, with Command on pain of death to
avoid that Kingdom: Finding by his return that none of those I formerly sent
had success, I thought my self obliged to try Fortune again; and (two young
resolute Italians, whom I gained with Money, proffering to run the Extremest
hazards for me) she yielded to my importunity, and began to be less contrary.

Cicio of Arpaia received my Proposals with much content, imparted them to his
friends and heads of the people, who hoped Naples should recover her desired
Liberty, by the assurance of assistance from France, I rendering my self their
hostage, and they in my person obtaining a Leader, to whose birth and name all
would submit without jealousy: which was no less than necessary, the Nobility
of the Country being so vain and haughty, that every one of them, (esteeming
himself worthy the Command) would refuse to obey any of their own Nation, or
yield him advantages above the rest. A necessity appearing to take off the
respect (which through the highest of the Sedition) was continued to the King
of Spain, I conceived the certainest way to engage them to reject his yoke, and
advance to a distance might render them irreconcilable, was The Proposal of
forming themselves into a Republique, which must needs prove an agreeab^e Lure:
the Nobility by it expecting the principal share in the Government, after the
Example of Venice, and the people intending to exclude them in imitation of the
Switzers. So both parties flattering themselves with hopes of obtaining their
desires, would jointly endeavor the Extirpation of the Spaniards, after which
it would be easy to change the Government without giving any jealousy of
France, which I represented to them as obliged to their assistance, only, by
its interest of separating them from Spain, as it had done formerly for the
Hollanders, who had at last obtained Liberty and independence.

And to testify the zeal I had to sacrifice my self, and hazard all for their
service, that I would pretend nothing from them, but the same authority for my
self and Successors that was granted to the Princes of Orange in the United
Provinces, which they have continued hitherto with so much splendour and honor.

The Title of Republique (of which I was the first Proposer) dazeled their eyes
immediately, and from that day was the only Discourse of Naples: My proffers
were received with open arms, and they sent me word, that though all things
seemed calm at present, ere long they should again take arms, the Conditions
granted by the Duke of Arcos, being so disadvantageous to Spain, that they
could not be ratified by its Councils, wherefore the resentments of that
vindicative Nation were to be expected at the first arrival of its forces; The
Viceroys facility in yielding to all demands, proceeding only from want of
power to justify a refusal; that I was therefore besought in the name of all
the people to negotiate for them the protection of France, and its succors when
time should serve, and to be my self in a readiness to come and take the
command of their forces, upon the first alteration, which must needs happen
very suddenly, and then I should be sought to by Commissioners sent express. I
was over-joyed at so handsome an opportunity of serving the King, and becoming
by the effects of my own industry and address able to propound to him so
advantageous a design, which I alone was in a condition to undertake and
execute. I dispatched therefore an express to Court, with Letters for the King,
Queen Regent, the late Duke of Orleans, and Cardinal Mazzarin: and encharging
my late brother the Knight of Malta with what he was to negotiate on my behalf,
I sent him this following Instruction.

Instruction For my Brother the Knight of Malta, concerning such things as I
desire him to negotiate for me at Court.
FIrst, he is to represent, that happening to be here at the time of the revolt
of Naples, I supposed it to concern the Kings service to gain a party there,
which having made known to the Ambassador, and more particularly to the
Cardinal of St Cicilia, they not only testified their approbation, but withal
gave me assurance, that in the service I endeavored to render France I should
be assisted by its Credit and Forces, in case I could negotiate any thing
considerable.

Secondly, that having been so happy as to make such a party as might assure me
of success, I could not neglect giving notice of it, that I might receive
Orders what to do thereupon, and know if I might be allowed such assistance as
should be necessary for executing the enterprise.

In the third place, that however the disposition of affairs were such, that
several men, (and I perhaps more than any other) might be flattered with hopes
of a settlement to themselves as advantageous as solid, I was not capable of
that thought, nor ever to entertain any like it, whilst the King should with
reason pretend so just a conquest.

Fourthly, that finding the people of Naples absolutely resolved to free
themselves from the Spanish Tyranny, and (after the Example of Holland) enjoy
the Liberty they should acquire, I believed France would Consent, that seeing
a possibility of such place as is possessed by the Prince of Orange in the
United Provinces, I might endeavor to obtain it; because, besides the
advantage France would receive by depriving its enemies of this famous Kingdom,
peradventure my address and diligence might acquire me such esteem amongst the
people, that I might prevail with them (if weary of their own Government) to
submit themselves to our Crown, under which I might in such case justly pretend
to be Viceroy.

Lastly, that I have the more reason to hope such a consent in regard the
attempt is so extremely hazardous, that only my self dare venture on it,
because whosoever does so, must cast himself into the hands of those people,
without other assurance than their affection, without any Forces of his own, or
Places of strength, and without being permitted the landing any Strangers, till
they conceive them needful and demand them: The confidence I have that my
Person will not be disagreeable to the Chiefs of them, does the more easily
engage me, besides the hopes that the Protection of France, and friendship of
the Cardinal will not suffer me to be abandoned: and that when I have been some
time there I shall have acquired credit to make me afterward subsist securely.

He shall add that the heads of the people having sent me an express to invite
me to this resolution, I do very shortly expect another with power to agree on
conditions, they being resolved at the time that the ratification of what was
granted them by the Viceroy should arrive from Spain, in case of refusal of
their Articles, to take offense and make use of that pretense for a second
rising, and attempting Liberty: and in case of condescension not to be
satisfied, but seek some other cause of Complaint, though of the former there
is little appearance, it not being to be credited that Castle St Elm shall be
put into their hands, as the Governor has gone about to persuade them. And if
the inclination of this people for me, whom they know not, seem strange, he
shall reply it is acquired by some friends I have amongst them, who continually
do me good Offices on account of the care I have had here to caress and win all
of that Nation, besides the distrust of their present General Don Francisco
Toralte, and all the Nobility. There remains no more but to desire him to be
very careful to obtain for me (that which is most absolutely necessary)
permission to accept the employment offered, an Order, (in case I shall need
it, for the security of my passage) to some Ships or Galleys to accompany me,
and assistance of money, as on mine own particular I will raise all I possibly
can; and, I conjure him to supplicat the Cardinal for paying my Pensions, and
some other Sums due from the Crown, and to assure him, that as soon as the
Messenger I expect shall arrive, I will with all diligence dispatch an express,
to give him a particular account of the Proposals.

Concerning all above mentioned my brother is to take care to return me a
speedy Answer; but especially I recommend to him secrecy, not so much for what
concerns my own particular, or out of apprehension that discovery may destroy
the business; but because it would cost the lives of many innocent persons,
whom I could not without infinite regret see sacrificed to my evil fortune.

From Rome the 16th. Sept. 1647. Henry of Lorrain Duke of Guise.


I formerly communicated to the Kings Ministers all particulars, that they
might write conformably: And, whether it were, that they dissembled their
thoughts, or really esteemed me capable of renewing the troubles which seemed
appeased in Naples, they approved the resolution I had taken, encouraged and
pressed me to go forward; with assurance, that I ought not to doubt of all
necescary supplies, since I undertook the greatest Service could possibly be
rendered France, by making so powerful a diversion during her War with Spain;
of which, she would well know how to make use, and find her advantages in the
prejudices of her Enemy, whom she must needs overpower with her Forces, when
he should be deprived of those he drew from so potent a Kingdom, which supplied
him with more Men, Money, Ships and Galleys, than all his other Dominions; that
therefore, nothing was to be omitted, in order to dispossess him of that Crown,
and that it little imported by what means. That I was looked on as very fit
for the enterprise, being one, that without consideration of danger, would
sacrifice and hazard all for Glory; that, in like manner, time would be gained
to the Court for taking its measures, which would venture nothing but my
Person, whose loss would be little considerable. But, in case I escaped, and
could embroile Affairs, any Conditions might be made, the Neapolitans being
once engaged, and become irreconcilable: and afterward, making use of my
Labor and Industry, it might at leisure be resolved, to suffer me to perfect
this Conquest, or Retire; to establish, or ruin me, either of which would be
still in their power.

The Cardinal of St. Cecilia, the only person I could depend on, well knowing
that the rest of the Ministers were my Enemies, on account of the service I had
done him, by which they lost part of their trust and credit, undertook to send
to his Brother the Memorial hereafter inserted, accompanied only by a word or
two, referring the rest to what should be discerned by its perusal.

But before I go further, I hold it very important to reconcile an appearing
contradiction between my Instruction and Discourse, and to clear my self from
the greatest imputation has been laid to me, that I solicited nothing but
Money; as if I thought my self capable of standing on my own bottom, and sought
no other assistance, out of an affectation of independence. The first is easily
answered; When I demanded permission of the Court to undertake this Enterprise,
if I had let it appear, that I had no other cabal in Naples, but what I my self
had gained; and, that in stead of their having sent for me, it was I that
offered my self to go, I should have been looked on as Chimerical, and no
resolution would have followed, in a time, when all Italy thought the Disorders
quieted, my self alone, by secret correspondences, being assured the contrary:
Besides, that choice might have been made of some other to head this
Enterprise, (with which I most earnestly desired to be encharged, it being as
full of danger as glory) had they not thought it unavoidable to leave me the
Conduct: So that it was both more honorable, and more to the purpose, to make
the Answers I received pass as Proposals, and the persons I employed as deputed
from that People; for which I ought not to be blamed, it being often necessary
to use address and dissimulation toward those we desire to serve, to engage
them, when we apprehend their irresolution: besides, that proposing nothing but
the hazard of mine own Person, without reflection on the Kings Authority, I
assured my self my proffer would not be rejected, which would give me
opportunity of Acting without constraint, and negotiating without obstacle, and
gain me the esteem of the Neapolitans, seeing me in a posture to serve them, by
the Kings consent and permission: and, that consequently to me would be
directed Commissions for what ever was to be treated with them, which might no
longer pass through other hands; neither could they have thoughts of employing
any other in that Command, I by this means having all at my disposal: This,
being well considered, will pass for address no ways blameable.

For the second Objection: It is yet easier to demonstrate the Reasons that
obliged me to the conduct I followed, and make appear, that I was decried
without ground, and that my Enemies maliciously endeavored to make use of it,
that I might be abandoned, and responsible for the ill success of an
enterprise, in which I have so comported my self, that my actions being
attentively examined, and my memorials perused without preejudice, it must
needs be granted, that humanly speaking, more than I did, could not have been
done; and, that it was never known before, that one Man alone, could, without
astonishment, so long support the burden of Affairs so embroiled, resist the
whole power of Spain, and that of the United Nobility of a great Kingdom, and
redress so many Disorders without any supplies; those I justly expected being
not only refused, but vaunted, and made appear only in order to dishonor, and
ruin me; and had no other effects but to destroy that for which I had
labored, retard all that my address and diligence had set forward, and managed
to the best advantage, and to encourage my Enemies and Traitors, by all ways,
to attempt against my life.

It is certainly admirable, and without example in History, that, in the midst
of Assassinations, and Tumults, without any in whom I could put confidence (not
excepting my own Domestiques, who, for the most part, served me not according
to my intentions; nor those, that had engaged themselves to follow my Fortune,
who failed of their duty; and, as little the Ministers of a great Kingdom, for
whose Service I Acted, who contributed the most to my ruin; or the Court,
whose Orders were detained from me, and which was prepossessed by reports as
malicious as false: Or a People Vain, Cruel, and Seditious, I made War without
Powder, Ammunition, or Money, with new-raised and ill-armed Forces, without
Canon or Baggage: and yet caused a City to subsist five complete Months, the
eminences of which were fortified, and in the hands of the Enemy, Blocked by
Sea with a powerful Fleet, and Beleaguered by Land with an Army strong, both in
Horse and Foot, Provisions cut off on every side, all Elements contrary,
continually battered by three Castles; notwithstanding all which I maintained a
famished People in Respect and Obedience, put an end to their Disorders,
Murders, and Plunderings, re-established Government and Justice, and at last
repose and tranquillity, in a place, where, before my arrival, innocent blood
incessantly flowed about the Streets; Violence was Authorized, Burning and
Pillaging Houses not only tolerated, but commanded, with such fatal and
Tragical events as could not be beheld without compassion, horror and
astonishment.

Did not consideration of the safety of many heads that are dear to me, oblige
me to suppress the greatest part of my most secret negotiations, I could
discover That would convince my Enemies, and those that envy me, and make me
appear to the eyes of all Europe, not only innocent but glorious, in having by
Miracle as new as surprising, raised force out of weakness; and persecuted by
all the World, and destitute of all assistance, my self alone brought so
difficult an enterprise to such perfection, that the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Naples: and consequently the destruction of the Spanish Monarchy, (of which it
is the most solid foundation) failed, on no other account, but that I was
envied the glory of it, and could never obtain so much as was necessary for
taking in the least fortified place; which, might I have had, it would have
sufficed to have completed so extraordinary and glorious a work, which I
undertook without any other interest than to enjoy the honor of it, after
which I could have died joyfully, in assurance, that through all Posterity my
memory should be glorious. But, my ambition giving place to my friendship, I
will not, to defend my self, bring them into the least danger, and resolve (by
publishing nothing, but what I may declare without their hazard) to suffer my
proceedings to be condemned by such as (never weighing the labor and conduct,
made use of) Judge of things by their success, and have neither esteem nor
contempt for any, but according to their good or evil Fortune. I hope I may be
easily pardoned this digression, which I could not possibly omit, and on which
perhaps the displeasure to see my self blamed without cause, has too long
detained, and transported me to too great heat and resentment.

To return then to that which I promised to make understood, I must say, that
having at that time no other favor to pretend, but leave to accept the offer
was made me, to Negotiate with the Neapolitans, and devote my self to their
service, and sacrifice my self to their interests, and recovery of their
Liberty, I demanded nothing but Money, because it was then the only thing
necessary to render me considerable amongst them, and put me in a condition to
be useful to their assistance: Besides, that they had informed me, that they
wanted only a Head to establish Order amongst them, that they might
advantageously make use of all those things, which (to invite me) they
pretended they had in abundance; that they apprehended all Foreign Powers, and
that I should have given them distrust, in providing my self of that which they
demanded not of me, and that if I had refused to go to them, without Forces
that should not have depended on their Authority, or the support of a powerful
Army, I should probably have given them jealousy, that under pretense of
defending them, I intended to subdue them to France, That it was necessary to
be Master of their Arms before any farther Declaration; and, having to do with
irresolute People, engage them to advance some steps before they themselves
perceived it: That, having a form of Peace with Spain, it was they that must
renew the War; That it would have seemed, that France had solicited them to a
new Insurrection, which I perceiving must infallibly follow, thought it was
best to stay for it, that necessity and apprehension of ruin opening their
eyes, might force them to have recourse to the only protection that could be
present and useful to them, that so upon their applications, the King might
have opportunity of making such Conditions as he best liked; that it was
necessary they should apply themselves to me to mediate for them; and that I
should have lost their good opinion, if I had done it of my self without their
instruction; and lastly, that my business being to satisfy a multitude, every
particular of which has a different sense, it is nice and dangerous to make
advances, such affairs being often ruined by precipitation; that, having
patience, I should see time insensibly lead them to the point I desired: which
failed not to happen two Months after, no more than the pressures wherewith by
their order I solicited the arrival of the Fleet, which had so little effect,
and the supplies I in vain pretended, of Men, Victuals, Powder, Artillery and
Money; all which shall be justified hereafter.

I am yet (that I may rectify some disorder which appears as to time) to tell
you that it is true, that the Cardinal of Aix, who had afterward the Title of
Saint Cecillia was not a Cardinal when I made my first dispatch: but, besides
that, he was so within a very short time after, long before my embarquing for
Naples, and his promotion then resolved on, unwilling to divide the negotiation
I had made in what related to him, I thought it a very small fault to give him
the quality of Cardinal by advance. Having made appear that this was neither a
mistake nor default of memory, I return to my story by the Letter he writ to
Cardinal Mazarin, his Brother, to accompany the Memorial I put into his hands.

Letter of the Cardinal of St. Cecillia.
THe Affairs of Naples tend still to Revolution, and it is generally thought
the Spaniards will not easily pacify them, nor in such manner as they give
out: I have received touching this subject a Memorial from the Duke of Guise,
which I send you, and referring my self to what you shall understand by it, my
Letter being only to that end, remain

From Rome, this 18th. Sept. 1647.

Memorial.
THe People of Naples, unable any longer to suffer the Spanish Tyrannies,
apprehending severe Chastisement for the attempts they have already made
toward repose and liberty, and, finding no security in the conditions proposed
to them, are at last resolved entirely to cast off the yoke, to be
enfranchised, and become their own Governors in form of a Republique. But,
being sensible, that without a head (after the same manner as is used in
Holland, from which that Country derives so great advantages) it is impossible
for them to maintain themselves: And having already learned to their cost, that
they cannot choose any in their own Country so unbiased, as not to be liable to
corruption, or that (the natural jealousy of the Nation considered,) shall not
acquire as many enemies as emulators, have resolved to choose a stranger to run
their fortune with them, who can expect no security amongst them, but in the
fidelity of his Services. The Duke of Guise being accidentally at Rome, has
seemed to the chiefest and most intelligent, a Person very proper to render
them so important a Service; and that the rather, in regard his birth exempts
him from the emulation several of that Nation might have for another: that none
will make difficulty of obeying him; nor can any suspect a person of his
quality capable of corruption or weakness, to this purpose the Duke has been
sent to with notice, that they would give him more particular information by an
Express, which he daily expects, charged with sufficient power and instructions
to treat, and make conditions, but (resolved not to engage himself in so great
a design, though useful to the interests of France, without the Kings
Permission) he offers, in case his Majesty approve it, to run the hazard of
this business, and sacrificing himself for performance of so eminent a service,
to employ his life for the advantages of the Crown, of which (in case of
Consent) he also hopes protection, and to be assisted with whatever he shall
stand in need, but above all with a quick dispatch, which is absolutely
necessary; the people of Naples desiring to make an attempt with their utmost
force the next month, which is the time the ratification of the Articles
agreed on with the Viceroy is to arrive from Spain, or they to become sensible
of its refusal. The Duke of Guise most humbly desires that all may be kept very
secret, to prevent the ruin of such, whose friendship and esteem for him is
all their crime.

After these diligences, whilst I expected the Courts answers, I thought fit
to drive the business on farther with what strength I could, and to this
purpose sent to Don Francisco Trealte General of the Arms of the people of
Naples, to discover whether his employment would not clash against my
Pretenses, and whether he would not make difficulties of obeying me, whether he
was resolved to go through with the business, and whether he had not some
secret correspondence with the Spaniards? He received favorably the person I
sent to him, promised secrecy in the Negotiation, which he faithfully observed,
and returned, that he saw little assurance in the vain and impetuous humor of
the people he served, that (their disunion from the Nobility considered) little
good could be done, without an expedient to put an end to it. But if a French
fleet might appear in a condition to land Forces and Supplies of all things
necessary to furnish the Town with Victuals and Ammunition, he thought the
Spaniards might easily be driven away, the great aversion of the whole Kingdom
as well Nobility as People, and the general weariness of their Government
considered. That if I came to head this enterprise he would very willingly
receive my Orders, understanding what was due to my name and family, for which
he ever had much respect; That there was nothing more to be treated on with
him, I was only to make sure of Supplies, and cause the fleet to appear: but
above all to have a care of dealing with Signior Octavio Marquis, who was a
Person timorous and irresolute, and that concerning himself in their affairs,
kept still a secret correspondence with the Viceroy.

Neither did I omit to hold particular Conferences with all the Neapolitans
that were in Rome, caressing them what I possibly could, to the end that
although they proved not useful to my Negotiation, they might at least by
speaking well of me to their Contrymen, by their Letters, and reports of
those that went home, make me known and acquire me Friends and Credit. I
employed part of the night to give audience, to all that demanded it, to bring
me news, and thought not the time lost when after the harkening to twenty
impertinents, I met one from whom I gained any light. Monsieur de Fontenay was
importuned with many fabulous relations, and intelligences brought him every
moment; There arrived not a Mariner, that to get a reward, did not give him
some account of the disorders, and some fained to be come express that had
never been out of Rome. And they often brought him, what had been spoken in the
Morning in the Popes withdrawing room, at St Andrew de la val, and the
Minerve; and some that knew nothing but what had passed through twenty several
mouths, writ Letters, and dated them at Naples, to get the credit of persons
well informed, and that had great Correspondencies, though their most important
secrets were drawn from Vulgar report. His humor naturally neither free nor
obliging, people ordinarily went ill satisfied from him, to give me account of
all they had told him; so that amongst many triffles I sometimes learned things
he vainly sought to conceal from me, and I took great care to please and humor
every body, that I might be informed of all, and gain the general inclination
of the Neapolitans.

Amongst this great number of intelligencers there was at Rome one Lorenzo
Tonti, of mean Birth, but quick wit, who by many intrigues having made himself
agreeable to the Earl of Monterei, and finding the way to live by this
industry, forsaking his handicraft trade, gave intelligence for Money, and
receiving often recompenses, began to live at his ease on what he had spared;
but his Patron being out of employment and returned to Spain, he chose to
reside at Rome as a secure and pleasant retreat, being a place where with a
very moderate expense one may live honorably. He had applied himself to follow
Prince Ludovisio the Popes Nephew, where he practiced the Artifices and
Subtleties he had learned in Naples, and attained the perfection of the School
of the Court of Rome; by his means his brother in law Augustino Lieto, a young
man witty and of an active and turbulent humor, had obtained a Company, in the
Regiment of Calabria, which gave him the title of Captain.

These two Persons must not be forgotten, each of them having acted a
considerable part; the first with all Industry endeavoring ways of making
himself considerable, and some innovation to occasion them, became one of those
dispersers of news, that write to all manner of people to procure answers,
which sometimes they make themselves, and read in all Companies, after having
digested them into Order, and by this means are welcome to the Ministers of
Princes, and such others as are Curious, of whom they obtain Gratifications. He
spent his idle hours at Rippa, where the Feluccaes of Naples and Sicilie, and
all others from Sea come a shore where he made much of the Mariners, and gave
them Wine, pumping from them what he could to make his Court to the Marquis of
Fontenai: And understanding that I endeavored to have a share in those
disorders, he came every night to inform me what he had learned, holding this
corresponce with me (as he said without the others Knowledge, finding me very
ambitious to do something high and considerable for the service of France, he
imagined he should draw great recompenses from me, and so by me or Monsieur de
Fontenai make his fortune.

He writ very solicitously to all parts that he might be the better instructed,
and gain credit with more ground and appearance, and at last by his address
bec^me necessary, to the Agent of the people of Naples, to the Ambassador and
my self. He gave me hopes of obtaining for me the command of the Army, and I on
my part assured him of my acknowledgements, and to make his brother in law
Captain of my Guards, the more to win those of the Country, by entirely putting
my self into their hands, entrusting my Person to a Neapolitan, and taking off
the Suspicion of my employing French men in the most considerable charges of my
Family: this was absolutely necessary for getting footing amongst them, till
authorized by my actions, I might afterward alter it, and take such course as
I judged most honorable and most safe. I gave not yet so great trust to him,
that I neglected other correspondences, or whatever else might contribute to
the design I had proposed.

I dispatched Captain Augustine to Naples, at his return from whence he made me
a report of its condition, either true or fabulous. It is very certain that the
little address of those that commanded, their too great confidence ill grounded
the incapacitie as well as malice of several of them in a short time changed
the face of affairs, ruined the foundations I had laid, and lost all hopes of
farther advantages to the people by depriving them of those they had already in
their hands, which having been well managed, nothing could have been more easy
than to drive away the Spaniards, take the Citadels of the Town, and generally
all the fortresses of the Kingdom, without one stroke striking, or shedding one
drop of blood, they being unprovided of all things necessary to defense. Very
evil Council was followed during the Cessation of Arms, to supply all places
with Victuals, Powder, and other Ammunition; supposing by it to testify their
respect to the King of Spain, and oblige him to ratify the Conditions agreed
on with the Viceroy, which were too much to their advantage to be confirmed:
this yet they were persuaded to by some of their Chiefs, gained by the
Spaniards, they (to their cost) not in the least suspecting them.

Vincenzo Andrea, of whom I shall often speak, who ever played the Traitor with
great address, having maliciously, the sooner to consume the Corn which
remained, sufficient for four or five Months Provision, caused Bread to be
made, weighing forty five ounces, and sold for the same price, as that had
been which weighed but 25, and also wasted the stock ordained for supplying
that which should be drawn from the Public Granaries, worth a hundred
thousand Crowns, in Liberalities he distributed amongst the Soldiers, and
Officers of greatest Authority, (he having the charge of Commissary-General of
the Provisions) in such manner that at my arrival I found but very little, and
no money at all to buy more.

Captain Augustine gave me account, that at the last Muster there appeared one
hundred and seventy thousand men in Arms, active, resolute, and ready for all
Enterprises, how dangerous soever, and that the five or six hundred horse
already raised, by making use of those that belonged to Coaches, in less than
eight days might be made up five or six thousand. That reckoning what had been
preserved of the Plunder, Jewels, Plate, and ready Money in the Banks,
belonging to Persons either declared or suspected Enemies, there might easily
be amassed three or four millions of Gold: That there was great quantity of
Powder, besides that three hundred workmen daily wrought in making more: That
they had Magazins of Match, Bullets and Saltpeter, that they had secured all
the Copper, and such other Metal that could be found in the Town for casting
Artillery, besides forty Pieces mounted in the Carmelites Tower, and at the
entrance of all Streets and other avenews, by which the Enemy might attempt;
That the whole Kingdom was in Arms as well as the City, and besides Corn for
six Months Provision in the Granaries, they might have from the Country,
which was of their Party, what they pleased, and in such abundance as could
never fail them, That the enemy had not Forces sufficient to block the
Passages, or hinder its transport, That they had no need of Strangers, which
would give a jealousy to the people, who out of apprehension of becoming
subject to a new Authority, might reconcile themselves to Spain, supposing,
that (instead of obtaining the liberty they pretended, and for which they were
so well resolved to die) they should only exchange their Chains for new ones,
which perhaps would prove more heavy: That if there should happen any
discourse of another foreign Dominion, many different Cabals would be formed,
which would join themselves with the Spaniards and the Nobility, to oppose that
Faction which should seem likely to prevail over the rest. That they wanted
nothing but a head to teach them to fight, and establish order amongst them;
That if their Forces and what else they had in their hands were well managed,
they would suffice, not only to drive the Spaniards out of that Kingdom, but
to make war upon them in their own Country, and take from them Sicilie and
Sardinia reunited in the interests of Naples. That this would be the work but
of one Campagna, and the Liberty of the Town but of a few Weeks; That they
looked on me as a Person capable of actions so eminent; and that in fine they
sent not for me to a combat, but to victory and triumph, without toil or peril,
and to make me the most glorious of men, in defending their Liberty, and
freeing them from a servitude they had so long suffered under with so much
regret and Impatience.

Knowing the vanity of the Nation I did not give any firm Belief to all those
things, yet I could not persuade my self but there was some ground for them,
neither could I doubt of the truth of a part, in which yet I was disabused in a
very short time; but not till I had so far engaged my self, that I could not
with honor decline undergoing the hazard of the enterprise. Let all men judge,
whether after such hopes, I must not necessarily be very much surprised, when
being on the place I found an entire want of all things, and that I had only
my self to depend on.

In the mean time by the return of my Express I received news from Court, and
Letters from Cardinal Mazzarin, which animated and enflamed me more. He said
that so much danger appearing in the design I proposed, he durst not advise me
to it; but if I resolved to run the hazard, I had the Kings leave, and should
be assisted with all things necessary, toward which I had no more to do but
apply my self to the Kings Ministers at Rome, and take my measures conjoyntly
with them, to whom he writ to the same purpose.

I understood notwithstanding that at the arrival of my Express, I was looked
on as Chimerical, all advices from all parts importing, that the disorders of
Naples were ended; That the Spaniards resolved to ratify what had been
demanded, and consented to by the Duke of Arcos, deferring their revenge and
resentments to a time less dangerous, in which they might obtain their
satisfaction without hazarding any thing; which would be after the conclusion
of the Peace, then treated on at Munster with much earnestness. I endeavored
by all manner of ways to understand what passed and was discoursed of at the
Ambassadors, and amongst the Cardinals of the Spanish Faction, of which I had
most exact intelligence, either by Spies, whom I had hired, or by women; and I
found that my Person gave them greater apprehension, than all the Preparatives
of France. And one day meeting the Earl of Ognate accompanied by four or five
Cardinals, I perceived, that (after my saluting them) they beheld me very
attentively, and their Conversation became more earnest. That Evening one of
the best Voices of Rome, whom I often went to hear sing, with whom Cavalier
Lodi Chamberlain to Cardinal Montalte (who had great power over the
inclinations of his Master, and knew all his secrets) was desperately in love,
having learned of him the particulars of that discourse, for which I had so
great curiosity, gave me account of it, and told me that that Company
discoursing of the affairs of Naples, (which were the principal subject of
entertainments in Rome) Cardinal Albornos seeing me pass by cried out, that if
the King their Master must loose the Kingdom of Naples, I alone should do him
that mischief being capable of the greatest undertakings, and qualified to
become the head of the revolted, who wanted nothing but a person to lead them
on to the most desperate attempts, and by establishing Order amongst them, let
them know their own strength, with the weakness of the Spaniards. To this some
of the Company having replied, that I was not so greatly to be apprehended,
minding so much my pleasure, he smiled and told them that Duke Doria had the
same opinion of the Earl of Lavagne, who the night after made himself Master of
the Town of Genova, and had perfected so difficult an enterprise, had he not
been unfortunately drowned in passing to secure himself of the last Galley:
that I came not short of him either in Ambition or Courage, that I surpassed
him in Birth, and descended of a Family ever ready to execute the highest and
most hazardous enterprises; and to conclude, if Naples must be lost, in his
opinion, it could not be by means of any other, and added that if they made
sure of me, he would be responsible for the Conservation of that Kingdom. That
France gave him no apprehension, but on the contrary he should gladly hear her
fleet was under sail, and arrived in the Haven of Naples before that of Spain;
Its appearance (by reason of jealousy of the French power) being the best and
most assured way for putting end to the difficulties that kept the people from
Reconciliation. This he confirmed with so many Reasons, and so refined
Politics that all the Company concurred with him.

This Relation fortified my hopes, and I was confident so intelligent a Person
spoke not without reason, and that my design was more easy than I imagined it,
he having Informations which I came short of. I therefore resolved to go no
more abroad by night, and commanded my Officers carefully to visit what I was
to eat and drink, being in danger of assassination and poison. About this time
a Sicilian proposed to Mr de Fontenay a design on the Isle of Lipari, extolling
the importance of the post, and the facility it would give to make advantage of
the revolt of Sicily, besides that it would not be unuseful for encouraging
that of Naples. He sent him to me to examine his overture (perhaps repenting to
have too lightly engaged with me in the affairs of Naples, whose execution he
thought too easy, and therefore rather wished in other hands than mine)
imagining I might make an exchange, and apply my self to a present attempt,
rather than to one which appeared at a greater distance. I immediately
suspected that this man was sent to me by the Spaniards, who might flatter
themselves with the same opinion, or that they would insinuate him into my
acquaintance to serve them as a Spy, or to be employed on some attempt more
dangerous. I heard notwithstanding all that he had to tell me, slighting the
offers he made, this Isle being neither well enough fortified nor of sufficient
consideration, I told him if he had nothing else to treat with me, he might
cause himself to be suspected by the Spanish Ministers, and too lightly hazard
his life if he came any more to me.

A few days after we had advice of the arrival of the Spanish Fleet, full of
Soldiers, and with them the Person of Don John of Austria. The people made a
deputation to him, and too easily believed he brought the Ratification of what
had been granted them by the Duke of Arcos: and that the King his father sent
him to give greater authority to the Promises of preserving their Privileges,
and more punctual executing all that had been agreed in his name: But the joy
that appeared at his arrival was soon over-shadowed, when two days after,
landing his Forces, the Canon of the Castles and whole Fleet discharging
against the Town, the Spaniards furiously entered, every man with a Sword in
one hand and a Torch in the other to confound all in blood and fire. The
consternation of this surprise was very great amongst the people. But being a
little come to themselves they all took Arms, and vigorously opposed their
Enemies, who fearing to be overpowered by the multitude, were contented to
have possessed all the eminences, and entrenching there, to turn their assault
to the defensive.

By this time the Neapolitans perceived, but too late, that they had been
betrayed, and suffered themselves to be lulled asleep, in too great a neglect
of the Protection of France, whose succors were most necessary, in so pressing
an extremity; they repented that in testimony of their Zeal and Fidelity for
Spain, they had provided the Castles with Victuals and Ammunition, which were
now employed in a war against them, and to batter down their houses. They a
hundred times called those men Traitors that hindered the firing of the mine
under Castle St Elmo, which had certainly gained that post, which as the
strongest and highest about the Town, did them most mischief. They were
sensible of the necessity they had of a Head of Birth and Consideration,
(beginning to distrust Dom Francisco Toralte) and how useful the Protection of
France would be to them, and the need they had of her Fleet to oppose against
that of Spain, which being in the Haven blocked the Town, and cut off its
Communication by Sea, and considering all that was necessary to their defense,
they found very little Corn, less Powder, and that they were indeed unprovided
of all things fit for resisting their enemies. This deplorable Condition
obliged all the Provinces of the Kingdom to declare against the City, and the
Nobility that had hitherto continued quiet, leaving it, in observance of the
Order of Dom John of Austria and the Viceroy, retired to take Arms, and all
Gentlemen as far as their Credit and Forces would extend, endeavored at
their own charge to make Levies of Horse and Foot, to form an Army, and come
and besiege them by Land.

This people, that refused succors, and thought they stood in need of no man,
now begged it of all the World, and published a Manifest expressing the
unfortunate Condition to which they were reduced, and seeking to move
Compassion throughout all Christendom, made a lamentable Relation of their
adventures, how that notwithstanding their Zeal and Fidelity to the service of
Spain, the Promises had been made, and Capitulations agreed with them, in
contempt of their sincerity and too great confidence, they had been assaulted
with unheard of cruelty, their City three days and nights battered by the
Canon, to destroy it and bury them in its ruins: That they therefore conjured
all Kings, Princes, Potentates and Republiques to take pity on them, by sending
them Supplies and Assistances to resist such dangerous Enemies that pretended
to be their Tyrants, and help to free them from slavery and oppression. They
sent away to Rome immediately to move the Kings Ministers to procure them his
Protection and Succor, conjuring me to come to them, and most earnestly
pressing the sending the Fleet, besought me to become their Solicitor. No day
passed in which there arrived not some Messenger from them with new demands;
Tonti was very much taken up with introducing these new Envoyes, and I writ a
Letter to the people of Naples, to whom, to humor them, I gave the title of
Republique Royal, which I sent by Captain Augustine, who was detained in his
Passage by the Galleys of Genova; but having happily about him his Commission
for Captain in the Regiment of Calabria, and showing it to the Duke of Tursi,
so well persuaded him that he was going to do his duty in that charge, that he
suffered him to go on his Voyage, and carry news from me which was received
with incredible joy and applause.

In the mean time the Ambassador, Cardinals of the Faction, and the Kings
other Ministers held a Council (to which I was called) to consider what was to
be done in the present conjuncture, where it was resolved to send an Express to
Court, to give advice of what passed, to press earnestly the equipping and
sending away the Fleet, on which I was to embarque as soon as I should hear of
its arrival at Portolongone. And to make it appear that succors were demanded
by the Neapolitans themselves, it was held necessary to send into France a
Carmelite called Peter de Juliis, to represent their Necessities, and implore
Assistance and Supplies, he having been sent us from Naples to that purpose,
they supposing it would take well to have all this demanded by one of their own
Nation. That above all, the shipping of a considerable body of Infantery was
neccessary, to land, if it should be desired, Ammunition, Money, and some
Vessels laden with Corn, that so being in a posture of supplying all their
wants, Conditions advantageous to the Crown might be negotiated with them.

All this while there were continual Skirmishes in Naples, and the people
thinking it poor to stand only on the defensive, designed to retake some of
the Posts the Enemies had gained from them. The unfortunate Dom Francisco
Toralte, Prince of Mass, thought best to begin by attacquing the Cloister of
S. Clare, a place most important, as being in a Manner in the middle of the
Town. His Wives affection occasioned his ruin, for detaining him with her the
greatest part of the time, out of apprehension of the dangers he was to undergo
she increased the distrust had formerly of him, he but rarely appearing to the
people, who imputed this retirement, ei- to a neglect of their service, or some
ill inclination and correspondence; this caused murmurings against his conduct,
and designs against his life, which his presence might easily have dissipated.
He had caused a mine to be made, which failing of the entire effect was
expected from it, rendered him responsible for the bad success, and it was
rumored he had caused part of the Powder to be taken out and Sand put in its
place. The flight of Octavio Marquies fortified the suspicions that were
against him, supposing it to have been contrived between them. Thinking to let
pass the first fury of the multitude, by concealing himself, with hope that
afterward his Justifications would be heard more favorably, he was so
diligently sought after, that the place of his retreat was at last discovered,
from whence being led and immediately encompassed by the rabble, being a comely
Person and of Quality, Witty and naturally Eloquent, he made them a discourse
of his whole Conduct and the Services he had rendered them, in which he was so
favorably heard, (having many friends, and a general esteem and affection) that
he had in a manner secured himself, and mollified and persuaded all about him,
when Gennaro coming in, cried out he was a Traitor, that he ought to be
beheaded and his body dragged through the Streets; This being seconded by the
exclamations of the Lazares, who sought nothing more than such employments,
that sentence (as unjust as violent) was immediately put in Execution; They cut
off his head, and tore out his heart, which in a Silver Basin were carried to
his Wife, his body being miserably dragged through the Streets; and by the
menaces these Rascals made to burn in their houses whoever should oppose them,
Genaro was tumultuously proclaimed General, in recompense of so brutish and
outrageous an action. The Carmelites tower (with whose guard he had been
entrusted ever since the beginning of the revolt, because he was Captain of the
Trained Band of that Quarter, having his Gun-smiths shop over against the gate
of it) contributed much to authorize his power, and secured him of a Retreat
the most considerable and important of the Town against tumults, and such
attempts as might be made upon his Person. Marco Anthonio Brancacio, a person
of years and repute, and an old enemy of the Spaniards, by whom he had been ill
used without occasion, was chosen Major General.

Captain Augustine found all these alterations at his return, and addressed
himself to him as well as to Genaro, to present my Letter, show his Commission,
and the Proffers I made of succors from France; This old Gentleman unable to
comply with the brutality and ignorance of Genaro, so vigorously urged my
Election, that all the people concurred with incredible joy, and deputed
Niccolo Maria Mannara (a young man of an active spirit, and but lately come
into the World) to bring me the peoples dispatches, companied by Aniello Falco
(an old Advocate, to whom they had given the charge of General of the
Artillery) and some others, by whom they also sent Letters to the Marquis of
Fontenay; Captain Augustine came back with them to acquaint me with what had
been resolved.

About this time Vincenzo Andrea, (the confident of the Prince of Massa, but
much more of the Spaniards) to dissipate the suspicions were had of him, with
so much Justice, drew up a Proclamation which the People of Naples immediately
Published, by which, on pain of death, it was forbidden to acknowledge the King
of Spain, or obey his Orders, with Command to receive none but those of the
Republic, in whom alone the Sovereignty should from that time reside; and by
this disguising his ill intentions, put himself in a condition securely to
continue his Treasons, whose practice he failed not in to the last, though he
escaped not (after diverse years re-establishment of the Spaniards) the just
punishment ordinarily received by Traitors in stead of recompense.

The Deputies being arrived to offer me the Command of their Forces, I refused
them Audience, but wished them to carry their Dispatches to Monsieur de
Fontenay the Kings Ambassador, and that I would not speak with them but when he
should be present, that so I might be the better Authorized, in negotiating
only according to the Orders of his Majesty's Ministers, they the more obliged
to procure me Supplies, and I the better enabled to negotiate the Conditions,
without which I would not undertake the Enterprise. As soon as he had heard
them, and read their Letters, he sent to desire the Cardinals of St* Cecillia,
Theodoli and Vesini, of the Faction of France to come to him, with whom, as
also with the Abbot of St. Nicolas, he held Council, on so considerable an
occasion. At length sending the Sieur Lusarchi his Chamberlain to let me know
they were with him, and had something of Importance as well to the Kings
service, as my Interest to communicate to me, I went to know what they had to
command me, Cardinal Mazarin having acquainted me that I should hear from them
His Majesty's Intentions, and that complying with their Opinions, I should
regulate my self by their Advice, in a business of so great difficulty. They
told me the occasion of the arrival of the Neapolitan Deputies, and the esteem
of that Republic for me, making choice of me for their General, and Defender
of their Liberty: That it was an Honor (though justly due to my Merit and
Birth) envied by many Princes; and that besides the important Services in such
an employment I might render France, for which they well understood my Zeal and
Respect, I was in a way to become the most glorious Person of this Age, by the
Actions I was to undertake, by how much the more extraordinary, so much the
more glorious. I answered, That being born to no other purpose but to employ my
Life for the Crown, I was ready to hazard all without consideration of the
Perils into which I went to precipitate and expose my self, though not ignorant
of them. That my ruin would be inevitable if abandoned, but that I confided in
the protection of Cardinal Mazarin, in their good Offices and Mediations, and
the concernment France had to assist me in a design in which I engaged only to
manage it to her glory and advantage. Every one of them with emulation assured
me of all succors necessary, The Cardinal of St. Cecillia told me, he would
secure me, I should want nothing: that his Brother and himself had too great
Obligations to me, ever to prove ungrateful; and, that I ought to put an entire
confidence in their friendship.

After this Monsieur de Fontenay sent for the Deputies of Naples, who at their
entrance addressed themselves immediately to me; but, having pointed out to
them the Cardinals, whom they ought first to salute, they performed that Duty,
and then turning to me, Saluted me on the Knee; refusing to speak to me
otherwise: I had much ado to make them stand up till I told them I would not
hear them in the other posture. They made me a Speech to represent the unjust
usage the City of Naples received from the Spaniards; that against a Zeal,
Fidelity, and Respect, unshaken by all the Tyrannies they had continually
exercised on its inhabitants, they at last practiced the highest infidelity, by
assaulting them, without any new Subject of discontent, at a time when they
thought themselves in a well established Peace, destroying the City with
Batteries of all the Artillery of their Ships, Galleys and Forts, and entering
with all their Forces with Torches in their hands, to put all the inhabitants
to the Sword, and burn all the Houses; that this proceeding so injust and
violent, had so far diverted their inclinations, that they were resolved to
break the Chain and acquire Liberty by forming themselves into a Republic, for
the secure establishment of their Government; and, that standing in need of a
Head for their defense, and to Command their Forces, the People had appointed
them in its Name to come and cast themselves at my feet, to conjure me to
become their Protector, and take upon me the same Authority in the City of
Naples, and the whole Kingdom, as has been, and still is enjoyed by the
Princes of Orange in the United Provinces of the Low Countries: That they did
not believe they could reasonably cast their Eyes on any other; not only in
respect of my reputation, esteem, and merit, but out of a just resentment and
acknowledgement of the Favors I had done them, and the zeal wherewith I had
engaged my self to serve them, and negotiate necessary supplies; and that by
reason of the esteem France had for me, I should be as a Sacred Pledge, to
oblige her to their Defense and Protection with all her power: But, that one of
the principal Motives of seeking me for their General, was my Birth, derived
from a family that was so considerable to them, that its Memory was with the
greatest affection imprinted in the hearts of all its inhabitants, as well as
its Arms on all Public Edifices, whose Foundations were the eternal marks,
as well of the Piety as Magnificence of my Predecessors. That they believed me
too generous to refuse to succor them, that they had many Arms to resist their
enemies, but wanted a Head to regulate their Disorders, to teach them how to
fight, and quickly put them in a condition, not only to defend themselves, but
drive the Spaniards out of their Country: That there would be no want of
Soldiers when they should be Disciplined, and that I should find none that
would not cheerfully die under my Command, and readily shed his blood to defend
his Country, and acquire me honor.

After this they presented the Letters they had for me; but, stepping back, I
told them, That it was to the Ambassador and Kings Ministers there present, to
whom they were to apply themselves, because that I (having the honor to be born
his Subject) could not without his permission and command engage my self in a
foreign Service, especially in one so considerable, to which I must resign, not
only the remainder of my life, but also my Successors, and that ceasing (as it
were) to be any longer a Frenchman, and become a Neapolitan, such a resolution
was not in my power, owing an absolute obedience to whatsoever should be
ordained me in his name. Monsieur de Fontenay then told me, that I ought to
accept the Offers made me, since the King had not only given me leave, but
thought himself obliged by it: and that he had Order to tell me. That
Sacrificing my self for the Service and Defense of the Commonwealth of Naples,
I testified my zeal and passion for his Crown, to which I could not render any
service more agreeable, profitable, or important.

Then turning my self to the Deputies, I told them, That after the permission
given me, I joyfully accepted the honor done me by the Republique, in making
choice of me for their General, and Protector of their Liberty: That I would
keep alive an eternal acknowledgment of a favor so extraordinary and little
merited. That I would endeavor by my zeal and fidelity to make amends for my
incapacity; That I would never forsake them, till I had obtained them repose
and liberty, that I would expose my self to all perils, hazarding my life, and
shedding the last drop of my blood, whenever their Interest or Honor should
be concerned. After this I received their Letters, which I think fit to publish
here, to make appear, that I will insert nothing in these Memorials, of which I
have not the justification ready.

Letter of the Republique of Naples.
Most Serene Highness Duke of Guise,
THe most Faithful People of Naples, and that whole Kingdom, having (with
Tears of Blood in their eyes) besought your Highness to become their
Protector, (as the Prince of Orange is at present in Holland) and to procure
them the assistances your Highness has so graciously offered, by the Obliging
Letter the said most Faithful People has this Day (with open Arms) received:
We cannot be wanting in our incessant Prayers, that we may speedily see Your
Highnesses Person, and enjoy the effects of your Valor, whose Hands we kiss
with the humblest respect and submission.

From the Palace of the Royal Post of the Carmelites Tower, the 24. October.
1647. Of Your most Serene Highness The most Devoted and Obliged Servants
The People of Naples, and Kingdom belonging to it.


Letter of Gennaro Annese.
Most Serene Highness.
HAving read the obliging Letter of your Highness, I concurred with the rest of
the Chiefs of this most Faithful People of Naples, to send Seignior Nicolo
Maria Maunara, our Agent-General, with our Instructions, and the present
Letter; but disturbed by so many disorders of War, we referr our selves in all
to what he shall Propose, Judge, Supplicate and Act, as well in our behalf, as
in the Name of the most Faithful People; and in fine, most heartily
recommending his Person to you, we remain, in expectation of your Highness
Favors, whose Hands with all manner of Respects we most humbly kiss.

From the Palace of the Royal Post of the Carmelites Tower, the 24th. Oct.
1647. Of your most Serene Highness, The Most Humble, Most Devoted, and Most
Obliged Servants, Gennaro Annese, Generalissimo, and Chief of the Most faithful
People of Naples.
Don John Lewis del Ferro, First Counselor.


After perusal of these, I told them, that having Devoted my self to the
Service of the People of Naples, by the Charge they had offered me in its Name,
and which (with submission to the Kings good pleasure) I accepted, with as much
satisfaction as respect and acknowledgment, it was but reasonable they should
give me account of the present condition of Affairs, and acquaint me with all
their necessities, that I might begin to demand on their behalves, all such
assistances as they stood in need of, and become their solicitor as well to
the Court as the Kings Ministers.

The Deputies told me the Tragical accident of the Gallant, and too unfortunate
Prince of Massa, the Disorders and Confusions that reigned in the City, for
want of a Person of Authority and Conduct sufficient to redress them; that the
whole Kingdom at the arrival of the Spaniards throwing down their Arms, and
abandoning their Party, followed that of the strongest; That they received no
more succors from abroad, the passages being obstructed on every side, and all
the Country Enemy, except some neighboring Towns and Villages, that seemed
yet inclinable to them; but the fame of my arrival would alter all: And that
they doubted not but at the appearance of a Chief of birth and reputation, all
would take Courage, and wearied by so cruel and insupportable Tyrannies, after
their Example use all possible endeavors toward Liberty: That they were
unprovided of Corn for more than six weeks or two months, with small hopes of
any from the Country, unless by my Valor a passage might be opened to that
purpose. That although many particular persons had well profited by Plunder,
yet every one concealing his Treasure, they had not wherewithal to help
themselves; That the Bank could not be touched without raising a dangerous
Sedition, all parties, as well enemies as friends, being concerned in the
preservation of that which had ever been Sacred and Inviolable; that to make
use of the Churches Plate, was to draw on their heads the Vengeance of Heaven,
and indignation of Rome: That the Nobility, and the rest of their most
envenomed and formidable Enemies, Armed, and got a Horseback through the whole
Realm, that they might contribute to their Oppression, and revenge themselves
for the Affronts and Outrages done to the most considerable of that Body, by
pillaging their Houses, and cruelly Massacring the Prince of Massa, Don Pepe
Caraffa, and some others: That they stood in need of Powder as well as of
wherewithal to make it for want of Saltpeter being obliged to consume a great
quantity continually, in Attacques and Defenses of the several Posts, and the
frequent Skirmishes made night and day; That the People, as a testimony of zeal
and fidelity to their King (seduced by some corrupted persons) had, in time of
the Truce furnished the Castles with Victuals, and Ammunition: That the same
fault had been committed through the whole Kindom, by supplying the Fortresses
that were before unprovided of all things, hoping, by it, the more easily to
obtain Ratification of the Articles concluded with the Duke of Arcos; and so,
having disfurnished themselves of those things they formerly had in abundance,
they were reduced to the present necessity, That the Spanish Ships and Galleys
cut them off from the Sea, by which they heretofore received their subsistence:
That they had Multitudes of Men; who, if well Commanded and Disciplined, being
zealous and brave, might undertake great things; That at the last Muster there
were found above one hundred and seventy thousand Armed men, well resolved to
die for their Country. That, by this Discourse, I could (better than they)
judge what was necessary for them; and lastly, that the courage of all the
Inhabitants began to fall, and could not be raised but by my presence: That
they therefore besought me to hasten my Voyage all I possibly could, and press
their supplies, without which they could not evade the desolation of the Town,
and consequently of the whole Kingdom.

This true relation caused me to make some reflection on the dangers into which
I went about to precipitate my self: But, not valuing my life, and resolving to
sacrifice it for the interests of the Crown, addressing my self to the Kings
Ministers, I let them understand that I was not at all discouraged by news so
surprising, and contrary to all that had till then been reported: That it
concerned them to consider, whether the King would engage his Forces in an
enterprise of so much difficulty, that in case he would, I undertook to run the
hazard; But that they as well as I might foresee, that to abandon, was to
expose me to eternal infamy and inevitable ruin; and that it was neither just
nor reasonable to engage me too lightly where the reputation of France was so
far concerned. With one Voice they answered, that I ought to doubt nothing;
That the Supplies should be so sudden and considerable, that in the Execution
of so glorious a design, I should neither meet the difficulties nor dangers I
imagined: And going about to convince me of this by many reasons, I replied, It
was to no purpose to allege them; That I was not a person could vainly flatter
my self: That I perceived well what was to be feared, but that difficulties and
dangers in stead of discouraging animated me more; that my Confidence in their
promises, and that which I had in the protection of Cardinal Mazzarin, joined
to my Passion (with loss of my life) to contribute to the advantages of France,
would make me affront death, and all manner of difficulties; and that I
required them to be witnesses of the fidelity and zeal wherewith I contemned
not only my safety, but also my honor, when it might be useful to such a
purpose. That they must needs concur with me, that I was (peradventure) the
only man in the World capable of undertaking so dangerous a Commission, the
very apprehension whereof might make the most hardy and resolute tremble. They
seemed convinced of this, and to advance and settle so great an affair, assured
me, That I needed only demand what I desired, that they had Commission and
power to grant it; that on this I might depend, the Kings Promises being secure
and inviolable.

I demanded the Fleet to wait on my Orders, as strong in Ships and Galleys as
possible might be; two hundred thousand Crowns ready Money, in expectation of
a larger supply; four thousand foot ready to land at my first demand; fifteen
hundred horsemen with Saddles, Bridles and Pistols to be mounted at Naples,
the like furniture for two thousand horsemen I intended to raise there; Pikes
and Muskets for twelve thousand foot; twelve Pieces of Canon, 60000 weight of
Powder with Match and Bullet proprotionable, and, at the least, four Ships
laden with Corn; that, thus provided, I would be responsible for the success of
this great design, and for depriving the King of Spain of the Crown of Naples
in a very short time. All of them in the Kings name gave me positive assurance.
Afterward I gave Letters to Nicolo Maria Mannara as did also Monsieur de
Fontenay, that he might render account to the Republique of the happy success
of his Negotiation: I charged him also to let them know that I prepared for my
Voyage to go and serve them, and that, as soon as the Fleet should be arrived
at Protolongone, I would embarque without loss of time, to carry with me all
supplies that should be necessary for them.

In the mean time Tonti, to let Monsieur de Fontenay see he had no dependence
on me, but on France and him alone, hoping so either to credit himself the
more, or that this minister would procure him some considerable Pension from
the Court, and a sum of ready Money for himself and friends, with whom he
held correspondence, as he pretended, at a great expense, Or to discover, as he
endeavored to persuade me, whether his pretenses to me were sincere and
veritable, propounded to him to move that some person of quality, as the Earl
of Harcourt, or Marshal of Meilleray, might come with the Fleet, that so it
might be in his choice, either to entrust this enterprise to me, or put it into
their hands if they should seem more agreeable; the Neapolitans being in so
great a necessity of supplies, that provided they might receive them, they
would very little trouble themselves to consider by whom. But, whether it were
that by report of the Condition of affairs, he imagined them too hazardous to
expect that any but my self would run their fortune; or that he thought me too
far engaged, to suffer with patience another to take my place, being
unwilling lightly to offend a person of my Condition, He answered that it would
be unreasonable, after having gone on so far with me, to change thoughts and
enter on a different conduct.

Tonti came with great have to court me with this answer, and to make appear to
me as an eminent service, the artifice he had used to discover whether they
were real in my concernments; After which he desired me, when I should write to
the Court, to recommend the Services of himself and brother in law, and procure
them Pensions, and some considerable sum to reward their Friends and
Correspondents, that they might by interest allure many more Neapolitans to the
service of France, acquire Creatures, and form a powerful Cabal, which in time
and place might be disposed of to serve her faithfully and contribute to her
advantages.

For my own part I had no other thoughts than to fit my self for my departure,
and provide all things necessary that I might embarque as soon as the Kings
Fleet should be in a Condition, and place convenient to receive and transport
me; And knowing I could not undertake this voyage without Money, I used all
endeavors to get it. I sent for all the French Merchants, to draw from them
the greatest sums I could, giving them Security and Bills of Exchange payable
at Paris. My misfortune would so have it, that the Duke of Modena, having taken
upon him the command of the Kings armies in Italy, and formed great designs,
and high enterprises, wanted it as well as I; in so much as that he might be
supplied at the appointed time, the Kings Ministers had given them order not to
part with what they had in their hands: which obliged me to apply my self to
the Cardinal of St Cicilia, and Monsieur de Fontenay, to get them permission to
treat with me: who thereupon sent for the Sieur Philip Valenti, and told him he
would do the King acceptable service, and a kindness to Cardinal Mazzarin, in
furnishing me with 4000 Pistols on Bills of Exchange which I would give him,
for whose payment they would be Security, the Crown undertaking to satisfy in
case my Family should delay him. He kept this sum ready for me in Gold, to
deliver it at my departure, for fear I should spend part of it before I left
Rome, and so oblige them to supply me with more, it being impossible for me to
go without Money, and the necessity of affairs being such that they could not
pass me by, nor retard my voyage without entirely ruining them.

I cannot here forbear mentioning the generosity of a woman (though not very
pertinent to the Subject I am speaking of) who hearing of the care I took to
provide Money for this enterprise; (now no longer a secret in Rome) brought me
all that she had in plate and jewels, and ten thousand Crowns in Obligations on
the Bank, which with thanks I refused, it being all the wealth she had acquired
by the industry and travel of many years.

I resolved to send to the late Duchess of Guise, my mother, a Letter of
Attorney for disposal of my whole estate, thereby to engage her more powerfully
to my assistance, desiring her to dispose of all for furnishing me with the
greatest sum she possibly could, because on such a supply depended my
establishment or ruin.

I was daily in continual Conferences with the French Ministers and Cardinals
of that Faction, to determine with them of all that was to be done for the
service and advantage of the Crown; but though I pressed them concerning the
conduct I was to follow, and demanded what instructions they had for me?
whether after having gained esteem in Naples, on pretense of Establishing their
Republique I ought not to endeavor an insensible traversing their inclinations
toward the King? it being impossible that the Nobility and People, as much
separated by interest as affection, could ever so unite as to form the body of
a Commonwealth, and govern themselves, without being weary at last, and
choosing a Master, this unquiet and turbulent Nation having never been under
any other Government than that of a Monarch, and (their natural jealousy one
of another considered) could never be at rest but under the command of one
alone. This was granted, but (apprehending it dangerous to propound to a
violent and seditious people, a foreign power, which they ever apprehended) he
told me, that the choice was to be left to themselves of their form of
Government and Master. The imagination alone that the King had any thoughts of
becoming such, would gain their hatred in stead of their friendship, and
contribute to their Reconciliation with the Spaniards; That on the other side
the Pope, without whose authority no innovation could be made in that Kingdom,
(he being Lord Paramont) might enter into alliance with the rest of the Princes
of Italy to oppose it, fearing lest France having gotten so firm a footing,
might at last attempt to subdue the whole. That it would be a sufficient
advantage to the King, to cut off from Spain so potent a Kingdom, from which it
derived its principal forces, and that by the loss of it France would be as
much raised above her as by a conquest: that besides this, such persons of that
Country as sought an innovation, to advantage themselves by the honors and
employments of the Kingdom, by Governments of Towns and Provinces, which they
had hitherto with regret seen in the hands of Strangers, would apprehend to be
nothing the better, but rather that they should be impoverished and ruined, by
the enriching other Countries with the transportation of their wealth. And
lastly reuniting to the enemy all such as on any other grounds were against it,
the party would be so much weakened it could not long subsist.

That for such powerful reasons I was to endeavor, to dissipate all I possibly
could the suspicions they might have of any such thought, giving out that
France never acted but on Principles of Generosity, altogether dis-interessed,
to relieve the oppressed, and procure the Liberty of those that languished
under the tyranny of their enemies; That the Spaniards, at what price soever,
were to be driven out of that Kingdom; that it was no matter what means were
used toward so great a work; That the King would assist what resolution soever
should be taken; That he had formerly consented to the crowning Prince Thomas,
in the enterprise that was managed during the siege of Orbitelloy. That it was
indifferent to him who should profit by those revolutions, and that whosoever
fortune favored should have his support, alliance, and protection, and that in
this manner, without giving envy or enmity to any, he should reap greater
advantages by the Neapolitans than if they became his subjects: That he had
formerly refused to verify in Parliament the uniting Catalonia to his crown,
that he might not eternize the war, and deprive himself of the means of giving
Peace to Christendom when he should think fit: That therefore they had neither
Orders nor Instructions to give me; that I might (according to time and its
conjunctures) act as I conceived most to the purpose; that I could not render a
more important service than the setting Naples at liberty, and depriving the
Spaniards of that crown.

After this the Cardinal of St Cicilia withdrawing with me to a Window, to
speak privately, told me; that I was not to have any Confidence in Master de
Fontenay, who was neither his friend nor mine, that he had no part in the
secrets of the Cardinal his brother, of whose friendship and protection he
assured me, in order to the great Obligation he had to me: That I should
confidently undertake my Voyage, in which I should want nothing: That I should
be assisted with Men, Money, Ammunition and Victuals, with a powerful Fleet,
composed of many good Ships and Galleys, and to conclude, that France would
abandon all other designs to support me with her whole Forces.

We parted after many embraces, equally satisfied with each other, he to write
his Letters, of which he expected a success as favorable, as I thought I ought
to attend from mine. When I came home I sent for the Sieur de Tilli my
Secretary to give him my Instructions and Orders to draw up the Letters of
Attorney and other Commissions necessary for negotiating at Court, and with my
Relations, according to the resolutions I had taken, and ordering him to cause
to be sent me what Money he could raise, as the use fullest supply for
preservation of my life, and execution of my designs; I yet detained him some
days, that he might take with him advice of the Bills of Exchange I was to draw
on Paris, and carry certain news, as well of the condition of my affairs, as of
the prefixed time for my departure, being withal desirous that the dispatches
of the Cardinal of St Cicilia might first arrive, that so at his coming to
Court, he might find things prepared to give him opportunity of a more useful
serving me. The matters I encharged him with, being too nice to be trusted to
writing, I gave him Letters of Credence, which I will here insert, (though
perhaps not very necessary) only to show that I am punctual, and that I was
confident to have found in Naples greater Forces than could be made appear when
I was upon the place.

Letter for the Duchess of Guise.
Madam,
THe esteem the People and Kingdom of Naples have testified of my Person, (by
making choice of me to free them from the tyranny of the Spaniards, and command
their Armies, with the same authority the Prince of Orange does those of the
United Provinces) obliging me to be in a readiness to embarque my self on the
Royal Fleet, and put my self at the head of a hundred and seventy thousand men
that expect me, I thought, Madam, it would not be disagreeable to you to
receive account of the honor done me, and that I could not hope for success in
so glorious an employment without the happiness of your blessing. I therefore
most earnestly beg it of you, beseeching you not to forsake me on this
occasion, where I may acquire so much honor and establish so great a fortune.
Your goodness encourages me to hope your assistance, which is extremely
necessary, especially if you please to consider, that if any advantage accrue,
it is not only to all our Family, but more particularly to your self, since I
am with all imaginable respects,

Madam, Your most humble, most obedient and most obliged Son and Servant The
Duke of Guise.
From Rome this 9 Nov. 1647. I beseech you to give entire credit to what this
Bearer shall in my name acquaint you with, it being of too great importance to
be entrusted to writing.




Believing that the presence of my Brother the Knight of Malta would not be
unuseful to me; his interest obliging me to a greater confidence in him than in
any other of our Family, in an affair in which he was to have his share, I writ
him the following Letter, which though not regular enough to appear to the view
of the World, shall not yet be omitted, supposing (Liberty of correspondence
between so near Relations being easily excused) it will make appear that I
neither neglected nor contemned any means of putting my self in a condition to
want nothing necessary, and that I made use as far as possibly I could, of all
ways of employing my fortune as well as life toward the success of the
enterprise I had undertaken, likely to prove so profitable and advantageous to
the crown.

My Letter to him.
THis dispatch (dearest brother) will prevent my appearing either ridiculous or
chimerical, and make me looked on as a Prophet, or a Person as well
enlightened, because it makes appear already effected all whereof I writ six
Months since by the Express I sent you. In short you will learn by the Letters
sent by Tillie, and that which he will tell you, that it has not been without
difficulty, that my Negotiation has attained the height, you will hereafter
understand, it arrived at; and that the deputation the People and Kingdom of
Naples have made to me, is not a little glorious; and the interests of France
meeting so great advantages, in the posture into which I have reduced matters,
I doubt not to render her so effectual services, as shall procure me her
powerfullest assistance; your self and brother are to apply your selves to the
Cardinal, and considering the extreme necessity I have for Money, use all
diligences possible to furnish me. All my Relations ought in like manner to
contribute to my advantages, which are also theirs, and let them send me all
they can whether Money or Jewels. Rifle them all on so good an occasion. I have
no time to write to our Brothers, nor Sisters, present them my service and
excuses, let this Letter serve for you all: I direct it to you, because all the
rest are to continue in France, for establishing our Family, I expect that you
shall come to assist me here. I shall send for you when it shall be time, in
the interim take care that none come to me without order, because I desire some
days settlement before the arrival of many French, though I intend very
suddenly to send for my Family and equipage. I stay only for the Fleet to
embarque my self and pass to Naples, where I am expected with more impatience
than their Messiah is by the Jews. If we may believe honest Machiavel, I shall
be more puissant than the Great Turk, since he could not draw together a
hundred and seventy thousand men, which is the number that in Arms attend to
receive my orders. Naples is a fair Theater of honor, where I am to encounter
a Son of the King of Spain, put his army to flight, take three Castles and
other Fortresses of the Kingdom, and recover ten Posts that have been lost to
the Enemy, and kept by them well fortified in that one City. Who has more work
to do, and more honor to gain, if I play my part well? How difficult soever it
may appear, I am made believe I shall overcome it very shortly after my
arrival; I will keep something yet for you to do, and you shall have your part,
if you take care to send me good store of Money. Adieu, I entertain you too
long, considering the little time I have for making my dispatch. Plunder all
you can lay your hands on, and if possible the great Diamonds of honest
Chevereuse: Leave nothing in Guise house, in a word, let neither Locks nor
Bolts be proof against your Fingers.

I am all yours, The Duke of Guise.
Rome the 29. Oct. 1647.

This Letter went not away immediately, and the news I shall now impart
arriving after it was written, I was forced to add this Apostile.

I delayed the departure of Tilli for some Bills of Exchange that are to be
agreed on, and the Cardinal of St Cicilia, and the Ambassador, having judged
my presence immediately necessary at Naples, I parted for that place the tenth
of November. This Bearer will assure you he saw me embarque, I am in such have
I can write to none, you will make it known to our Friends and Relations; the
next of mine will be from Naples, where I shall want a most potent assistance
of Money, solicit and heap up on all hands.

In the mean time Father Capuce a Jacobin Friar arrived to solicit my
departure, and the succors, but more to make himself known to me, and obtain
the charge of being my Confessor and Preacher in Ordinary, by it to become more
considerable in his Country: and Nicolo Maria Mannara returned, to cause an
alteration to be made in the resolutions had been taken concerning me, and
desired, that without expecting the Fleet, (all being in danger of ruin if my
presence re-established it not, and re-inspired not courage into the
Neapolitans, who had entirely lost it) I would resolve my departure. In
presence of the Ambassador and all the Kings Ministers he delivered me the
following Letter.

Most Serene Lord,
WE have this day received by the hands of Nicolo Maria Mannara your Highness
dispatches, by which as well as by his report we understand that many persons
whom we have entrusted with Letters to your Highness have not given a faithful
account of our intentions: We therefore most humbly beseech you to give no
belief but to him alone, especially in order to the demand he will make your
Highness in our name for assisting us with Ammunition, and pressing the arrival
of the French Fleet, of which we are in extreme want: but above all of your
Highness person. And understanding that our said Envoies have not particularly
enough expressed our necessities, we in all refer our selves to what the said
Nicolo Maria Mannara shall represent, he having particular information: with
the extremest zeal and impatience we attend the person of your Highness, to
consolate the whole Kingdom, and with our most humble respects kiss your hands.

Your Highnesses Most humble and most obliged Servant, The Commonwealth of
Naples. Gennaro Anneze Generalissimo of the People.
Naples the 3d Nov. 1647.

After the reading of which Letter, the said Nicolo Maria Mannara told us, that
the condition of affairs in Naples was changed much for the worse, since his
last Voyage: that by artifice of the Spaniard different reports were every day
cast abroad, to the wonderful consternation of the people; first, they
endeavored to persuade them they should receive no succors from France, then
that I never intended to come and head their Armies; and that my design of
expecting the Fleet to embarque on, was but a Specious pretense to free my self
from the engagement I had made, and the word I had too lightly given of coming
to serve them; I understanding that they would be abandoned, and that there was
too little honor to be acquired, and too much peril to be undergone in this
enterprise. That Lewis de Ferro, who had taken upon himself the quality of
Ambassador of France, had offered them, in the Kings name, a million of Gold,
fifty ships of war, thirty Galleys, ten Vessels laden with Corn, fifty pieces
of Canon, twelve thousand foot, and four thousand horse, with ammunition
sufficient for above two years: That I was coming to put my self into their
hands as Hostage for all these things, and that he would give himself up as
prisoner to secure them with the price of his head, in a word making such
exorbitant Proposals, as appeared incredible and ridiculous. That Gennaro was
accused to have been too easily persuaded of these chimerical succors: That
the people lost all hope of assistance, and their spirits were so dejected,
that they were ready to throw down their arms (having no more courage to defend
themselves) that they might no farther exasperate the Spaniards against them;
And although the apprehension of their revenge were very great, many persons
flattered themselves, that they might escape it, supposing the punishment would
fall only upon the leaders. That many Cabals were already formed in the Town.
That the rabble were observed to make parties in the Streets to murmr. That
nothing was heard but cries and lamentations, and in a word, all possessed with
despair and desolation. That notwithstanding all this, it was generally
believed that at my appearance amongst them, they would recover their wonted
vigor and courage, being by it confirmed that France would not forsake them,
lest she should so expose a person of my birth and consideration; that they
would yet take Patience for fourteen or fifteen days, but in case the Fleet
appeared not by that time, they would yield, resolved to defend themselves no
longer, and seek their own security in delivering up their Leaders.

This news surprised us all, well knowing the impossibility (what diligence
soever could be used) of the Fleets precise arrival within that time. For
(besides that the equipping at Toulon was not yet completed) had it been ready
to set sail, the incertainty of the winds, and perils of Navigation, (the
Winter so far advanced,) would not admit a fixed day for its appearing before
Naples. Mannara was sensible of the truth of what we said, but withal
represented, that having to do with a multitude, turbulent, seditious and
impatient, it was impossible to sway them by reason, That they must be
convinced by something present and effectual, because timorous and incredulous
persons are not easily encouraged, That my presence alone could have so great
effects, and that during the joy conceived thereupon, it would be easy to make
the people of Naples, nay even the women take arms in order to the most
desperate attempts. That their hatred to Spain might cool, but never be
extinguished, and that there was none that would not (under my command) expose
himself to death, and shed the last drop of his blood for the safety and
liberty of his Country. We resolved to dispatch at that very instant an
express, to hasten the coming of the Fleet, and I offered to go the next
morning to Portolongone to attend it, and embarque as soon as it should appear,
gaining so three or four days time, that would have been spent in giving me
notice of its arrival, and my Journey after receipt of the advice; And that if
there were any other possibility of my getting to Naples, I would make no
difficulty of any hazard thereby to re-incourage them, wishing rather to die
than see the loss of so favorable a conjuncture (which could never afterward
be recovered) for rendering to France so important and extraordinary service.

Mannara answered that if I would take so brave a resolution, it was easy for
me to enter Naples, in spite of any hinderance from the Ships and Galleys of
the Spanish Fleet, that there were small Feluccas so light and nimble, that
neither Galleys nor Brigantines could overtake them, of which there was already
experience, not one of those which had been sent since the arrival of the
enemies fleet being lost, either going or coming; That if I would make use of
them, he would send that very night for a number sufficient to take me in with
all my train, and that they should arrive within three days.

The Cardinals began to look one upon another, uncertain what resolution I
would take, too clearly discerning the danger, it being very hazardous (though
I escaped the enemy) to expose my self to the fury of that Sea, the Navigation
whereof is more to be apprehended than of any other Coast of the Mediterranean,
especially in the Month of November, the time in which there arise in the
Baies, wherewith it abounds, most furious tempests. Monsieur de Fontenay seeing
the necessity of my passing, and not venturing to counsel me directly to it,
said, that in effect these Feluccas were so happy, and their Mariners of such
experience, that there was little peril in trusting to them, and that the
passage was so short, that taking a seasonable time (which they well
understood) there was scarcely any thing left to fortune. I smiled and looking
upon him, told him, that if he desired to have me attempt this passage, he had
no more to do, but to tell me that it was useful to the Kings service, and that
I could not do any thing more agreeable, profitable or advantageous to France;
If so, never any man exposed himself to greater and more evident danger than I
was ready to undertake that instant, because I gloried in understanding the
peril and contemning it, and that the facility of enterprises deprived them of
their relish. I told him finally that to serve the King I feared nothing, but
would venture all with joy, and presently ordered Nicolo Maria Mannara to send
for Feluccas, and to let the people of Naples know, they should suddenly see me
amongst them, armed for their defense, or I would die on the way. He then fell
on his knees to give me thanks in the name of the people, to whose protection I
was going, and particularly of Gennaro whose life I saved, it being impossible
for him to preserve it above a very few days, unless my presence freed him from
the danger he was exposed to, and which was decreed against him, in case the
Fleet appeared not in fourteen days, or if my arrival were delayed. The
Ambassador thanked me in the Kings name for the zeal and passion that obliged
me to so frank a hazarding my self for the interests of his Crown, and assured
me to recommend my resolution according to its merits, it being indeed very
extraordinary: The Cardinals as surprised made the most obliging expressions,
and flattering me on the action I undertook so generously, assured me that by
it I surpassed all the Hero's of Antiquity, and transcended those of ancient
Rome. I was told afterward by the same deputy that they wanted Powder in
Naples; and therefore resolved to take with me all I possibly could, and he
assured me that with my presence, and this present supply, those of France with
the arrival of its Fleet would be expected patiently. I pressed an immediate
dispatch of the post they had resolved to send to hasten it, it being but
reasonable that my so resolute embarking my self on the Feluccas, should rather
advance than retard its dispatch, so to leave me the less time in that danger
into which I so voluntarily cast my self.

Whilst Mannara went to write to Naples, the Kings Ministers and I fell into
discourse, and they not forbearing to commend me; I told them, that if what I
went about were an action so worthy, it could not fail of acquiring me great
credit and authority in the opinion of the Neapolitans, and that when I should
be established by other as important services, which I hoped very shortly to
render them, I should be in a condition to persuade them to any thing, and they
of contradicting nothing of my Proposals: that then I might negotiate their
resigning themselves to the King, and that I would cause so sudden a
performance of such a resolution, that the Pope and the rest of the Princes of
Italy, what jealousy soever they conceived, should want time to oppose it.
They answered me as they had done before at our other Conferences, that the
King was so far from any such thought, that he would not be so much as
believed capable of it; that there was too little to be got, and too much to be
hazarded by such a proposal. That the choice of a master was to be left to the
Kingdom of Naples, and to fortune. That all (the Spaniard excepted) were alike
to France, that nothing more was to be thought on than the driving out him, (as
they had formerly said, and the rest to be left to time and hazard.

I proposed afterward to contrive the Election either of the Kings brother, or
of the (since deceased) Duke of Orleance; They told me the last was old,
incommoded by the Gout, and of little activity; that he loved repose, and would
never quit France to reign in a Kingdom where the Crown was ill settled, and
where he must be forced to be continually with his sword drawn to support it.
That for the Kings brother, his infancy would hinder the people from fixing
their thoughts on him, since many years must pass before he could be in a
condition to protect or govern them. I answered that his few years were in my
opinion to his advantage, that by being bred up in the Country he would
acquire its fashions and customs, and so would afterward pass rather for a
Native than Stranger. That during his Minority I might govern under him, which
would be done easily and without resistance, the Neapolitans having been some
time accustomed to live under my command, and to receive my orders. To
conclude, that I assured my self (in case they approved this business) I should
with time bring it to effect. They told me they had received no orders in this
particular; that they durst prescribe nothing to me not knowing the Courts
intentions; that there was no more to be thought on but to gain the people
liberty, and let them afterward embrace such form of Government as best
pleased them; that what resolution soever they took, the King would approve it,
being resolved to protect them without interest. What instructions then (said
I) have you to give me? I desire good and punctual Orders, that I may in
nothing displease, but serve the King as much to his content as I hope to do to
his advantage. They answered, manage well the war, and drive the Spaniards out
of the Kingdom of Naples, and for all else, regulate your self as you shall
judge to best purpose, and as you shall find good or evil Conjunctures.
Immediately after your arrival draw out 6000 foot and 2000 horse to possess
your self of some post, which opening the way from hence to Naples, will give
us easy convenience of corresponding, that we may act in Consort, receiving
often intelligence from each other. We have only two advices to give you; the
first, That you yield no precedence to Don John of Austria, what business
soever you negotiate with him, and the other, That you never loose the respect
belongs to you; the multitude often abusing the goodness of their Governors;
and when one is so unfortunate as to fall into contempt, it is very difficult
to rise again; we must not therefore suffer to be dallied with, nor make our
selves too common. These were all the Instructions I could obtain from the
Kings Ministers: and since my departure, not receiving any other orders, it is
an injury to tax me, that I would have made my self independent, since I never
entertained any other thought, but to please and serve the King, and in spite
of all the troubles that have in his name been set afoot against me, I have
continued firm in my respect and fidelity, and (entirely abandoned, as I have
been) chose rather to hazard my life and liberty, than accept the advantageous
offers his enemies made me, as shall appear in the Continuation of these
Memoires.

In the mean time I resolved to send away the Sieur de Tilli, to the end he
might solicit all succors I wanted, and follow the Negotiation with which I
had encharged him: promising to send a post after him, (which I did,) to
overtake him on the way, and assure him of the day of my embarking, not
suffering him to depart till he should have seen me at sea. I appointed him to
pass by Provence, and from thence speedily to remit to Rome part of the Money I
had designed for my expense, and for paying all my debts, leaving for security
the greatest part of the Family I had, with order to my Steward not to go from
thence till he saw every man satisfied, and presently after to come to me;
since out of the sum I received from Valenti I could not take so much as
would be necessary for it.

Although the Arrival of the Sieur de Tilly, and all effected by it, happened
not till long after my coming to Naples, that I may not confound the Coherence
of my Narration, I think best to place it here. He was received with much Joy
by all my relations, and with assurances that I should be assisted with
whatever was necessary, and that all should be hazarded rather than I want any
thing. Cardinal Mazarin prepared by his brothers dispatches, received him very
favorably, and having commended and approved my zeal and resolution, promised
I should be supplied with all things, that he would take a particular care of
it, and make it his own business. That I should have assistances greater and
with more expedition than I expected; in short, he found the Court in as
favorable inclinations for me as I could desire. My relations cried me up the
honor of our family, and the most glorious of all those that had hitherto born
our name, and supported it with so much splendour and reputation: but
notwithstanding all these fair Promises, and high and great expectations which
never had effect, I was at last unhappily abandoned by all the World.

I thought fit before my departure to sound the Popes inclinations, and see if
the friendship he had promised me were firm and solid enough to prevent his
opposal of my designs: and whether the consideration of Spain would not hinder
him from being favorable to me, by concerning himself in an affair whose good
or evil success depended much on the part he should take, by the balance his
authority would give to such side as he should discourage or protect. I sent to
demand audience, which he granted me with pleasure, out of the curiosity he
had to know the particulars of all that had been negotiated. I rendered him an
exact account of all that had been treated on to that time, and desiring his
Council touching the conduct I was to follow, he told me I ought to let loose
the reins to the carriere of my good fortune, which he desired to see
established with solidity, and minded me, that having many things to fear, I
ought to have a continual distrust, and my eyes ever open, not neglecting or
contemning the smallest things, which might all be of concernment to me, since
no misadventure could happen to me which would cost me less than my life; that
I should not depend on the Ministers of France residing in his Court, the
greatest part of whom were not my friends, and who in order to their own
advantages would give out, that by their negotiations and addresses, they were
the authors of all the good events procured by my diligence and danger: That in
case I found it easy to cause the whole Kingdom to revolt, they would
attribute it to the disposition of the time, and the general hatred of the
Spanish Government; that they would persuade themselves that any other as well
as I might have done the same; and by this elevating their hopes, would use
their endeavors to blast my fame and obstruct the establishment of my
authority; That unknown to me they would manage secret negotiations, and form a
hundred cabals contrary to me, endeavoring to maintain divisions to profit by
them. That they would cause the Fleet to appear without sending me assistance,
cause supplies to be shown but not delivered, to the end that the despairing
people might by necessity be compelled to cast themselves into the arms of
France, and submit to her. That this design, which they would not fail to
undertake, would destroy the business, and precipitate me, knowing as he did
the nature of that people, who are much greater enemies to the French than
Spanish authority, because of the violent and impetuous humor of our Nation,
and that only from this might arise the desolation of that Kingdom, and the
re-establishment of all things in their first condition; That I ought to
distrust equally both crowns, of which the least suspected would do me most
mischief. That the difference between the Nobility and People would hinder all
my Progressions; that I should be able to effect nothing till I had reunited
them, that this ought to be my only care and principal employment; which if I
could compass, the conquest of that Kingdom was infallible; That he could
assure me that the Nobility were more incensed and more desirous of Liberty
than the people, though they dissembled their true resentments: That all Italy
would oppose the Establishment of the French, and would be favorable to that
of a particular Prince; That on this foundation I was to build my hopes, and
regulate my proceedings: That he loved not the Spaniards so much as was
imagined; That he would look on all as an indifferent father, without
concerning or declaring himself on either side. That the rigors and vexations
under which that whole Kingdom long groaned, had drawn down the indignation of
Heaven, the effects whereof perhaps were now at hand; That divine vengeance
though slow, never fails of arriving at last; and that I should have a care to
avoid the snares would be laid for me on all sides, that I should meet them at
every step I made; that I was to avoid them by Prudence, of which I had great
need in an enterprise of so much difficulty and glory; That he offered me his
Prayers, which he would continually pour out for the preservation of a person
so dear to him, and for whom he had the same tenderness a father has for his
beloved son: and at parting, after he had given me his blessing, embracing me
with tears in his eyes, told me, That he was indifferent who hereafter should
present him the white Nag, which he would as willingly receive from my hand as
any other.

I besought him yet to hear a word I had to say to him, (which I thought
necessary, the better to sound his intentions, and discover his most secret
thoughts) and expressing my acknowledgements for his many favors during my
stay at Rome, and giving him a thousand thanks, I assured him that if he had
any design of making advantage by the present revolutions, and reunite Naples
to the Papacy, which by very good right belonged to it more than to any
whosoever, I was so much devoted to his service, that I proffered my interposal
and assistance, desiring no other recompense than the glory of serving him;
toward which I thought to find great facility, in the present dispositions of
the Nobility and People of that Kingdom. He thanked me for my good affection,
and told me, he was now too old to expect time for so great a design; That it
would be the ruin of his family, and draw more envy, and powerful enmity
against his Relations, than they would be able to support themselves against,
after his death. That the example of Paul the fourth made him wise: and in
fine, that he would not begin so great a work to leave it imperfect: That his
ambition was moderate, and sought not for his Relations more than such a
competent fortune as they might maintain; That he was obliged to me for the
kindness of my offer; but that he would not at all concern himself in any thing
that was to be done, which he would look on as an indifferent Spectator; that
his wishes should be on my side, and that my advantages would as sensibly
concern him as his own: and confirming all he had said to me, again embraced me
and gave me his blessing. Having kissed his feet I took leave, assuring him
that as soon as I should be departed, Monsieur de Fontenay should give him an
account of my passage toward Naples, with the knowledge, consent, and order of
the King, as he had promised, and punctually performed the day after my
embarking.

That night I desired the Ambassador and the rest of the Kings Ministers to
send some one to continue with me on their behalf to take charge of the
ciphers. They propounded the Sieur de Cerisantes for want of any other at that
time capable of such an employment; Having then no Secretary, and it being
impossible for me to be without one, I desired one of their recommending: They
proposed the Sieur Fabrani, who had formerly been employed in service of the
Barbarines, and principally in that of Cardinal Antonio. He followed me in my
Voyage, and served me, till the day of my prison; He had good parts, but spoke
no French, and understood it but indifferently, which gave occasion to some
complaints were made of me at Court, and at which such as loved me not would
have taken occasions to my prejudice. All the dispatches I made from Naples
were in Italian, which was excepted against, as if I pretended to separate my
self from France, and make my self independent, refusing to make use of that
Language. But it may easily be understood that this was a pure effect of
necessity, and not of choice; the pressure of affairs that lay on me night and
day, gave me not time to write with mine own hand, and in this I was forced to
ease my self by the assistance of Sieur Fabrani, who taking only my Orders and
Conceptions, to write them down, could do it in no other than in that Language
was known to him; besides all which having to do with distrustful people I was
forced to show them all my dispatches, which they could not have understood in
French; This is so innocent and convincing that I need no longer justify my
self of so frivolous an accusation: which I touched not at first, but by the by
to make appear, that nothing was omitted toward doing me ill offices, to which
it was very necessary I should give no occasion by my comportment, use being
made of a matter of so small importance.

The Feluccas being at last arrived, I seriously prepared my self to be gone,
taking leave of all such persons as I had respect and friendship for; And the
Cardinal of Este being with his brother the Duke of Modena, I writ to him, to
acquaint him with my adventures, and take leave of him; being very sorry I
could not in person perform that duty, to which I was obliged, not only by the
relation of Kindred, and near friendship between us, but in that
(notwithstanding my refusals out of fear of incommoding him) he had given me
the use of his Equipage and Coaches all the while I stayed in Rome; I writ also
to Cardinal Grimaldi, who was at Modena the following Letter.

For Cardinal Grimaldi.
I Suppose your Excellence has been sufficiently informed by the Ambassador,
of his Negotiations with the Neapolitans and the Ministers of France, doing
nothing without your participation and approbation, it will be needless to
trouble you with particulars better known to you than to my self: Nevertheless
I cannot omit acquainting you with my embarking for Naples, and beg of you the
assistance of your prudent Counsels, in an enterprise so full of dangers and
difficulties. The goodness your Excellence has expressed toward me since my
coming to Rome, makes me hope much from your Generosity, and I am assured that
in order to a powerful assistance in this occurrence, it is enough that you
know the honor of France to be concerned, of whose interest and reputation
your Excellence is so glorious a supporter. If I prove so happy as to serve the
King advantageously in this conjuncture, I will, by an express give your
Excellence notice of it, with my thanks for your favors, which I hope to do in
person before I return to France: beseeching your Excellence to believe that I
will seek all occasions of expressing my acknowledgements, and to make appear
that I am more than any other

Your Excellencies most humble and most obliged Servant The Duke of Guise.


My Palace was filled with Neapolitan Mariners, and every hour of the day I
sent them to see if there were any appearance of fair weather, and the winds
settling so as to carry me speedily to Naples, where I most impatiently desire
to be, but I was nine days in this continual expectation. One Evening they
came to tell me of the arrival of a Felucca: my desire of news caused me to
send for the Mariners, who acquainted me that they had brought with them an old
advocate called Francisco de Pasti, to negotiate something on behalf of the
Republique. Monsieur de Fontenay concealed from me as well his Arrival as his
Negotiation, of which I seemed to him to have no knowledge nor suspicion,
learning by this what I was to expect from him, who began with me in a fashion
so disobliging, hiding from me affairs in which I had so great concernment.
Francisco de Pasti at his return acquainted me with all things, and I think,
shame obliged the Ambassador to make this a secret to me, not willing I should
perceive how easily he swallowed whatsoever was propounded to him. It being the
opinion of some in Naples, that to hasten the Kings Supplies, they must in some
manner own a subjection to him, they had sent this honest man to offer a yearly
tribute to France, which would more have offended the Pope than a pretense to
the Sovereign power, and dis-obliged him by accepting an offer so unreasonable,
at a time when he might be useful to the acquiring a Kingdom.

In the mean while his Proposal was received with open arms; but kept secret as
a mystery, and Monsieur de Fontenay thought by it to have rendered to France a
service of extraordinary importance, not remembering that CHARLES the eighth,
very ambitious and very wise, had formerly refused it; Knowing well that a
Kingdom owning but one supreme Lord, cannot pay tribute to two at the same
time, whose equality of Power being inconsistent, destroys the glory and
advantage.

The End of the First Book.
The second BOOK.
THe Felucca's of Naples having attended me seven or eight days at Fiumicine,
the peoples Envoies very much pressed my departure, the Town (as has been
already said) being reduced to so great extremity, so divided, and sunk in hope
and courage, that they resolved to return to the Spanish Obedience, and yield
themselves with their Leaders to mercy, in case that by Saturday the sixth of
November the Kings Fleet appeared not, or they were not in some other manner
relieved. The necessity of my presence there, giving me greater assurance of
being supported in such an enterprise with all that should be necessary. I made
a show of some coolness for executing a design so hazardous, being laid wait
for by the whole naval power of Spain, and besides Ships and Galleys, by a
great number of Felucca's and Brigantines. The Kings Ministers perceiving that
on my passage alone depended the Continuation or Conclusion of the revolt of
Naples, made use of all expedients to recommend to me the importance of the
service I should render the Crown in sacrificing my self to its interests, and
the honor I should acquire by so extraordinary an action. And understanding
the esteem and friendship I had for Sir Kenelme Digby, encharged with the
affairs of the Queen of Great Britain at Rome, conceived him very proper to
persuade me; I pretended to yield to his reasons, provided they assured me in
the Kings name, to send his Fleet suddenly to Naples to attend my Orders, and
with it all such assistance as I had demanded.

These just Proposals having been consented to in the name of his Majesty by
Monsieur de Fontenay his Ambassador, the Cardinals Theodoli, Vrsini, St
Cicilia, and the Abbot of S^ Nicholas his Ministers at Rome, (Cardinal D'Este
the Protector of France being then absent, and Cardinal Grimaldi at Modena to
negotiate with that Duke) I engaged my self to enter Naples, to revive their
spirits, and continue them in arms till the arrival of the Fleet, and that
nothing but my death should prevent performance; to which purpose I would be
gone as soon as the wind appeared settled for my passage. And though they were
all of opinion that I should embark disguised; I judged it would be easy to
kill me by the way, the Spaniards not wanting Spies to give them notice of the
time and manner of my departure, and therefore desired the Ambassador to
command all the French that were in Rome to take horse and accompany me,
esteeming this not only more honorable but more safe, because I could not be
attacqued but by a considerable body, which the Pope would not suffer to be
drawn together in his Dominions.

Wednesday the thirteenth of November at my rising, having notice given me by
the Sailers belonging to the Felucca's that were to transport me, that the wind
was come about and seemed settled, to continue fair some time, having gone and
satisfied my self in it, I gave account to the Ambassador, and told him I
would be ready to go away immediately after Dinner. Having heard Mass and given
Order for all that was necessary toward so precipitated a Voyage, after
Dinner, quitting my Court habit, for such as suited with a Camp, I appeared in
Buff, and published to all whom the news had invited to me, that I was going
for Naples, firmly resolved either to perish or drive thence the Spaniards. The
Ambassador carried me in his Coach as far as Saint Paul's, accompanied by the
Abbots of S. Nicholas and la Feuillade, and followed on horseback by all the
French that were in Rome, the horse I was to make use of being led by me. In
this equipage I passed cross the Spanish ^iazza, to let the Spaniards see that
occasions of serving my King requiring it, I gloried in declaring my self their
enemy. After my Devotions before the miraculous Crucifix of S. Paul's Church, I
took leave of the Ambassador, and getting on horseback, my Trumpet sounding,
began my march straight to Fiumicine, where arriving about two in the Morning,
I visited the Felucca's that waited for me, amongst which I chose the least and
lightest, the more easily to escape the enemies Galleys and Brigantines. I was
accompanied by two and twenty persons in all, which number was made up of the
Envoies of the people of Naples, some Officers, and five or six of my
domestics; and Captain Andrea Portaro who commanded the Felucca, in which I
went my self, representing that it would be overcharged if I took with me a
Chamberlain and a Trumpet, I removed the latter to another Vessel. My little
Fleet was composed of three Brigantines and eight Felucca's, four of which were
laden with six thousand weight of Powder I had bought at Palo (a Sea-town
belonging to the Duke of Bracciano) to carry to Naples, having been informed
that the people wanted it. I carried also four thousand Pistols, which did me
good service, as will appear hereafter, it being the only sum I could obtain
from abroad, during the whole space of five months, wherein I maintained my
self without any supplies, unless two thousand Crowns brought me by the
remainder of the Servants I left at Rome.

On Thursday about four in the Morning I set sail, the weather favorable and
somewhat sharp, and gave a Servant called Callet my dispatches for the Court,
with order to let them know he had seen me embarque, and that the next news to
be expected of me was my death or arrival at Naples. About Noon we discovered
two Brigantines with Spanish Colors, and presently pursued them, and causing
them to come aboard found they were Sicilians, laden with Limons and other
Fruits for Rome: I could learn nothing of them, they not having touched at
Naples, and let them steer on their course conditionally that they should give
account to the Ambassador of the time and place of their meeting me. About four
in the Evening I discovered the Isle of Pons, from whence at the same time I
saw two Galleys come forth, who made a smoke as a signal to three other that
were at Terracine, who immediately answered them, and the whole Coast being by
such smoke advertised of my Passage, five other Galleys lying in Gaeta made
themselves ready to oppose it. I presently called together all the Felucca's,
to give them order to let me go alone, forbidding them to follow me, as
supposing the Galleys would pursue the greatest number, and mine being alone
would be less observed and followed. At the same time I caused mine to strike
sail, and row near the shore, whose shadow (night approaching) would secure me
from being seen by the Galleys. The Seamen were of opinion, that coming near
Gaeta we should put out to Sea, but I caused them to steer right upon Rolands
tower, that seeming a friend I might get a great way off before they discovered
the contrary, and their Galleys could weigh Anchor. I passed so near the
Castle, that I answered the Sentrie, that I was an Express sent to the Viceroy,
but in stead of coming to Anchor in the Harbor I put off, and then the Galleys
made themselves ready to follow: But a strong wind arising, and driving right
into the mouth of the Haven, hindered them, what endeavors soever they made,
from getting out. I would have taken the advantage of this fresh gale for
setting sail, and getting forward, but we lost our Mast and hardly escaped
oversetting.

Two Waves split two Rudders one after the other, so that being fain to m^ke
use of an Ore in their stead, with a great deal of toil and danger, we passed
the Bay, and were glad to find our selves under shelter of the Land.

At day break we were near the Isle of Ischia, where the Seamen would have
persuaded me to seek a retreat, to pass the day and make the easier entrance
into Naples by night: but I opposed, apprehending to be discovered, either by
the infidelity of some of them, or some other unthought of accident, and so
fall into the enemies hands without striking stroke; Fear making them obstinate
in their opinion, I was forced to draw my sword, and compel them to row. Soon
after we discovered the City of Naples, and the Spanish Fleet riding before it:
and that I might the better resolve what was to be done, I most exactly
informed my self what posts were possessed by the enemy, and inquired who was
master of the ground, both above and below the City. Then I commanded them to
steer right with the Admiral that carried the flag, that I might be unsuspected
and so gain time to pass, before they could launch their long Boats and
Shalops. When I was about twice canon shot from the Admiral, in stead of
steering straight to the Town, I took my course lower, toward the Greek Tower,
that the Felucca's of Chiay and St Lucy might not cut off my way: and to give
notice to the Town of my arrival, I commanded the Mariners, even whilst they
passed through the Spanish Fleet, to cry out that I was aboard, and standing up
on the poop made a sign with my Hat, to cause their foot to draw out, and
receive me at my landing. I was immediately pursued by all Vessels with Oars
that the enemy could possibly cast into the Sea, and fired on by all the
Artillery of the Castles, Haven, Ships and Galleys. I fell in with the Shore a
league below the Town, and ordering the Musketeers that were sent to receive
me, to give continual fire upon the enemies Boats, that pressed me hard,
coasted Riesene and Portici, and would not land till (under favor of this
skirmish, amidst the noise of all the enemies Canon) I arrived at the place of
the Cavalerice, in the suburbs of Loretto. There leaping a shore, Friday the
fifteenth about eleven a clock, I was received with the incredible applauses of
an infinite number of people, who having, for a good space, carried me in the
air, at length mounted me on a fair Courser provided for me, on which I made my
entry into the Town, where I alighted at the Church of our Lady of the
Carmelites, to give thanks for the good success of my passage.

The joy of the people is inexpressible, as well as the respects and
testimonies of affection they rendered me, which extended even to admiration
and idolatry, burning incense at the nostrils of my horse; but that which
seemed to me most extraordinary and of happiest Omen was, that of so
innumerable a multitude assembled to see my landing, there was not any one hurt
by more than a thousand Canon shot from the Castles, Haven, Ships and Galleys.
Mass being ended, Gennaro's brother in law came to make me a Complement in his
name, with excuses for his not meeting me, as not thinking himself secure out
of the Carmelites tower, where with much impatience he attended me. I went
immediately and found him on a little terrass, at the entrance of his lodging,
where by a Complement, ill enough expressed, as far as his ignorance and
incapacity would permit, he testified his joy to see me, for had I not arrived,
he was the next day to have been delivered to the Spaniards, and consequently
to death; of which his fortune respited the execution only for six or seven
Months. Many people were assembled to be Spectators of this interview, whose
circumstances might well enough incite curiosity. I was not a little surprised
at the blindness of the people of Naples, to have chosen such a man their
General; his person seemed to me so extraordinary that I cannot omit (with the
loss of as little time as is possible) to give you his picture. He was a little
man, very ill made, and very black, his eyes sunk in his head, short hair which
discovered large ears, a wide mouth, his beard close cut and beginning to be
gray, his voice full and very hoarse, he could not speak two words without
stammering, ever unquiet, and so very timorous that the least noise made him
tremble. He was attended by a matter of twenty guards of as ill men as himself.
He wore a Buff-coat with sleeves of red Velvet and Scarlet Breeches, with a Cap
of Cloth of Gold of the same color on his Head, which he hardly took the pains
to take off when he saluted me; he had a Girdle of red Velvet furnished with
three Pistols on each side; he wore no sword, but in stead of it carried a
great Blunderbus in his hand. His first Civility was the taking off my Hat, and
in stead of it causing to be brought me in a Silver Basin such a Cap as his
own, and then taking me by the Hand led me into his Hall, whose doors he very
carefully caused to be shut, with most strict Order to his Guards to let none
enter, lest they should cut his throat. As soon as we were seated I presented
him Monsieur de Fontenay's Letter, with assurance (as I had been ordered) of
the protection of France, and of the coming of the Fleet, and all such Supplies
as the Neapolitans should stand in need of toward attaining their Liberty, and
deliverance from the Spanish oppression. He answered me with much more
satisfaction than eloquence, and having opened the Letter I delivered him, ran
it over with his eyes, and having turned upwards every one of the four sides,
cast it to me again, telling me he could not read, and desiring me to acquaint
him with its Contents.

Whilst this passed, some body knocked at the door as if they intended to
break it down: this gave us an alarm, and the cry from without mentioning the
Ambassador of France that was desirous to see me, the door was opened, and
preparing my self to go and receive him with the ceremony due to his character,
I was amazed to see a man without a Hat, his sword drawn, two great Chapelets
like a Hermites about his neck, on the one whereof he said he prayed for the
King, and on the other for the People, who casting himself down at his full
length, and throwing away his Sword, embracing my legs kissed my feet; with
much ado I raised him up, and was doubtful whether I should give him Monsieur
de Fontenay's Letter, which treated him with the quality of Excellence, and the
Kings Ambassador, seeing in the person of Sieur Lewis del Ferro rather the
figure of a mad man broke out of Bedlam than of the Minister of a great Crown;
but supposing he might have some concealed good quality that I had not yet
discovered, considering the great credit he which encharged me with that
Letter, assured me he had acquired amongst the people, I thought my self
obliged to deliver it, lest I might be blamed for not executing punctually what
had been enjoined me.

We heard a great noise in the Street, occasioned by a tumult of such people as
demanded to see me; to satisfy their curiosity I went to a window, and Gennaro
having caused to be brought me in two Basins, two Bags of Money, one of Gold
and the other of Silver, I cast it amongst the people, and whilst they were at
cuffs about gathering it up, I thought it was time to call for Dinner, having
eaten nothing since my departure from Rome, because of the roughness of the
Sea. Gennaro made excuses for the ill cheer he should give me, not daring, for
fear of poison, to make use of any other Cook than his Wife, as improper for
that employment as personating the Lady of quality. She brought the first Dish,
having on a Gown of Skie-coloured wrought Satin embrodered with Silver, with a
Farthingale, a Chain of Jewels, and a fair Necklace of Pearl, with Pendants of
Diamonds in her Ears, all plundered from the Duchess of Matalone: and in this
stately equipage it was pleasant to see her dress meat, scour dishes and
divert her self in the afternoon with washing and smoothing Linen. I invited
Lewis del Ferro, as Ambassador, to wash and sit down with us; But Gennaro told
me, Sure I was not in earnest, for he had wont to use him like a dog; and when
I called for drink, he fetched it, saying, it belonged only to him to serve
me, because of his quality: He presented me the Cup on his knees, which when I
would not permit, Gennaro told me he served him in the same manner, which
presently after I saw verified. Dinner lasted not long, and all things were so
nastie and unsavory, that had it not been for the Bread, Wine, Sallad and
Fruit, which were indeed excellent, I had run hazard of starving.

Arising from Table I desired the Magistrates of the Town might be sent for,
and the Council, which, by reason of his incapacity, had been assigned to
Gennaro, consisting of one person of every quarter, and called Expresses by the
people, the General Officers and Colonels, with all others that had any
authority, that I might inform my self of the condition of affairs, and
(without loss of time) provide for all things that might be necessary, redress
disorders, put my self in a condition to make a vigorous defense against the
Spaniards, and gain time for the arrival of the Fleet, and the succors I had
given this great City cause to expect from the Kings powerful protection.

I found there remained Victuals for no more than twelve or fourteen days: That
the Stock designed for buying more had been maliciously consumed: That of the
hundred and seventy thousand men I was made believe at Rome I should find in
arms, there were scarce four thousand foot, and three hundred horse in a
condition to do service, disposed into Regiments and particular Companies,
under incapable and inexperienced Officers: That the rest of the people being
wearied out would no longer bear arms, and that the small number employed on
the Guard, every one of his own quarter refused to stay the night on their
post, unless they received daily pay; That there was no more Powder but what I
brought with me; That there was no money; That the division and enmity between
Gennaro Annese and Pepe Palombe chief of the Concherie, (accusing each other of
treason and correspondence with the Spaniards, and that not without some
ground, as I afterward discovered) was arrived at such a height, that they
thought of nothing but their entrenchments, and keeping exact Guards against
each other, for fear those of the quarter of the Concherie should attempt on
those of the Market: which gave all the rest of the Town apprehension that its
sack and ruin might be the effect of this ill understanding, of which the
enemy would not fail to make his advantage.

Whilst I informed my self of the bad condition to which the Town of Naples
was reduced, two things happened of very great consideration, and capable to
surprise and astonish any man, that had not resolved himself against all
extremities.

A Butcher one of the City Captains, called Jommo Ropolo, a man seditious and
violent, broke down the door of the chamber where we were at Council, and
coming up to Gennaro, and calling him Traitor, with all his force gave him
three or four blows on the neck, which was bare, with the flat of his hand,
swearing he would cut off his head, from which nothing detained him but my
presence, and the respect he bore me. Gennaro cast himself at his feet weeping,
and embracing his knees, begged his life. I interposed to make them friends,
and did it as having authority, sending Jommo Ropolo to his quarter, which I
promised to visit the next morning, as well as all the rest of the City,
appointing him in the mean time to keep good Guards.

As soon as this difference was reconciled, and we had retaken our places for
continuing the Council, we were interrupted again by a great noise of a
concourse of people with such cries and lamentations as made it evident some
notable mischief had happened: It was a famous Bandite called Jacomo Rosso, who
having marched out of Naples three or four days before, with about 15 hundred
foot, and three or four hundred horse, to keep the Town of St Anastasio, and
some others at the foot of the Mountain of Somma, from whence great supplies of
Corn were had, against the body of the Nobility, had been so fiercely charged,
that the greatest number of his men were cut in pieces, and several taken
Prisoners; the few that escaped with him, all hurt, and he himself with two
cuts of a Sword, one on his face and the other on his head: This sad Spectacle
gave so great astonishment, that had not the people been encouraged by my
arrival they had probably laid down their arms. The Duke of Matalone, Earl of
Conversano, Prince of Ottaino, Dom Ferrante Carracciolo, and other Gentlemen,
having vigorously pursued the rout, even to the suburbs of the Town, the people
found themselves shut up, without hope of obtaining any more Provisions from
abroad; This unhappy Combat having caused all such places as held for them to
change side, and even those who (favorable to them that very morning,) had
facilitated my landing, and without whom I could not have avoided falling into
the hands of the enemy. Let all men judge by this condition in which I found
things at my arrival, whether I had not need of an extraordinary resolution not
to be dejected at so many undiscerned accidents, finding nothing without my
self to depend on, being abandoned by all the world, and generally unprovided
of all that was necessary to the defense of a place in which I was blocked up.

The rest of the Day was spent in Council, every moment interrupted by the
arrival of those Gennaro had sent out to plunder such houses, as he had been
told would afford good booties, by concealed Plate or other movables of value,
this being his chief employment: in the mean time leaving to chance the conduct
of all other affairs, so that we rose not till the night was far spent, yet
without my getting any better information of the condition of the Town, the
force of its troops, or its necessities, than at the instance of my arrival; By
this I judged I was to expect no other light than what I could gain my self by
care and vigilance.

I passed the remainder of the Evening in receiving the Complements of many
particular persons without discovering any thing but an extraordinary
confusion, and a general incapacity in all the chiefs, whether civil or
military. Their hatred of the Spaniards was no otherways expressed than by
injurious Speeches; and their weariness of having been so long in arms was so
great, that no man would tarry all night at the advanced Posts, unless very
well paid; the richer sort causing their duty to be done by poor miserable
wretches, themselves going home and lying at their houses.

I could not discover who had the greatest authority, the Captains of every
quarter commanding without dependence on one another; and had not acquired
their charges either by merit or capacity, but only by having talked louder
and made more noise than their fellows: Gennaro himself, as much General as he
was, was respected by no body, though feared by reason of the train he had
acquired out of the scum of the people, and principally of the marketplace, to
whom he gave liberty to plunder. His election, neither having been made by the
City-Council, nor approved by any of its inhabitants, (as all in private
reported) but by five or six hundred barefooted Boys, who rambling about the
Town with a long Staff and Hook at the end of it with a Faggot, offered a
hundred insolences to the Citizens, threatening to fire the houses of all such
as refused to comply with them. These ^azars, for that was the title this
rabble gave themselves, had a kindness for him, because he suffered all manner
of licentiousness, even to an unpunishable loss of respect to himself every
moment, and because they had seen him forwarder than any else in affronting the
unfortunate Don Francisco Toralte, whose body he caused to be inhumanely
dragged through the Streets after his death. By this may easily be judged how
far his person was to be depended on, and whether I deserved not pity to see
my self engaged in so great a disorder, without knowing either whom to
distrust, or in whom to put confidence.

It being now very late and I wanting rest, every one retired, and I had a
Supper brought as unhandsome and distasteful as my Dinner, it lasted not long,
and inquiring in what part they had prepared me a bed, I was not a little
surprised when Gennaro told me I should lie with him; having refused this as
much as possibly I could, out of pretense of not incommoding his wife by taking
her place, he told me she should lie on a Quilt before the fire with her
Sister, and that it concerned his safety to share his bed with me, without
which his enemies would cut his throat, the respect of my person being the
only means to secure him from that danger, whose apprehension had so strongly
prepossest him, that he awaked twenty times in the night in disorder, and with
tears in his eyes embracing me, besought me to save his life, and secure him
from those that would murder him. He conducted me to lodge in his Kitchen,
where I found a very rich Bed of cloth of Gold, and at the feet of it in a
Cradle a little Blackamore slave about two years old full of the Small Pox: a
great deal of Plate both white and guilt, heaped up in the middle of the Room,
many Cabinets half open, out of which tumbled Chains and Bracelets of Pearl and
other Jewels, some bags of Silver and some of Gold half scattered on the
ground, very rich Household Stuff, and many fair Pictures thrown up and down
disorderly, which made sufficiently appear what profit he had made by
plundering the houses of the richest and best qualified Persons of the Town;
though he could never be induced to assist the people with the smallest part of
it, either to buy Ammunition or Victuals, for paying the Troops already raised,
or making new Levies; This put me in a rage, to see my self in want of every
thing, and yet to have so considerable Supplies at hand, which I might make no
use of.

On the other side of the Kitchen were all necessaries in great Quantity, which
had been plundered in several Quarters, with all manner of arms, all in an
extraordinary confusion. The Presents and Contributions he daily received of
all manner of Venison and wild Fowl powdered, and all the Walls tapistried with
whatever is edible.

This was the sumptuous apartment prepared for entertaining me, and where even
oppressed with sleep, I thought of nothing but a speedy unclothing my self to
get into bed. Lewis del Ferro would suffer none to come near to pull off my
Boots, maintaining it belonged to him alone to do me all manner of Services,
but I refused him, till Gennaro advising me to let him do it, caused his own
Stockins to be pulled off to give me example, which I afterward followed
without Controversy, and got into Bed as fast as I could. Gennaro came
presently to lie down by me, and setting a candle on the bed, and unbinding his
leg to dress it, I asked if he had received any wound? He answered, that being
naturally repleat, and full of humors, a Physician his Friend had advised him
to make use of a remedy, I forbear to name, lest its mention offend others
stomachs as much as its sight did mine.

You have heard now how I passed the first day of my arrival in Naples, and my
reception, whose disagreeable beginning (the first surprisal of sleep over)
made me pass very thoughtfully the remainder of the night, with many
reflections on the present condition of my affairs, and the dangers I was to
undergo. But at last having resolved my self against all events whatever, I
expected day with extreme impatience, that I might begin to work all things
necessary as well for preservation of the place into which I had cast my self,
as my own particular, since my safety or ruin could no longer depend on any
but my self, and that my self alone must become the artificer of my good or
evil fortune.

Saturday in the Morning, as soon as I was up, I went with Gennaro to hear Mass
at the Carmelites, who failed not (for upholding his quality of the peoples
General) to take the right hand of me. Lewis del Ferro went before us
bare-headed, carrying a naked Sword, and (in compliance with the French mode,)
with a great deal of hair; He had a black Perriwig made of a horses tail, such
as on our Theaters are worn by Furies, and incessantly cried out, Let the
people live, and General Gennaro, and the Duke of Guise; and transported either
with joy or madness, struck with his sword all that came in his way, and hurt
so many he had like to have made a tumult. To be quit of him I was fain to give
him an Employment. I found the Carmelites at the great Gate of their Church
with their Cross and holy Water, and their Prior having made me a Speech, they
began to sing Te Deum, and I was conducted to the rail of the high Altar to
hear Mass on a Carpet was provided for me, where Gennaro kneeled on my right
hand. After Mass I was reconducted in the same manner, with the Applauses and
Benedictions of all the people; at the Church-door stood a horse ready, that I
might see the town and visit the Quarters, and Gennaro having mounted a mettled
Courser, spurring him to come up to me, the horse made a bound and cast him
over his ears, flat on his length at my feet; which some looked on as an ill
omen for him: who for fear of the like, all the rest of the way, caused himself
to be held in his saddle by two men, and his horse to be led by the bridle.
Having passed over the Marketplace, where a multitude of people were assembled
to see me, I went to visit the quarter of the Concherie, where I found Pepe
Palombe in arms at the head of his men, who after a great Complement made his
excuses, for not having waited on me, because he never went into Gennaro's
house, for whom he had an extraordinary aversion, and as he pretended a very
great affection, and respect for me, I told him I should reckon him amongst my
friends, and that I would take a particular care of his fortune. I immediately
made him Colonel of the foot Regiment I was about to raise in my name, and
appointed him to be always near me, to carry about my Orders in quality of
Adjutant General: This I did to gain him, being one of the most considerable,
and most followed of the people: and as well to have a nearer eye on him,
because of the just distrust I had been told I was to have of him. He made
great acknowledgements of these favors, with protestation to depend all his
life absolutely on my pleasure; I presently put him to the trial, commanding
him to be friends with Gennaro, and ever after hold a good correspondence with
him; Gennaro, who very much feared him, as the most dangerous of his enemies,
seemed very glad of this reconciliation, which the better to confirm, Pepe
Palombe's wife being that day brought a bed, I obliged Gennaro to be Godfather.
Instantly I caused all the entrenchments they had made against each other to be
slighted, and ordered them to employ their Soldiers for the future against the
common enemy only, and live with the correspondence of good Compatriots and
Brothers. This accommodation gave as great satisfaction to all the people as
displeasure (as I was told) to the Spaniards. Afterward I visited all the
quarters of the Town, followed by above fifty thousand persons. Vincenzo Andrea
Commissarie General of the Provisions, told me, that in so public a rejoicing
it was not just that any should remain in misery, and that therefore it were
good to set open the prisons, which was done as I passed before any of their
gates, more particularly at the Vicarie, the ancient Palace of the Kings of
Naples, where the Judges of several Tribunals assemble to do justice, and where
the greatest number of Prisoners are shut up; and what opposition soever
Gennaro endeavored to make, I caused such Gentlemen to be delivered as he
would have put to death, to satisfy his hatred against the Nobility: to whom I
ordered the Marquis of Monte Silvano of the family of Brancaccio, and an old
Colonel of Foot called Bartolomeo Griffo, and some other Gentlemen, to give
assurance in my name, that I would take an extraordinary care of the
preservation, as well of the persons as goods of every particular, having no
other design but to procure repose and liberty to the whole Kingdom, and that
my great endeavor should be to reduce things to order, which I hoped very
shortly to effect; they returned me infinite thanks with promises to retain an
eternal memory: Little else considerable happ'ning in my Cavalcade, I shall
omit many small particulars, and mention only three things wothy to be
observed.

The first, that Gennaro began to show himself discontented, that in all the
public exclamations, which were excessive, I only was named without any
mention of him, all endeavoring to express as much indifference and contempt
for him, as affection and respect for me, supposing themselves by my presence
secured from his outrages. The second, that at my passage through the Streets
the houses were all hung with tapestry, and the women at the windows who
continually cast into the Street, Flowers, sweet Waters, and Comfits,
accompanying those testimonies of respect and joy with a thousand Benedictions;
The third, that the people came out of their houses to spread their Cloaks and
Tapestry under my horses feet; and the women with perfuming Pots, the poorer
sort on tiles, burning incense; with general protestations they had no more
fear since I was come to their assistance, and that acknowledging me the author
of their Liberty, they were resolved to live and die with me, and to sacrifice
their lives and fortunes to my interest; These demonstrations of affection were
in the same manner, with the same ceremony and passion continued to the day of
my imprisonment.

By that time I had rid round the Town and visited all the quarters, it was
very late, and I went to dine with Gennaro, who treated me as ill as the day
before. When I came to the Carmelites tower I found the Chamberlain of Cardinal
Filomarini to complement me in his masters name with excuses, that some
indisposition had hindered his visiting me, as soon as he heard of my arrival,
and to desire audience in the afternoon. Willing to prevent him, immediately
after Dinner, I took a Sedan of Blew Velvet embroidered with Silver, which had
belonged to the Duchess of Matalone, which Gennaro's wife made use of, and
went to the Archbishops Palace, where I found in the Court all the domestics
of Cardinal Filomarini, with the best qualified Citizens of the Town, who came
to receive me, he himself expecting me at the top of the Stairs; Taking me by
the hand he led me into a very fair appartement, where we sat down, and all
having avoided the room, and left us alone, we continued in private Conference
an hour and half. Several Complements having passed on each side, he expressed
a great affection for the people, whose liberty he hoped by the powerful
protection of France, and infinitely extolled my zeal for coming to venture my
life in so just a cause; That there could not be a sufficient value put upon my
resolution, which had contemned so many dangers as I was to undergo, and
attempted so hazardous a passage. He repeated all that had happened from the
beginning of the Revolutions, and blaming the Spaniards conduct, said, he
firmly believed Heaven would deliver so considerable and famous a Kingdom as
that of Naples from the oppression it had hitherto languished under, and which
could be no longer continued without its final ruin; That I was the instrument
made use of for finishing a work so great and pious. That he, having ever had a
true fatherly affection for the Neapolitan people, thought himself very much
concerned in their obligation to me, for undertaking their defense, offering me
the assistance of his Prayers, and whatever else depended on his credit,
industry or care. I thanked him for these so obliging discourses, but
understanding them to have more of dissimulation than reality, resolved to
engage him ere he was aware to render himself irreconcilable to Spain, and
consequently to a necessity of making a near alliance with me: The good parts I
discerned in him, his wit and prudence obliging me to desire it. I agreed with
him that I should the next day take the oath of Fidelity to the people in the
great Church, swearing to serve them with the peril of my life against all the
World according to the Orders I had received from the King; and engaged him
(though he would very fain have avoided it) to consecrate the sword the people
was to present me for their defense, as a mark of authority, and of the
absolute command they gave me over their Forces, which I accepted, and they had
put into my hands. This Ceremony was very insignificant, excepting in order to
the design I had to embroil this Cardinal with the Spaniards, who indeed, never
forgave him. Being very subtle, he quickly discovered my intention, but after
an obstinate contestation he was forced to comply, having protested that
without his Benediction I would not accept the Command, and that he must be
responsible to the people for my refusal, to whom it more imported that the
oath I was to make to them should be public, and that my Word and Faith should
be deposited with him.

I took leave when we had agreed according to my desires, and he brought me to
my Sedan, where after many reciprocal Testimonies of esteem and friendship, I
went toward the Carmelites tower followed by the Captains Onoffri^ Pissacani,
Carlo Longobardo, Cicio Battimiello, and Matheo Damore, chief of the quarter of
Vinare, four of the most faithful persons I met in Naples, and that had the
greatest respect for me Passing over the Marketplace I alighted to speak to
many people desirous to acquaint me with their necessities, and seek a
regulation of differences happened amongst Officers, and withal to receive my
Commands for the Conduct they were to follow, and for the Orders of their
Guards, nothing as yet having been well settled. I was willing also to see
whether the entrenchments between the Marketplace and the Concheria were
slighted according to my Orders in the Morning: which having done I returned to
the Carmelites tower where I found Gennaro very busy, in putting Manacles and
Fetters on the hands and feet of Lewis del Ferro, for having Printed and Posted
up certain Proclamations without his permission: I would have begged his
Pardon, but what entreaties soever I could make, it would not be granted, till
he should have been eight and forty hours Prisoner in the Cellar, Gennaro
telling me that without such frequent Chastisements, it was impossible to
prevent his extravagancies.

Having been a Witness of this worthy execution, as I returned to the Hall I
had notice that the Cardinal was coming to visit me; I went to meet him, and we
continued half an hour in private Discourse, and he being troubled at what had
been resolved at our last enterview, endeavored to alter me, but I persisting
and alleging the same Reasons, he durst no longer contradict them, and went
away very sollicitous how his excuses would be received by the Viceroy, which
in the Night he sent him by a Gentleman, who brought back Word, That the
Spaniards were dissatisfied with him, and highly complained; that by what he
was to do on the morrow, he would establish my Reputation, and be instrumental
to a confidence between me and the People. As soon as he was gone I supt and
went to Bed, with the same disgust, and in the same manner as the day before.

At my rising on Sunday morning I was not a little joyful to see all those that
had embarked with me arrived in safety, not any of the Felucca's or
Brigantines of my little Fleet miscarrying, who, after having been pursued in
vain by the Enemies Galleys, after various Fortunes, and many considerable
Adventures, came happily ashore, some in the Evening, the rest late in the
night, though every one of them had steered a several course. Our meeting was
an extraordinary satisfaction to all (having received no news of each other
till then) to be freed from the apprehensions we were in four days together.
All things being in a readiness for our going to Church, I gave notice to the
Cardinal that I was taking Horse to that purpose; The Houses were hung with
Tapistry, and a Guard of the Citizens drawn out on each side the way, the
Women at the Windows, all that were in the Town of either Sex assisting, and
taking places to see my passage; Gennaro's Guards marched first, and after them
the Trumpets, followed by a Person chosen by Gennaro, who carried in a Scabbard
the Sword that was to be Consecrated, and put into my hands. The General and my
self rid together* he on my right hand; the Captains of our Guard followed us
on Horseback, with all General Officers and Captains of the City, my own
Domestics, and other Persons of Consideration.

Having passed in this order from the Carmelites-Tower to the great Church,
with the loud Applauses of all the People, and all testimonies of Affection,
Respect, and Joy imaginable. I alighted, and was met by Cardinal Filomarini at
the head of his Clergy; who, after a Complement of the Obligations the City had
to me for coming to undertake its defense, conducted me into the Churches
Treasury, where he presented me the Head of Saint Gennaro the Patron of Naples;
and let me see (not without Admiration) the continued Miracle of his Blood,
which preserved in a Viol, dissolves at the approach of his Head, and as soon
as separated from it congeales again; this I then saw, and many times since,
not without astonishment: from thence I went and took my place with Gennaro, on
a Carpet spread before the High-Altar: and the Cardinal having on his
Pontifical Habit, and being seated in his Archiepiscopal Chair, Gennaro
kneeling before him, presented him the Sword that was to be consecrated, which
he drew, and after such Ceremonies as the Church usually practices in the
Consecration of Arms, ( Gennaro holding it up naked, to make it appear that
the Peoples Authority resided in him, as well in Civil as Military Affairs,
and standing on his right hand) the Master of the Ceremonies came and conducted
me to the Cardinals feet, who presented me the form of the Oath I was to make
to the Neapolitans, to serve them, my self and Successors, with our lives,
against all the World, and not to lay down Arms till we had delivered them
from slavery, by acquiring them liberty and repose* all which I pronounced
aloud, laying my right hand on the New Testament; and after a discourse the
Cardinal made me, of what Obligations my Oath bound me to, Gennaro presented
him the Sword, which he put into my hands, telling me, it was given me for the
defense of Naples, to oppose the violence wherewith their Enemies would oppress
them, and to break the fetters under whose weight they had so long groaned. He
concluded, by Proclaiming me Generallissimo of the Peoples Forces, and
Protector of their Liberties, which was followed by the Acclamations and
Applauses of all that were present, who, making the Church Echo it, carried
the news to the whole City, whose Inhabitants that were in Arms, testified
their satisfaction by a great Volley, to which all the Artillery answered, this
being the only time it was fired during my abode for want of Powder. Te Deum
was afterward Sung in Music, and having made one Obeisance to the Cardinal,
and another to the High Altar, I returned to my place with the Sword in my
hand, and delivered it to be held by me, by him that brought it. Mass was
Pontifically Celebrated, and when I rose at the Reading of the Gospel, it was
again presented me, as long as which lasted I held it up, in token of
Confirmation of the 0ath I had taken.

All Ceremonies finished, I returned to the Carmelites-Tower in the same manner
I came from thence; excepting that the Sword was carried naked before me, and
Gennaro gave me the right hand, and all public Acclamations were redoubled.
Every body went to Dinner, and Gennaro gave me one after the usual manner. I
gave order for the Magistrates of the Town, and all Captains and Officers, with
the Council to meet in the Evening, who had besought me to assign them an hour
to congratulate with me, and confer of all things necessary for the security
of Naples, and supplying its wants. After I had been to return thanks to
Cardinal Filomarini for the pains he had taken, I visited all the Posts that
had been fortified against-the enemy, and appointed the next Morning a general
review of ail the Forces. From thence I went to see the Magazines, and took a
particular account of what Ammunition and Provisions were in the Town. Part of
the day thus employed, perceiving it late I retired to hold Council, and be
ready at the hour I had appointed to all such persons as I had to do with.

The first audience I gave to the Magistrates of the Town, whose complements I
received, the Speech (for want of an Elect of the people, to which none had
been nominated since Cicio Arpaia absented himself (and whose Office is much
the same with that of Mayor of a Town) was made by the eldest of the City
Captains. For answer I protested unto them that I would lay down my life for
their concernments, and that I would never abuse the authority they had given
me, with which I held my self to be infinitely honored: and lastly, consulting
with them by what means we might get in Provisions, and re-establish plenty;
They told me that of Wine there was so great a quantity, that it was sold for a
Pistol the Tun: That Butchers meat and salted meats were so far from
augmenting in price that they were fallen lower, and that in a long while no
want could be of them, no more than of Poultry, and all other sort of Victual,
which would come in abundantly, as soon as the Country should have knowledge
that I commanded their Forces; and that this would oblige all of them to
declare: That the only thing that was wanting, though indeed the most
necessary, was Corn, of which some quantity might be had, if the Stock
designed for buying it had not been wasted: I offered them two thousand Pistols
for their assistance in so pressing a necessity, which I caused to be
immediately delivered out of the Money I brought with me, till I could supply
them with more considerable sums, or till I should have forced open a passage
whereby to receive Provisions from abroad. We concluded that Bread should be
sold something dearer than the Corn cost us, by that small profit to increase
the Stock I gave them, and that it was better to forbear lessening the price of
it at present, than to be afterward obliged to raise it. In the mean time our
Felucca's plentifully furnished us with fish, and all manner of herbs, fruits,
and roots, on which the greatest part of the Inhabitants usually feed.

The chief of the Army came afterward to make their Complements, and having
given them order to bring the next Morning at my rising the names of all
Officers, and a Roll of such persons as were in arms in the Town, of whom I
intended to take a review, they told me that powder was wanting on all their
Posts, not having wherewithal to defend them should the Spaniards make any
attack that night. I instantly ordered some to be delivered, and commanded
Amello Falco General of the Artillery to cause two thousand weight to be sent
to Gennaro for defense of the tower, and the rest to be carefully laid up, to
give me an exact account, and deliver none without order under my hand, the
little remainder obliging me to so cautious a management.

Having dismissed the Officers, I sent for the Counsel, and having received and
answered their Complements on the same Subject in the same manner, we sat down
to deliberate on the public affairs. Gennaro took his place next me, whose
perpetual disquiet obliged him to incessant risings up to receive advice of
some plunder was to be made, or to lay up such as was brought in. He perceived
us incommoded by this, (it being necessary to begin again all discourses that
every moment were interrupted) and desired me not to mind him, his presence
being little necessary, and that he complied with whatever we should resolve.
Our beginning was the limiting his Authority and mine, and it was concluded
that I should absolutely dispose of all that related to war, and that the
Officers and Soldiers should have no dependence but on me alone. That he
should take upon him the civil Government, yet not to act any thing without
advice of the Council, which should be assembled on all manner of occurrences,
where I should sit President, and hold the first place; That in case of my
absence I should receive Advertisement of all Deliberations, which should not
be executed without my assent and participation. That his power in the Town,
having never been owned by the rest of the Kingdom, should extend no farther;
And that all Declarations, Manifests, and Proclamations, which should be sent
into the Provinces, should be made and published in my name only.

And lastly, it was resolved that all Military Officers should take new
Commissions from me, and (the extreme want of Provisions considered) that I
should be besought to draw out the greatest force could possibly be made both
of Horse and Foot, to attempt the regaining of the Suburbs, of which the
greater part were possessed by the Enemies, to make my self Master of the
Field, oblige the Country to declare for us, and open the Passages which were
blocked up, so to have Communication with the rest of the Kingdom, and
principally with those Provinces from which the City had wont to derive its
subsistence; And when I represented that Levies in order to this could not be
made without Money, and enquired from whence we might draw such sums as
should be necessary, Gennaro was moved to furnish us, the public Treasury
being exhausted; Upon his refusal I offered to make this expense, as far as
the little Stock I had brought with me would extend. They told me I should find
Arms sufficient in the City, causing search to be made amongst the Inhabitants,
the meanest of whom had wherewithal to arm four or five persons. And it being
represented that those that kept Guard at the several Posts (though with
convenience enough, because every one was in his own quarter) tired with this
duty which they thought insupportable, because it lasted so long, would no more
perform it without pay, it was resolved to seek all expedients for a remedy,
and that all such as had any advice to give me in order to it should be heard;
and that in the mean time I would not be wanting my Self to consider of it,
that so we might avoid the mischief threatened us by the cooling of the old
hatred against the Spaniards, now no longer expressed but in words, that so
every one might do his utmost for defense of his liberty, estate, life and
honor.

I was also besought to send a Manifest through the whole Kingdom, to declare
that I came to Naples with no other intent than to procure liberty and drive
away the Spaniards, by the assurance I brought of the powerful assistance of
France, which would very suddenly send a potent Fleet, with all necessary
supplies, and which, to avoid giving jealousy, should land no Forces but such
as were demanded, the King having no design to invade the Kingdom, or make
himself its Master, but only to deliver it from oppression; it having ever
been the custom of France to assist without interest all such as groaning under
Tyranny have recourse to her (this being of the highest consequence to remove
the distrust the Spaniards maliciously infused into the minds as well of the
Nobility as People of Naples, naturally enemies to all foreign dominion) and
that of this no certainer testimony could be required than my Order to come
amongst them, and engage my self in their service by so solemn an Oath, which
discharging me of all other Obligations, as nearly concerns me in their
interests as if I had been born in their Country. They told me afterward,
that in order to my greater Authority, and to open a way for such of the
Nobility as were willing to reunite with them, by knowledge of some one to
whom they might apply themselves, (their vanity not suffering them to make any
Addresses to Gennaro, because of the meanness of his Birth) henceforward
remissions and Graces should be dispensed by me alone. Some of the most violent
exclaimed at the word Nobility, and said, they ought to extirpate them all,
that it was they possessed the Country and cut off their Provisions, who after
having on all occasions joined with the Spaniards to oppress them, had now
taken arms in order to their final ruin, that but two days ago had routed
their Forces, and caused many families to wear Mourning for the loss of their
Relations, and particularly that the Prince of Montesarchio had cut off their
Water. Upon this discourse Gennaro taking his place, propounded to go to the
Cloister, where were four of his Sisters, and cut off their heads to send him
as a token, or at least (to be revenged on him) cause them to be ravished, and
abandoned to the Skum of the people. I replied, that was not the way to recover
the water he had deprived us of, but that I would take upon me to give him
notice of the danger from which I had secured his Sisters, which peradventure
my authority might another time come short of, and that all was to be feared
from an exasperated people, whom he ought not to drive to despair, and that
giving alarm in the Cloister of what these poor Ladies were to apprehend, they
would gladly make use of all their credit with him, for the obtaining that
which we demanded, on which depended their Lives and Honors, which he could
not refuse had he the least affection and kindness for them.

This advice was generally approved, and attained such success as I expected;
and for what concerned their great hatred for the Nobility, I gave them to
understand that it having no other foundation than the mischiefs already
received, and which for the future they apprehended from them, to pretend to
ruin, and massacre them as irreconcilable enemies, was to engage them to
worse, and reunite them inseparably with Spain, who without their assistance
was not in a condition to do us much hurt, since it was the Nobility were
Masters of the Field, and that cut off our Provisions; if we could therefore
once separate them from the Spanish interests and engage them in ours, the
whole Kingdom would declare for us, After which it would be easy for us
blocking up the Spaniards in their Castles to starve and force them to yield:
and that so in a short time we should arrive at the height of our wishes, being
delivered from all foreign power, and in condition to form our Republique, and
raise it up to be as considerable and potent as that of Holland.

All yielded to my Reasons, and conjured me to labor in so important a design,
and to this purpose to send for all such Gentlemen as were in Town, to give
them assurance of my good intentions, and order them to give notice of them to
the rest of the Nobility. I would not make any expressions of my joy, for
having obtained so important a point toward the Public safety, and my own
particular, lest I should render my self liable to the peoples jealousy, who
(ever inclined to the worser side) desire that which is prejudicial to
themselves, and concealing my satisfaction, replied, that understanding the
natural vanity of the chief of their Nobility, I knew they would become
insolent if they found themselves sought to, and looking on themselves as too
considerable, imagine we could not subsist without them, which would cause them
to exact from us insupportable conditions: but if they thought fit, I would let
them know that but for me, their estates, persons, and families were in
continual danger, and that I would still continue my endeavors for their
preservation; That if they thought good to join with us, I assured them they
should find in our Republique conditions worthy their Birth. That the common
interest of their Country obliged them to this concurrence for driving away
the common enemy. That they as well as the people wore Chains which were to be
broken, and that when ever they should take so good a resolution, they should
find me ready with open arms to receive them, and sacrifice my Life for their
Interests, which Honor, Reason and love of their Country, ought to render
inseparable from those of the People.

The Managing this Important Affair was left to my discretion, and the Council
rising, every Man retired, and having supped ill and slenderly, I went to make
a dispatch, to give the Court, and the Kings Ministers at Rome advice of my
arrival at Naples, and all that passed since, and having furnished the same
Felucca that brought me, favored by the night, I sent a servant called
Bourdeaux to supply the omissons might happen in my letters, and to give an
exact account of all things whereof he had been an eyewitness.

Monsieur de Fontenay had been so strongly prepossest by the Fabulous Relations
made him, of the Forces of the People of Naples, that (imagining there was no
want, either of Victuals, Ammunition, Money, or Men, but only of a Head that
with Authority, giving remedy to their Confusions, after an establishment of
some Order, might make a profitable use of all advantages) He had encharged me
to draw out five or six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, to open a
passage, and make a free correspondence between Rome and Naples: I thought it
necessary (by making him understand the true condition of Affairs) to let him
see the impossibility of executing so great a Design, being so far from it,
that I was at the point of ruin, unless powerfully and speedily succored; which
obliged me to write him my wants more at large, that being sensible of them he
might become my Solicitor. But (whether it were that he credited more the
Chimerical discourses of some Neapolitans, or that he was ill affected toward
me, the cause whereof I know not, or out of desire to appear considerable, by
seeming better informed at Rome of what passed at Naples, then I that was upon
the place; or that flattering himself in some secret intelligences and
negotiations with persons (though without his knowledge) employed by the
Spaniards, who decried my conduct, and gave him jealousy of the credit I daily
acquired, or imagining that any other might have done what I did, and perhaps
more; and that I owed my Authority less to my own address and care, then to the
irreconcilable hatred the Neapolitans bore the Spaniards, on which though on a
deceitful bottom, he grounded great hopes of rendering himself necessary) he
began to complain of me, as if, to avoid dependence, and such orders as I might
too frequently receive, I would not (by opening a passage) establish a more
easy correspondence betwixt us: and, without excusing me, on account of the
difficulties of Navigation in so tempestuous a season, and the obstruction of
the passage of Felucca's, by a Fleet composed of so many Ships, Galleys, and
small Vessels with Ores, which I sometimes vainly attempted ten days together,
accused me for not writing to him, though I omitted no opportunity, unless in
such instants in which only I could gain advantages, or some enterprises of
war, or my absence from Town prevented me. He detained all my dispatches for
the Court that came to his hands, all Orders and Letters that were sent me, in
so much, that in five Months I never could receive any other, hut such as were
brought me by some of my domestics. He gave informations to my prejudice,
which I perceived at the arrival of the Fleet, by the jealousy had of me, and
the endeavors to deprive me of all credit, and prevent my performing (which I
could have done without difficulty) Actions so glorious and advantageous to the
Crown, industriously Crying me down as a Person Chimerical, that suffering my
self to be blindly transported by Ambition, sought nothing but my own
establishment, imagining to subsist on my own bottom, and to stand in need
neither of Protection nor supplies. He endeavored in the same manner to
possess the most Factious persons in Naples, that he might render me odious.
Entertained a correspondence with Gennaro, and in a word sought my ruin by all
manner of ways, as if I had been the greatest Enemy of France.

These intrigues I quickly discovered; for the greatest part of the Messengers
he employed being Soldiers of the Garrison of Piombino, and Frenchmen, and
consequently having greater kindness for me than him, listed themselves in the
Troops I levied, and bringing me their packets, delivered them not till I had
opened and sealed them again. On the other side, I had taken care to win all
persons that were about Gennaro, even his wife, who sometimes furnished me with
part of his Money, of whom I should have obtained considerable sums, had he not
perceived the loss, though he could not guess by whom it was taken; and since
he could not read, there being a necessity he should trust some body, they who
perused his Letters, gave me an instant account of them; By such lights it was
easy to direct my resolutions.

Though this day would have seemed toilsome to another, it was agreeable to me,
because I had employed it profitably, and in so short a time advanced Affairs,
I reasonably thought might have proved the work of some weeks: so that not
staying for Supper, which deserved it not, I went to Bed, as well to repose, as
at my ease to recollect what I had done, and was to do the day following, where
I had found great content, had it not been for the troublesome Company I was
forced to endure. I put Gennaro in mind of his Promise, to give liberty to
Lewis del Ferro, which he told me should be done in the morning, and afterward
bidding him goodnight, feigned my self very drowsy, to avoid so
unsatisfactory and irrational an entertainment.

The next morning, Monday the eighteenth of November, I arose very early, and
went to the Carmelites, there at leisure to conferr with such Officers as I had
appointed to meet me. They informed me of the number and importance of the
Posts (besides the 3 Castles) that were possessed by the Spaniards in the
Town, what Regiments they had, as well of their own Nation, as Italians and
Germans, what Horse, and how disposed of; the names of their General Officers
and Colonels, the manner of their keeping Guard; what particular Officers
Commanded in every quarter, and generally of all things I was concerned to
know. Afterward they told me, That we could make state of no more than three
thousand and five hundred Foot, and two hundred, or two hundred and fifty
Horse, the rest having been ruined in a fight against the Nobility the day of
my arrival; but that in case of extraordinary necessity, I might list what I
pleased, the People being all Armed, and ready for a sudden Exploit, provided
the occasion lasted not long. They gave me the Names of the Colonels,
Serjeant-Majors, and Captains, that had the Guard of the Quarters, or advanced
Posts, who being to take new Commissions from me, were not backward in
bringing in their Memorials. I enquired also after the most intelligent and
creditable persons, to employ in making my Levies, and resolved not to lose
this Morning which I had designed for taking a review of all the Forces, and of
all the Streets we had entrenched against the Enemy; to remedy what I should
find amiss, and secure our selves better: Being ready to take Horse, I was told
the Council was assembled at Gennaro's. This being contrary to the resolution
had been taken, that I should be always President of such as should be held
whilst I was in Town, I hasted thither to enquire the reason of such a
Novelty, which was, that the Sieur de Cerisantes had procured it, to give
account (as he said) of a Commission sent him by Monsieur de Fontenay, and
present his Letters of Credence. After his offers to the Council of the Kings
Protection and assistance, he began to blame my slackness, for not having
attempted to open a passage for bringing in provisions; and told them, That had
be been in my place, they should have come in abundantly. He vaunted his former
Employments, and wanting neither wit nor eloquence, had almost persuaded those
that heard him, that he was as great a Captain, as Marquis Spinola, or the
Princes of Orange, impudently concluding that he was Ambassador of France, and
that as such he participated of her trust and secrets, and that himself alone
was encharged with her Orders: pretending by this Artifice to make himself
Camp-Master-General, (and to necessitate me not to refuse it, having Gennaro,
the Council, and People on his side) which he knew he should never obtain from
me, that looked on him as too unworthy in Birth, merit and experience for an
Employment I reserved to invite to us some one of the greatest Nobility in the
Kingdom, that had been a Soldier, and whose quality and capacity might be more
useful and creditable to me. Cerisantes was the Son of a Preacher of Saumur;
and the Marquis of Fors, whose Tutor he had been, made him Lieutenant to the
Colonels Company, in the Regiment of Navarre, after whose death he left the
Employment; He had Courage, but was most extravagantly vain. A difference he
had, impertinently enough, in the beginning of the Queens Regency, with
Monsieur de Candal obliged him to leave the Kingdom, and go for Sweden; where
Queen Christina, having a value for Men of parts, had some consideration for
him, because of the excellent Latin Verses he made, in which few of this age
equalize him; having obtained of her a Commission for a Regiment which was
never raised, he returned into France with the quality of Colonel and her
Agent: but she having learned how little he was esteemed, and her self on his
account in some manner slighted, discharged him. Presently after this he went
for Rome, and giving out that his dismission happened on no other account, but
the intention was discovered in him of changing his Religion, he sought a
Pension of the Pope, and having abjured his former belief, and daily presenting
as well to him as to the chiefest and ablest of the Cardinals, excellent Latin
Compositions, put himself in a posture of pretending to some favor. He often
visited Monsieur de Fontenay, and made his regular Court to me, that we might
do him good Offices. In this condition he was at the time of my passing to
Naples, and when I desired of the Ambassador some one to keep the Ciphers
(having then no French Secretary) he recommended this man to me for want of
another capable of such an employment. The easiness he discovered in the Kings
Ministers qualifying Lewis del Ferro with the title of Ambassador, persuaded
him, that he meriting it more than the other, could not be refused it,
especially if it appeared he had gained credit enough to maintain some close
intrique, and work my ruin, which perhaps he had discovered they were desirous
of. I had been told too that in his passage from Rome, he let slip, to the
Sieur D'orillac, a Gentleman belonging to me, (who reasonably enough feared I
might be taken Prisoner, having heard no news from me:) that though such a
misfortune had happened, the Kings service should suffer little by it, himself
alone being capable of supporting the weight of the Neapolitan affairs, how
embroiled soever, till the arrival of the Fleet.

This discourse held with one of my Domestics sufficiently discovers the
judgment of the party. He was much surprised at my coming into the Council,
where declaring that I took it very ill that they deliberated on any thing
without my knowledge, they made many excuses, that they could not refuse
receiving the Kings Letters, nor hearing what his Ambassador had to say to
them. I ranted Cerisantes for his insolence in taking upon him that title, and
threatened him with severe punishment, if in his life he any more committed such
a folly directly contrary to the honor of the Crown, turning to ridiculous, in
the eyes of all Europe, that character by which particular persons represent
Sovereigns.

He went away in a great deal of Confusion, yet he had so far infatuated the
whole Assembly by his plausible discourses, that with one consent I was
besought to make choice of him for Campmaster general. This I refused,
notwithstanding all instances could be made, as of too great prejudice to my
Honor in all places where he was known: it being as important to me as to the
people, to restrain such encroachments, which would give our enemies too great
advantages, and too many occasions to contemn us. Afterward I got on horseback
and went to make the review, which by this unexpected occasion had been
delayed: I had little satisfaction in it, finding (as has been said) but three
thousand and five hundred foot, and two hundred and fifty horse, the greatest
part of whose Officers never saw any other War than that which had been raised
in their City since the first Revolutions, where the Confusion and Disorder had
been so great, that it were more significant toward understanding the
profession, to forget than make use of what they had seen. I visited also all
the Posts that were fortified and entrenched, and though naturally I want not
memory for reporting what I have seen, it will be impossible for me to recite
it, the whole being so irregular and extraordinary, that I must acknowledge I
can make nothing of it. There were cuttings off at the end of every street that
fronted the enemies works. The trenches in some places were made of Faggots and
Barrels filled with Earth, flanked only by the houses, in which sometimes the
Spaniards were possessed of the Garrets and Cellars, and the people of the other
Stories. In other places all was very different, Soldiers were placed behind
Chimneys, and where the Streets were narrow, they were crossed by Planks, which
gave Communication from the Roofs of the Houses, where for the most part the
Gutters were made the fields of Battle. Only the Custom-house, the Gate of
Albe, and two or three other Posts were in a good condition, they having been
accidently provided with some Officer that had served in Flanders, at Milan or
in Catalonia.

When I recollect what I saw that Morning, I cannot but still admire how the
Town held out against the Spaniards, and am confident it must needs have been
reduced before my arrival, had it not been either by reason of the incapacity
of the greatest part of their Officers, who obtain their Charges from the
Viceroys before they have seen any thing, and are very suddenly advanced, by
reforming many under pretense of giving them Pensions, and this in such manner
that in the time of the Duke of Medina de los torres one Company of foot in one
day had successively seven Captains; or the want of resolution in their
Councils, or their fear of being over-powred by the multitude, or else that
wanting Provisions, they forbore to undertake any thing, till the Spring should
give them facility and security of Navigation, to bring them plenty, lest they
might be overcharged with too many mouths, and so consume the little that
remained for preservation of their Castles. I added to these extravagant
Fortifications whatever I could imagine useful, and made them secure against
Surprises, unless by Treason.

I began my Levies by a Company of three hundred Fowlers, who being the best
marksmen in the World, I placed them on the tops of Houses, in all the Garret
windows, and behind the Chimneys, but principally in the Steeple of the
Cloister of St Sebastian, from whence discovering the backside of the Gate of
St Spirito (the most important of all the enemies quarters, and kept by
Spaniards) they killed all Officers that went to and fro with Orders; at my
hours of leisure I went every day thither to enjoy this pleasure, till the
Canon of St Elmos Castle drove me away; One day Don John of Austria and the
Earl of Ognate, passing in Sedans, the men that carried them were killed, and
they forced to make haste to save themselves afoot. These expert fellows did
them infinite mischief, and in five months time knocked down an incredible
number of their Officers.

I gave out Commissions for five Regiments, of which I gave one to Sieur Perez
(who had served in Milan and Catalonia, and been hurt at the defense of the
Custom-house, which he kept with a great deal of honor) and who is yet with
me, the others to Sieur Castaldo, Sieur Antonio de Calco who had been
Lieutenant of the Camp-master General in the Spanish service, Sieur Juan
Dominico an old Soldier, and to Pepe Palombe. I made one also of Dragoons,
which having but two Companies raised, I gave their command to Marco Pisano. I
raised also one hundred guards and three troops of horse, all at my own
expense, and appointed Onofrio Pisacani, Carlo Longobardo, and Cicio
Batimiello, persons in whom I confided, to search what arms were in all the
houses, and to give me account on the Marketplace at three a clock where I
would expect them. Being told of a disorder about the Vicairie I hasted
thither, and found Lewis del Ferro followed by Boys and others of the
Rascalitie he had drawn together, who, having brought Ladders, were with
Chissels breaking down the Arms of the Emperor Charles the fifth, which stood
over the Gate: The people that had an extraordinary respect for his memory were
in a tumult, which I appeased by causing him to be clapped into a dungeon in
Irons. I commanded the arms to be set up anew, and on pain of death forbad the
like insolences, or to drag the King of Spains picture through the Streets, or
stab it with Knives; on which account I cashiered the Regiment of the Lazares,
reserving only the company of Pione, who commanded it, and had been more
obedient to my Orders than the rest, and had not only accompanied Masaniello in
the first revolt, but had taken the Duke of Arcos by the Beard; I caused two
such Rascals to be whipped whom I found tearing with hooks the pour-traiture of
the Catholic King, being of opinion that how fierce a war soever we make, we
are not to forget a respect to Majesty, which ought to be always sacred.

I am not insensible that ill offices were endeavored to be done me at Court
on this occasion, though my proceedings cannot be condemned by persons of
Honor, the Spaniards themselves, though they extremely hate our nation, not
having demolished that which in the principal Quarters of the City preserves
the memory of the French Government.

Presently after Dinner I went to the Marketplace to expect account of my
Orders, where I met a remarkable adventure, which tended to my greater
authority and respect. They to whom I had given Commission brought me account
of such Arms as they had found; but a Butcher called Michael de Santis, a man
seditious and insolent, accompanied by five and twenty or thirty persons like
himself, who were his ordinary followers, came rudely to complain to me, that
he was not used with such respect as belonged to him, the search for Arms
having been made in his house as well as amongst the other Inhabitants; I told
him it had been done by my Order, and that I understood not on what account he
pretended to be exempted. He told me he was Camp-Master General. I desired to
know how long he had been possessed of that charge, and who gave it him, and
whether he had ever been a Soldier? He acknowledged he had not, and that he
had no experience, but that he had taken that charge upon himself; that he
would receive a Commission from no man, and that this was the slightest
recompense the important services he had rendered the people merited, for
having driven the Nobility out of the Town, whose enemy and persecutor he had
declared himself. I forbad him any longer to assume that Quality, which I
reserved for a Person of greater consideration, and that he should content
himself with the command of his Quarter: Upon which answering me arrogantly and
with too little respect, I threatened that if he persisted, I would cause him
immediately to be hanged on the Gallows that was in the Marketplace. Having
withdrawn into the middle of his rabble, where he thought himself safe, he
began to grumble, that I had not been above two days in Naples and would
already play the Master, and bragging, that he had cut off the head of Don Pepe
Caraffa, brother to the Duke of Matalone, and caused his Body to be dragged
through the Streets, said, he would use me in the same manner, if I too much
vexed him: I was then upon a black Spanish Horse, very vigorous, which I
spurred right upon him, and trampled him under feet in the middle of his
Company. Supposing one that used so little Ceremony, would certainly hang him,
possessed with fear, he got on his knees and begged his life, protesting ever
after to have all manner of submission and respect for me: I pardoned him, but
with assurance, that if he should ever be again so insolent, I would make him
an example. All that were present seemed surprised at this Action, and that I
apprehended not the danger to which I might have exposed my self, to whom,
smiling, I answered, That I had a natural contempt for the rabble, and that
when God framed a Person of my quality, he imprinted something on his forehead,
could not be beheld by it without trembling.

Afterward came an Apothecary to demand Justice of me, because the Soldiers
he had till then Commanded, weary of Obeying him, had on their own Authority
made choice of another Captain. I gave them a great repriment, and commanded
them to obey him as they had done formerly: And, in answer to some Complaints
they made of his ill Conduct, he impudently told me they lied. I was in choler,
and perceiving that by suffering such things I should every day fall from the
respect due to me, gave him a blow on the head with my Cane, that laid him at
my feet, which he kissed in acknowledgment of his fault, and fearing something
worse, thought himself happy to escape so easily, and that he was very much
beholding to my moderation: He served me well and faithfully ever after, and
his Soldiers obeyed him without having any difference with him, which seemed
very extraordinary to me.

The most pressing Affair that lay now upon me, being to provide for the
subsistence of those that guarded our Posts, who would no longer have fatigue
without pay, having thought on a hundred expedients, I fixed on one, which
seemed the most ready, and most sure, which was, to appoint the Mint-Master,
and all his Officers, to bring me to Gennaro's a Furnace, to try whether their
Money were of the true Allay. All things being ready for this purpose, I went,
and discovering the abuse, of which this sort of People never fail, threatened
to hang them as Coyners of false Money; which they, not without reason,
apprehending, I was a long while inflexible to the entreaties of all that spoke
for them, and made them accept it as a great mercy, to punish them only in the
forfeiture of their Salaries and Profits to the Publick-use, for as long a time
as I should think good.

The great quantity of Plate that had been Plundered from the first
insurrection of Massaniello, which they that were Masters of converted into
Money, considered, we found we might make Estate daily, (counting one day with
another) of five hundred Crowns. I appointed this stock for paying the Forces I
had in the Town, which not only proved sufficient, but served for those also,
which from that day to the day of my Imprisonment, I maintained in the Field,
with such success as you shall hereafter hear of.

Unwilling to continue any longer useless, and without some action, whose
splendour might gain me reputation, I caused an extraordinary drawing out, of
two thousand commanded Foot* of the best of all the Quarters, that I might make
advantage by the intelligence I had of the Enemies negligence on two
considerable Posts, called the Mortelles and St. Charles. These thought
themselves very secure, because covered by St. Elmos Castle, and Lantignana and
the Vomero which are (as it were) two Suburbs, having till then held for them,
but now had sent to assure me, they would declare for me, and take Arms on my
first Order. I sent them one in Writing by Sergeant Major de la Cave, who
commanded a Body of six hundred Men, drawn from a Town of the same name, whose
Inhabitants have in all Ages had the reputation of the best and hardiest
Soldiers of the Kingdom; I would not go my self toward that quarter, lest I
might give suspicion of my Design, of which the Enemies, by their Spies, might
have received advertisement.

As soon as it was night, I headed my two thousand men in the Marketplace,
ready to March when it should be time. I designed two attaques, one near the
Custom-house, and the other by the Cloister of St. Clare, to busy and divert
their Forces, by apprehension that I was ready to second either of them, where
I should see most facility, and appearance of success. The Cavaioli or men of
la Cava were in the interim drawn near St. Charles, to fall on as soon as I
should give the Signal, which was a Musket three times fired; five hundred
Musketeers of Vomero and Lantignana were to second them, and I to be at the
same time at the head of my two thousand men, to force the Spaniards from all
they were possessed of in the Town, except the Castles; These two Posts, when
gained, playing on their rear, and cutting off all their other quarters; which
was not difficult to effect, the incapacity of the greatest part of their
Officers considered, and the astonishment and confusion that would be amongst
them at such a surprizal. A hundred men were to fall on first, and (seconded by
the like number) to advance farther as soon as the Work they had stormed should
be possessed, and in a condition to secure them from being cut off; the same
thing was afterward to be done from Post to Post: and thus, without any
great hazard of Men, I might have succeeded in so handsome an enterprise.

The signal was to be given at four in the morning, and I expecting the time
with much impatience, that of my Men was so much greater, that they began the
attaque two hours sooner, before those that should have seconded them were
come up, or I knew how to bring them succor. The great firing I heard, soon
gave me notice of their precipitation, I lost no time in beginning my March,
which I had but just done, when I had news by an Officer, dispatched to me in
all haste, that St. Charles was stormed, with the Death or Imprisonment of five
and thirty Reformadoes that kept it. The encouragement of this good success
gave me a great deal of Joy, which was too much allayed a quarter of an hour
after, when I understood that my men, two far transported, by the little
opposition they met, going on without minding whether they were seconded or
not, had taken the Morteles, and some other Fortified Posts, and passed on to
the Gardiole, and St. Annes Chapel, which are near the Viceroys Palace, who
was so surprised, that he abandoned it, and in all haste made to the New
Castle: Had my Orders been followed, so that I might have come timely in, the
Spaniards seemed driven out of Naples, the Castles accidentally being provided
with no more then four and twenty hours Victuals, and their communication cut
off. But, my men dazeled by their good fortune, fell to plunder, and enter
houses; which, the Regiment of Naples perceiving, without resistance re-possest
the Posts we had gained, but disorderly abandoned; and of three hundred men
they took, they killed some, hanged seven or eight, and sent the rest a
plentiful recruit to their Galleys.

This sensibly touched me, and made me regret the want of a Body of
well-regulated Troops, who, having more obedience, would not have exposed me to
such a displeasure, underderstanding that we ought not to press forward till we
have made our selves secure of our retreat. Vexed to the Soul by this
misfortune, I resolved not to retire, till I had attempted something else; and
to this purpose, having put such Troops as I had with me in battalia, in the
Piazza that is before Cardinal Filomarini's Palace, I drew out two bodies, one
to attaque a Work that had been advanced by the enemies, to the end of the
Street that goes toward St. Mary's Church, where they had lodged one of their
most considerable bodies; the other to attempt to gain ground toward the
bottom of Cedrangulo, where they were so advanced they might easily fall on our
rear, in two or three of the most important places in which we were posted.

These two attaques had success, and seconding them often, I had the good luck
to recover, in less then half an hour, in this last quarter, all the enemy had
gained from the people in six weeks. Greater opposition was made about St.
Mary's; my Men were twice beaten back, and perceiving them fall from the vigor
that first appeared in them, I was forced to give them example; and followed by
some of my own servants, and other private persons, I charged the enemies so
smartly with my Sword, that I drove them into the Cloister, and breaking
through the Houses, one after another, recovered a whole Street, and advanced a
Trench within ten paces, though they had five hundred men in it. I ordered
Cerisantes to Post himself strongly there, in doing which, he behaved himself
as gallantly as he had done at the attacque, and made it so defensible, that I
ever after kept it. After this I went to make place for the Cannon on the right
and left hand of the neighboring Works, to flank them, and lodge Musketeers;
and having broke down a piece of a Wall, out of curiosity to observe the
countenance of the Enemy, I received a Musket Shot below my left eye, which
only razed the skin, and a little singed my hair, It was so favorable, that it
signified nothing but to gain me credit and affection amongst the People, all
both Men and Women coming to see the mark of it, which remained eight or nine
days, giving me a thousand Benedictions, and conjuring me to a greater care of
my self, since losing me they lost all, on whom alone, next to God, depended
their repose and liberty.

This little action, not ill managed, caused the bad success of the morning to
be forgotten; and seeing my Levies begin to come on, I resolved after a few
days to take the field, to bring Provisions into the Town, which necessity
began to make murmur. All Towns and Villages near the City, hearing that I
commanded, had taken Arms for me, and were followed by all the Country
(excepting such places as had Garrisons) encouraged by the renown of my Person,
and Authority of my Name as soon as they had heard of my arrival, and seen the
manifests I had carefully distributed to all parts; I sent Jacomo Rosso to draw
together a thousand Musketeers, and bring them to me as soon as I should give
Order, in quality of Colonel of such Soldiers as should be drawn out of the
Neighboring Villages, and employed eight or ten days in all things necessary
for my taking the Field.

In the mean time I made a Proclamation on pain of death against Plundering
Houses, on pretense of searching for concealed Arms, Money, or other
Movables: and another, that whosoever had any intelligence to give me of
Treason, or other secret enterprises, might address themselves to me, with
assurance to be well rewarded for their Accusations, in case they could
justify them; but otherwise, for want of prooffs, to be irremissibly punished
with the same penalties that belonged to the Crimes of which they were the
informers. This was absolutely necessary, for before I undertook the
Government, it was in the power of every Rogue to take away the life of the
honestest Man, Gennaro, without farther enquiry, cutting off the heads, and
dragging the Bodies about the Streets of all such as were but reported to hold
correspondence with the Enemy, to contrive any design against the People or his
Person: which kept all in a strange confusion, in a Country where hatreds are
so violent, that he that has an Enemy, must fear death at all times, without
opportunity of speaking for himself, and being heard in his Justifications.

Applying my self to all means of getting Powder, without which War cannot be
made, till I could cause Saltpeter to be brought in from abroad, I went to the
Powder-house in St. Anthonies Suburbs, and commanded the undertakers of it to
make use of the earth of all Stables, and other places where Saltpeter might
be had, to spare none of them, nor the Labor of Men. Having done all that was
possible, I could never get above four and forty, or five and forty pound a
day, which I caused to be brought home to me, that it might be the better
preserved, and none delivered without order under my hand, having perceived
that Aniello Falco, General of the Artillery, and his Officers, made too great
a profusion.

I was so weary of my ill entertainment and lodging at Gennaro's, that I
resolved, till a Palace could be provided for me, to lodge at the Carmelites,
in an appartement reserved for the General of their Order, and to be served by
mine own Officers, thinking it neither convenient nor honorable to continue
longer without house or equipage; and the patience I had for eight days being
at an end, I told Gennaro my intention, who used all means to dissuade me, but
in vain: so inviting him to Dine with me the next day, being the twenty second
of November, and bidding him goodnight, I went to my own lodging, to sleep at
my ease in a good bed provided for me; which I had never done since my arrival
at Naples.

As soon as I had left him he was advertised that at the Jesuits was a Chest
hid under a pair of Stairs, full of Money and Jewels: his avarice obliged him to
make haste, and breaking down part of a Wall he perceived had been newly made
up, found the Chest, but much to his discontent, filled with nothing but
Chalices, and other Church-Ornaments. He supposed the Porter of the Cloister
could give him notice of some other that contained more wealth, and took him
home with him, and diverted himself the whole night in racking him with his own
hand. In the morning he made me acquainted with it, and I gave him a very great
Repriment, and obliged him to send him back with all the booty he had made of
Church-goods, and terrified him so much with the punishment he ought to
apprehend from Heaven, that being naturally timorous, he promised no more to
commit such a fault.

From thence we went to Mass together, where, having caused a Cushion to be
laid for him near mine on the Carpet, I perceived another laid on my left hand,
and demanding for whom, answer was made me for the French Ambassador, and
Cerisantes proffering to come and take that place, I sent back the Cushion into
the Vestry, and told him, that if he would not become wiser by the Lessons I
had given him, I would make him be shut up in Bedlam, not able to suffer the
Honor of France, and my own Authority to be made ridiculous by his imprudence
and temerity, of which I ought to be very sollicitous, the eyes of all Europe
being fixed upon me, to endeavor to discover in my Conduct any thing that
might blemish the Glory of such Actions, as I had attempted with so much pains
and danger.

In the mean time I resolved to leave the Baron of Modene in Naples during my
absence, an understanding Man, and one I confided in, that he might observe all
the motions of Gennaro, and give me notice of all should be resolved on, and
endeavor with address to manage Men's Inclinations, so that all deliberations
might answer my intention. He became acceptable to all the People, made himself
esteemed and beloved, and gained an ascendant over the inclinations of Gennaro.
He made use of all these advantages, to make himself Camp-master-General,
either because unable to suffer Cerisantes to be preferred before him, or out
of zeal to my Service, believing himself more capable of the employment, and
ambitious of acquiring Honor, with his Sword in his hand, which rendered him
useless in all. I had designed him for, embroiled him afterward with me, and
gave me a great deal of trouble.

The People came in a Body with incredible solicitations to recommend him,
supposing it to be pleasing to me to be importuned to it: I returned thanks for
the affection they testified for me, in placing so great confidence in one that
had followed my Fortune, but that it was but reasonable that I should reserve
that place for some of their own Nation, since its honors and advantages might
invite to us the most considerable of the Nobility, whose Birth and parts might
be very helpful to us; besides, that so I should deprive the Enemy of some
eminent person, whose loss would be as prejudicial to them, as his acquisition
advantageous to us.

I continnued firm in this intention, which I justified by Reasons that
admitted little reply, but he working underhand, and persuading them that
compulsion would not be disagreeable to me on this occasion, I was extremely
surprised when in the afternoon he brought me his Commission for
Camp-master-General, signed by Gennaro, and all the Captains of the Quarters,
and heads of the People, who (he said) forced him to accept it, after his vain
endeavors to be excused. I was troubled at this manner of proceeding, but,
dissembling my resentments, told him, I was glad of the esteem they had for
him, which would give him the better opportunities of serving me; but, that the
consequence would be very ill, and directly opposite to my Authority, if the
People got a Custom of giving Commissions; I therefore signed one for him, and
for that of the People commanded him to carry it back, and cancel it before
them, which he did, very much satisfied, to have by such address obtained his
pretense.

The Sieur de Cerisantes impatiently suffering another to be possessed of the
Charge he had pretended to, after some hours of discontent, put on another
Face; and having heard of the Insurrection of part of Calabria, which had sent
to me for a Chief to Command them, he thought he might there find something
considerable enough to recompense the other loss, and finding me out, accosted
me with very great Protestations of Respect, Zeal and Fidelity; telling me,
that his Fortune was in my hands, and first relating a great part of his
adventures, misfortunes and voyages, acquainted me that a Lady of quality was
the cause, whom he had long loved, and was beloved again, but that coming too
short in birth and Fortune, he could not hope the satisfaction and advantage of
marrying her; That she had allowed him time to try whether his Actions and
Merit could raise him so high in Estate and Honor, that she might Marry him
without prejudice to her Reputation and Family; that fortune had been contrary
to him on a hundred occasions, wherein he had courted her, but had at last led
him by the hand to my service, where if I had a kindness for him, it was in my
power to make him the happiest of men.

I hearkened to this Romance with a great deal of pleasure, and asking what he
had to pretend of me, he replied, the Government of the two Calabria's, with
the Title of a Duchy or Principality of some of the best Towns possessed in
those Provinces by some Spaniard, or other of the Nobility that was our enemy.
I replied, I could not spare him till I had some other to entrust with the
Ciphers, which possibly might happen at the arrival of the Fleet, or with the
answer of a Letter I had written to Rome to that purpose; My reply, though very
reasonable, gave him no satisfaction, and going murmuring out of my Chamber,
Lewis del Ferro coming in opportunely, and asking me what was the matter with
Cerisantes, I thought it not amiss to revenge my self on one Fool by another,
and told him what had passed in our Conversation Del Ferro presently followed,
with pretense that if Cerisantes went from me, the Court Cipher ought to be
left in his hand, he being Ambassador: The other whose blood was already
heated, calling him Fool and Bedlam, refused to part with it in his behalf,
whereupon Lewis del Ferro briskly replied, he must either deliver it, or draw
his Sword, Cerisantes mad to see such a Fellow in competition with him, came
back, extremely transported, to demand satisfaction for being treated with so
little respect. I answered, laughing, that it is no affront to challenge a man,
when the discourse is not accompanied with Violence or Contempt, besides that I
knew not what respect belonged to him, nor what difference to make betwixt
them; that, things well considered, the advantage was altogether on Lewis del
Ferro's side, because I had order to treat with him as an Ambassador, and had
with my own hand delivered him Monsieur de Fontenay's Letters, which gave him
that title, and that himself was recommended to no other end, but to keep the
Ciphers. At this he lost all patience, swearing he was Ambassador, and that if
I did not right him on account of the affront he had received, he knew how to
right himself. This dis-respective reply obliged me to confine him to his
Chamber, with order to the Captain of my Guard to set a Sentry at his door, and
not to suffer him to converse with any till I learned from the Kings Ministers
that were at Rome, in what quality they had sent him to me, if as an
Ambassador, that he might receive all honors due to him; But on the contrary,
if not as such, I should wrong my self to let him pretend to be so; and that
the honor of the Crown was too much concerned to suffer at the same time and
in the same place two fools to usurp that character. His passion being over, he
sent to beg my pardon, and conjure me not to write to Rome of what had passed,
which would entirely ruin his fortune. I pitied, and would not undo him; but I
kept him eight days in apprehension, by it to rectify his judgment and
conduct. The same night happened an accident of which I heard nothing till I
waked next morning; but that which seemed very strange in it, is that I
received two Letters from two several places, one over night and the other in
the morning, to have a care of my Self, for endeavors were used to poison me,
and that Pepe Palombe had promised the Spaniards to do it. A young man coming
into my Kitchen a little before Supper, pressed very earnestly toward the
meat, which occasioning suspicion, he was turned out. He afterward mixed with
the Crowd that came to see me sup, and getting near the cupboard, holding
something in his hand, in a little Paper, offered a considerable sum of Money
to a Neapolitan servant I had entertained after my arrival, to put it into my
Glass when I should call for drink. One of my guards having accidentally heard
something followed him, and stopped him at his going out of my appartment, and
carried him to the Chamber of his Captain, giving him notice of it, who being
told the same thing by my servant, would let me know nothing of it, till he had
made a perfect discovery of the truth.

After I was in bed they put him on the rack, where he confessed all, and the
poison being found about him, it was tried on a Dog, who died within a quarter
of an hour. When he was pressed to declare where he had it, he said it was
given him by Pepe Palombe's Adjutant, who was a man very intimate and much
entrusted by his Colonel. In the Morning they acquainted me what had passed
over night. I forbad them going so far another time, or precipitating a
business of that nature without first acquainting me with it, and receiving my
Orders. I would not cause him he had accused to be arrested, and knowing the
credit Pepe Palombe had in his quarter, thought it better to endeavor to gain
than ruin him, resolving to deal with him in so obliging a fashion, that if he
had any honor he should ever acknowledge it, and be ever faithful to me. He
came to wait on me at my rising, and drawing him apart I showed him the Letters
of advice I had received, of the ill design was pretended he had against me;
and causing the Captain of my Guards to relate to him what had passed, he said
he would be responsible for his friend that was accused; I seemed persuaded of
his innocence, and to put an end to the business, and more sensibly oblige him,
commanded the Prisoner to be set at liberty. The report (though I endeavored
the contrary) was spread through all the Town, that I was poisoned, and the
people crowded in multitudes to the gate of the Carmelites; demanding to see
me. I got on horseback to ride about the Quarters, and give them the
satisfaction they so earnestly desired; and being told that some on the
Marketplace accused Pepe Palombe of this attempt, taking it to be necessary to
justify him, and make appear the confidence I had in him, that so I might
entirely win him, I went to the Concheria, followed by an incredible multitude
of people, and finding him at his door, told him, that coming out fasting I
found my self a little ill, and therefore desired him to call for a Glass of
Wine, with a Crust of Bread or some Sweetmeats; which when he had brought I
drank to him, and having eaten of what he presented, embracing him, whispered
in his ear, that what I had done was not out of any necessity of my own, but to
clear him to the people, and make them witnesses of the confidence I had in
him, desiring to continue him in the number of my friends. He protested never
to fail in his fidelity, and to retain an eternal memory of so extraordinary a
favor.

I employed that day in visiting the Posts, and causing such works as were not
to my mind to be altered, standing by all the while.

No attacque was made either night or day, where I was not immediately present,
and the Spaniards were amazed to find that not a Musket was fired, but I was
presently on the place, and surprised to meet continually in their way, and
most commonly to their disadvantage, such succors as I brought with me
vigorously beating them back; in such manner that all the time of my being in
Naples I never came to blows without getting the better, and recovering some
notable advantage from them. The people had acquired such affection and esteem
for me, that they thought themselves invincible when I fought at their head;
which caused the enemies to make it their only business to destroy me,
persuaded that on my person alone depended their final ruin, or
re-establishment. Their poison having failed of the success was expected, not
only in that which has been mentioned, but in two or three other attempts,
they had recourse to other ways of destroying me, by endeavoring to give a
jealousy of my conduct, and procuring my death by some sedition or tumult. One
Morning, the Marketplace being full of people, where I was to reconcile a
difference between two of their Chiefs, a little Boy gave me a Letter which he
said was of importance, and shifting away amongst the Crowd, without any
possibility of finding him, or learning of whom he had received it, I opened
it, and seeing what it contained, read it aloud to the people, which in stead
of causing their suspicion, animated their friendship for me, and their hatred
against their enemies. It was directed to the Duke of Siane, son of the regent
Capici Ladro, and in form of an answer, to this purpose,

That Don John had with a great deal of joy received the proposal I made him of
delivering a Post, and procuring his entrance into the Town, to give
opportunity with Fire and Sword to punish the rebellion of its inhabitants, but
knowing that the goodness of the King his father would never approve so bloody
a revenge, looking upon the people as disobedient children, whom yet he
tenderly loved, and would reclaim by no other ways but those of demency, being
resolved to pardon them, he gave me thanks for my affection, of which he was
assured, and desired me to continue it for a more favorable occasion, since I
came not to Naples without his participation, nor had undergone so many perils
but to do him the better service, by taking away all distrust. That on his part
he assured me that the Money I had demanded was ready, and that I should
receive it in Genoua, or any other place of which I would give intimation, That
he made use of him, to negotiate with me being a person of Quality and my
Friend, that I might repose the greater confidence in it.

This dull policy had no other effect than such as I could wish, and altogether
contrary to their design. The people murmured extremely and detesting the
malice, cried out, Long live the Duke of Guise our Protector, for whom we will
spend our lives and fortunes, and sacrifice our wives and children; and more to
win them by a soft and compliable comportment, I granted all Pardons of
Criminals that were demanded of me, and continued some days to do so, not
finding in my heart to put any to death. But this people accustomed to Blood
and Massacres, were desirous of such Spectacles, and finding by their discourse
and murmurings, that it was time to make my self feared, (it being told me as I
passed the Streets, that my goodness was too great in that I caused no
executions, and that without such examples I should never contain within the
limits of duty, such as were become habituated in murders and robberies,) seven
men having been imprisoned for such actions, I caused them to be all hanged
together, and found that this severe justice was very agreeable, and that the
peoples respect and kindness for me was fortified and increased by it. And
afterward seeming inflexible, when I was desirous to pardon, I made use of an
address which I continued to the last. Having notice given me of the time that
a Criminal was to be brought to punishment, I ordered it so, that I met him on
the way, as if by accident, and (seeming angry that they that went before had
not avoided him, but obliged me against my will to see him pass) gave him his
life at the suit of his Wife and Children, saying it was not reasonable he
should die since his good fortune had brought him to my presence, pardons being
naturally inseparable from the eyes of Princes.

Vincenzo Andrea thinking on nothing but his treason, secretly endeavored to
give Gennaro jealousy of the authority I daily acquired, to which he was very
much disposed of himself by finding a diminution of his respect, and Vincenzo
daily complained to me of his brutality, ignorance, sloth and avarice, which
would ruin all at last if I took not the whole conduct upon me; he underhand
encouraging disorders and plunders, and omitting nothing to obtain his ends. An
accident happened that gave him a great deal of joy and hope, which yet brought
on no disastrous event as he had expected: Three Captains of the Regiment of
Sebastian Landi, with his Sergeant Major, who had the Guard of the Gate of
Albe, the most suspicious and considerable of all we had, commanding the
easiest and most to be apprehended passage of the town (as afterward appeared
by the application the Spaniards made for buying it of him, by which they at
last became Masters of all, and reduced Naples, and consequently the rest of
the Kingdom to their obedience) came to complain to me of the imprisonment of
their Colonel, and enquiring of them whether the enemies had made any Sallie,
or there had happened any Skirmish, they told me no, but that Gennaro had clapped
him up for opposing his plundering a house in his quarter, contrary to the
Proclamation I had made for prevention of such violences. Going therefore to
the Carmelites Tower, very much incensed for so unreasonable an action, I sent
the Sergeant Major and two of the Captains to cause the Guard to be doubled,
lest the enemy should make advantage by this accident, and took only one of
the Captains with me. I found Gennaro with the Council and some of the City
Captains, and other Chiefs of the people, who met me and rudely told me he knew
what I came about, and that I was not to concern my self in that affair. I went
into the Hall where they were assembled, and using him with all the contempt
that belonged to his condition, moved by a just indignation raised by his
imprudence, and the hazard to which he exposed the whole Town as well as my
Person, without once looking on him, and walking up and down the room I told
him, he knew well enough that the command of the Army belonging to me, all
military persons offending were to be punished by me, and that upon any
dis-satisfaction he needed only make his Complaint, and I should do such right
as I judged convenient. That he should have a care hereafter of doing as he had
done, for I was resolved not to suffer it. That I being entrusted with the
security of the Town, my Honor and Life depended on it, which he ought not to
hazard by his passion and humor. That the title of Protector was not given me
to suffer my self to be ill used, and contemned in such a manner. That it was
not just that a person of my condition, after the neglect of so many dangers,
should be every moment irrationally exposed to ruin, where no honorable
occasion presented it self. He gave me an insolent answer which moving me to
reply, that persons so brutal and insolent were not worthy to be commanded by
one of my quality, I broke my Staff on my Knee, and casting away the pieces
told him, I renounced the charge I had taken upon me, and assured him he should
be responsible for all such mischiefs as would infallibly follow, for the loss
of the Estates, and Lives of all the Inhabitants, the honor of their Families,
the sacking and desolation of their City and whole Kingdom, which I abandoned
to the cruel Vengeance of the Spaniards: That I would immediately seek
felucca's for my return, to leave a plate where I was so little valued, and
where nothing could be acquired but infamy in stead of the honor I had
proposed to my self: That I could not suffer a failing of the respect belonged
to me, especially by such as he, and that I had a great mind before my
departure to make him an example, and cause him to be thrown out of the Window.

All that were present offered themselves to perform this, he in the mean time
weeping, and casting himself at my feet, which he often kissed, begging my
pardon, which was in like manner done by his Wife and Brother-in-law, with a
thousand demonstrations of fear, and as many Protestations for the future to be
more obedient and submissive to me than the meanest person in the Town. All the
Company on their Knees, and with tears in their eyes, besought me to take again
the command, they having no hope but in me alone, being for ever ruined if I
laid aside the defense of their liberty. I yielded to so many entreaties, and
another Staff being presented, accepted it as a mark of the Authority I
reassumed. After this I had much ado to hinder those that were present from
killing him, so great were their animosities; I sent back Colonel Landi to his
charge, ordering him for the future to apply himself to it, with the same
punctuality, vigilance and zeal as formerly, of which he gave me all such
Promises, as this Obligation and the Friendship I had ever expressed for him
required.

In the mean time Pepe Palombe at the head of those of the Concheria, Matheo
Damore followed by all Lavinare and the adjoining quarters, and all those of
the Marketplace in Arms, with loud cries and a furious tumult demanded the
person of Gennaro to be delivered to them, that they might cut off his Head,
and afterward hang him up by the foot, by that Example to teach the respect
that belonged to me. I went down to pacify them, which my appearance
immediately did, after the assurance I gave them of my Satisfaction. They
oftentimes called me their Father and Defender, with tears conjuring me not to
abandon them, since without me they could not hope deliverance from slavery,
recommending to me the preservation of their Lives and Fortunes, with the
honor of their Families.

This insolent penitent not thinking himself secure, besought me to protect him
against the fury of the whole Town, and publicly kneeled down before me to
beg his Life, where I embraced him and commanded the people, since I had
pardoned him and looked on him as the best and faithfullest of my Friends, to
love and value him as formerly, I taking into my protection his interests and
safety against all men. In this manner I made useful to me an accident that
might probably have given me much trouble and danger. He retired into his
Tower, and I got on horseback to show my self to the people, and visit the
condition of the Posts, and vigilance of the Guards, that I might have nothing
to fear in the night. As I passed by St Lawrence's Cloister, I heard a noise in
a Palace that belonged to a Person of Quality, and sent an Officer of my Guards
to enquire the occasion, Who returned with word that fifteen or sixteen persons
were plundering it; I commanded him to bring the chief of them to me, whom I
asked whether he had not knowledge of my Proclamation, by which the pillaging
of any House was forbidden on pain of death. He told me Yes, but it being
reported that arms were hidden there, he went to search by authority of an
order signed by my self and Vincenzo Andrea. I demanded it, and finding my hand
counterfeited, sent for a Priest out of the Cloister to confess him, and
immediately after, caused him to be hanged at the Bars of a Window. This
prompt Justice drew a thousand Benedictions on me, and so terrified all such as
till then had securely committed the like outrages, that no more of them were
ever afterward heard of in the Town.

I very seriously applied my self to negotiate some intelligence with the
Nobility, and ordered all such Gentlemen as were in Town, to meet me the next
Morning at the Carmelites, in order to a Conference I desired to hold with
them: they failed not of coming, nor I of an extraordinary caressing them all.
I told them that having come to Naples to no other purpose but to free all the
Kingdom as well as the Town from the rigorous Domination of Spain, I thought it
a happiness to me to be in a condition to be useful to the Service of the
Nobility, and that I was already sufficiently recompensed for all the dangers I
had undergone, by having had the good fortune to secure the Houses and Goods of
many persons of Quality, from the fury of the people, more exasperated against
them by artifice of the Spaniards, and for want of understanding what was
profitable and necessary for themselves than out of any particular aversion.
That I was very desirous to find ways to reconcile them, since their interests
ought to be one and the same; that they ought to be equally concerned in
Liberty, which I could not acquire to the people without the Nobilities
receiving advantage by it. That they both made up one body, in which the
Nobility ought to possess the highest place, and preserve the Rank and
Prerogative God and Nature had given them. That a Person of my Quality could
never forget the esteem belonged to Gentlemen, and that my actions should
hereafter make evident, that I knew very well how to put a difference between
persons of Birth and the Vulgar. That there was not any one amongst them but
ought to rejoice for the falling of the authority into my hands, since in place
of the outrages they had formerly suffered, they should find in me all
civility, courtesy and passion to serve as well all of them in general as
every one in particular.

This Complement was as welcomely received as really and unfainedly made, and
accompanied by thanks for the favorable effects they had already enjoyed, by
my having freed all the Gentry from oppression, and danger of the plunderings
and insolences of the common people. To which I replied that I had done
nothing yet could merit their good opinion, but was confident that when time
should present me an opportunity to discover the sincerity of my intentions,
they would own themselves to be in some manner obliged to me, and that though I
should fail of acquiring their persons, I could not but hope some share in
their esteem and friendship, and that how nearly soever they depended on Spain,
it should transport them no farther than their duty obliged them, because they
must needs yield something of their hearts and inclinations to the care and
pains I would take on all occasions to do them service. I then acquainted them
that I daily expected the French Fleet, to depend on my Orders, provided with
all things necessary to the enemies ruin, in which apprehending they might be
involved, I conjured them to open their eyes, and provide for their security
and advantage: I besought them to make serious reflections on it, to give
account of the true condition of affairs to the rest of their order that were
absent, and to assure themselves they might entirely rely upon me in all their
Concernments; That for what remained, being now about settling the Government
by forming it into a Republique, they should not exclude themselves, nor suffer
it to be framed simply popular, which would be much to their prejudice, and
very difficult to be remedied afterward; That I delayed that business, all I
possibly could, to give them time to take a good resolution. That they had no
longer to do with a Masaniello nor a Gennaro, but with one that tenderly loved
and valued them, and that would always prefer their interests above his own:
that they therefore might and ought to have an entire confidence in me. That I
advised them to assemble themselves, where I would be responsible they might
with freedom and safety treat of their affairs, and take their measures in the
present conjunctures, because something possibly might happen would make it too
late. I warily observed the Countenances of every one of them, so to penetrate
into their most secret thoughts; the greatest part seemed cheerful, some (as I
imagined) moved by my discourse, and all of them generally had something of
inclination and esteem for me; the Prince of la Rocca Cousin to Cardinal
Filomarini excepted, who, though he rendered me all manner of respects and
civilities imaginable, by his coolness sufficiently discovered I was never to
trust him; of which at last I had but too great experience.

I was quickly after sensible of the effect of this conference, which drew news
from all parts, and which (after the consideration of what I had told them)
caused the greatest part of the Gentry to wish me well, and desire my
preservation, since on me alone depended their Estates, Persons, and Families.
I sent a Complement to the Princess of Massa on the loss of her Husband, which
had so sensibly moved me, with offers to her Self and Children of all that
could depend on my Authority and Credit: excusing my self that the weighty
affairs that lay upon me, prevented my Personal paying her those Civilities.

I went often to Mass to the Nunneries, where were Ladies of Quality, and
visiting them at the Grate, desired them to send to their Relations all manner
of Complements and offers in my name, and desired them to give me notice of all
things in which I might oblige and serve them: In a word, I omitted nothing in
my power that tended to gain the Nobility, without whom I knew the Spaniards
could not support themselves, their Conjunction making their principal force,
and which was most likely to give me danger and difficulty. Being one day at
one of the Cloisters, I desired to see the Princess of Sens and her daughters,
to whom I made my Compliments, as to a person animated against the Spaniards by
the Death of her Husband, and that by consequence would be very glad to draw
off from their service all her Relations, and engage them with me. I thought it
also good Policy to show some kind of consideration for the memory of
Masaniello, he having laid the first foundation of the liberty of Naples; and
causing his Widow to be found out, who was reduced to the extremest necessity,
I took particular care for assisting her, which I continued to the time of my
imprisonment; which was very acceptable to all the People.

In the mean time want of Victuals necessitating me to hazard all for making a
way for their entrance, I resolved to take the field, and attempt Aversa,
though with very great difficulty, and little hope. I prepared to March the
Twelfth of December, with my Regiment Commanded by Pepe Palombe, that of Jacomo
Rosso, which consisted of one thousand Musketeers, and two others, which I
afterward gave to Sieur Peers, and de Mallet, and that of Antonio de Calco;
with the Companies of Onofrio Pisacani, Carlo Longobardo* and Batimiello,
making about four hundred Musketeers, and all my Infantry three thousand five
hundred, or four thousand Men; of which fifteen hundred were not Armed, and
the greatest part of them without Swords, carried only Staves hardened at the
end in the fire. Besides these, there were four or five hundred Lazares, who
carried long Poles with Iron hooks, with which they pretended to attaque the
Cavalry, and pull the Horsemen out of their Saddles. Aniello de Falco Commanded
the Artillery, which consisted of four Fieldpieces, with proportionable
Equipage. Having no more than four hundred pound of Powder, to make a greater
show I carried some Barrels of Sand, a Maltese being Commissary. The Cavalry
consisted of the Company of my Guardes, of that of General Cicio Ferlingere
Commanded by his Lieutenant, himself disabled by the gout; of Gennaro, to whom
Horacio Vassalo was Lieutenant, those of Andrea Rama, Rocco, Damiane, and the
brother of Augustine de Lieto, who might make five or six hundred Horse. The
Sieur D'orillac my Servant, that was to Command my Troop of Light Horse, did
the duty of Lieutenant General of the Horse; Philip Prignani, an Advocate, was
Commissary General, and the whole Body under me to be Commanded by the Baron of
Modene, in quality of Camp-Master-General: Bernardo Spinto was Judge Advocate.
This little Army had its Rendezvous in a large Plain without the Gate of Capua,
at the end of the Suburbs of St. Anthony, where, drawn in Battalia, it expected
me to March the Twelfth of December at two in the Afternoon; but, a
considerable accident caused me to differ my departure till the next morning.

Whilst my Servants were yet at Dinner, I went into the Marketplace, and
while I caused Arms to be given to a new-levied Company of a hundred Men, I had
advice, that the Enemy, (not without reason, supposing my absence would cause
some disorder) attacqued the Posts of the Custom-house, of St.
Bartholomews-Isle, and Visita Pauveri, and were become Masters, having found
them unprovided, those that were entrusted with. the Guard having abandoned
them to go home and Dine at their own Houses. I immediately sent the Company
that was upon the place, to oppose them, and Orders to my Servants to get a
Horseback, and continue ready to follow me, and galloped to the Capuan Gate,
where I ordered the Baron of Modene to draw out five hundred Musketeers, under
the Command of Colonel Anthonio de Calco, and sent for the three hundred
Cavaioles that remained (on whom I could safely depend, and who served me with
a great deal of courage and success in this occasion) to make all haste toward
me, and returning as swiftly as I went, placing my self at the head of my
Servants, and some few others the noise had drawn to me, making in all about
forty Horse, marched straight to the Enemy; The Company I sent out of the
Marketplace being not gone far, I quickly overtook it, and having passed two
Streets, and arriving at the Celleria, a place very spacious, especially in
that part of it which is near the Fountain of the Serpents, and as it were in
the middle of the Town, I saw three hundred Italian Reformado's, who began to
put themselves in order, and had their first Rank of Partisans. I charged them
vigorously, and having broken, pursued them as far as the Custom-house, and
alighting from my Horse at a little bridge I was to pass, fell pell-mell in
amongst them, and drove them from that Post with a very great slaughter; they
endeavored to lodge themselves in some ruins, from which I also drove them.
All my Troops being come up, they again endeavored to entrench themselves,
and my Men briskly repulsed them: but the Fight growing warm, my Powder begin
to fail, and I sent for some to Gennaro, who sent me a Barrel, but before it
came, we were constrained to oppose with our Swords and casting of stones, the
attempts they made upon us with good Muskets, which lasted above a great half
hour: at the end whereof, taking advantage of my want of Ammunition, they made
up the Work they had undertaken. In this extremity I gave order to Colonel
Melone, with five hundred Musketeers to re-take the Island of St. Bartholomew,
which he did with little resistance; and afterward causing him to fall out
into the open field, followed by three hundred with Swords in their hands,
leaving the rest to guard what had been regained, I sent him to cut off the
enemies retreat, and endeavor to possess himself of the Custom-house of Corn.
I drew out Anthonio de Calco, with two hundred Musketeers to drive them out of
Visita Pauveri: And in the mean time went up into one of the Rooms yet in our
possession, where causing Oil, which I found in great quantity, to be made hot,
breaking through a Wall, I made it be thrown upon the Enemy; and making use of
pitched Ropes and Faggots, which had been reserved to attempt the burning some
ships, they could no longer resist, and were forced to retreat, by which I
preserved the Town, that without my diligence and vigor had been lost; the
Enemy having entered and advanced within two streets of the Marketplace.

Having secured all there, I went to Visita Paveri, which we had re-taken, but
not thinking it enough, I gained a whole street, and advanced a Work as far
as the Italian Playhouse; and finding that some Spaniards were Posted in the
upper Rooms of the last house, I made use of the Powder I had sent for, and
which was but then brought me, to blow them up, where they lost twelve or
fourteen men.

In all this occasion, which lasted above two hours, one of the hottest and
most obstinate that had been seen in Naples, there were but two or three slain
on my side, and five or six hurt: and, by confession of the Spaniards, during
the time of my Prison, they had six score Reformadoes killed, or dangerously
wounded, most of them by Swords. This action very much reincouraged the People,
by whom I was received with extraordinary applauses.

The Spaniards taking to heart this days misfortune, attributed its effect
only to my presence, and (supposing me gone out of the Town) hoped to revenge
themselves in the night, and that the People, in stead of providing for their
defense, would employ themselves in Rejoycings, they therefore filled up the
places of such Officers as had been slain, held in readiness a considerable
body, and about eleven a Clock smartly assaulted the Custom-house: But,
understanding of what importance it was to us, on the conservation or loss of
this Post the fate of the Town depending, I had visited it about nine or ten
that night, which occasioned their finding the Guards doubled and very exact,
and were not a little surprised (immediately after the beginning of the
skirmish) to learn my arrival by the Soldiers Exclamations of long live his
Highness our Protector. This caused them to faint and retreat, least the night
might prove as unfortunate to them as the Day; They discharged their choler by
firing their Canon, of which they were quickly weary, finding they spent their
Powder in vain. In the mean time, in their sight, I finished the making up our
breaches, which 1 had begun before dinner, and put this Post in a condition to
fear nothing but Treason, and indeed after this they never durst attempt it.
Afterward I went to rest, that I might be ready in the morning to order all
things necessary for our defense, and the manner in which the Council were to
act, for putting all in so secure a posture, that the enemy might attempt
nothing, in the time my absence might persuade them they should find all things
easy.

The next morning, being the thirteenth of December, at Daybreak, I got on
horseback to visit the Posts and Quarters of the Town, and leave such orders
as should be necessary. I gave the Command of the Custom-house to Colonel
Melone, with a Serjeant-Major, and Captains and Soldiers under him; All the
neighboring quarters I likewise took under my Authority, as the Isle of St.
Bartholomew guarded by a Captain, De Porto and Visita Pauveri by a
Serjeant-Major: Colonel Pouca had the Guard of St. Clare, and a Serjeant-Major
of the lower end of Cedrangulo. St. Dominico Soriano was entrusted to Colonel
Hannibal Brancaccio; Mount Oliveto to a Serjeant-Major; The Gate of Albe and
St. Sebastians-Cloyster, to Colonel Sebastian Landi; the Corne-Ditch to Captain
Cicio Costa; St. Dominico and St. Anielli to two other Captains. Saint
Gennaroes Gate, and the Virgins Suburbs to Colonel Diego Passero. The Gate of
Nola and its Suburb to Colonel John Dominico, that of Capua and St. Anthonies
Suburbs to Colonel Gastaldo; those of St. Effremo to Colonel Dom Bernardo
Castracucco: that of Posilippe to a Serjeant-Major; of Foragrotto and two or
three other little Towns, or rather Suburbs, to the Command of Serjeant-Major
Alexio, who after the taking of Chiaia was made Colonel and Governor of it, of
Cavone, to Colonel Lombardi; of La Cellaria to Captain Cimino; of La Monnoi to
Captain Ignatio Spagnuolo; of La Vinara to Captain Matthew Damore; of the
Concieria to Pepe Palombe, and in his absence to his Lieutenant; of La
Sauateria to Captain Pepo Ricco; of La Pietra del Peste to Onoffrio Pagano; of
the Marketplace to Gennaro's Captain of his guards under himself: Assigning
all other quarters of the Town their particular Captains, and the guard of the
Vicairie to Grassulo de Roza, with the custody of the Prisoners, and the charge
of head-Jaylor: giving them all such Orders as were necessary, and wherewithal
to make punctual payments to their Soldiers, out of the Stock I have already
said I appointed for it.

All thus regulated for what concerned the Soldiery, I sent for the
Magistrates, and Gennaro being present, told them, That all my endeavors for
preservation of the Town would be useless, unless they supplied the want of
Provisions, and took care that the People might live quietly, and without
murmur, in expectation of the Plenty I should restore them; which I doubted not
very suddenly to effect, it being the only cause of my taking the field: And
for the Council, I conjured them to assist Gennaro with their best advice,
observe narrowly his Conduct, and resolve nothing of importance without
communicating it to me. That this could no ways retard Affairs, since I
should not go to any farther distance, then such as admitted a mutual
correspondence twice a day. That I depended on them in my absence; That it
concerned us to be unanimous, our Interest being one and the same; and that the
Liberty we all so passionately aspired to, must be as much the Work of their
Heads, as my Hands. I principally recommended these things (besides such other
as belonged to his charge of Commissary general of the Provisions) to Vincenzo
Andrea, Tonno Basso, Aniello Porcio, Anthonio Scacciavento, and Augustino
Mollo, and recommended to this last, in whom I had entire confidence, to look
after all my Concernments, to give me punctual advice of all things, and oppose
whatsoever might be undertaken to my prejudice, which would be easy for him,
he being a person very active, intelligent and dextrous, really devoted to me,
for whom he had an extraordinary zeal and affection.

All these but necessary precautions having spent more time than I expected,
night coming on, I could do no more than take up my lodging in the Suburbs of
S. Anthony, to be the readier to be gone next Morning, being the fourteenth of
December at day break. However I first took my leave and the Benedictions of
Cardinal Filomarini, and visited the holy Relics of Saint Gennaro. I released
Cerisantes from his Confinement to his Chamber, with permission to follow me
into the Field: and sending for him in the Evening, after a repriment, and
advice to make a good use of what had happened to him, he told me, that that
which so importunely pressed him to a sudden Provision for his fortune was his
apprehension lest the Fleet might bring some one by the Kings order to take his
place, and the Ciphers from him; which would be extremely to his prejudice, by
the loss of his Credit and Respect, in such manner that if his fortune were not
made before, it would afterward be very difficult; he added, that I was in the
like hazard, being employed only out of pure necessity for want of another,
that I was not beloved; that they were jealous and distrustful of my
exaltation, and that I ought no less then he to hasten to an establishment,
since some one might come with the Fleet capable of possessing my place. I must
acknowledge, that the often comparison he made of him and me, was as
displeasing to me as it was neither just nor respective: So that I replied, he
had some reason to be troubled, because there were a great many persons capable
of the employment he had about me, and that would accept it without
consideration, whether he were displeased or satisfied: but that my Birth would
deterr any from disobliging me lightly, that there were few persons in the
World qualified to take upon them my employment, which, how glorious soever,
had too many Toiles and hazards. That, if my being at Naples were disagreeable
to the King, and my services suspected, I should be always ready, without any
importunity, to retire on his least order: But, without that, if any one should
have the vanity by intrigues and cabals, to go about to dispossess me, and make
advantage by my spoils, as well as by my travel and industry, it should not
pass unpunished; and that whoever they were, they ought to consider well before
they exposed themselves to such a hazard, without bringing me an Order, to
which my respect and fidelity would prevent any reply, being incapable of any
other passion then that of serving my Master, and obeying his pleasure; but
that I knew very well how to vindicate my self against such as should outrage
me without ground or reason, and that I should assuredly be much more
apprehended and feared then he could be by such as designed to bereave him of
his employment.

Let the World judge if this answer contains any thing contrary to respect and
fidelity, yet it was imputed a Crime, and looked on as a Menace against such as
should come to negotiate on behalf of the Crown, were it that my words were
not faithfully reported, or that they endeavored to pervert their meaning.

A few days after, the reality of my intentions appeared, and my respects were
justified by my Comportment with the Abbot Baschi, to whom I performed
continual civilities out of consideration of the Character he bore of the Kings
Envoy, though I was fully informed he endeavored my ruin by many intrigues,
nay, managed a conspiracy against my life, serving in it the Spaniards, (to
whom I certainly knew him to be a Pentioner) to the prejudice of France.

Before I went, I dispatched Commissions to several Banditi, who had drawn
together, and desired that they might take Arms through the whole Kingdom:
these are a sort of People very proper for insurrections, but that commit so
many disorders and outrages, that they ruin all wheresoever they pass; and who
afterward are usually made Sacrifices to the public hatred, the affection of
the People being regained at the price of their heads, after they have
performed all such services as they are can b^e of; They regard neither word
nor oath in their capitulations, nor make any difference in the usage of such
Towns and places as yield voluntarily, or are stormed by force; with them the
example of Fathers is to be followed, who burn the Rods after the Correction of
their Children. I caused Papone to March by the Garigliano, with two Gentlemen
of the Family of Daretzo, who in a short time made themselves Masters of all
thereabouts, and (after many attempts) of Sessa, and the Tower of Sperlonga,
where Captain Peter of Piemont was left Commander. The Sieur de Lascari marched
toward Fondi, of which he possessed himself; Marcello Turso into Calabria,
Pietro Crescentio toward Monte Fuscolo; The Earl of Vaglie and Matheo
Christiano into the Country of Barie, and Mazotta into Basilicata, Sabato
Pastorie into Apulia: other Bandites into Abruzzo, where afterward many other
Persons declared for us, whom I shall nominate and speak of in time and place,
Polito Pastena commanded toward Salerno, Paul of Naples, and the Vassals,
toward St. Severino, Nocera, La Cava, and Avellino, and I sent them for this
purpose the Cavaioles that continued yet in Naples: It gave great astonishment
to the Spaniards to see themselves attacqued on all sides, and I drew together
so numerous forces, that in less than a Month the whole Kingdom declared for
me, and all the Towns came in, except such as had Castles and Citadels, and the
whole Nobility was necessitated to have recourse to me for safeguards, and
securing their Lands and Houses from Plunder; in which I took all care
imaginable, that I might gain them, and when they were forced to abandon all,
wished them to send People of their own to preserve their rents and movables:
this wrought so much on them, that they afterward fought against me, with
great respect, and concerned themselves in my safety, as necessary to that of
their Fortunes, Wives and Children, on which account there are very few amongst
them that are not obliged to me, and that have not kept alive for me (in their
Hearts) their acknowledgments and gratitude.

After three hours March I came to Juliano, a place very populous, and from
whence there goes forth to take the field every year a great many Banditi, here
I found five hundred good men in Arms; I made it my Head Quarter, and sent the
rest of my Troops to St. Antimo, half a League distant, and situated on a
small Rivolet, with Order to entrench, as I did all the avenues of my Quarter,
after I had taken a diligent view of them. Returning to my Lodging, I found
there the Marchioness of Ataviane, a Lady of Quality, who came to desire a
safeguard, which I immediately appointed her, with a Coach to return, she
having come a Foot in very ill way, and as bad weather: Being a widow, and
having two Sons well grown, she desired leave to send them to Naples to their
Relations, with some Money and Jewels, to which I consented with a Passeport for
their security, she going away extremely satisfied with my Civilities, and
resolved, as she assured me, to use all her endeavors to gain me her friends
and Kindred.

I had brought with me an Augustine Friar, very well known to all the Nobility,
as having been Companion to Father Andrea d' Avallos, afterward a Bishop,
brother of the Marquess of Vaste, called Father Thomas Sebastian, very much
affected to me, and who being a man of parts, might be useful to me in my
negotiation. He told me, there lived hard by a Gentleman called Vincenzo
Carafa, a very understanding person, and great enemy of the Spaniards, who
could easily negotiate with the Nobility that had retired into Aversa, I
appointed him to bring him to me next morning at my rising: After this, being
informed that there was a great Town called St. Ciprian, about half a League
off, from whence the Enemy had received a great deal of Corn, and where yet
there might remain twelve or fourteen thousand sacks, I sent for Jacomo Rosso,
who, as a famous Bandito, knew very well the way, and had a great credit
amongst that People; I commanded him with his Regiment, which consisted of a
thousand good Men, to March thither the next morning at daybreak, which might
easily be done without any fear of the Enemies Horse, the Country being broken
with Ditches, and traversed with Trees; that without making any halt, or
suffering himself to be amused by light skirmishes, or small parties, which
would questionless be sent after him, he should make thither as fast as he
could, and entrench himself so as to keep it, till I could convey all the Corn
to Naples. His imprudence in not observing my Orders, engaged me the next day
in a very dangerous Combat, which yet had no other effect then to gain me
honor, and an opportunity which I so well managed, that it proved the Fountain
of all the good success that afterward arrived to me, and went very near to
give an irreparable loss to the Spaniards.

Vincenzo Carafa was with me the next morning at my rising, whom (to secure him
from suspicion) I had sent for by four of my Guards; I shut my self up with him
an hour and half, and was assured that the Nobility, being greater Enemies to
the Spaniards than the People, did more passionately desire to see themselves
delivered from their Government, but that their hatred for the Multitude, and
their apprehension of becoming subject to them, was the only consideration
restrained them from attempting the ways of Liberty: I spoke to him all such
things as I thought might be acceptable, and free him from his distrust; very
glad to understand my intentions, he assured me, I should not find any of the
Nobility that would not joyfully have recourse to me, own me as their head, and
readily obey all my Orders: After many embraces I sent him to Aversa, well
instructed, and well affected with a Passeport, under pretense of retiring with
those that were already there, and caused him to be accompanied by Father
Thomas Sebastian, who pretended he came thither to give account to some of the
Gentlemen of their particular Affairs entrusted to his managing. I very much
depended on this negotiation, of which I conceived great hopes: but, by reason
of the indiscretion of Vincenzo Carafa, who was too eager and passionate,
though something was effected, yet not all that I expected: He was very
favorably received and heard, but opening himself to too many, was made
Prisoner, for which I was very sorry.

I was but just set down to Dinner, when Jacomo Rosso sent me word he had met
some Scouts of the Enemies Horse, and pursued them to the Ports of Aversa,
where he had engaged them with considerable advantage; so as if I immediately
came to him, he assured me of taking it. I was so surprised by this extravagant
news, that rising hastily from the Table I threw it down, and causing instantly
to sound to Horse, resolved to hazard all to save him, and prevent his Regiment
from being cut in pieces, it being the best body of Foot I had; I sent him
order to come off, whilst I attacqued such Troops as I reasonably imagined the
Enemy would send to meet me, to hinder my disengaging him, and cut off his
retreat.

I commanded the Baron of Modene to place at the head of my Quarter, which I
had entrenched, two pieces of Canon charged with carthages, and to send me five
hundred Musquettiers, to secure all the straight passages by which I was to
retreat, and to keep all the rest of the foot in arms in the Quarter, as well
for its security, as to be ready to march where I should have occasion for
them, not doubting to receive a repulse, knowing that there were in Aversa
about three thousand horse. I caused D'orillac to draw out the Horse Guard,
with orders to take a view of the enemy, to endeavor to amuse them by a
Skirmish, to give me immediate notice of their march, to have a care not to
engage himself too lightly, and gain me time to put my self in order of Battle
in the high way from Aversa to Naples, which had on each side two great
Ditches, as is usual in Flanders, the Country being all divided into little
Closes, on whose Borders grow Fruit Trees, encompassed with Vines, as in many
parts of Piedmont and Lombardie. I left my Infantry in the places in which I
thought it would be most necessary, and caused the Troops that were quartered
in S. Antimo to advance, to hinder my being that way cut off behind. I had
scarce begun to put my men in order, when D'orillac having found the enemy
nearer him than he had imagined, occasioned by reason of the defect of his
sight, was charged by a Squadron of Horse commanded by Captain Latin, whose Hat
he shot off with his Pistol, and turning his horse about to retreat, the ground
being bad, fell, and was unhappily taken under him, and carried away Prisoner;
soon after which a Spaniard called Don Diego de Halamo gave him two wounds with
a Sword behind, with which he killed him in cold blood, to the extraordinary
regret of the Nobility of Naples, who abominated so vile an action. I saw the
guard come back galloping, which falling on a Squadron that was before me,
disordered and reversed it on mine. I was so strongly shaken that my horse was
forced into a Ditch, the Captain of my Guards cast on the ground, and his Hat
lost; as soon as I got up I was feign to fly two mile with all the rest of my
horse, to gain ground to rally, being all that while enclosed by two Ditches
that were on each side the Highway, in such a manner that had the enemy made a
vigorous pursuit, they might have followed beating me to the gates of Naples,
without any possibility of my turning Head. But perceiving the enemy slack in
the chase of us, I galloped to be head of these Runaways, and did my utmost
endeavor with words and blows of the flat of my Sword to renew the fight.
Captain Rocco ran away at the head of his Company, without looking behind him,
crying out that he was very much wounded, though there was nothing of it, and
riding over such of my foot as he found at the head of my Quarter, entered very
much astonished. At my return I cashiered him, causing him to be disarmed, with
all such marks of infamy as his cowardice merited: lifting up my hand to strike
with my Sword an Officer I could no otherways cause to stand, I perceived it
was Philip Prignani, Commissary general of the Horse, who had a little blood on
his hand, caused by a scratch of a Nail on the Pommel of his Sadle, which he
would have persuaded me to have taken for a cut of a Sword, telling me he shed
that blood with joy for my service, as he would do all that remained whenever
there should be occasion, and that he was shot through the Reins with a
Carabine; I sent him into the Quarter to be dressed, which was the only thing
he desired.

In the mean time I made a stand in the Highway all alone, and called out that
such as had honor should turn to me; thirty men came in, whom having drawn up,
whilst the rest were rallying, I with them charged such of the enemy as were
in disorder, who falling back on two Squadrons that were to be their seconds,
broke them, whom I pursued about a mile to a little bridge where I made a halt.
The Lazares imagining there was no more to be done but plunder and get Horses,
demanded my leave to do so, I gave it them with a very good will, desirous to
rid my hands of them, as of useless and troublesome fellows, I therefore told
them that getting out into the Field they should advance as far as possible,
to endeavor to fall on the enemies rear, which they imprudently doing, I
attained my end, three hundred of them being killed. I overtook a Lieutenant of
Horse that commanded the enemies Scouts, and who made good the rear during
their retreat: him I took prisoner, proud to have yielded to me, and to have
been deprived of his Liberty by my hand. My Runaways perceiving the enemies had
turned their backs, and that I had vigorously repelled them, rallying began to
march, as believing there was nothing more to be feared, when I was suddenly
fired upon by thirty or forty Musquettiers, who under shelter of two Houses
were left to guard the bridge, they killed fourteen of the thirty that were
with me, the rest astonished, fled, and left me with only two persons in my
company, of whom the Maltese Commissary of the Artillery was one, him I sent to
cause two hundred Musquettiers to advance, and seeing fourteen or fifteen of my
servants coming along with Firelocks I met them, and drew them into the Ditches
that were on each side of the way, forbidding them to show themselves, or fire
till I gave them order; Three Squadrons of the enemy filing after each other,
passed the bridge, and afterward drew up again before me, from amongst whom
the Prince of Minorvine advanced, with his sword drawn, threatening and ranting
our runaways, and seeing two of my footmen by me, whose Livery of Green Velvet
laced with Gold was very remarkable, struck down one close by my stirrup with a
great blow of his Sword on the head: I asked Horatio Vasallo if he knew that so
gallant and handsome person; he, mistaking, told me it was the Prince of
Torello, I then sent him to rally his Troop, and bring it to me, and the mean
while rid right up to the other, who mounted a fresh Horse was brought him, of
a dappled gray, very beautiful, within ten paces of me, and drawing my Pistol,
called to him, Prince of Torello, whilst your men advance and mine rally,
since we are accidentally met, let us exchange a brace of Bullets, there is
honor to be won on either side; but he retreated without attending me, I
followed and when I came near called to him to yield to the Duke of Guise, but
loosning the rains to his Horse, he quickly out-went mine that was almost
tired. I would neither venture to shoot at such a distance, nor engage my self
in his pursuit which was too hazardous, he calling to his men to advance, and
placing himself at their head, to oppose mine which he saw marching toward
him. I perceived many Gentlemen in his first Rank, by the beauty of their
Horses, and black Velvet Coats. I turned toward them, and (pickering) sought
to engage them to follow me; when they came near me I retreated twenty paces,
then again wheeling and doing as before; this at last insensibly drew them into
the turning of the way where I had lodged my Firelocks, to whom I made sign
with my Hat to fire, and every one to choose his man which proved very fatal.
Don Emanuel de Vais, Captain of Horse, was shot dead, The Marquis de Paihede
had his right hand shattered, The Marquis of Saint Juliani received two shots,
one in his side and the other in his head, of which four days after he died;
in fine seven of the bravest fell; their Squadron was shaken and weakened by
those that carried off the dead and wounded, and my men recovering courage beat
them back to the Bridge a second time, from whence I was driven by their Horse
and some Musquettiers, at whose head the Duke of Andria placing himself for
their encouragement, they repassed the Bridge with three Squadrons, My men were
again discouraged, and having discharged their Carabines, left me the third
time alone in the Highway, where I thought my self safer than formerly,
because of the apprehension my Foot gave the Enemy. However, the first Squadron
marching in very good order to charge me, the Duke of Andria with his Sword in
his hand, leading them, commanded them to halt, whether unwilling to engage,
or, as he told me at our interview two days after, loath to attacque my Person,
and bring me into a new danger; In this interim, the Foot I had sent for being
come up, after the Enemy had a sight of them, I placed them in the ditches, and
with all my horse, now in better heart, and in a body, marched to them, and
again drove them over that fatal Bridge, where the skirmish grew hot, and
lasted more than a great quarter of an hour. In this pursuit an Officers horse
being fallen, I saw him encompassed by some Rascals that went about to kill him
with many wounds, but hearing him call for quarter. I rid up to him, and
driving away those that would so cruelly have massacred him, he yielded himself
to me with a great deal of joy, and delivering him to one of my Guards, I sent
him to my Quarter. The reason of my so easy gaining this last advantage, was
the Duke of Andria's having gone back to draw five hundred horse out of his
rear to cut off my retreat. I ran very great hazard in this rancontre, not so
much from the Enemy, as my own men, who discharging behind me, burned my hair
and feathers. Jacomo Rosso obeying the order I had sent him, making use of the
Ditches and Trees that were in the fields, made a happy retreat still fighting,
not loosing above nine or ten men, with the like number wounded. The horse that
should have cut off my retreat, meeting two hundred Musquettiers I had to that
purpose left on a passage, affrighted by their fire thought of nothing but
getting back. Notwithstanding all which, my Men were alarmed by their March,
crying out we were cut off, in such manner, that I had much ado to reincourage
them, by persuading them, it was our own Horse of the quarter of St. Antimo,
whom I had caused to advance in favor of our retreat, which I had also secured
by placing Foot at all passes. But, some of them perceiving this Body was
greater then that I spoke of, I told them the Squadron that appeared had no
depth, and that taking advantage of the shade of Trees, and night which
approached, I had commanded to make a large front, in order to a greater
appearance; and as soon as I heard that Jacomo Rosso was in safety, having made
this Fight only in order to that, I thought of nothing but getting off; I gave
the conduct of the Rear to the Sieur de Cerisantes, who came in very luckily,
and causing thirty of the most resolute of my Guardes to alight, they hindered
the Enemy from passing the bridge, with order, in case they were too much
pressed on, that (abandoning their Horses, and leaping the Ditch) they should
retreat under shelter of the Trees that were in the Field; I began then to
March toward my quarter, and as soon as I found I might with safety do it,
caused Cerisantes to come off, who joined with me after a light skirmish, in
which he lost no body: Two of my Guardes were taken Prisoners, and one of them
ran the same fortune with Dorillac, the other had the good luck to recover of a
wound with a Sword given him behind at the Gate of Averse, where I found him in
the Hospital, when some days afterward I became Master of that place. This
skirmish lasted above three hours, with the loss of four or five hundred of
my men, but not above fifty or sixty of the enemies. The death of Dorillac was
alone to be lamented, getting more advantage then prejudice by that of all the
rest, having discharged my self of a great many useless and troublesome persons.

I entered my quarter with very much applause, left amongst the Nobility a
great esteem and kindness for me, and found no other inconvenience of the toil
of this day, but an extraordinary hoarsness, occasioned by the heat and dust,
and my calling out and tormenting my self during my Men's disorders. Coming to
my lodging, I was very much surprised to see Philip Prignani perfectly well,
and enquiring of his wounds, he told me he had none but in his Coat, the
Carabin-Bullet having missed his Body; finding that after this I had very
little kindness for him, he was so ashamed, that he served no longer in his
employment, neither would I have suffered it, which made him so much my enemy,
that he sought all means of doing me hurt, and making acquaintance with
Monsieur de Fontenay, rendered me all ill Offices possible, going expressly
into France, where he continued to do the same, till at the return of the
Fleet, after my Imprisonment, a Cannon-Bullet carrying away both his Legs,
punished at once both his malice and cowardice.

I was scarcely in my Chamber when the Marchioness of Attaviane came to make
her complaints, that notwithstanding my Passport, her sons had been imprisoned
and pillaged at Naples, where they had been so far from giving it respect,
that they had insolently torn and trampled it under feet: I assured her of
Satisfaction, being my self most concerned in it, and instantly dispatched away
the Marshal general to take information of this action, with order to secure
such as should be found faulty, cause what had been taken away to be restored,
and release the Gentlemen, and sent one of my Guards to attend them to the
enemies quarter. Michael de Santis, of whom I have formerly spoken, continued
to qualify himself Camp-master General, and having no certain post, walking up
and down accompanied by fourteen or fifteen rascals, chanced to be in S.
Anthonie's suburbs, as those Gentlemen passed, and fearing the Nobility as much
as he hated them, since he could never expect they should forgive the murder
of Don Pepe Caraffa, sought all means of injuring them, and doing them
outrages: He would not omit this occasion of satisfying himself, and my
Passeport being presented, tore and trampled it under his feet, saying, he
received Orders from no man: He caused also my Marshal to be secured, and his
temerity making him imagine I ought to fear him, sent back my Guard, to assure
me, he would come the next day and give me account of his action.

That night I dispatched a Passeport to Sergeant Major John Lewis Landi, to go
next morning at daybreak with a Trumpet, to enquire after D' Orillac, and
demand a Cessation for burying the Dead, and a Conference with some
General-Officer, for regulating quarter betwixt us; I ordered my Trumpet to
make the Prince of Torella a Compliment, and Complaint in my Name, for
slighting me, not believing there was honor to be acquired by engaging me, and
therefore refusing to exchange a Bullet when I invited him to it; but, that the
esteem I had for the gallant action I saw him perform, prevailing over my
resentments, obliged me to beg his friendship, being addicted with all care to
seek that of persons of courage and merit like himself.

Next morning at my rising Father Thomas Sebastian gave me account of the
misfortune of ***, which sensibly struck me; told me of the Faction that spread
it self amongst all the Nobility, and the inclinations he discovered in them.
which seemed very favorable, and gave me hope that I had begun to sow a good
seed, which being cultivated, would in time produce an advantageous harvest.

In the mean time John Lewis Landi, and the Trumpet I had sent to Aversa, being
arrived there, were a while detained without the Gates, till all things might
be put in such a posture as was desired might be reported to me; After which,
they caused them to enter, and conducted them to the great Church, which was
hung with mourning, and a great many Lights; All the Nobility and Officers of
their Army, most of them in mourning Clokes, being assembled to assist at the
Service was made for the Sieur D' Orillac, with the same Honors and Ceremonies
that are due to the General of an Army. They all told my Trumpet, that by what
they rendered to his Memory, they testified their sorrow for his fatal accident,
and their disavowal of the brutal action of the Spaniard, that killed him in
cool blood, after he had been taken Prisoner and disarmed: Encharging him to
make me a true report of what he had seen, and assure me that they would Treat
with a great deal of civility all Frenchmen, especially such as belonged
particularly to me, but that they must deal in a different manner with the
Neapolitan People, who had used them so ill, and on all occasions had so little
respect for them, that they could Treat them no other ways then as mad Dogs.
That for the Cessation, they willingly consented to it for two days, for
burying the dead, though on their side there was but a very small number, and
that those on mine were unworthy of Sepulture; but that they in the Town, and I
in my Quarter, would be two much incommoded by the corruption of so many
bodies, which, for the common interest it was convenient to lay underground.
That for the Conference I demanded for settling Quarter, they would assemble to
take a resolution, and return answer within two hours. That time being
expired, they made choice of the Duke of Andria (after some contestation and
difference in opinion) to confer with a general Officer on my behalf, whom they
desired me to nominate the next day, and to send some one to agree of the time
and place of the conference, and how many persons should be brought on either
side.

Whilst all these matters were regulating, I went to hear Mass at the Church
of Juliane, and the Curate coming to meet me, at the head of all the
Inhabitants in Arms, and followed by all the Priests, presented me a State,
which I refused, notwithstanding the immeasurable ambition of which I have been
accused, neither did I ever accept it during my being in that Kingdom, though
very often offered me.

At my return from Mass they brought me a Spy, who, having passed through the
Quarter of St. Antimo, came from thence to mine, where he was taken attentively
observing all particulars, and having about him concealed Letters, I caused him
to be delivered to the Auditor-general, with Order, as soon as his process
should be made, to hang him by the Highway. After Dinner I took Horse, to make
use of the liberty of the Cessation, for a diligent consideration of the ground
we fought on the day before: and whilst I looked out at the Window in
expectation of my Horses, I saw Michael de Santis, accompanied by eight or nine
Persons, enter the Court of my Lodging; he hardly gave himself the pains of
saluting me, and alighting to come to me, was very much surprised, when at the
head of the Stairs the Captain of my guard Arrested him in my Name, with two
of his Companions, where making a show of resistance, and my guardes going
about to kill him, surprised by fear he wept, and suffered himself to be
disarmed with his followers: I caused them all to be imprisoned, himself in a
Dungeon, with Irons on his hands and feet; I sent immediately to examine him,
causing the Pieces of my Passeport he had torn and trampled on to be presented
to him, he acknowledged his insolence and begged his life, which I would not
condescend to, reserving him for an example of disobedience, and want of
respect, and a Sacrifice to the Nobility, for acquiring their affection, by
revenging the death of Dom Pepe Caraffa, whom he had so inhumanely murdered,
and whereof he continually boasted. His Companions declared, that he alone,
contrary to their sense, had caused the Sons of the Marchioness of Attaviane to
be Arrested; and that when they minded him of the respect due to my Pass, he
told them, He owed none, and none would pay me, and accompanying his insolent
and injurious Language with suitable actions, tore the Pass and trod on it,
swearing he would use me in the same manner if he had me in his power. These
things were justified against him not only by them, but by two servants of the
Marchioness of Attaviane, and the Marshal general of the Army whom he had
rashly arrested.

I caused all the Money and Jewels had been taken from the Gentlemen to be
restored, pardoning his companions, as guilty of no other crime but following
him.

The rancounter I had with him on the Marketplace two days after my arrival,
the arrogance of his words, joined to the contempt and hatred he had expressed
against me, made me judge he might probably have designed against my life, and
that I might by him discover others that had the same intentions, I therefore
ordered he should be put on the Rack, which at first he suffered with some
constancy, but it lasted not long, ere he confessed he had resolved to kill me,
and waited only an opportunity; that he had once failed in attempting it, And
that his great aversion for me proceeded not from his affection to the
Spaniards, but his rage against all the Nobility, whom he would gladly destroy
even to the last man, and cut them in pieces as he had cruelly done the brother
of the Duke of Metalone, being sorry for his death on no other account, but
that he had not done as much to him; That he looked on me as their Friend and
Protector, that would never suffer any Violence to be done them; and that this
was the only reason why he would have destroyed me, that he might afterward
have satisfied himself in what related to them. In two or three days time his
Process was finished, and he condemned to be beheaded, his head set upon a
Post, and his body hung by one foot, according to the custom of punishing
Murderers and traitors. I caused his Execution to be deferred, in expectation
of an occasion of making use of it to the Nobility, and drawing some advantage
from it.

Returning then to the answer was brought me from Aversa, it obliged me to send
back my Trumpet with the same Lewis Landi, to tell the Duke of Andria from me,
that I had resolved to have sent the Baron of Modena Camp-master general, to
confer with such as should be nominated by them, for the settling quarter
betwixt us, but having with much satisfaction heard that he was pitched on for
that treaty, I thought my self not too good to meet in such manner as we
should agree on, whose choice I left to him, so far depending on his word,
that I would come with a number of followers equal to his, to what place soever
he pleased to appoint me.

My civility was very well received, and answered with all imaginable
gallantry. But fearing the Spaniards might prevent this interview, which, if
they got notice of it, would give them a great deal of jealousy, and looking
upon it as very necessary to the execution of my designs, I ordered the said
Landi, to a gree of the Cloister of the Capuchins of Aversa, equally distant
from the Town and my Quarter, that either side should bring for their security
one hundred and fifty horse, and two hundred Musquettiers, to guard the
avenues; and that they should advance Courts of Guard and Sentries to prevent
surprisal: that the troops of neither side should come nearer the place where
we were than five hundred paces. That each of us would come with our Swords and
Pistols, and accompanied by ten persons, with an adjutant for carrying orders
to our men, when it should be necessary for them to advance or retreat, as we
should judge it convenient; that neither side should bring above a dozen
Lacquies for holding the horses, and that we would meet the eighteenth of
December at two in the afternoon at the appointed place. Many Gentlemen
desirous of seeing me were Competitors for accompanying the Duke of Andria, and
after many Contestations the lot fell on Don Fabritio Spinell, Don Scipio
Pignatelli, Don Carlo Caetano, Carlo Marullo a Knight of Malta, Don Caesar de
la Marra, Joseph Papalette Captain of Horse, John Jacob Affati Baron of Canosa,
Don Francisco de Tassis a Spanish Knight, and the Adjutant General Battimiello.
I brought with me the Baron of Modene Camp-master general, the Sieur de
Cerisantes, the Sieur de Taillade, Augustine de Lieto Captain of my Guards,
Antonio Tonti a Gentleman of Rome, the Sieur Dessinar of Avignon, Onoffrio
Pissacany, Jomo St Apollina Master of my Horse, Cicio Battimiello, Aniello de
Falco General of the Artillery, and Pepe Palombe to carry my orders, as my
Adjutant general.

The day being come of my obtaining that which I had most passionately desired
ever since my entrance into Naples, that I might in person found the thoughts
of the Nobility, and face to face employ the best of my addresses for winning
them to me, I prepared my self with as much joy as hope, that this conference
could not fail of a good effect: for I should either gain them by my Civilities
and Arguments, or raise such a jealousy of them in the Spaniards, as to cause
them by distrust and other ill usage in time to force them to have recourse to
me, and cast themselves into my ams. I sent for the two Officers I had taken at
the last skirmish, and whom I had used very civilly, and after I had commended
their valor, and testified an esteem for them, propounded to them to take
entertaiment with me, tempting them by great promises of advantage, but they
answering that the fidelity of Burgundians had been ever inviolable, and that
they would die in service of the King whose Subjects they were born, I told
them that as I must needs love them the less, I could not but esteem them the
more, that it was but just that having been made Prisoners by my hand, they
should receive the advantages of my Courtesy, that they were at Liberty, and
might return, and causing their arms and horses to be given them again with
some Money, I ordered them to be accompanied by a trumpet, who was to give me
notice when the Duke of Andria took horse, that I might come to our rendezvous
at the same time with him, having disposed him to more willingness for granting
us quarter, by the example I had given of Civility to Prisoners of War. Those
men thinking they could never sufficiently extol my bounty, spoke so much of
it, that all their troops were ready to disband for my service.

In the mean time I sent to view all about the Capuchins for fear of an ambush,
and to visit carefully their Cloister: I drew out all my forces both Horse and
Foot at the head of my Quarter, secured all passages that were favorable to my
retreat, and kept my self ready to march with the number agreed on, at the
first news should be brought me. It was not long before they came, and marching
within a thousand paces of the place of our Conference, I halted, and sent to
visit those Gentlemen, who doing the same to us, and being assured of the
integrity of each other, we met, our Guards staying at the distance agreed on
betwixt us.

The Duke of Andria alighted when he came within thirty paces, I did the same,
and we encountered with open arms, and after many embraces and testimonies of
esteem and affection, He presented to me those that accompanied him, as I
caused him to be saluted by all that followed me: After which he expressed his
joy to have been made choice of for this Conference, and his obligation to me,
for coming in person in stead of sending, which was an honor he received as he
ought; and of which all his life he would preserve the memory with gratitude. I
answered that understanding his birth and merit I neither could nor ought to do
less, being very well informed of the antiquity and grandeur of the family of
Caraffa, whose chief he was, and whose splendor he supported by his courage
and virtue, and many other perfections which acquired him a general esteem;
that I with Passion coveted his friendship, and came expressly to beg it; He
added that his curiosity for knowing my person had been satisfied two days
before, when I was so near him with my Sword in my hand, that he easily then
observed all the lineaments of my face, that honor might have been acquired by
coming nearer me, but that I was so dangerous an enemy, that his curiosity
could not be satisfied without difficulty and extreme danger; That he had seen
me do things so extraordinay, that there was no need of asking my name, since
all the Nobility concurred with him, that it must necessarily be I, no other
person in the world being capable alone to continue a combat, abandoned (as he
in the high way had thrice seen me) by all my troops in confusion, without any
passion remarkable in me but an Extraordinary fierceness against a great body
of Horse that came upon me, and indignation not to be followed. That if I were
at the head of men gallant enough to accompany me in the dangers I led them to,
he believed I should find nothing difficult, nor that any force could be
capable of resisting my courage. That he could not see me so ill seconded
without some displeasure, that he had given me some testimony of respect and
affection, when to prevent my death or Imprisonment (one of which could not
have been avoided) I might have observed he came to the head of his Troops and
commanded them to halt, that they might not so fiercely engage themselves
against me.

To a Discourse of so much Gallantry I replied, that my respect for all the
Neapolitan Nobility had like to have cost me dear, because it was rather my
ambition of gaining their love and esteem that gave me courage and boldness,
then the blood derived from my Ancestors; and that I should have been ashamed,
if at my first appearance amongst them, my Face had not been as easy to have
been remarked as my Person. That the Example of what I saw so handsomely done
by them, obliged me to imitate it, that simpathy might produce some kind of
inclination for me. That I well perceived how he had sought to oblige me, and
acknowledged it, with desire to preserve its memory all the days of my life,
though I was in no very great danger, being well seconded by my foot, as, to my
regret, I had made appear to the cost of some of his Comerades. To which,
replying, That he was sorry to see me at the head of a Rabble unworthy of such
a Leader, whose virtues equalized his birth, and that deserved to be better
followed: I answered with a great sigh, That I might easily be so, if himself,
with the rest of the Nobility, would resolve to see me fight for their Liberty,
and employ my life to deliver them from the Chains they bore, too heavy to be
suffered any longer: Persons of their quality and courage not being borne to
die slaves, but live with such Honor, Advantages, and Prerogatives, as Heaven
designed them to, in giving them so illustrious extractions. He replied, It was
their Glory to spend their lives for the service of a King, whose Subjects they
were borne: that their fidelity made the Empire of their master easy, and that
no yoke can be heavy that is born with pleasure, and without regret; that they
could not spend their lives better then in the chastisement of a Rout of
infamous Rebels, that endeavored to shake a Crown, of which honor obliged all
Gentlemen to be the supporters, and himself as the most zealous to give example
to the rest.

I saw we engaged our selves too far for a public Discourse, and hoping a more
easy discovery of his thoughts in particular, making a sign to those of my
Retinue to entertain his Company, I proposed to him to go into the Church,
where after our Prayers, we sat down on a Bench, and began a conversation more
free and more important: He told me, that with tears of blood, he lamented to
see a Person, for whom he had already his heart so possessed with affection,
esteem and respect (of a Family not only illustrious, but descending from their
ancient Kings, which obliged him to a particular veneration for me, whose
Ancestors had supported the Catholic Religion in France, and by so many great
and famous actions, acquired the admiration of all Europe, that inheriting
their eminent Virtues, did not only imitate, but surpass them in all
endowments, so bountifully bestowed on him by Heaven) exposed to so many
dangers for supporting the Interests of a revolted People, Rebellious,
Inconstant, ungrateful, treacherous and cruel, that recompensed the Services
done them by blood and Massacres, of which the Prince of Massa was an
unfortunate example; that he should in a single Felucca pass through a potent
Fleet, disdaining Tempests, and the fortune of the Sea in so dangerous a
season, pursued by so many Galleys, and other Vessels with Ores, prepared for
his destruction, and expose himself in a place where he was to venture his life
and honor, in quest of a death as certain, as full of shame and infamy,
unseconded by a Fleet, abandoned by all but his virtue and courage, without any
one Man in whom to confide, or capable of easing or executing his high Designs,
having Forces so considerable to oppose him, that the apprehension was able to
make the most resolute tremble, and whose adventures resembled more the actions
of some despairing wretch, then of a generous and ambitious Prince. That he
could not think of it without sorrow; that he conjured me to make a serious
reflection, and without prejudice consider, what I had to fear and hope. He told
me besides, That he perceived I flattered my self with a hope of drawing the
Nobility to me, which I ought not to expect; that it was true, there was not
any of them that had not great esteem, respect, and kindness for me, or that
did not hold himself obliged to me for putting an end to the burning and
plundering their Houses, and protecting them since my arrival from the
insolences and outrages of the Common People, or that did not attribute to my
care the preservation of what remained of their Estates, Relations, and the
Honor of their Families, for which they would never prove ungrateful: but,
that all things considered, I had no interest in this Affair, having no other
share but what my Command of their Forces whom I served gave me, of whom I was
not Master, Gennaro being the head, whom persons of quality would never own:
that he thought me too generous to pretend to advise them to it, and that they
had too much vanity to submit to Peasants they had till then always trampled
on: That this were not to acquire liberty, but become slaves to the meanest of
the multitude, whose hands (with sorrow and resentment) they yet saw reeking
with the blood of their Relations, the revenge whereof had been as certain as
ready, if my arrival, vigor and conduct had not retarded the execution, by the
courage and resolution I made appear in supporting so ill a cause. That their
Births and Honors rendering them the supports of the Crown of Naples, obliged
them to continue their fidelity to all extremities: That I might judge of their
zeal by their having formed an Army at their own charge, and carried on the War
without fear of exposing their Families and Fortunes to the rage of the Rebels.
That they gloried in spending to their last penny, and shedding to their last
drop of blood, to preserve the Crown to their King and Master, though (to deal
freely with me) they expected no other recompense than the satisfaction to have
complied with their duty, it being most generous to sacrifice all, after having
been so ill used and little considered, as they had hitherto been by the
Spaniards, not expecting so much as thanks for what they did so frankly, and
with their total ruin, but that it was enough for them, to let all Europe see,
that they had consumed their Estates and hazarded their persons to save a
Kingdom whose destruction they might have beheld without crime, by not opposing
the torrent, nor applying themselves to more than the defense of their lands
and preservation of their fortunes.

To conclude, that they were sorry to see me every hour of the day in danger of
my life, either by poison, assassination, or treason. That it would prove
impossible for me to overcome alone such oppositions as would daily arise; That
I was not to depend on a people void of courage and honor, who, as they had
done but two days before, would ever abandon me, on all occasions of war;
That questionless a false account of the peoples forces had been given me at
Rome, or I had not come to their service; but that he doubted not that having
discovered such malicious artifices as were made use of to engage me, I had a
hundred times repented to have so easily cast my self into the midst of so
infamous a rabble. That I ought to consider that upon the first ill success,
for which (according to their custom) they would make me responsible, or at
the first sedition incited by some fool or mad man, whose credit should cry
louder than that of others, they would cut off my head, and dragge me through
the Streets; That he very well knew that in two or three rancounters they had
already lost their respect to me, and though I then found a remedy in
resolution and courage, I should not perhaps have always the same fortune
though the same heart, and whenever she failed me, I should infallibly loose
both my life and honor. That he came expressly to represent all these things
to me in the name of the Nobility, and to offer me (in case I resolved to
retire to Rome) to accompany me in a body thither: that as my Servant he
advised me to this resolution, since I could not nor ought not to fancy any
establishment by the people, capable only of tumults and seditions: Revolutions
of Monarchies, and alterations of Governments being effected by the Nobility,
who could never be favorable to the hopes wherewithal I perhaps flattered my
self, my obligation to and dependence on the Commonalty, preventing their
uniting with me, who on my part would not think my self beholding to them for
my establishment, whose first foundations had been laid by the people. I began
with my thanks for, the good Counsels he gave me, as well in the Nobilities
name as his own, which yet I had no inclination to follow, neither could I do
it with reason and honor: I told him also that I hoped he had so good an
opinion of me that he did not expect it; that I had not attempted so hazardous
a passage, to loose the glory it acquired me, and make that seem an action of
imprudence, which I had undertaken with so much honor and resolution. That I
found nothing in Naples that surprised me. That I foresaw all the dangers to
which I exposed my self, and fancied greater difficulties than I had met
withal. That honor cannot be obtained without danger, that my Passion for the
service of the Crown to which I was born a subject, armed me against all. That
I had calmely considered all the good and evil successes of fortune, and sought
all means of advancing the one and remedying the other, and that casting into
one scale the honor and glory I should acquire, and into the other all manner
of dangers I was to undergo, I found my self so animated and confirmed in my
designs, that nothing in the world was capable of making me forsake them. That
I engaged not so lightly as he might imagine; That if I had alone in a felucca
crossed through the Spanish Fleet, and contemned such perils as another might
with reason have apprehended, it was not that like a fabulous Knight errant, I
thought to defend a people against such puissant forces by Land and Sea as I
was to combat, and alone conquer a great Kingdom, but having been acquainted
that the people of Naples were discouraged, I thought good to enter to animate
them, and gain time for the arrival of the French Fleet, with all succors
necessary not only for preservation of the Town, but for driving the Spaniards
out of the whole Kingdom, which I thought speedily to effect. In a word (I told
him) I had provided for all things; a potent Fleet was coming and at present
under sail to attend my Orders, whose arrival the Winds alone were able to
retard, you will see it, said I, very suddenly sink and burn that of Spain, it
is furnished with all things necessary, whereas the other is entirely
unprovided. It convoys me ships laden with Corn, Ammunition, Artillery and
Money: it brings a great body of foot that I may land such numbers as I shall
think necessary: and a great many horsemen, whom when I have mounted, nothing
can prevent my being master of the Field, I am willing to give you and the rest
of the Nobility notice of this, that you may perceive I am not chimerical, and
that without vanity I may boast, to be ready to give the Law, and not receive
it. I am sorry for your blindness that provide not for your selves, and fear,
if you open not your eyes to seek your security, least you be irreparably
involved in the ruin of the Spaniards. Do not fancy that I endeavor to engage
you on precipices, I love you too well. I would have you make reflections, but
neither resolve nor execute, till you see all that I have told you made good.
If you continue united to the Spaniard, the Forces of France joining with the
people will declare against you; the Establishment of a popular Republic may
be taken into consideration, which will trouble you, and being once excluded
you will never recover the Rank and Authority you may now reasonably expect.
You may answer me that the execution of this project is very difficult as long
as you oppose it: which I shall grant you, and more, that possibly you may
prevent it: but this cannot be done without great effusion of blood, the
destruction of your families and ruin of your estates, with the desolation of
the whole Kingdom, which you will make a Stage of war perhaps for many ages,
whereas reuniting both the bodies of the State in the same interest, as it is
unnatural for them to be divided, liberty and enfranchisement from the
tyrannous dominion of Spain will be the work but of a few weeks: And as you are
to receive greater advantages by it then the common people, it is but reason
that you take your share of the pains and travel, neither would it be
honorable for you to leave them all the glory that you might acquire all the
profit; In such a case none but my self would have any thing to pretend, having
the command of their Forces in my hand, which I will share with you now, that I
may do the same hereafter by such advantages of fortune as will follow it. Do
not imagine that I would by this persuade you to cast your selves at their
feet, I hate the multitude too much, and love persons of quality too well to be
capable of such a thought. If the authority of Gennaro offend you, you shall
quickly be rid of him, for I give you my word that at my return to Naples I
will take it from him, and you shall understand it to be wholly in my hands; I
promise you that I will not be there eight days before you shall hear that I am
master, and no orders but mine spoken of: Matters are so well disposed toward
this, that no man is in a condition to oppose it; I have so far gained the
affection of the better sort, and am so much feared by the vulgar, that I am
more absolute than you formerly saw Mazaniello. When affairs shall be in this
condition, if you think good to have recourse to me, you shall always find me
ready with open arms to receive you, with all manner of services and
testimonies of esteem and friendship; and to remove all unwillingness, know
that I am an enemy to disorder, insolence, and tumult; that I will cause them
to cease, and re-establish repose and justice, cause to be given to persons of
Quality the respect that suits with them, and hold the vulgar in such contempt,
subjection and dependence as belongs to it, and in which it was ever held
before the revolutions. I will punish all Incendiaries, and such as are
accustomed to plundering houses, I will sacrifice to the resentments of their
Relations, all such as have dipped their hands in the blood of the Gentry, to
put a beginning to which I keep in irons Michael de Santis, who cruelly
massacred Don Pepe Caraffa; I will sacrifice him to you and your family, and
before six days are over, you shall see his head on a Post at the gate of
Aversa, and his body hung by one foot on a tree on the Highway side. These are
the testimonies I will give you of my credit and authority, as well as of my
affection for the Nobility, and the design I have of seeking your good will, by
rendering you all manner of service; hoping withal when you shall see so many
things effected more for your interest than mine own, you will consider your
condition and prevent your being involved in the ruin of the Spaniards, and
labor, as prudence shall require, to make your advantages by them.

Afterward I told him that I commended his zeal and fidelity for Spain, though
it would infallibly be rewarded with ingratitude, that they might assure
themselves all services they did for her would be reputed as crimes, because
the refined Politics of her Ministers would oblige her to destroy those she
could not recompense according to their merits, and whose resentments she must
afterward fear, which would reasonably draw on her hatred and ingratitude.
That it was much easier to cause the ruin of a Kingdom than to preserve and
maintain it against the decrees of Heaven and general Revolutions, and that the
Spaniards would not run a hazard of depending on the humors of the Nobility,
who might at their pleasure deprive them of the Crown they had with so much
Generosity and Courage supported; That they knew very well there was not any
that had not been stabbed in his bosom, and highly outraged by their injurious
usage. That the Spaniards would not think themselves obliged by their arming,
nor assen bling so considerable troops for them, which had hitherto prevented
their being driven away, and preserved them all their Garrisons; that all this
would be attributed to their hatred against the common people, and revenge for
their insolence in plundering their houses, and resentment of the blood of
their Relations so barbarously spilled. In a word, that the Council of Spain
fears all, and is obliged by nothing, punishes but never rewards; looks on all
as enemies whose power gives jealousy, apprehends Revolutions, and studies to
destroy all that are capable of making them, and out of its natural distrust
applies it self to prevent those it takes to be in a condition to do hurt, if
they have a mind: That I was sorry to see all the Nobility in this danger, and
him as most powerful and considerable, more than any other. That he was to
understand he should make himself criminal by great and generous actions, and
that his ruin as well as that of all his Companions was inevitable, because
they should either be miserably involved in that of the Spaniards, or most
certainly destroy themselves in settling the others affairs, and
re-establishing their authority, nothing being able to secure them against
their distrust and severity; That no faults were venial with them; that
whatsoever gives them jealousy (often raised on no foundation) they call
design and treason; that they should be looked on as more guilty than the
revolted people, by opposing their insolences, and endeavoring, as they did,
to settle the general disorders of the Kingdom, and prevent its total
subversion. That the Spaniards dissimulation was too well understood to be
confided in, and that after many fair words and specious appearances, the time
would come when they should feel the effects of their cruel Maxims, without
knowing how to avoid them.

He relished all my Arguments, and could do no less then yield to them;
answering that he had very well considered all I had so judiciously
represented, but that he would continue as he had begun, and even to death
comply with his obligations: the greatest you have, said I is, the preservation
of your Country, and protecting it from final ruin, and the whole Nobility,
and your own particular Family from perishing miserably: and you will be
blameable to eternity; if having it in your power to prevent so many mischiefs
as threaten you, you obstinately draw on your head Famine, War, Murders,
Conflagrations and Plunderings, and so become the destroyer of your Country,
when you may make your self the restorer. You began not the insurrection, but
not being able to allay it, you ought to make use of it for procuring repose
and liberty.

The Spaniards alone will be blamed for this Revolution, their injust and
violent conduct having acquired the general hatred of the People, and their
negligence and weakness depriving them of the means to secure themselves from
their resentments, so that you abandon them not till they had first abandoned
themselves and you, to the violence and brutality of a despairing multitude.
Are you obliged to impossibilities in the behalf of those who have suffered
themselves to be overpowered for want of foresight, and precaution against a
mischief, one may say they wilfully pulled on their own heads, since after so
many reiterated advices, they would not change their conduct? Can you always
maintain at your own charge the Troops you have raised in a War that probably
may last long? You will soon be exhausted, receiving no rents from your Lands,
which I shall not always have a power to secure from spoiling, nor your houses
from demolishing, when obstinate against all reason, and contrary to your own
Interests, you shall continue in Arms against me: and when necessity shall
compel you to lay them down, you will be undone, and become inconsiderable to
each party, being neither in a condition to assist, nor prejudice. Prevent by
prudence this inevitable inconvenience, by which you will lose your reputation
and credit. I demand not your joining with me, it would not become you to do it
so lightly, nor me to propose it, since I have a particular care of your
honor. I would have you first see performed what I have promised: you will
therefore do well to go every one home for preservation of your Estates, and
gain time to contemplate the course of Affairs, and make use o^ them to your
advantage. I shall have great cause of satisfaction in you, and the Spaniards
none of Complaint, when you let them know, you have done all that was possible
for them; that you have raised and maintained Forces at your own charge, which
for want of Money you can no longer keep together; That you go home to
endeavor to raise more, and seek to preserve that little of your Fortunes that
remains, having spent the rest in their Service. I will not only give you
safeguards, but the Command of your Towns to such as you shall nominate; since
under the Constellation that now predominates, the smallest Village must have a
Captain and make War. I will prevent all talk of a Republic, till such time
as you shall be in a capacity of entering upon that part of the Government that
belongs to you, and of giving your opinion for the manner of establishing it.

My opinion said he (and all the Nobilities) is, that a Republique being no
ways suitable to us, we neither can, nor ought to hearken to it; we will never
suffer the People to share the Authority with us; and we are naturally of an
humor so turbulent and vainglorious, that it is impossible for us to look one
upon another in an equality of power.

There will infallibly arise Divisions, Jealousies and hatreds, to the ruin of
the Country: We are born under Monarchy, and cannot subsist without a King; A
Sovereign Authority must be Guardian of our repose and quiet, pacify our
Dissentions, and reconcile our Enmities, to this Nature and Education incline
us, which supposed, we must of necessity resolve to lose our lives and
fortunes, for continuing us under our Kings Authority how violent soever, we
are habituated to it, and believe that of France would not be more moderate,
and that we should not gain, but might possibly lose by the Exchange: We shall
still see our Country at the feet of strangers, our Employments, Offices, and
the Government of our Towns and Provinces in their hands, our Wealth will as
formerly be transported into another Country, which will be enriched by our
Impoverishment, and we shall still be enforced to Court and kneel to a
Viceroy, of no greater birth than our selves. By this you may perceive we
shall no ways better our condition; besides, that the Spanish humor suites
more with ours, the French being too airy for People serious and jealous as we
naturally are.

I replied, That he had no reason to distrust France, who contributed her
assistance and power to give the Kingdom of Naples liberty, without other
interest then the Glory of succoring the oppressed, as she had done to the
Princes of Germany that had recourse to her Protection, and deprive her Enemies
of a Crown from whence they derived the best of those Forces that resisted her
Victorious Arms:. That the King two well understood his Interests to pretend
to be their Master, by which he might possibly incurr their hatred, but most
certainly the jealousy of all the Princes of Italy, who would on that account
enter into a League against him, so as he should by it draw great
inconveniences on himself without any advantage; That doing the contrary, he
should win the hearts of all, as well Nobility as People, by driving away their
common Enemy, and afterward leaving them to the liberty of choosing such a
Master as should best please them, if it be so that they cannot be without one,
who should be obliged to depend on him for his support, so that their common
Interest should always unite their Naval Power, which would be in a condition
to subdue that of the Spaniards, enfeebled by all accessions that had been made
to France; and to take from the whole Kingdom the distrust they might have of
so potent Succors, the Fleet should always lie ready to attempt whatsoever I
should judge advantageous, without landing any thing, or any man till I
demanded it; that this was the Order wherewith I had a particular charge to
acquaint them: so that himself and all his friends ought to be satisfied and
persuaded, that if they must change Master, it should be for no other then such
as themselves made choice of, which might be one of their own body, if such a
one could be found, for whom the rest of the Nobility had esteem enough, to
obey him without repining: That if they desired a stranger, we had two Princes
in France, one the Kings Uncle, most discreet and prudent, who loving repose,
would be very sollicitous to preserve it to them; the other his Brother, yet a
Child, of great hopes, who by being bred amongst them, and seasoned with the
humors and customs of their Country, it would be as if they formed a King
after their own Model, which is no small advantage. That if any particular
reason thwarted their choice of one of these Princes, Italy, or at least the
rest of Europe might present others; and that whomsoever they set on their
Throne, should be owned, approved, and assisted by France.

He told me, There was no need of seeking them a Master, since they had one
already, under whom they hoped to continue, and to which end they would spare
no endeavors; but if any of the Nobility should be convinced by my reasons,
which he acknowledged to be powerful, he would not be the first in such a
compliance, nor till it should be made apparent to all the World, that he was
compelled to it by inevitable necessity, as being out of condition of doing
otherwise. That if they must resolve to submit themselves to another, it could
be to none of their own Country, since every man would in such a case pretend,
not as believing himself to merit it, but that he might not give place to any
of his Companions, whose exaltation he would never suffer. For the two Princes
I had propounded, they were no ways proper for them, the first being
incommoded with the Gout, and of little activity, they standing in need of a
Prince vigilant and vigorous, to defend the liberty he should acquire them: for
the other, besides that he was too young to govern them, the King his Brother
dying without children, or they failing, they must become united to the Crown
of France, the only thing they feared, nothing being capable to make them take
Arms contrary to their duty, but the hope of freeing their Crown from
dependence on any other. He told me afterward, That they had no great
inclination for the Princes of Italy; that they should rather make choice of a
mere stranger, the gallantry of whose actions had acquired their esteem and
affection; I answered nothing to this Discourse, it being too complaisant and
flattering. After this he asked me if the Credit I had amongst the People gave
me any hopes, and whether I thought the Crown of Naples might ever depend on
their support, favor, or election: if so, that I extremely mistook, because
the Nobility would perish in opposal of all their determinations, would never
have dependence on them, nor submit to the Authority of a man, that should owe
his Fortune to them, and might believe himself obliged to them for it.

I answered him, That my ambition was too moderate for so high imaginations,
that I was not so vain to flatter my self with expectation of a Dignity I was
unable to support. That I would not so expose my self to fortune, whose
inconstancy I too much apprehended, neither was I desirous to mount to a
height, a fall from whence might cost my honor and life, or, where the last of
these being preserved to me by an extraordinary effect, I must pass the
remainder of it in eternal shame and sorrow; but if, (contrary to my
expectation,) I should ever attain any advantage, I would receive it from none
but the Nobility, that I might owe it to them, and be by it engaged to use my
uttermost endeavor to restore them to their wonted splendour, and the Vulgar to
that dependence and subjection wherein God and Nature had placed them, and
reason required they should continue. That I would endeavor to revenge them of
all outrages had been done them, and severely and exemplarily punish the
Authors. To conclude, that I would pretend to nothing high and glorious, but by
the Duke of Andria, to whom only I would be obliged; that, if I ever came to
attain the first place in his Country, the second might be his, sharing with
him and his friends all Honors, Charges, Profits, and Governments of the
Kingdom.

He returned me his thanks, but assured me, That he neither believed, nor
wished matters should ever come to such a pass, persuading himself I should
never get Forces sufficient to drive away the Spaniards, and that he doubted
not but that the Nobility had enough, as well as sufficient courage and fidelity,
to preserve to the King their Master a Crown he had inherited from his
Ancestors, and to which Heaven and their Duty had made them Subjects.

I besought him, considering the inclination I had to do them all manner of
Services, to acquaint me with their resolution, in case necessity compelled
them to take any, and I promised to give him notice of the arrival of the
French Fleet, and the supplies I expected; and when I should have deprived of
all Authority Gennaro, and the other heads of the People, who were so odious to
them, and taken on my self the management of all Affairs, to remove the
difficulties that interposed betwixt them and their interests: and after a
thousand Protestations of friendship, and as many embraces we went out of the
Church to meet the company, where we returned to a Conversation less serious
and more gallant.

I asked him in presence of all those Gentlemen, if the brave Cavaleer I
remarked in the skirmish two days ago were not the Prince of Torello, whose
Gallantry gave me a great esteem for him, yet against whom I thought I had some
cause of complaint, because of his refusal to exchange a Bullet with me, when I
invited him to it, as if he thought there had not been honor enough to have
been acquired in that rancontre.

He told me, it was the Prince of Minorvine who had besought him to make me his
complements and excuses, for not accepting a combat that would have been so
glorious to him: but besides that he had already fired both his Pistols, his
unwillingness to engage me by reason of the approach of his Troops (whom he
could not restrain,) and the Cowardice of mine (who in stead of sustaining the
shock would undoubtedly have fled and abandoned me, as he had seen them do
before) forced him to refuse the honor I proprounded, by which I so highly
obliged him that he should never loose the memory but remain my servant all
the days of his life I received this Complement with such acknowledgements as
its gallantry merited, and besought him to tell him in my name that he very
much obliged me, and that I thought I had escaped a very great danger, it being
in my opinion extremely hazardous to encounter a person of his Valor.

Don Fabritio Spinelli saw amongst my Horses a gray Courser he very much
esteemed, and that had been taken out of one of his Houses by some Troops that
served the People, I offered to restore him, which he would not accept, seeming
very well satisfied, that he was in my hands: And the Duke of Andria told me
that the Spaniards being naturally distrustful, would have been jealous of his
receiving such a courtesy from me. He looked on a bay Horse of mine as very
suitable to a Set of Coach-horses he had of the same height and color, which I
offered and he refused for the same reason his Camerade had done the other: and
I commending a dapeled gray of his breed, on which he came, he very much
pressed me to accept him, I thanked him, but would not propound a truck with
mine, to which he would have been willing, because it came in my head to send
it to him the next Morning, which I did by a Trumpet, with the other to Don
Fabritio Spinelli, who returned them with this Message, that I did not treat
them as my Friends and Servants, because there was as much malice as generosity
in the present I went about to make them, and it looked as if I intended to
raise a jealousy of them, so to compel them, out of apprehension of the danger
to which I exposed them, to seek their safety with me.

Many obliging Discourses were made on each side, after which, the night
approaching caused us to separate; I perceived that by this interview I had
gained much on their inclination and friendship, which might in time produce
good effects. And though the principal cause of it was to settle quarter
betwixt our Forces, I purposely forbore speaking one word of it, to give the
Spaniards the greater jealousy of so long and secret a conference, where
nothing was mentioned of the subject that caused it to be demanded; this
punctually succeeded as I imagined: and those Gentlemen returned so well
satisfied with me, that they expressed it to all the rest of the Nobility in
terms so obliging and affectionate, that it was out of question that I had won
their hearts.

At my return I heard the joyful news of the arrival of the French Fleet, the
more acceptable in that it had been reported, that the same tempest, which I
saw before my eyes, the day before my departure, break in pieces two Spanish
vessels in the road of Naples, had scattered and destroyed several of our
Ships. The people were overjoyed at its appearance, and the Spaniards as much
surprised, who expected it not, taking it at first for supplies sent to them,
and which they every day looked for.

The Spanish Fleet was at anchor, their (...) unmasted and no men aboard, so
that (...) which came on with a fresh gale might without any hazard have taken
and burnt it (...) all, so that few ships should have, escaped (...) those
useless, not daring to keep t^^ (...) a puissant and victorious (...) been. I
cannot imagine (...) so important and easy attempt was not made, which the
Spaniards could never have recovered; but this I can say, that in the time of
my imprisonment they acknowledged they never were so near ruin, which they
could not have avoided if ours had come on: all that were aboard our Fleet
grant this, yet none can allege a reason or excuse for this fault, nor can
tell to what to attribute it.

The next Morning at my rising, the Abbot Basqui came to me, and having
delivered all the dispatches he had for me, which assured me of the
satisfaction, the news of my passage had given the Court, and that in
Confirmation of the Promises I had made to the people of Naples, of the
protection and powerful assistance of France, the Fleet was sent to supply us
with whatsoever we should desire, and land whatever we should have occasion
for, whither Men or Ammunition; he at last proffered me the account of what he
brought along: and coming to particulars, I asked him with what Money we should
be supplied, and desired that some body might be landed to take charge of it in
the Kings name, and distribute it according to my Orders, assuring him that it
should be managed with all care, and that I would not suffer any unprofitable
expense to be made. He told me there were five hundred thousand Livers, but
that not being able to touch at Genoua to receive it, they had only the Bills
of Exchange, so that I was to take it upon my credit in Naples, and that it
should be punctually reimbursed at Genoua on sight. I answered that what he
propounded was useless, because in a City where disorder had so long
continued, all men had concealed and hid their Money, and that, had it been
possible to have discovered any, I should have made an advantageous use of it,
and the Fleet have found me in a much better condition, that we must therefore
immediately dispatch away some ships to fetch it, because it was the thing the
most necessary, and of which we had greatest want. Then I asked if they had
brought any Corn, he told me no, but that order was left to lade some Vessels
in Provence which would suddenly arrive, and in such manner that we should have
enough: I asked what foot they could land us, and he told me as many as I
should desire, I demanded six thousand men, he thought it too many. I reduced
my self to four, afterward to three, then to two thousand five hundred; and
two thousand; at last I fell to eighteen hundred, on which number we agreed,
and which he said might be landed without disfurnishing the Fleet. I expected a
good number of horsemen to mount in Naples, but I was fain to content my self
with the company of the Queens Guards, which had formerly belonged to the Duke
of Breze, and that of Monsieur de Manicamp, there being no other persons fit to
be employed on horseback.

I had demanded fourscore thousand weight of Powder, but was fain to be content
with forty, which were promised me with Match and Bullet proportionable. I had
also demanded Pikes and Muskets for Foot, Sadles, Bridles and Pistols for two
thousand horse, but would have abated one half. And whether it were they had
not time to ship them, or had forgot them, they told me they had brought none.
They consented to land me ten Pieces of Ordnance. At last having acquainted the
Abbot Basqui with the condition of all affairs since my arrival, and given him
account of my Negotiations with the Nobility, whose reunion with us was so
necessary, and which I held infallible, as soon as they should hear I had
received so powerful succors, and that the Fleet was at my disposal; He told me
the Fleet and all the succors were sent to the people of Naples, and were to
obey him that commanded them, and that had the principal authority in the City.
I replied that was I, since the supplies and command of the Fleet related to
War, and the people had given me the same command over their Armies, as the
Prince of Orange had over those of the United Netherlands; and more the title
of Protector of their Liberty, with the disposal of all Military affairs which
depended on me alone. He replied that Gennaro was chief and Generalissimo, and
that France taking him to have the absolute power in the City, he could address
himself to no other. I alleged his incapacity, want of Experience and small
credit. That he meddled with little or nothing, besides that it was unsafe to
trust him, he having evermore some secret correspondence with the enemy, and
suffering himself to be guided by unconfiding persons; in a word, that I had
acquired the trust and esteem of all the people, of whom I disposed according
to my pleasure.

When (said he) you shall have made appear your absolute authority in the City,
that you are Master, and your Orders only obeyed, Addresses shall be made
only to you; but till then I must of necessity negotiate in the name of the
King with him that has hitherto seemed to have the greatest command. I assured
him he should be satisfied the next Morning, and that returning to lie aboard,
I would give him account of it by a Gentleman I would send to those that
commanded, to complement their arrival* inform them of the condition of
affairs, demand the succors of which we were agreed, and I wanted; deferring
it till I could do it in my own name and the peoples, as the head of them,
having deprived Gennaro of his authority, that to this purpose I would return
to Naples as soon as I had dined.

I then commanded Pepe Palombe, Onoffrio Pissacani, Carlo Longobardo, and Cicio
Battimiello, as persons in whom I confided, and that were necessary for the
execution of the design I had undertaken, to march thither with their
Companies; and leaving the rest of the troops under the command of the Baron of
Modene, I ordered him to continue the blocking up of Aversa, by keeping
possession of the Quarters I had taken of Juliana and Saint Antimo, with charge
to give me notice of all alterations that should happen, and to attempt nothing
without my Orders, which I would punctually send him every day: after Dinner I
went to Naples, where I was received with extraordinary applauses, my
reputation and credit having been augmented by the fame of the passages of the
skirmish of Aversa, and by the excess of joy in which I found the whole Town,
for the arrival of the French Fleet, and performance of the Promises I had made
in the Kings name of a powerful and speedy succor.

Gennaro was overjoyed, not so much with the share he took of that of the
Public, but out of hopes of re-establishing his authority, by the assistance
and support the Abbot Basqui had promised him, who made it his great business
to disunite us, and disorder the Town, in such manner as became a Spy and
Pensioner of Spain, which he was, though entrusted, in quality of Agent, with
all the affairs of France. I called for a fresh horse and immediately visited
all the Posts, to see their condition, and take account of all that had passed
in my absence.

Afterward I commanded Pepe Palombe and Mathaeo d' Amore to be in arms next
Morning in their quarter by nine a clock, and Onoffrio Pissacani, Carlo
Longobardo, Cicio Battimiello, Capitain Cimino, Ignatio Spagnuolo and Grassullo
de Rosa, to be at the same hour in Battalia, at the heads of their Companies in
the Marketplace. The Council having acquainted me with all that happened
whilst I was out of Town, I prayed them to come to me in the Morning between
eight and nine, that I might communicate to them an affair of extraordinary
Concernment, and Vincenzo Andrea, having, as he used to do, entertained me with
discourse of the ignorance and brutality of Gennaro, which disordered all, and
would cause the final ruin of the people, if (out of Charity) I took not the
entire authority into my hands, with the conduct of all affairs; suffering my
self to be a good while pressed upon, I seemed at last to be persuaded, and to
take my Resolution out of Compliance with his thoughts, so to engage him the
more firmly to support a design of which he believed himself the Author, and to
which he supposed he had given me the first encouragement. I bid him good
night, and that he should not fail to be with me betimes in the Morning, that I
stood in very great need as well of his Council as Credit for putting in
execution what I had undertaken, and of which he had caused me to resolve.
After Supper I went to Bed to repose in expectation of the Morning, which was
to open the most happy and glorious day of my life, as I shall show by what I
attempted with success, and by the solid establishment of my Sovereign
Authority, which I continued to the day of my Imprisonment, with greater
respect and submission of the people of Naples than they ever showed to the
person of any of their Kings.

The End of the Second Book.
The Third BOOK.
THe Twentieth of December I rose at daybreak, and having heard Mass, shut my
self up with Vincenzo Andrea; we conferred of the means I was to use for
completing so great and important an enterprise as that I had resolved to
execute. The Council waited on me, whom I let understand, That the incapacity,
ignorance and brutality of Gennaro ruined all; that he minded nothing but
Plundering and Robbing the whole City; that it was high time to put an end to
those Disorders: and, that now our Succors were arrived, and we had power in
our hands to go seriously to work for establishing repose and liberty, we were
to apply our selves to it with all our might, and regulate all things in such a
manner, that the order and good Government which we should cause to be observed
in the Town, might begin to gain us credit, and acquire us some reputation
throughout Italy, which was very necessary for us, to the end, that making
appear we acted no more tumultuously, we might be considered as persons capable
of bringing to perfection so great and glorious a design, as that of freeing
the Kingdom of Naples from the Spanish Tyranny; That we could not drive them
out, without gaining to us the Nobility, who alone were capable of maintaining
them, and of opposing with their credit and power whatsoever we could undertake
against them. That I had observed that all Gentlemen were very well affected
toward me, and confided in me; the main reason that prevented them from
declaring for us, being their aversion for submitting to Gennaro and others of
the People, for whom their contempt and hatred were so violent, there was no
way of overcoming it; That this obstacle was to be removed, after which we
should find all easy, by placing the Authority in the hands of a person for
whom they had esteem, respect and affection, and that could secure them against
the apprehension of being any more liable to the affronts and violences of the
Vulgar: That these weighty reasons made me resolve to undertake the conduct of
all Affairs, and to lay on my own shoulders the whole burden of the
Government, though I very well understood the toils and perils to which I
exposed my self: but, seeing no other means of delivering the Kingdom from the
Spanish Tyranny, and that my endeavors would be otherwise without success, my
affection to the People of Naples made me resolve to sacrifice my life to the
dangers of War, Poison, Assassination, Tumults and Seditions, to the envy of
many persons, and the rage of such others as I endeavored to contain within
the limits of respect and fear, not suffering any more the insolences and
violences they had been wont to practice, that all might enjoy repose and
liberty.

Upon all which I desired them freely, and without any by-respects to give me
their advice, being resolved to acquiesce in their opinions whatsoever they
might be. They were all unanimous, and did not only approve my resolution, but
with one voice besought me no longer to delay the putting it in execution; that
being at the brink of ruin, and no safety visible without this expedient, they
and the People, for whose good intentions they would be responsible, were
resolved to spend their lives and fortunes for the establishment and
preservation of my Authority.

Seeing things in so fair a way, I commanded all Officers to be at the head of
their Men in the Marketplace; and all Captains of the several quarters of the
City to assemble the People to attend my Orders: I sent the Sieurs Antonio
Scaccia^ento, and Augustino Mollo, to go in the Peoples name and mine to
Gennaro, to give him thanks for the pains he had till then taken, in
maintaining the Town, and preserving it in so good a condition, free from the
cruel and violent Dominion of the Spaniards; but, it being now time to
establish Order in Naples, and finish what had been begun so happily, nature
having not given him an intellect and capacity sufficient for the support of so
weighty Affairs, General Applications had been made to me to undertake them;
That it was time for him to think of repose, after having labored so long and
usefully, in recompense whereof we offered him the Government of the New Castle
as soon as we should be Masters of it, the Title of Duke or Prince of one of
the best Towns that should be confiscated, and Fifty thousand Crowns Revenue
to him and his Successors: That nothing should be done without his advice; That
he should have the second place in the Government and Councils, where, in my
absence, he should be President; That, in consideration of the great number of
enemies he had made in the time of his Administration, he should be allowed
Guards, and permitted to carry them about with him for his safety. That if he
seriously considered these offers, he ought to be well satisfied in the
acknowledgments of his Services, think it a happiness to see his fortune so
well established and himself discharged from the burden of Affairs, of which
he was not capable, and rejoice to be secured from so many perils and accidents
which had hitherto threatened him, by an honorable resignation of that
Authority which the People for very important reasons, could not, nor ought not
any longer to suffer in his hands; that, if he did not this voluntarily, all
means would be used for compelling him to it; that we should be sorry to have
recourse to violence, and to be obliged to endeavor his ruin as an enemy, and
disturber of the Public quiet.

These Gentlemen represented all this to him, with a great deal of eloquence
and efficacy; but he, whose timorous nature would on his knees have accepted so
advantageous conditions, which he had also oftentimes sought, thinking himself
supported by the French Fleet, and animated by the conference he had held with
the Abbot Basqui, insolently replied, That he would continue Master, and knew
very well how to maintain his Authority and Power. This Answer being brought
me, I presently got on Horseback, followed by my Servants and such Frenchmen as
I had about me, the number of whom was increased by the Sieurs de Mallet and
Villepreux, Captains in the Regiment of la Motte, Persons of Merit and Valor,
who were come from the Garrison of Portolongone with Letters of Recommendation
from Monsieur de Fontenai for employment; by the Sieurs de Beauvais, de
Apremont, de La Serre, and the Knight de La Viselette, (some of which came from
Rome, and others from Venice, whom the desire of serving in our War, and
following my Fortune, had invited) and accompanied by Vincenzo Andrea, and the
chief of the Council, came into the Marketplace; where, having Commanded
silence, I propounded all the reasons before alleged, and demanded, Whom they
would have Command in Naples, Gennaro or my self; they answered with great
Cries, That they would no more hear of Gennaro, a man brutal and incapable;
that they would live and die under me, to whom they had so essential
Obligations, and by whose means alone they expected to obtain Repose and
Liberty: This was followed by a General shout in my favor, and with an unisal
Exclamation of, Long live the Duke of Guise our King; we will have none but
him, nor ever own any other.

I caused the noise to cease, telling them, My Ambition was more moderate, that
the time of making themselves a Master was not yet come, that the Spaniards
must first be driven away; that so precipitated a resolution would infallibly
cause their Ruin and mine, by drawing on me the envy of all Europe, and
depriving us of all the Supplies we expected, and which were so necessary for
us; rhat rather then consent, I would Ship my self on the Fleet and be gone;
that I aimed at nothing but doing them service, and Sacrificing my self to free
them from slavery, without pretending any other recompense, then what I should
derive from so great and worthy an action: From thence (very much satisfied in
their affection) I went into the Concheria, Lavinare, and generally all the
Quarters of the Town, where all passed after the same manner, and in a fashion
yet more obliging.

The great round I was fain to make caused me to come very late to the Convent
of Saint Lawrence, where all deliberations are made that concern the Affairs
of the Kingdom; I caused the Bell to be immediately Rung, to Assemble the
Magistrates, the Military and City Captains, and the Council: When they were
come together, I told them I had sent for them, not to seek of them the
Authority, and absolute Command the People with one Voice had already conferred
upon me; but, to advertise them, that, having accepted it, they should publish
it to all men, forbidding them, on pain of their lives, to receive or
acknowledge any other Orders then mine: That I would like a good Father Protect
all such as should comply with their duty, and faithfully obey me: As, on the
other side, I should not fail to punish all those that for the future failed of
the respect they owed me.

After this I dismissed them; and was told that Gennaro made a great Commotion
amongst the inferior sort of People, persuading them, that I took upon me the
Command at the arrival of the Fleet, on purpose to put the Town into the hands
of France; and that under pretense of gaining them Liberty, I only went about
to change their Fetters, and impose heavier then the Spaniards had hitherto
detained them in. Night being too far advanced to go to appease this Tumult,
accompanied as usually with insolence and disorder, I deferred it till the
morning, and in the mean time sent to Gennaro, to consider well what he did;
that at Ten a Clock I would go to Mass at the Carmelites, and if by that time
he resigned not his Authority into my hands, I would have his head cut off, and
set on a Post in the Marketplace, and would hang his Body by one foot on the
Gallows that is in the middle of it: then going to bed, I with extraordinary
impatience expected day, to finish what I had so happily begun.

In the mean while there was great running to and fro, and many Cabals were
made, which I nevertheless dissipated with much facility. I arose very early,
and many Gentlemen of the most considerable of Naples came to wait on me,
amongst others, Mazillo Caracciolo, Marco Antonio Brancaccio, and Bartholomeo
Griffo, whom I intended to make Colonel of my Guards, because he was a person
of Quality, and an old Soldier, of great merit and experience, and Mazillo
Cracciolo Camp-master-General, who was very well born, and of great ability,
that had carried Arms all his life with much honor, and an irreconcilable
enemy of the Spaniards, by whom he had been very ill used: but, the People
having a dislike of them, this intention had no effect, I thinking fit to have
some respect for their aversion; But, I kept still near me old Marco Antonio
Brancaccio, whose Counsels I followed on all important occasions, which ever
succeeded well, deriving many advantages from my confidence in him.

About eight a Clock I went to Mass, after which I spoke to the People, who
heard me favorably, and by their Answers, Cries and Acclamations appeared yet
more affected to and more resolved to make me their King, then overnight; I
with the same reasons dissuaded them, tel^ing them, I was resolved to retire,
and abandon them, if they persisted in that thought. I got on horseback to go
to St. Austins, followed by above twenty thousand People, where I heard the
Magistrates of the City, and the Council were assembled, that being the usual
place where they are wont to deliberate, and making a stand under the windows
of the room where they were at Council, I sent the Captain of my Guards to
enquire what they were doing, and let them know that having acquainted them
with my intentions, it was to very little purpose for them to imagine they had
any thing to determine on; That all the people had owned me, by whose general
acclamations they might easily understand their pleasure; That if they went
about to cast in any difficulty or qualification, I had no more to do but
loosen the reigns to the people, whom I had much ado to restrain from throwing
them all out at the Windows. They demanded a little patience, by which I should
be satisfied of their obedience and zeal, and immediately after they brought me
the result of their Consultations, signed by all that were present, by which
they declared me Duke of their Republic for five years, with an absolute and
sovereign power, which was approved by the consent and applause of all the
people.

After this I went into the Marketplace, where I found five or six thousand
Mutineers in Arms with a strange tumult, I rid up to them and demanded what
obliged them to such a disorder: they answered that Gennaro had told them, I
undertook the authority to no other end but to resign it to France, and that I
took possession of the Kingdom in the name of the King, intending to land all
the troops that were aboard the Fleet, to deliver the Town to them, to which
they would never give their consent, being desirous of an entire Liberty, and
to see their Country without dependence on any other: that they would not
suffer themselves to become subject to another Nation, the chief occasion of
their taking Arms, having been to drive away the Spaniards, that they might be
free, which could not be by their subjection to the French, whose dominion
would be equally rough and insupportable; that they sought protection and
succors, but not subjection; and when they desired assistance, they thought it
should have been given them without any other interest then the enfeeblishment
and ruin of their enemies. I endeavored to disabuse them, and rectify this
mistake which had no foundation, telling them that France had no such
intention, that of this I was sufficiently assured, having received Orders to
engage the contrary (as I had already done) and that Commissions were not given
to persons of my Quality to be afterward disavowed, by giving the lie to such
things as they had been commanded to declare in behalf of a Crown, so exact in
executing whatsoever it positively promises, and so religious in observing its
faith. That I was a pledge they ought entirely to trust to, and that I would
never have accepted the title of Protector of their Liberty to become
instrumental to the loss of it.

Answer was made that they should have no suspicion nor distrust of me, were I
not born a Frenchman, but that they had reason to apprehend all from a person
that must prefer the interests of his Country above all other concernments. I
answered them, that what they doubted was not the interest of my Country, but
however that I embraced none but theirs: the Oath I so solemnly made at my
acceptance of the command of their Armies having discharged me from all others,
making me cease to be any longer a Frenchman and become a Neapolitan, of which
they needed not doubt, since I did it not without the permission and order of
my King, who then discharged me of what I owed to him by his approbation of my
engaging my self in their service. One of the most mutinous persisting to tell
me, that I could not separate my self from my affection to my Country, where I
had my Birth, I replied I was born in the Felucca that brought me to Naples,
beyond which I took cognizance of nothing. This answer being unexpected so
agreeably surprised them, and was so welcomely received, that they made a great
shout, and cried out altogether that they would live and die with me, and
resolved never to acknowledge any other Master.

From thence I went to the Carmelites, where I found Gennaro, who astonished at
my good fortune, and looking on himself as without support or party, waited
for me at the Church-gate; well informed of all that had passed at Saint
Lawrence, Saint Austins, and the Marketplace: He fell on his Knees before me
to beg pardon, beseeching me to grant him the advantages I had offered him
overnight, and casting his staff at my feet, which I ordered him to reassume
in quality of my Lieutenant, made a renunciation of his power before public
Notaries, which we both of us signed on the rail of the high Altar, causing the
chief of those that were present to sign also as witnesses, after which Te Deum
was sung, and we heard Mass together; at his desire I caused an instrument to
be drawn up of all the Privileges and Advantages I had granted him, and with a
thousand acclamations and shouts of joy, returned into the Convent, and carried
him to Dine with me in my apartment. At the end of which Mazillo Caracciolo,
representing that the Kings breed of Horses was entirely ruined, I gave him
order to return all Mares that had been taken away, in which I was so
punctually obeyed that very few were lost, and that they might be afterward
preserved with greater authority, I made him Master of the Horse, a charge time
out of mind possessed by those of his family, and particularly by the Marquis
of Saint Erasmo his Uncle, which afterward obliged him to be more assiduous
about my person. I then sent for Angustino Mollo a famous advocate, and great
friend of the Nobility, having managed the affairs of the principal of them,
and ordered him to give them notice of all these good successes, of the arrival
of the Fleet, and that they should now have the satisfaction of making no
addresses but to me alone, who had the absolute authority and might call my
self Master, that therefore they needed no longer apprehend the insolences of
the rabble, having in me a Protector not only powerful but so great a friend
to their Interests. After this I caused Letters to be written to all parts of
the Kingdom, and Manifests to be sent to all the Provinces, with such success,
that very shortly after, in a manner all the Towns, except such as had
Garrisons, sent to assure me of their obedience, and expressed extraordinary
Joy, that they were to own no other authority but mine, which I took all the
care imaginable to render just and acceptable, studying to oblige every body,
and acquire a general esteem and affection, in which I had very happy success.

I caused to be prepared a great present, composed of all manner of
refreshments, and whatever could be found in a great, rich and proud City, that
had yet for some Months suffered by Revolutions and War, with which twelve
Felucca's were laden, to send to those that commanded the Kings Fleet, with
account of the present condition of Naples, the renunciation made to me by
Gennaro of his authority, my establishment in it by the general consent of the
people, and the title that had been given me of the Duke of the Republic, with
that of Protector of its Liberty, and Generalissimo of its Armies; on which
account I could no longer doubt but the Fleet was to receive my Orders, since
the Abbot Basqui had assured me, they were to be received from no other but
such a person as should be head of the people, and absolute master of the Town;
that this discourse obliged me to attempt what I had so happily effected, and
to establish my authority on the ruins of that of Gennaro.

The Sieur de Taillade, to whom I had given his Commission, was also to make my
Complements to the Generals and all particular Officers, and to press in my
name the landing all such succors as two or three days before I had agreed on
with the said Abbot Baschi; but I was forced to defer his departure by the
Fleets removal out of sight of the Town to burn, as it did, five ships of the
enemy that rid at anchor under Castelamare, the Commanders seeking by this
little action, to efface the shame of not having at their first arrival taken
or destroyed the whole Fleet of Spain, as they might easily and without hazard
have done, if they had pleased: which would have put an end to all, and
compelled the Viceroy and all the Spaniards to yield to discretion, being
generally unprovided of all things, and after so considerable a loss out of
possibility of receiving any succors from abroad. They now shipped what men
they could, and weighing anchor went to fight the French, who had wilfully
neglected to conquer them when they were in no condition to defend themselves:
in fine the fight began which lasted five or six hours, but without any
considerable advantage on either side, nothing being done but firing their
Canon without boarding, of which I will not trouble my self to make the
recital, its particulars being known, and I resolved to relate nothing but what
I am my self concerned in. The Spaniards retreated, one part of them to shelter
themselves under Castello de l' Ovo, and the other to anchor in the Haven of
Baia.

As soon as the Kings Fleet returned within sight, I sent the Sieur de Taillade
to acquit himself of the Commission I had given him, and demand in my name the
forty thousand weight of Powder had been promised me, with the rest of the
Ammunition, the landing eighteen hundred foot, such of the Queens Guards and
Regiment of Monsieur de Manicamp, as they had given me hope of, to mount on
horseback, and for reception of the ten pieces of Canon, for which I had caused
Ponts to be made at the point of Posilippe. All these things they consented to,
but performed not. I also encharged him to desire the Generals and chief
Officers of the Fleet to come ashore where I would entertain them at Dinner, to
confer with them of all such things as we were to do by consent, especially
of an attacque upon the Spaniards who had not forces sufficient to man all
their forts; so that either they must abandon their ships, or else would become
so weak in both places by dividing their power, that they must necessarily
loose the day, with their Fleet and all they were possessed of in the Town, if
by Sea and Land we fell upon them at one and the same time. But as Land conduct
must be regulated with respect to Sea affairs, which depend on the wind, I
would expect a signal from the Fleet, and be in a readiness to fall on as soon
as I saw it prepare for fight.

The Sieur de Taillade returned with many fair words and promises, of all I had
ordered him to demand in my name, and the Abbot Basqui came to me accompanied
by Father de Juliis, for a more particular regulation of all affairs with me; I
received them joyfully, expecting to find an entire satisfaction in this
Conference, but I discovered that he sought nothing else but pretenses of
complaint against me, and that there was no intention of giving me succors. He
offered to land the troops which I most earnestly desired, but demanding Money
without which they would not only be useless, but altogether prejudicial and
destructive, he answered he had none to give me, because the Bills of Exchange
upon Genoua could not as yet be complied with. I told him if the troops were
landed without Money to pay them, it would be impossible for me to contain them
within the Bounds of Discipline, and that imagining themselves to be in a
conquered Country, and a new War, I should not be able to prevent their
plundering and licentious living, Soldiers being kept in order by punishment
only, which cannot be inflicted when they are unpaied; and that so their
insolence and excesses would not only incite the hatred of the Country
against the French Nation, but having to do with a cruel and outrageous people,
finding themselves ill used by those from whom they expected assistance, they
would cut all their throats and mine amongst the rest, and so we should become
an infallible means of re-establishing the Spanish authority.

To prevent such an inconvenience, I told him I knew very well there was great
gaming, and a great deal of Money in the Fleet, and that it would be easy to
make a purse of two thousand Pistols, with which I would be satisfied in
expectation of greater sums, and that being able to pay the men I demanded
eight or ten days, I would endeavor in that time to drive the Spaniards out of
the Town, and possibly might take one of the three Castles, and by busying all
their forces on Land make them leave their Fleet so disarmed that it might be
all burnt or taken. He answered me, that the Fleet came away in such haste,
that all were in such a manner unprovided, that he could not supply me with so
much as a hundred Pistols, to which I replied, it being so, he needed not think
of landing any troops, since I could well enough subsist without them, and
would have patience till he caused Money to come, without which, in stead of
getting advantage by their landing, I should loose the honor of France,
besides that it would infallibly cost me my life, and procure the enemies such
advantages as they were not in a condition to hope for.

From this answer occasion has been taken to complain of me, and to say, that
I refused the succors were offered me, that I might have no dependence on
France, supposing I could subsist without her. But let such as will take pains
to consider these things without passion judge, whether my comportment, or the
manner wherewith they dealt with me were more blameable.

After this I demanded Powder, and they promised it, and sending Felucca's to
fetch it, they returned them with six and thirty Barrels, thirty of which were
for Gennaro to supply the Carmelites Tower, and only six for me, giving me
hope of the remainder of the forty thousand weight, which I never could
obtain. For Artillery my Ponts were not well enough made to satisfy the
Officers of the Fleet, who said, they could not hazard the Canon in them till
they were mended, which I caused to be done but to no purpose. For Bullets and
Match there was not any more mention made of them.

The Abbot Basqui proposed to me to go aboard the Fleet to speak with the
Generals, which, besides that I could not do it with honor, a Governor never
going out of a place that is besieged, being entrusted with the safety of the
Town, the command of the Garrison, and an authority over the whole Country, it
had neither been handsome nor reasonable, that I should have hazarded the loss
of Naples, whilst a contrary wind might have hindered my return to remedy the
disorders my absence should have caused; the respect of my person and presence
alone maintaining a turbulent and seditious people in duty and obedience. But
had I wanted all these reasons, he made his proposal to me in a fashion so
far from being persuasive, that it tended rather to give me distrust and
jealousy: so that I perceived he had no other end than to do me ill Offices,
by giving out (as he did at his return) that I had not only refused all the
assistances proposed, but that I declined all correspondence and commerce with
the Officers of the Fleet, and he was besides so malicious that he caused me to
be told by Father de Juliis, as a friendly advice, that I should have a care
how I went aboard the Fleet, since there was an order and design to arrest me.
The same father, by the same instigation, gave out, that he had discovered that
I had an intention at the entertainment I would have made at Posilippe, to have
detained the Officers that should have come ashore as hostages, till such time
as they should have given me the assistance I had demanded, and they promised
me; This artifice was made use of to break all Communication between us, by
which we might have discovered all the deceits of this Gallant; and by it I was
sufficiently confirmed in what I well enough understood before, that he was a
Spy and Pensioner of Spain: of which I believe, every man that attentively
considers his comportment is persuaded as well as my self, and judges him
rather to have been a Spanish than French agent, but I have more solid proofs.
For the Nobility sending to know whether the Fleet had order to depend on me,
and that if so, they would declare for us, and I returning answer it had, he
went the same night to Gennaro, to give him assurance they were to obey none
but him, which the next day he published, to ruin my designs, and cause all
the Nobility to re-engage in the service of Spain, rather than become subject
to the insolence and brutality of Gennaro.

One thing happened which had like to have made me loose all patience; two
ships laden with Corn coming to the Spaniards, were taken by our Fleet within
our sight, at which I was extremely glad, believing Heaven had miraculously
sent them to relieve our necessities, but they were carried to Portolongone,
and we put off with slight excuses, and hopes of their return from day to day.
Their malice went yet farther, for the Abbot Baschi telling me the Fleet wanted
Biscuit, and desiring me to furnish them till the arrival of that they expected
from Provence, and with it plenty of Corn for us: though I had but three weeks
Provision, I caused half of it to be baked, which being done and it become in a
manner useless, he left it on my hands, telling me a ship had lately brought
some to the Fleet, so that now they had no occasion for it.

After this he made me a very ridiculous proposition, to give the Protection of
the Kingdom of Naples to the Cardinal of St Cecilia, to which I answered that I
was too great a servant of Cardinal Mazarin his brother, to consent to a thing
so contrary to his honor, which would make him the scorn and table-talk of
Rome, by becoming Protector of a Republic could pass for no other than
chimerical, because as yet but only in Idea. He perverted also this judicious
answer, and made use of it to spread abroad that I was not only the enemy of
France, but of Cardinal Mazarin and his Family.

Vincenzo Andrea, a close adherent to Spain, conspired with him to lay a snare
for me, which I presently discovered and avoided; it was that to show the
absolute establishment of my authority, I ought to coin Money, and not suffer
that of the King of Spain to be any longer current, that so they might render
useless the little Money I could make my self master of. I seemed to approve
this advice, and caused some Silver and Copper to be coined, but with this
precaution, that in a thousand Crowns not above fifty bore the stamp of the
Republic, the rest that of Spain, but with a date of the former year: On which
account they sought to prejudice me, but my reasons appeased a little tumult
that was raised on this occasion, and thought it best to forbear a vanity that
might put us in a condition of starving.

They sought to bring another inconvenience upon me, from which I freed my self
with resolution and vigor. Gennaro followed by a numerous rabble came
tumultuously to demand of me the pardon of Michael de Santis, who was very much
beloved in the town, for the agreeable service he had done the multitude,
during the first tumults, in cutting off the head of Dom Pepe Caraffa, and
causing his body to be dragged about the Streets, representing to me, that if I
put him to death, it would be thought that I sacrificed him to the resentments
of the Nobility, for whom I should express so great an affection that it would
make the people despair. I answered that his punishment was important toward
the supporting my authority, his temerity and insolence having been too
excessive and public to be passed by. He told me his pardon was sought by them
all, and that the refusal of a request they were so zealous in would cause a
general insurrection. I replied, that I was not of an humor to be compelled to
any thing, the consequence whereof would be dangerous, that I would accustom
the people to bear me more respect, and come on their knees to beg such
Graces as they sought of me, and not fancy they should oblige me to a
condescension by fear; that this too bold proceeding should hasten his death,
contrary to my intention, for if they had gone to work more moderately, and
with greater respect, I would have given them his life. That I valued not
tumults, having credit and resolution enough to appease them, continue the Town
in its duty, and cause such to be punished as went about to make any commotion,
and that if I heard but the least murmuring, I would cause the Gallowses of the
Marketplace to be furnished with the most violent and mutinous. That they
should learn to know me better, and the manner of applying themselves to me,
and calling one of my Guards, I, in their hearing, commanded him to carry order
to Bernardo Spirito, the Auditor general, to cause Michael de Santis to be
confessed, and immediately after executed on the Highway that goes to Aversa,
and to set up a Post there, and place his head upon it, and hang his body by
one foot on a tree, with an inscription that I had caused him to die as a
person seditious and bloody, a disobeyer of my orders and contemner of my
authority. This was punctually executed to the great satisfaction of the
Nobility, whose affection for me was much increased by the exact performance of
my promise, and my care to revenge and content them, after which dismissing
those that came to plead for him with so much insolence and imprudence, I rid
up and down the Town to see what effect the menaces had been made me might
produce; but I found the same testimonies of affection and respect that were
usual, without any man's daring to complain or open his mouth on this occasion.

A while after the Abbot Baschi visited Gennaro, whom he thought incensed by
the little value I had for him and his intercession, and consulting with him
the means of ruining me, promised him in order to it the assistance of France,
and the re-establishment of his Authority. They admitted none to this secret
Conference but Tonno Basso, and some others of their adherents, with Doctor
Francisco Pati, a man of whom they had no jealousy, who at Rome without my
privity, two days before my departure, agreed with Monsieur de Fontenay to have
rendered the Kingdom of Naples tributary to France, and had ever after held a
secret correspondence with him.

About five next Morning the said Francisco de Pati came to demand audience of
me, and casting himself on his Knees at my bedside, gave me account of all
particulars that had passed between Gennaro and the Abbot Baschi, what he had
negotiated with Monsieur de Fontenay, and generally all the secrets of their
correspondence, of which he promised me punctual advertisement for the future,
desiring, in recompense of this important service, the charge of President in
the Chamber of accounts: The Abbot Basqui coming to visit me at my rising, I
told him I was very much surprised at the manner of his proceeding, which could
be no other if he were paid by the Spaniards, and intended their service. At
this he was out of countenance and changed color, and began to enter upon many
justifications, with a thousand protestations of affection and service; to
which I replied, that he should not deceive me by fair words, that though I
acknowledged him to have great abilities, he came short of that; and was of too
heavy a Phisiognomie to overreach me, that though I believed he had studied
Machiavel, if I entered into competition of wit with him, it should be with so
refined Politics, that I would in two hours give him such Commentaries, as he
should not interpret with ten years study. He told me he understood nothing of
all this discourse, which I was willing to explain to him, by declaring that I
had notice of his most secret intrigues, his negotiations with Gennaro, and
their designs against my authority, liberty and life, which he impudently
attempted to deny. But he was altogether out of countenance, when I gave him
the particulars of all that had passed, of the means they intended to use for
putting their intentions in execution, and nominated to him all persons that
had knowledge of this plot; he seemed very much disturbed, yet fortified
himself on the negative, but was entirely confounded when I declared to him
that I was informed of all these things by Francisco de Pati, and told him the
recompense I had given him for so eminent a service, and that if he desired it,
I would send for him to justify all to his face. His speech failed him, and he
was ^o possessed by fear, that he thought his life at an end, but I recovered him
by assurance that I bore so great respect to his Character of the Kings Agent,
that whatsoever he had attempted against me, in stead of resentments he should
receive from me all manner of Civilities and Services. That I would oblige him
to acknowledge that I had greater zeal, passion and fidelity for the service of
France than himself, since his endeavors tended all to the re-establishing the
Spaniards, and ruining an enterprise so advantageous to the Crown, by
contriving the destruction of the most zealous, faithful and disinteressed
servant it ever had, and that in despite of all his malicious artifices I would
continue such, resolved to sacrifice my life for its advantages and glory: that
I was assured so infamous proceedings would be disavowed, and that it was not
by the Courts orders that he acted in such a manner: and that there was no need
to have recourse to so extraordinary ways for overthrowing my fortune, and
opposing my establishment, for if the Court had any distrust of me, or would
not have me continue any longer at Naples, on the first order signed by his
Majesty, or the least ticket under the hand of Cardinal Mazarin, I would go
away without contest, to give account of my actions, preferring the glory of
obeying and complying with my duty, to the highest and most solid establishment
I could expect from Fortune. He was sorry to find me so submissive, because he
wanted a pretense to prejudice me: but having dealt so ill with me, he was
careful not to give a true account of my conduct; but on the contrary did me
all the ill offices he possibly could, to prevent my being assisted, and
causing me to be abandoned by all, so to hasten the ruin of a person he had
too highly offended to expect any pardon, and that would ever be an
irreproachable witness of his infidelity to France.

He continued two days in Naples after this, in which he neglected not the
pursuit of his designs, as will appear by the remainder of this discourse. He
plotted to cause me to be killed in a popular commotion, and agreed of all
circumstances of doing it, with Vincenzo Andrea, and others of that Cabal;
would have me looked on as the tyrant of Naples, rather than as the restorer of
her Liberty, and in case he failed in this, which he thought the handsomest way
of doing it, that so he might seem unconcerned in an accident, which would be
attributed only to the fury of an outrageous and tumultuous multitude, he
resolved, casting off his mask, to cause me to be poniarded by a conspiracy of
seventeen persons, the heads of whom were Tonno Basso, Salvator de Gennaro, and
Petro Damico; persuading them that as an enemy of France I was the cause the
people received no succors from thence, which would supply all their wants
abundantly as soon as it should have knowledge of my death, and that without
this the Fleet had order to abandon them. I had some jealousy of this plot,
and engaged two persons, who seeming very much dissatisfied and animated
against me, had admittance into all their assemblies, and gave me punctual
advertisement of all resolutions that were taken.

That very night they drew a great many people into arms in the Marketplace,
and sent a like number into the Carmelites Cloister where I lodged, and I was
surprised to see (whilst I was in conference with the Abbot Baschi) the
Magistrates of the Town and Council come in, who demanded to speak with me of
an affair of the highest consequence for the public good. Vincenzo Andrea
having met them as if by accident, Tonno Basso was their spokesman, a man
eloquent, hot headed, and violent. He told me the people had satisfaction in my
conduct, with a very great sense of the extraordinary services I had rendered
them; but the establishment of a Republic being so necessary, he besought me
to lay the first foundations; That I should continue the quality of Duke, and
General of their Forces, with the title of Protector of their Liberty, which I
had so well deserved, but that it was time to form a Senate, without whose
advice and deliberation nothing should be acted or undertaken; for whilst the
whole authority was in my person alone, I seemed either a King or a tyrant;
that the jealousy of this would draw upon me the hatred of all men, because it
would look as if I had rather a design to enslave the City and Kingdom than to
deliver them from Captivity.

This captious discourse surprised, but did not astonish me, and caused me in
an instant to recollect all that my intellect could furnish me withal, which
was augmented by the necessity of immediately freeing my self from so dangerous
and slippery a precipice, there being much to be apprehended on either side,
since if I refused what was so pressingly demanded of me, I could not escape
death by discovering an intention to become a tyrant, and if I yielded to what
was desired I should afterward be but a shadow without credit and without
power. All had their eyes fixed on me, expecting my resolution with impatience,
not imagining that being so unprepared, I could take any advantageous to me,
nor avoid a danger so evident, and in a manner one and the same to which side
soever I inclined. I answered them smiling, that I thought my self extremely
happy, in that the services I had hitherto endeavored to render the people
were acceptable, but that my satisfaction was redoubled, to see the passion
with which they endeavored to form themselves into a Republic; that they
might recollect that I was the first proposer of this manner of Government, and
which I most earnestly desired to see effected as the most advantageous
resolution we could take. That to this no man alive should be more forward,
because on its establishment depended the repose and liberty of the Country.
That we were seriously to consult and act in order toward it, but that all
Europe, and Rome especially, having their eyes upon us, we ought to proceed
with so much justice and reason, that at least we might not become ridiculous,
great affairs depending much on reputation, which ought in such a manner to be
husbanded, that nothing might be done from which the enemy should derive
advantage, who would carefully observe all our steps, to make use of all our
failings, which could not be slight, our safety or ruin depending on our good
or evil conduct; That there were several sorts of Republics, and that we ought
very seriously to consider, before we made our choice, which of them would be
most advantageous to us, and most suitable to the humor and disposition of the
Country. That popular Government had something pleasing, but was not without
defects; That both Town and Country were certainly most inclined to it, but yet
the Kingdom of Naples numerous in Nobility, generous and haughty, and that had
hitherto had so great a share in the Government, I held it very dangerous to
exclude them, because despair reconciling them to the Spanish interests, we
should not without a great deal of difficulty resist their united powers; That
their number being so great we could neither drive them all out, nor destroy
them; That none of them were without many friends and dependants, by whose
means they would cause dangerous divisions amongst us, and give birth to so
many disturbances as entire ages would not be able to overcome; That despairing
people are to be feared above all other, who would leave nothing unattempted
for preservation of their honors, lives and estates, that we were to fight
against a renewing Hydra, That I could not discern what should oblige us to
precipitate our selves into so many perils, not only difficult but impossible
to be mastered, which would draw on the enmity of Rome, which we ought
seriously to consider, because in a Government where the Pope was the supreme
Lord, a general subversion could not be made without his participation and
consent, which we should never obtain, by the opposition would be made by the
Interest of some of the Nobility, nearly allied to several of the most powerful
Cardinals, and principal Lords of that Court; That this manner of Republic
would never suit with us, it being more reasonable to weaken the Spaniards than
fortify them with those whose valor and consideration made up all their
power, and who no less weary than our selves of their cruel dominion, would
have no other thoughts (when safely they might) then to act conjoyntly with us
toward repose and liberty, and employ against those that equally oppressed us,
their lives and fortunes to free themselves from the tyranny they had so many
years languished under. That therefore I thought we ought to endeavor to
regain the Nobility, by letting them understand they may find advantage and
security with us.

My reasons were applauded by all, and all granted they were not to be excluded
from the Government, and that a popular Commonwealth by the difficulty of its
establishment, would hasten our destruction. I told them there appeared to me
no less inconvenience, should it consist of the Nobility only, who would
tyrannize the people, having too fresh a remembrance of the outrages received,
seeing its hands yet stained with the blood of their Relations; That they would
never forget the plundering their goods, burning their houses, and laying waste
their Lands, but would employ the credit and authority should be settled on them
in particular revenges, That in this manner the Spaniards might indeed be
ruined, but the people would acquire only Chains in stead of the Liberty
pretended to, and be treated with greater cruelty than they had ever been by
the enemies, for whom they had so great horror and aversion. They all cried
out with one voice that this would be so far from giving ease, that it would
add to their sufferings, and was therefore to be no more mentioned; but that
they should settle in the choice of a mixed Republic, in which the Nobility and
People should have equal authority. I answered that I saw yet many
difficulties, because we could not of our selves take a resolution of
establishing it, without first consulting the Nobility, having first separated
them from the Spaniards, and reunited them with us, it being unjust (Heaven
having bestowed upon them so many advantages above the people) that the people
should give them the Law, and without them form a Government, in which they
ought to have the best share. That therefore before any thing were concluded
on, we ought to give them notice of what we were about to do, that their
interests might oblige them to come and give their opinions in an affair in
which they were principally concerned.

They then told me that as Duke of the Republique I should write to summon them
to come and deliberate of the Government we were to set up, and to consider
together the readiest and securest ways for restoring Peace and Liberty to the
whole Country. I am ready, said I, to do all that you shall order me on this
occasion, but I foresee ill consequences upon this resolution, which may
become troublesome to you, and which I hold my self obliged to represent, that
you may not hereafter reproach me to have brought upon you such inconveniences
as I shall have much ado to free you from; We shall give the Nobility too great
presumption by addressing our selves to them as necessary: all of that body
will believe we distrust our selves, as unable to resist our enemies, unless
supported by their valor and authority, and so supposing we cannot be without
them, they will hold the Knife at our throat, and exact such conditions as we
cannot with honor, nor ought not to grant them, of which the refusals
exasperating them against us, will more straightly unite them with our enemies,
whilst they imagine us at the point of destruction.

My opinion therefore is that a Manifest be published, by which I will declare,
that having been chosen Duke of the Republique, I with open Arms attend all
such as will have recourse to me: that this title as well as that of Protector
of their Liberty, as straightly engages me to the interests of the Nobility as
people, That I have a like consideration for them, yet with respect to the
distinctions of their Births and Qualities, and like a good Father, though I
tenderly love all my Children, put a difference between the rest and him that
has the Privilege of Eldership; In this manner I invite all to apply
themselves to me, resolved to treat them according to their different merits,
and give to all, in the establishment I intend of a Republic, the Qualities
and Advantages that Descent and Virtue ought to regulate, so imposing
conditions upon such as present themselves, in stead of receiving any from
them; And as the Nobility are to be looked upon in three several
Considerations, we on like manner must govern our selves in several manners;
There are some Gentlemen that have lived well with this City and with their
Tenants, and that by their discreet Comportment have gained the general esteem
and affection, we cannot do too much toward the advantages and good usage of
such; there are others that have gained the affection of the people of Naples,
and yet wracked and tyrannised their tenants, such must be obliged to change
conduct, and a good understanding must be made between them and their tenants,
lest by gaining the former we loose the latter, and interposing my authority,
must engage them to a punctual performance of what shall be promised on either
side; The third sort alike odious as well in their own Country as the City, by
reason of a continued violent and outrageous Comportment, are not nevertheless
to be excluded from all hopes of pardon, for that would of necessity compel
them to an inseparable Conjunction with our enemies; it will therefore be
better to oblige them to absent themselves for a time, leaving to them the
enjoyment of their estates, not recalling them till they have suffered a kind
of banishment, for expiation of their faults, which shall be longer or shorter
according to the probability of their amendment.

Every part of this discourse had its applause, and I was besought to act
conformably to it as speedily as could be possible. I undertook it, but
represented that it would require some time, precipitation rather ruining than
advancing affairs of this nature. Tonno Basso, having as the rest, approved my
discourse, told me, there was nothing more just nor reasonable: but as the
establishment of a Republic must necessarily be a work of time^ he thought it
necessary to begin immediately to form a Senate; I smiled at this and gave him
to understand, that a Senate being the body of a Republic, the establishing
the one was no less than the establishing the other, That we were first to
consider in what manner it ought to be regulated, of what number of Senators
it should consist, and how many from every Province; whether every Town should
have one, and how many the City of Naples, with a thousand other things that
could not be determined on a sudden; and besides that, he knew that to lay the
lightest tax upon the Country, the Votes of the Peers and Towns were necessary,
that that of Naples alone consisted of six Chambers of the Nobility, and thirty
two Ottines of the People, without which it was imperfect; That to deliberate
on an affair of the present importance, such a general assembly was much more
necessarily to be called, which for the present was absolutely impossible to us.

He could not deny what I had said, and therefore propounded to make
Vice-Senators for the present; I told him it had never been heard of to
confer the exercise of such charges as were not in nature; but that I
perceived (judging me incapable to govern without Council) all his discourse
tended to no other end than to form me one, by which he most sensibly obliged
me, since I loved not to stand security for successes, and was very glad to
have others to ease me, and capable of giving me good advice. That we should
therefore consider the number first of this body, and who should nominate them,
and to avoid all dispute about words, let them if they pleased make use of that
of Vice-Senators; but that it was to be feared lest the Kingdom would not
submit to the authority of such as should be nominated only by the City, and
without their participation, and that Naples would not loose the prerogative of
being the first, every Town pretending particularly to make it self an
independent Republic, and only confederate with it. All which I spoke not
without grounds, having in my Pocket two Letters which I showed them, the one
subscribed the Republic of Saint Severino, and the other the Republic of la
Cava.

They all began to murmr and cry out, I had very much reason, but Tonno Basso
growing hot and obstinate in his opinion, I once again demanded of him, who
were these Vice-Senators to be, and who was to nominate them; He answered me
impatiently, that they which represented the body of the Council ought to make
this nomination; I told him I thought it more reasonable to be done by the
Magistrates of the Town, and the Captains of the Quarters. He replied, not
without transport, that the Magistrates of the Town were not to meddle with
affairs of such a nature, their authority extending no farther than to regulate
the price of Provisions, and maintain Plenty. I admire, said I, that you
dispute the power of those from whom you derive your own; you have been
nominated to assist and serve Gennaro as a Council, because of his incapacitie,
and his employment being at an end yours is so in like manner; we are now upon
a matter of greater importance, and our business is to enquire whether the
Magistrates will make new nominations, or by confirming you, design you to the
employments in question. The dispute grew hot between the Council and the
Magistrates of the Town, to such a height that had it not been for the
interposal of my authority they had doubtlessly come from words to blows. They
besought me to put an end to their difference and to regulate their
pretensions, I told them I held my self incapable of determining a matter so
important, and that I might disoblige none, I would have the Magistrates of the
Town on one side, and such as pretended themselves of the Council on the other
side, give their Reasons in writing to four of the ablest Lawyers, who, well
versed in the Customs of the Country, what was practiced before it was a
Kingdom, or in the instant of some Revolutions, as that which happened a
hundred years before about the inquisition, having well studied the case,
should give me their opinions, which I would afterward determine, since each
of them had referred themselves to me; to this they agreed, and I nominated to
this effect John Camillo Caracciolo, Antonio Scacciavento, Augustino Mollo and
Aniello Porcio: I then demanded in whose hands the authority should reside in
the mean time? They all replied, in yours. Of whom then shall I receive
Council, said I, for I will not govern without it, not esteeming my self
sufficiently capacitated for it? you need it not, they replied, for you
understand more than all of us. I excused my self, telling them, that having to
do with a people diffident and hardly to be satisfied, I would not expose my
self to their displeasure, nor give them jealousy of my authority, besides
that I could not my self alone support the burden of so many and great
affairs, that I came amongst them to serve them without any ambition of
commanding, longer then I should be acceptable to them, or in any other manner
than should stand with their good liking, and that rather than suffer perpetual
disquiet by continual jealousies that had no foundation, I would retire, and
therefore desired my Pass while the Fleet was in a condition for my
re-imbarking, there were immediately outcries in the Room where we were,
afterward in the Halls, and then in the Marketplace, That the people were
lost if I abandoned them, that they neither had hope nor confidence in any
else, that they desired not that I should take advice of any body standing in
no need of it; and to conclude, that they would obey none but me, and that I
should command as Sovereign, since they owned me for their Master.

I pacified all by complying with the pleasure of so many people, and the
better to discover their thoughts appointed all to assemble the next Morning in
their several Quarters, where I intended to go to learn them.

The Abbot Basqui, after his leaving my lodging, had conference with the
Conspirators, who being enraged to have failed of their design, and to see with
what address I had avoided so dangerous a snare as they had laid for me, and
that my authority was the more confirmed, and themselves entirely excluded from
the part they pretended in the Government, met in a Church to resolve of
poniarding me: but not coming to a result either of the time or place for
executing their enterprise, they referred their conference to the night
following: And in the Morning the Abbot Basqui coming to take his leave of me,
that he might return to the Fleet, there to expect the success of his
Conspiracy, not thinking himself safe in Naples, where my power would not be
able to prevent his being torn in pieces by the people, his design failing, and
he discovered to be the author; but I detained him to be a witness of all that
should pass in the Town.

I went through all the Quarters, where having openly declared, what had passed
overnight, and desiring the sense of the people, he was very much surprised to
hear them with one voice declare, that it was their will I should be absolute
Master, and that I should act with Sovereign power, demanding my permission to
take and drag through the Streets all such as pretended to oppose. This was
followed by a general exclamation, that they would never own other authority
than mine, that to make me Duke of their Republic was too far below my
deserts, that they would therefore have me their King. This I opposed as I had
twice done before, and on the same account, threatened to leave them, and ship
my self on the Fleet, if they continued obstinate in that which was so
unreasonable, and out of season. Then calling me their Father, Defender, and
Protector of their Estates, Lives and Families, they with excessive
Testimonies of respect and affection protested to live and die with me, and
that they would neither be sparing of their own blood, nor that of their wives
and children in order to serve me, or advance the least of my Interests.

The Abbot Basqui was amazed at the great esteem I had acquired in so short a
time, and to see all the houses in a moment hung with Tapistry for my Passage,
Flowers, Sweet waters and Comfits cast from the Windows, Cloaks and Tapistry
spread under my Horses feet, Perfumes and Incense burned before me, Men, Women
and Children giving me thousands of Benedictions, and such Testimonies as were
easily discerned to be cordial, and to have nothing of flattery or
dissimulation. He said he could never have believed what he had seen, I desired
him to give a faithful account of it, and to let me understand the intentions
of the Court; telling him that I managed the inclinations of the people at my
pleasure, and that in a short time by my address and diligence I hoped to be
able to put the Crown of Naples on the Kings Head, or he not accepting it, on
his Brothers or Uncles, and I conjured him to speak freely to me, to so
important an affair, since I neither had nor ever should have any other design
than to make those of France effectual whatsoever they might be. He assured me
he had no instruction relating to this particular, and that all that he knew
was that the King pretended nothing more than to see the Spaniards driven out
of Naples; they loosing the Kingdom, it was indifferent to him into what hands
it fell, because he should from that derive a sufficient advantage. I know not
whether he was no better informed of the designs of France, or whether he would
open himself no farther to me, that he might have still pretense to complain of
my conduct; but this is a great truth, that I could neither from him nor any of
the Kings Ministers residing at Rome ever learn in what manner they desired I
should comport my self. So that they neither can nor ought with justice to
blame my actions, which they would never regulate.

His fear that I might comply with the Officers of the Fleet, and give them
particular informations of all, obliged him with all possible care to prevent
the landing of the Gentleman the Duke of Richelieu sent to complement me, to
which purpose he caused him to be most sollicitously detained aboard another
ship, that he might not return to the Admiral till the Fleet was ready to set
sail, which evinces that it was not my fault that I had no correspondence with
the officers, which I earnestly desired.

They sent me word that for want of water they should be forced to set sail, if
I provided them not, wherefore I presently sent them eight Felucca's to fetch
it, but this number being thought insufficient, they took so slight a pretense
to go for Portolongone, having done no other thing but exposed me to a thousand
dangers, from which, I may safely say, I escaped not without a Miracle, and had
I not before established an extraordinary confidence in the people, I should
have been torn in an hundred pieces, when they found themselves frustrated of
all the succors I had given them cause to hope, with so great probability, for
which I was security, yet there remained now no more but my person alone to
assist them.

This powerful Fleet would not contribute to the destruction of Spain, which
had been infallible by taking or burning all its ships, which at its arrival
were found at anchor, unarmed, and unmasted; consumed half my Provisions
uselessly, and if I may be a^lowed to say it, maliciously; took two ships laden
with Corn in my sight, and sent them to Portolongone, refused me the little
Money I demanded for causing those troops to subsist, whose landing I pressed
with so much importunity, furnished me with no more but six Barrels of Powder,
and gave me no manner of assistance but by the arrival of the Knight de
Fourbin, the Baron de la Guard, the Knight of Gent, Souillac, de Glandeveze,
Baron Durand, Saint Maximin, afterward Quartermaster of my Guards, and
Beauregard an Officer belonging to the Artillery, and used all possible
endeavors to prevent the coming of these to me. I leave it to be judged if an
other man, seeing himself so wretchedly abandoned, would not have lost all
courage as well as all hope? And whether I stood not in need of an
extraordinary resolution to resist so spightful a fortune, and of as great
address to secure my self from so apparent dangers? Notwithstanding all which,
this deplorable condition renewed my vigor, and seeing that all depended on my
person, I employed my self with so much care and fervency, that I did not only
avoid my own ruin, but came very near causing that of the Spaniards, which will
appear to such as attentively read the remainder of these Memoires, whose
verities are so extraordinary they will to many seem fabulous.

I sent next Morning for the Magistrates of the Town, and those which till then
had formed the body of a Council, and told them I had intelligence that some
amongst them conspired against my life, and had by night assembled themselves
in a Church to deliberate on such an attempt; That being unwilling to dip my
hands in blood, I pardoned them with all my heart, conditionally that they
repented, and took a different conduct, but if they obstinately persisted in
that wicked design, they should feel the effects of my justice and rigor, since
they neglected those of my goodness and clemency; with the assurance I gave
them not only to blot out of my memory so detestable a design, but neither to
affect nor value them the less for the future; All were surprised at so great a
moderation, those that were guilty said little, the rest beseeched me to
nominate and punish them severely, they being unworthy of pardon; and that if
my goodness permitted me not to do it, I should leave them to the people, whose
severity would terrify all persons capable of such treacheries, and that such
an example was due to the public, in whose name they conjured me to it on
their Knees, I answered that if the Confederates in so black a resolution had
any honor left, they would be moved by my Clemency, and become affectionate
and faithful to me, but if they persisted they would tire my patience, and I
should cause them to be punished according to their deserts.

The night following they met again in another Church to consult a second time
on their enterprise. The next Morning I sent for the same persons, and told
them the same things I had done the day before, that their ingratitude had
wearied me, and having pardoned them twice, if they a third time fell into the
same fault, nothing in the World should be capable to secure them from my just
revenge; In stead of altering their design, they contented themselves to change
the place of their meeting, of which having notice, I instantly sent Officers
of my Guard to secure them, and two of the seventeen, for so many they were,
demanding to be brought to me, that they might declare the whole Conspiracy, I
sent for them, where casting themselves at my feet, they begged their lives,
and gave me account of all they knew.

By their Confession I was informed that the Abbot Basqui had told them I was
an enemy to the Crown of France, that I came to Naples not only without its
participation, but contrary to its orders, and that I was the cause the people
received no supplies, that for this only reason the Fleet had neither landed
Men, Ammunition, nor Artillery, and sent to Portolongone the two ships laden
with Corn, that had been taken in sight of the Town. That others were ready to
be sent from Provence with all manner of Supplies, as soon as they should have
rid France of an enemy and rebel, and their City of a Tyrant, who under
pretense of procuring them Repose and Liberty, endeavored nothing but to gain
credit amongst them, that he might afterward the more easily oppress them, and
obtain the supreme authority: That desire to be assisted with all things
necessary to drive away the Spaniards, made them resolve to remove the only
obstacle, that deprived them of the support and protection of France; that
their despair, by seeing themselves abandoned; and the assurance of receiving
all manner of supplies in abundance, had caused them to swear my destruction
and undertake to poniard me. That there were seventeen in the Conspiracy, but
that Tonno Basso, Salvator de Gennaro, and Petro d' Amico were the most
violent, and the heads of the enterprise; That there was besides these a Priest
called Camillo Todino, and a Notary called Caldedino, naming afterward all the
rest, which I remember not, it being so long ago; but that for themselves they
ever abominated this action, concealing their own thoughts to discover those of
others, and afterward to give me account of all; that I might remember I had
ordered them to seem dissatisfied with me, and to engage amongst such as were
suspected to be ill affected. I did not only pardon, but acknowledged my self
obliged to them, for freeing me from so great a danger, which in time and place
convenient I would remember and reward. I then caused Paper and Ink to be
brought them, and commanded them to write down what they had declared to me,
and subscribe it: after which I sent them Prisoners to the Vicary, and ordered
the Auditor general to take the examinations of the rest, and to confront them
with those two which I had pardoned, putting them on the Rack only for forms
sake, to make their depositions authentic, according to the custom of the
Country. The Confederates being all presented to them, reproched by their
Consciences, they neither made an absolute denial, nor entire Confession.
Account was brought me of all that had passed, and considering the consequence
of this affair, and that these wretches would not fail to introduce France into
their Confessions, and impute to its orders that which proceeded only from the
malice and disloyalty of the Abbot Basqui, I commanded the Auditor General to
give the Heads of the Conspiracy the torture ordinary and extraordinary, and
when they began to confess, cause the Notary, and other Officers of Justice, to
avoid the room, and write their Depositions with his own hand, that they might
be kept secret, so to conceal from the people all they should say of France,
which might produce some bad effect, by the pretense that she was concerned in
this dishonorable action, so contrary to the humor and customs of that
Country, and of which the Abbot Baschi was the only author, being capable of
and accustomed to the like villainies, and having undertook this to serve Spain
advantangeously, by disp^raging France to the Neapolitans, and making her
suspected of authorizing an assassination, in which she was no ways concerned.
Tonno Basso at first seemed constant under the torture, but pressed by violence
of pain, and more by remorse of Conscience, he from point to point confirmed
the depositions of the two persons I had pardoned, and added many very
considerable circumstances, and amongst others, that in one of the Convents of
the Jacobins, in the Chamber of a Doctor he named, they should find a Manifest
he had drawn up to publish as soon as I should have been poniarded in
Justification of the action, and to make it appear necessary, and undertaken
only in order to the service of France, and advantages of their Country, which
could on no other account obtain such succors as were necessary for acquiring
Repose, Liberty, and Enfranchisement from the oppression of the Spaniards; And
that having acted on no other account but that of affection to his Country, it
must needs have been glorious to have taken away the life of a tyrant and
disturber of the public quiet. I sent presently to seek this Manifest which
was brought me, to the same sense and in the same manner expressed as he had
told us. The depositions of the rest of the Conspirators were conformable, but
to avoid effusion of so much blood, I exposed none but the three Chiefs to the
rigor of Justice, causing the rest to be detained in Prison, till I got
opportunity of banishing, and sending them by Sea out of the Kingdom; The Wives
and Relations of the condemned came with their hair disheveled, and tearing
their faces with their nails, according to the custom of the Country, to move
me to compassion, and cast themselves at my feet to beg their pardons, which I
refused and could not have made good, though I had inclined to it, the people
were so incensed against them; and having reiterated their attempts two or
three days together, without obtaining any thing, they at last besought me that
execution might not be made in public. I seemed unwilling to grant this, and
suffered my self to be a while importuned to it, though I had before resolved
it, to prevent their publishing at their death, (what the Abbot Baschi had
falsely informed them of) that I was an enemy to France, and the cause she sent
no supplies, and that it was for her service, and with her participation that
they had undertaken to poniard me; which I knew to be false, and was unwilling
it should be believed, or indeed suspected. As soon as their heads were cut off
they were set upon Posts in the Marketplace, and their bodies hung naked by
one foot, the ordinary punishment of Traitors, with inscriptions importing that
they had been executed as murderers, disturbers of the public quiet, and
Conspirators against me. This cruel Spectacle was very satisfactory to the
people, and their joy was no less to see me delivered from so great peril,
which gave them so much horror and apprehension, as redoubled their affection
and kindness for me.

After this I dispatched the Sieur de Taillade to Court, to give account of
such Negotiations as I had gone through, of the posture in which I had put all
affairs, of the demands I had made of such succors as the Fleet might have
provided me with, of which I had received an absolute refusal; of the ill
comportment of the Abbot Basqui, of the convincing proofs I had that in stead
of serving France, he had done nothing else but support the interests of Spain,
and endeavor my particular ruin as well as that of Naples, and the Country
depending on it, of the Commotions he had incited to destroy me, of the
artifices he used for attaining his end, of the ridiculous proposal he made me
concerning the Cardinal of St Cecilia, of his obstructing the Reconciliation
with the Nobility; and in fine, of his Conspiracy for killing me, with the
Cause I had to complain of my successless endeavors toward a correspondence
with the Officers of the Fleet, the want of which was maliciously imputed to
me, as well as the omission they made at their arrival of destroying the
Spanish Fleet, which might have been effected with as much ease as little
danger, last of all I mentioned their abandoning me after they had consumed
half my Provisions, without supplying me with one grain of the lading of two
Vessels of Corn, they took from the enemy in my sight, which had incensed the
people to the height of rage, and would have caused me to have been miserably
massacred, had I not been possessed of so great a credit amongst them, that I
could assure my self to continue our affairs without falling into a worse
condition, till the return of the Fleet: That I besought Cardinal Mazarin, on
whose Friendship and Protection I thought I might securely depend, to dispatch
immediately to me considerable supplies of Corn, Men, Money, Artillery, and
Ammunition, without which it was impossible for me to subsist any longer; but
if I might receive them I would engage to render the King services more
important than were expected from me, and in a short time deprive Spain of the
Crown of Naples. I gave him very exact Instructions of all he was to negotiate
on my behalf with the said Lord Cardinal, and my Relations, whom I encharged
him to press to supply me with Money, as speedily and largely as was possible,
because on it depended my safety or ruin. Above all I commanded him to
solicit Cardinal Mazarin to send Instructions how I was to comport my self,
that I might not fail of observing his Orders, and testifying by a blind
obedience, my fidelity, zeal and respect for the Crown of France. I ordered him
to pass by Rome to communicate all things with Monsieur de Fontenay, and
deliver him my Letters.

In the Christmas Holy Days the Banditi I have formerly mentioned, encouraged
by the hope I had given them of taking Aversa, and presence of the Army, fought
with greater vigor and to better purpose. The Spaniards attributed to my care
and vigilance whatsoever happened to their disadvantage, and thought my conduct
had a greater share in my successes than my fortune.

The Prince of Montesarchio sick of a quartan Ague went home some days before
he had been suspected to hold correspondence with me, which yet was no other
than his acknowledgements, for my having saved his Sisters from the peoples
fury, and permitted him to live at quiet in his house; Their jealousies
increased when retiring into Apulia for some particular affairs, to secure his
house from being pillaged in his absence, I sent a Commission to one of his
servants to command not only it, but all the Militia's of his other Lordships.
In this manner I dealt as often as possibly I could with all the Nobility, to
preserve them their Estates, gain their good will by such a Protection, and
increase the Spaniards distrust of them, from which I expected very happy
Consequences.

I was likewise informed that Polito Pastena had possessed himself of Salerno,
and marched to attacque Scafatta, whose Conquest would be of extraordinary
importance to me, by making me master of the River of Sarno, and the seventeen
Wind-mils that made the Enemy subsist, in the Castles and Quarters they were
possessed of in the Town, receiving all their Meal from thence. I was also told
that Paul of Naples had made himself Master of Avellino, and raised Men for
more considerable enterprises. Paponi, who till now had done nothing but run up
and down the Country, and plunder on the banks of Garillano, accompanied by the
two Brothers of Daretzo, had taken the Towns of Sessa, Itri, and the Tower of
Sperlonga, a Post very considerable, as being on the Seaside. The Sieur de
Lascaris Nephew of the great Master of Malta, whom I had sent to him, took in
the City of Fondi, and this little body of an Army became considerable enough
to be master of the Field, and in such a manner block the Town and Castle of
Gaeta, that it cut off its correspondence with the rest of the Kingdom, and
prevented its receiving any more succors by land. Pietro Crescentio, with seven
or eight hundred men he had drawn together, assaulted Montefusculo, the Capital
City of the Province that bears that name, and Seat of a President, which is
the title they give to governors of Provinces, whom he forced to quit it, and
took it in a very short time, his troops augmenting from day to day.

Sabato Pastore gave me advice from Apulia that he was so strong that nothing
could resist him in the field from executing some considerable design, and I
sent him order to march straight to the City of Fogia, a place famous for its
fare, worth six hundred thousand Crowns revenue, which consists only in the
Toll of Cattle, which pass the Winter in the Plains of Apulia, and in the
Summer go to seek their Pasture in the Mountains of Abruzzo, of this he
possessed himself in a very few days, and afterward of the Cities of Luscietae
and Troia.

In one part of Calabria Trussardo having made himself strong began to be
feared, and forced some places of importance, that made difficulty of declaring
with us: and another part of the same Province demanded a Commander in Chief
and some French Officer with him: I sent a young advocate called Paris, a man
of resolution and vigor, accompanied by the Sieur de la Serre, who was no less
successful than others that in other places fought under my Commissions. In
Basilicata, and the land of Barri, the Earl of Vallio and Matheo Christiano,
drawing people together, made considerable Conquests, amongst others of
Altamura, Matera, Gravina, Cassano, and Bitento. The Banditi began also to stir
in Abruzzo, and many persons sent to desire Commissions of me; The success of
my own men was no less fortunate; but as it arrived latter, I defer it to be
spoken of in its time.

The Spaniards daily receiving so bad news, began seriously to apprehend their
ruin, seeing all things succeed so happily with me, that I effected whatsoever
I undertook, and imagined they could no longer put confidence in the Nobility,
with whom they were jealous I had a very good understanding, and particular
correspondence. To confirm them more in this opinion the Duke of Vairana
casting off his disguise, sent to desire of me a Commission for Camp-master
General in the Country of Lavoro bordering on the Popes territory. The Duke of
Vieteri, whose lands lie near Salerno, did not see how he could preserve them
without joining with me, and arrived about this time at Naples to assure me of
his service and obedience. Many other persons of high Birth and the most
wealthy of the Kingdom, whose names it would be too tedious to particularise
here, having withdrawn themselves into the City of Benevento, sent expressly to
complement me in very obliging terms, which the Spaniards most vehemently
resented.

I thought I was not to continue idle my self, and drawing troops together in
the City, whom I caused to be met by the Militias of Nocera and la Cava sent to
attack the Greek Tower, which the Enemy had regained from us; it was taken in
four and twenty hours, and from thence I sent to besiege the Castle of the
Annunciation, giving the command of that Leager to Colonel Melloni; The
Spaniards sending to its assistance the Galley of Saint Francis, the slaves
that were in it revolted, took the Captain prisoner, and ran it ashore in the
place where three days before that of Teresia had done the same thing. This
Castle held out three days, which resistance vexing me, I resolved to go
thither in person, but at my arrival found the enemy had abandoned it in the
night. Having taken the Annunciato, I recalled the troops that had besieged it,
to send them away the next day to attempt Castelamare, by which the Spaniards
received their Provisions, not getting any thing from Capua, and Gaeta, being
so unprovided that from thence nothing could be expected. But Melloni being
very necessary in Naples, where he did the duty of Camp-master General, being
the eldest of our Officers, I gave this employment to the Sieur de Cerisantes,
a French Commander having been desired of me. He took upon him the conduct of
this little body, which being drawn up ready for march mutinied, and demanded
Money. I sent to promise it and appease the disorder, but the Soldiers forgot
their respect for him, threatening to kill him if he pressed them any farther.
He came to acquaint me with it that I might redress it. I went immediately, and
perceived the mutiniers at my coming up to them blow and cock their matches,
who preparing to fire upon me, presented their Muskets; I fiercely demanded
who they were that distrusted my Promise, and refused to obey me; One of them
first answered that he was one, and the rest generally did instantly the like,
I spurred right up to him and running my sword through his body killed him. Are
there any more, said I, desirous of dying by my hand? a Camerade of the others
said, Yes, he was; I replied, You deserve it not, but shall suffer that of the
Hangman, and seizing upon him caused him to be disarmed, and his Confession
taken by the Regiments Chaplain, made him be instantly hanged on a tree. The
rest astonished at my Resolution, laid down their arms and begged pardon. I
then commanded them to march, and showing them Money that I had brought for
them, told them that as a punishment for their disobedience they should receive
none in three days. After which I went along with them a quarter of a League,
and then returned to the Town, where I drew out some men to seize la Cerra, a
Pass of very great Concernment to us, and ordered Paul of Naples to attacque
the Town of Nola, which yielded in few days, sending to make capitulations with
me, which the said Paul of Naples did not observe, for which, as well as for
his many other crimes, he was sometime after punished.

Gennaro and Vincenzo uniting, made use of this favorable conjuncture to set
on foot the most dangerous encumbrance I met with whilst I was at Naples, from
which, having freed my self with vigor and address, I drew such advantage from
it as augmented my reputation. They cherished underhand the aversion the
rascallity had for the better sort of Citizens and civiler people, who by
reason of the insolences suffered from them, justly hated them. The later of
these by whom the greatest part of the Virgins suburbs was inhabited, were
called black Cloakes, and the ordinary sort of people took the name of Lazares
at the beginning of the Revolutions, as the Revolters in Flanders formerly had
done that of Beggars, those of Guienne that of Eaters, those of Normandy of
Barefeet, and of Beausse and Soulongne of Wooden Pattins. These Lazares that
day which was the most glorious of my life, grown insolent by our good
successes, went into the Virgins Suburbs peopled by thirty or forty thousand
inhabitants, to demand Money (on occasion of the public joy,) of the Black
Cloaks with great insolence, and a Gentleman answering that their pillagings
had not left them in a Condition to bestow liberalities, one of the rabble
replied, he should give him something or he would pull off his beard, and
attempting it, the Gentleman killed him with a Poniard, and got into his house,
These Lazares enraged at the death of their Companion, sent presently for
assistance to the Marketplace, and the other Quarters, from whence there came
running three or four thousand people, and a furious skirmish was begun, yet
with disadvantage to the Lazares, who, besides the body that made head against
them in the street, were fired on out of the Windows. News of this being
brought me as I rose from Dinner, my first care was to send to double our
Guards, fearing the Spaniards would not let sl^p so handsome an occasion of
making advantage of our disorder: And then I sent Onofrio Pisacani with his
Company to endeavor some means of remedying this unlucky accident. I hastened
after my self followed by my Guards and three or four of my Servants, having
disposed all the rest on our several Posts, to be ready for whatsoever might
happen, and to send me notice. I took along with me Mazillo Caracciolo Master
of my horse, who might do me good service, being a discreet person, beloved and
esteemed by all the Citizens, and capable of prevailing with those of that
Suburb, and the Nobility inhabiting it. I wore that day a Suit of the Italian
fashion, the only one I made during my whole residence, which for want of
Cloth not to be had in the Town, was of green Grogram of Naples embroidered
with Gold, which being very glittering and remarkable, was necessary to make me
distinguished at a distance. At my arrival I found Onofrio Pisacani hurt in the
hand by a Musket shot, who told me there was a strange disorder in the Suburb,
that he had caused the gate of the Town to be shut, to prevent the great
concourse of people, which coming from all parts, increased the tumult, and
rendered it more difficult to be appeased. I made a sign with my hand to the
people, who flocked together to hear me, and that I might put an end to the
difference, forbad, on pain of life, that whole day to pronounce either of the
words, Black Cloaks or Lazares, to mention treason or call any man rebel, all
which would only have tended to a greater exasperating men's minds.

I had scarce given over speaking when I saw four or five Rascals dragging a
Surgeon, who, very unluckily for him, wore black that day, because of his
Profession, and calling him rebel, traitor, and black Cloak, went about to kill
him before my face; whilst he cast himself at my stirrup very much affrighted,
a Butcher with a great Knife coming to cut his throat, I broke my Cane with a
blow I gave him on the head, which laid him along at my feet, another crying
out that the people would not suffer themselves to be treated in such a manner,
I rid over him, and sending them both to prison, threatened to have them hanged
before night. I had another Cane given me, which I broke upon other Mutineers,
doing the like till I had dispatched four, which allayed the tumult, and
brought all the Lazares to beg my pardon on their Knees. At last causing the
City gate to be opened, and leaving a guard upon it, I took along with me
Mazillo Caracciolo, Father Capece, and two or three Gentlemen to carry Orders,
and coming into the suburbs found the Lazares and black Cloaks fighting, two or
three thousand men on either side; I called out to the people to make me way,
and passing through the midst of them, placed my self between the two bodies,
making sign with my Hat to cause them to give over firing, which was done
immediately, and with so great respect, that without any more acts of
hostility, they with great attention hearkened to what I had to command them.
Taking hold of the occasion I told them, that with much sorrow I perceived that
all the pains I could take for reuniting the better and meaner sort of people
proved vain, b^ the great animosity which on the smallest occasions broke out
between them, at a time when one and the same interest obliged them to one nd
the same inclination; that the Spanish oppression concerning them both, they
ought both to have the same desires of deliverance, and both join their
endeavors to mine, that they might obtain liberty, and their sidings being the
greatest obstacles I met withal, put an end to them, to which I had till then
vainly endeavored to persuade them, by representing their interests, to which
they ought to sacrifice their animosities, if they loved their Country; but now
in fine perceiving my reasons and admonitions to be so little valued, I must
necessarily have recourse to more violent remedies to contain them within the
bounds of their duty, and that I was so sensible of this last disorder, that I
would use the uttermost rigor by a great example to prevent any other of so
dangerous concernment, of which the enemy would not have failed to have made
advantage without the preventions I had made use of. I commanded two Wheels and
four Gallowses to be set up in the middle of the Suburb, by the punishment of
such as should appear to have been the causers of this Commotion to terrify
others: at the same time I ordered all the black Cloaks to withdraw into the
Convent of Saint Mary of Health, and sent Mazillo Caracciolo and Father Capece
my Confessor to go with them to take particular information of what had passed,
and of the beginners of this disturbance, and to bring me account of it, after
which I would declare my farther intentions. I was immediately obeyed, and they
all went toward the place I had appointed them, after having forbidden both
sides, on pain of their lives, to commit any act of Hostility: From them
turning to the people, I gave them a severe repriment, for having undertaken to
right themselves in stead of applying themselves to me for Justice, by it
hazarding the whole Town had I not provided against all attempts that might
have been made, whilst every man was busied in his particular revenge,
abandoning the public defense to satisfy private animosities* Then demanding
that they which began the tumult might be delivered into my hands in order to
their punishment, it was found they were all slain, chance having become their
executioner. I sent an order to Aniello Porcio Auditor general to take
informations on all sides, that I might after order what I should judge
necessary. I caused the gate of the Town to be opened and the people to return,
enjoining all to retire to their dwellings, and lay down their Arms, which was
done in a moment, and then shutting the Gate, left my Guards there, expressly
forbidding any to be suffered to return into the Suburbs.

Mazillo Caracciolo and Father Capece came to render me account of what they
had done amongst the black Cloakes, to whom I presently went, to give them also
a repriment, but different from that of the common people, telling them I was
much surprised at this tumult, expecting more discretion from people of
quality, of whom the greatest part were Gentlemen; That understanding the
insolence of the Lazares they should not have concerned themselves with them.
That they ought to have retired into their houses, and given me notice of the
disorder, without taking arms against those that had not any; That I would
presently have come in and done them justice, causing the greatest mutineers of
that rabble to have been whipped through the Streets. That I besought them for
my sake to be more discreet another time, and that I would have a particular
care to secure them from all insolences. That if there were any amongst them
affected to the King of Spain, they ought to conceal their inclinations better,
which being useless to his service, only brought them into danger, hazarded
the honor of their families, and provoked the plundering their houses, from
which I would secure them, provided that by too indiscreet a zeal, they
discovered not themselves so far as would bind up my hands, and deprive me of
occasions of serving them according to my intention; and that since the
preservation of my person was necessary to all they held most dear in the
World, they ought seriously to concern themselves in it, and not every day
expose me to new dangers, their Lives and Honors depending only on my
Protection; of which since my arrival they had seen so many testimonies in so
many different rancounters.

They heard me with as great patience as submission, and protested never to
lose the memory of their Obligations to me, and that owing me all, they would
employ all they had in the World for the safety and preservation of my person,
for which they would offer up their Vows and Prayers continually. In effect
although most of them were concerned in the re-establishment of Spain, the
greatest part of their revenues being settled on the taxes, and that they had a
deadly hatred for the common people, who had so earnestly sought their
suppression, and highly affronted them, they were so sensible of the obliging
way I made use of in what concerned them, that not only they and their whole
Families mentioned me in their Prayers, but conceiving their ruin inseparable
from mine, they most sollicitously watched for my safety, discovering to me all
Conspiracies were made against my life, and advertising me of all such designs
of the Spaniards as might be dangerous to my person. I gave them assurance they
might every one go home and continue there without fear, since I took upon me
their Defense and Protection.

Presently after I got a horseback, and rode about the Suburbs, to see all
things settled in repose and security, and gallopping as fast as I could toward
a Street where I heard a Musket fired, I met a Gentlewoman weeping, who
casting her self on her knees before me, demanded justice for the death of her
brother, whom a Soldier belonging to a Company I had met in that Street, had
killed with a Musket shot as he stood at his Window; I demanded of the Captain
who it was that notwithstanding my prohibition had shot, it having been done
not far from him, and he replying he knew not, laying hold on his Belt I
caused him to be disarmed, and delivered him to one of my Guards, telling him
his life should answer for the fact of his Soldier, and commanding Father
Capece to alight to confess him, I sent for the Hangman, whom I had caused to
be brought into the Suburbs, by the terror of his presence, to hold all in
respect and duty. The Captain affrighted begged his life, with assurance that
he would deliver the Soldier that was guilty, which he did immediately, and
the truth of it being confirmed by other testimonies, I made the Captains arms
be restored him, and commanded him as soon as execution should be done, at
which I would have him be present, to return with his Company into the Town.
The Criminal after his Confession having been hanged by my order at the bars
of the Window of the deceased, his death was immediately revenged, and his
sister (as much as possibly could be) comforted by so speedy justice. At last
having rid round the Suburb, and hearing a noise in a house in a bylane, I
hastened thither, and saw Sergeant Major Gennaro Griffo, Son to the old Colonel
Bartholomew Griffo, of whom I have formerly spoken, whom eight or nine rascals
armed, some with Poniards, and some with great Knives, dragged on the ground;
others the mean while setting their swords at his breast, ready to kill him
with many wounds, I commanded them to leave him and be gone, but seeing that in
spite of my order they persisted, I leapt from my horse with my Sword in my
hand, and having entered the house l^ied about me, to cause them to let him go
The poor Gentleman casting himself at my feet besought me to save his life, I
embraced him with my left arm, and with the right put by several thrusts the
rascals made at him in my arms, which without extraordinary good fortune had
slain him with me. I pushed him into a low Chamber, and going out in pursuit of
the Villains, overtook him that had made the last thrust, which I had put by,
and which had passed two foot beyond my body, I made so violent a thrust at him
that I cast him down two paces distant from me, my sword having bended even to
the Hilt without entering, by lighting on a place (happily for him) where one of
the skirts of his Buff Coat hung over the other; and getting hastily up he ran
away with his Companions, whom I followed laying upon them with my sword till I
came to the great Street of the Suburb, where I found fourteen or fifteen
hundred men in arms, who having passed through other Gates of the Town came
together on the rumor of what passed in the Suburb. I threatened to have them
severely punished for returning contrary to my order, and commanding them
instantly to return into the Town, whose Gate I had caused to be opened, I
wondered to perceive they durst not go and asking the reason, they told me they
were afraid I would strike them with my Sword: I set its point on the ground,
and leaning upon it, gave them my word not to strike them, if they obeyed me.
They threw down their arms, and falling on their Knees begged my pardon. By
this testimony of Submission I judged I might yet do something more, and
sending one of my Guards for Gennaro Griffo, let him know he should come on my
Parole, and that it concerned his safety so to do. At his arrival I took him by
the left hand, and turning to the people, said, Look on this Gentleman, I
affect and value him, and have taken him into my Protection, in such manner
that if any of you dis-respect or injure him, the whole world shall not save
the party offending from hanging; Where are those that even now would have
murdered him? let them come forth, I will pardon them for his sake, but I will
have them beg it of him on their Knees, and come and kiss his feet; This they
did with all imaginable testimonies of repentance and submission. Then
embracing him, I told him in all their hearing, he might rest secure at home,
and that if any hereafter gave him the least offense, I would so severely
punish it, that the Example should make all the people respect him. He withdrew
with many acknowledgements of his obligation to me, and very much satisfied in
so good a Protector I got on horseback again, and causing all the people to
return into the Town by Saint Gennaro's Gate, made it be shut again, and
fetching another round about the Suburb, finding all things quiet returned by
the Gate of Capua.

I was no sooner in the Town but I heard an alarm at one of the Posts, whither
I made haste. The Spaniards supposing me wholly taken up in pacifying the
disorder they heard was in the Virgins Suburb, thinking to make advantage by my
absence, intended to attempt something about the Quarter of Saint Clare, but
they found themselves much deceived when by the cries of all the Soldiers of
Long live his Highness the Duke of Guise our Protector, they were assured of
my Presence, which obliged them to retreat without any more firing.

At my coming home I found the Wives and Sisters of those wretches I had sent
to prison, who with disheveled hair and tears in their eyes implored their
pardon. This day had been so glorious, and I was so well pleased that I could
refuse nothing, I therefore readily granted their requests, and that very
instant sent to give their Husbands and Brothers liberty, on condition they
should afterward be more discreet and respective. My thoughts highly satisfied
with so glorious a day, I went home to refresh my self after the toil it had
given me, and to consider all night at my ease what I was to do next morning:
and the better to establish Government and Order in the City, I began such a
manner of life as I thought necessary to it, which will appear very rational
though difficult to practice by persons less vigorous and laborious than my
self, which none could have undergone to whom nature had given a less able body.

As soon as I arose in the Morning, whilst I dressed me, I took account of all
that had passed at our attacques in the night, and the most considerable
persons of the Town informed me of all disorders that required redress, and
gave me their opinions concerning all that was to be done in the day; After
that I placed my self in my Hall under a State, leaning against a Table, to
give particular audiences, my Suiss Guards standing on each side to suffer but
one at a time to approach me, that so they which spoke to me might neither be
interrupted nor overheard, a Gentleman standing by me, into whose hands I gave
all the Petitions were presented me, having established the order of making
addresses by writing, to avoid confusion and help my memory, hearing
nevertheless what every one had to say, and giving present answers to all
affairs whose condition would admit them; from thence I was carried to Mass in
a Sedan, every Wednesday and Saturday to our Lady of the Carmelites, and on
other days to such other Churches where there were some particular
solemnities, or to such Cloisters of Nuns where Ladies of Quality resided, by
their means to hold correspondence with their Relations, to know of them what I
might do for their service, acquire their friendship, and engage them in my
Concernments by the care I took to oblige them on all occasions. By the way I
caused my Sedan to stop, whilst I spoke with all such as had any thing to say
to me: women came with Suits, which I either granted or refused, according to
equity, without delaying them, and most commonly having a Pen and Ink carried
along to write answers on Petitions, I did it as often as I could possibly. I
gave out over night where I intended to go to Mass next Morning, that Ladies of
Quality might repair thither, they not coming home to me, it being contrary to
the custom of the Country. After Mass was ended, I spoke to them to know if
they had any thing to pretend of me, and having heard them one after another, I
signed on the Rails of the Altar such dispatches as they desired, for their
Husbands, Brothers, or Kinsmen; At my return, whilst my meat was served up, I
again gave audience to all that pretended to it, and then went to Dinner,
during which my Music played which was of the best in Europe. It was often
interrupted either by such as had some intelligence to bring me, or some other
thing to say, or for the signing dispatches. When I rose from table I called
for my horses, and till my servants had dined continued to give audience: As I
rid I stayed my horse at the corner of every Street, where I saw people gather
together, to hear all complaints that might be made me, and inform my self of
all necessities, that I might supply them; in this manner I rid about the
Streets, which I found always hung with Tapestry, and perfumes were burned, as
I have formerly related, and as soon as my Pictures could be had I saw them
erected at all turnings of the Streets under States with perfuming pots before
them. I visited without failing all the Posts, and gave all necessary Orders.
Afterward I rid out of Town to take the air, and most commonly to Poggio Reale
where the Gardens and Fountains are the most delicious of the World: Otherwise
I caused my horses to be ridden in my presence, and many times mounted them my
self. Toward Evening I went homewards, hearing and discoursing by the way with
all that were desirous of it. When I came home I again gave audience, which
being finished, the Officers commanding the several Posts and Quarters came for
Orders, and Tickets for receiving Powder, which I gave according to the
occasion I found they had of it. The Knight de Fourbin, in whom I had an entire
confidence, distributed it to them, having put it into his custody after I
found that Aniello de Falco General of the Artillery was too free of it, not
knowing how to refuse any that demanded it, and after discovery of so great
abuse in this particular, that it was sometimes sold to the Enemy.

The City Magistrates came every Evening according to the Order I had given
them, and I then conferred with them of all means for making the people
subsist, and supplying them with all things necessary. Wine of which we had
abundance was so cheap that the best cost but two pence a quart, which made a
very good amends to the people for all such other Provisions as were less
plentiful. Butchers meat was sold for two pence a pound, only Veal which is
there accounted most delicate for three pence; and in like manner Gammons of
Bacon, Lard, and other Salt-meats; We had from the Country so great plenty of
Fowl and Venison that they bore almost no price. We had great abundance of
Pigeons more delicious than those of Rome. In short, bread excepted, which was
something dear, all things necessary not only to eating but feasting were
cheaper than in any other place in the World, and we had extraordinary fair and
delicate fish at very low rates. I took so exact care of preserving our Corn,
that I resolved every night with the Magistrates the weight and price of the
bread that was to be sold next day, appointing what Corn should be sent to be
ground, and what quantity of Meal distributed amongst the Bakers, suffering
nothing to be drawn from the public Granaries without Tickets under my hand:
and to avoid disorder and confusion, I appointed what Ovens should bake for the
Soldiers, leaving all the rest to the use of the Inhabitants of the Town. At
night the Bakers paid in the price of the Corn that had been taken out of the
Granaries; and the Money was laid up to buy more, and some Loaves of those that
were to be sold were brought me that I might see whether they were according to
the weight and quality ordained. We never wanted fruit, roots and herbs, and
having great quantity of Indian Corn, it was mixed amongst the courser Bread*
which the poorer sort therefore bought the cheaper. Besides all which, the
Country people after we became master there, brought Bread to sell in the Town
every Morning. For Oats and Forage for our Horse we never were in any great
want of them.

The Regulating of all these matters belonging to the City Magistrates, I spent
part of the Evening with them, after which I retired to my Chamber, where
sometimes going into my bed to refresh my self, I caused some Officer of the
Exchequer, a civil and criminal judge, with some one of the Council of Saint
Clare, to give me their opinions on the different Subjects of the Petitions
that had that day been presented me, which I ordered to be read before me. This
sometimes employed me two or three hours; for I never passed any by without a
grant or a refusal, causing a List of all such as had been presented to be hung
up in the Morning at my Secretaries Office, where every one might see whether
his business had success or failed, and this with such punctuality, that I
never delayed any to another day. But for my refreshment in so great troubles,
we drank all sorts of iced waters which are made better and more deliciously in
Naples than in any other part of Italy: afterward dismissing the Magistrates I
called for Supper, detaining some with whom I was most intimate and familiar,
to divert and entertain my self with them. After I had supped, walking about my
Chamber, I had all the dispatches I had that day received out of the Country
read, appointing answers, and in my presence causing extracts to be made of the
principal Matters: My Letters were drawing up all night, and as soon as I waked
in the Morning brought me to sign. But for what concerned my Negotiations with
the Nobility, that I might keep them secret, I showed no man the Letters I
received, and writ all answers with mine own hand. Three hours of the night
were usually passed before I went to bed, and I appointed my Chamberlains to
wake me, to speak with all such as had any thing to say to me, which usually
happened five or six times in a night: but considering the Condition I was in,
I thought I ought to neglect nothing, believing that amongst many useless
Relations, I might possibly learn something of Importance. And of what age,
quality, or sex soever the parties were that desired to speak with me, they had
an immediate admittance. This was the manner of my life, and I may safely say,
that during the space of five months, I neither eat nor slept in quiet.

I was desirous to remedy the confusion caused in the Town by the idleness of
such as bore arms, the insolences which Soldiers going up and down in troops
might the more easily act, the inconveniences caused by the shops being
continually shut up, the necessity to which handicrafts people were reduced for
want of work, and the tyranny exercised on the poor Citizens, by such as sold
Provisions with their arms lying by them: to which purpose I made Proclamation,
and caused it to be posted up at the Corner of every Street, commanding all
Artificers to return to work in their Callings, and all Tradesmen to open their
Shops: forbid all Soldiers to go up and down the Town in bodies, to carry any
fire arms, or beat Drums, unless at the hours of setting the Watch, and all
Officers to be followed by their Soldiers in Arms when they went about their
particular business, or to buy any thing, but especially when to speak to the
Magistrates, or solicit and receive their pay: that no Butchers, Bakers, or
others selling Provisions should have any fire or other Arms about them, or
upon their Stalls, whilst they sold their ware, complaints having been made
that some of them had been so insolent, as to exact on poor people, forcing
them to take such things as they liked not, and at rates they had not agreed
on, as also all fraud in weights and measures, and enhancing the Prices set by
order on all Provisions; and this on pain of death.

This Proclamation was so exactly observed, that from that day the City of
Naples enjoyed more repose and quiet, than it had ever done in time of the most
settled peace: All shops were opened and furnished with all manner of Ware;
Traffic went forward with as much security as liberty; no theft was
committed, no arms seen, nor noise heard. Artificers gained their livings by
their work as before the revolutions, and all people lived with greater ease
and tranquillity than ever. That order the Spaniards could never establish in
the time of their most absolute Authority, and which I caused to be observed at
the very instant of declaring my pleasure, surprised all the World, who could
not imagine it possible, and drew from all a greater respect and affection.

Things were in this condition when the Spaniards, that sought to destroy me,
by endeavoring every day to raise some new Commotion, made use of the Duke of
Tursi, whom they looked on as very considerable amongst the people, for
carrying on some enterprise. He applied himself to a Sergeant Major called
Alexio, and making use of the credit of the Popes Internuncio for gaining him a
Priest, called Joseph Scopa, proposed a meeting with him: of which an account
being given me, I could hardly persuade my self, that a person of his age and
condition could possibly suffer himself to be transported to such an excess, by
an inconsiderate zeal for Spain, which would not have been excusable in a young
man.

These two persons assured me he would not fail to be at the rendezvous
appointed, and that they had already discovered he had an intention to propound
a design upon my person, and at the same time to give the enemy an entrance
into the Town; That they had well laid their plot, and assured me the next day,
which was the fourth of January, to bring me his head. I forbad them on pain of
death, to injure his person, and told them I would have nothing to do with
their business, unless they could deliver him to me in perfect health; but
above all that they should be very careful to disguise nothing, nor engage my
Parole for the Duke of Tursi's security, whom I esteemed too prudent to put
himself into their hands on any other account, or trust persons that had no
character to make authentic the assurance they should give him. I gave them
leave to take all their Measures against the next day in the afternoon, and
appointed them to come at my rising and receive my farther Orders, and give me
account of all they had negotiated They came punctually at the hour, and told
me that the Duke of Tursi, with the Internuncio, his grandchild the Prince of
Avella, and Don John of Austria's Secretary, would be at three of the Clock in
the Church of the Fathers of Luca, in the Suburbs of Chiaye: they desired men
to lie in ambush, and would be responsible upon their Lives to bring me within
two hours the Grandfather, Grandchild, and Don John's Secretary, and possibly
himself, who they were told would be personally at this Conference. I commanded
them above all to be careful no way to offend the person of the Internuncio,
which ought to be sacred as well to them as me, for on the Popes being for or
against us absolutely depended the ruin or establishment of our affairs.

At the hour appointed the Duke of Tursi came with his Grand child the Prince
of Avella, about eighteen or nineteen years of age, and Don Prospero Suardo, a
Gentleman of much wit, and a great Enemy of the people; word was sent me that
Don John's Secretary was gone to fetch his Master, who, the rest told them,
intended to come, to confirm all such advantageous conditions as he had
promised in behalf of the people, and that if I would have a little patience
they might take him prisoner with the rest. I judged the Spaniards would never
consent to his hazarding himself so lightly, and that to do something more
extraordinary we should loose the opportunity already in our hands, I therefore
sent them word they should content themselves with the persons of the Duke of
Tursi, the Prince of Avella, and Don Prospero Suardo, and fearing the peoples
insolence, and that some of the Plot might be barbarous enough to kill them by
the way, I sent the Company of my Guards for their Convoy, with three Sedans to
bring them more at their ease, and ordered the Captain to make them a
Complement on the occasion of their misfortune, and bring them to me to the
Carmelites, where I would expect them. The Duke of Tursi did not very
handsomely receive my Civility, more troubled at his own imprudence, to have in
such a manner rendered himself into the hands of the people, than at his
imprisonment; and very much transported with heat enough told Augustine de
Lieto that when with his Galleys he met him passing in a Felucca to Naples, had
he believed him engaged in my service, he would have caused him to have been
hanged at the Anchor of the Admiral. The people were all in arms as he passed
by, and he was showed the Shambles provided with meat in abundance, great
quantity of Wild-fowl, Poultry and Venison, and in the Marketplace Tables of
Bread, which seemed the remainder of what had been sold all day; all which
struck him to the heart having seen nothing but misery and poverty amongst the
Spaniards. He found a foot-guard drawn up before the Carmelites Cloister where
I lay, my Suiss on each side the Stairs, and my other Guards in the Hall, being
returned from waiting on him, and five and twenty footmen, every one a torch of
white Wax in his hand, my apartment richly furnished and full of lights. I
caused him to be met at my Stair-foot by thirty Gentlemen; and Fifty Officers,
my self staying for him in my Hall, with Gennaro, some of the Nobility, all the
Heads of the people, and the chief Officers of the Army: I received him with
all kindness and honor imaginable, leading him into my Chamber, where being
seated, we entered upon very serious discourse, which began by a Complement I
made him, relating to his misfortune, telling him that all that wore swords
were subject to the like accidents, which ought neither to astonish nor
surprise a person of courage and discretion as he was. That whatsoever
advantage I might derive from his captivity, I could not avoid being sensible
of his affliction, which I would endeavor to mitigate by all civilities and
services possible; that I assured him of receiving from me such usage as I my
self would wish, if misfortune had put me in his place: but if I might freely
express my thoughts without offending him, I must needs tell him I could not
have believed that a person of his years and experience would have entrusted
himself in the hands of a Priest and a Soldier of fortune, to whose word so
much confidence ought not to be given, because, besides that they have not
enough of honor to keep it, they come also short in credit, not being in a
condition sufficiently elevated to enable them to comply with it, nor to give
assurance for performance though desirous of it. That some days were passed
since their acquainting me that they had treated with him, which they would not
have continued without my permission; and that without any design of
representing to him the Obligation he had to me, I must needs acquaint him that
their first intention was to have cut off his head and brought it to me; that
abhorring this proposal I forbad them to attempt any thing against his life,
for which their own should be responsible, but if they could bring him to me
without any farther prejudice to him, I approved their design, and would
recompense it as a remarkable service; but on the other side, what profit
soever our party might receive, by depriving our enemies of a head so able for
Council, and a person so capacitated by valor and experience to render them
considerable services, I would rather let them enjoy him, and loose all the
advantages I might obtain by his imprisonment, than see him whose merit, birth,
virtue, and honor, had given me not only so great esteem, but veneration for
him exposed to any danger on my account. He thanked me for so obliging a
discourse, and acknowledged he had very lightly exposed himself, and played the
part of a young man, but that he would have hazarded much more for the service
of his King, and that having to deal with a faithless and rebellious people, it
was necessary to sacrifice himself, since there was not a man in the Town
capable of giving him assurance, besides my self, to whom he had no reason to
make his overture, the principal point of his negotiation being against me, as
against the most dangerous enemy of Spain* on whose misfortune or prosperity
depended her good or evil success. You see (I replied) the particular care
heaven takes of my preservation, since it so severely punishes designs against
my person: he told me he found it to his cost, but that I was too generous to
wish him harm, for endeavoring by all means to preserve a Crown on the head of
a Master, to whose interests his honor, duty and inclination so powerfully
engaged him. That he pitied me for having concerned my self in an enterprise
that must needs at last ruin me, and that would probably cost me my life and
honor. That a person of my quality and merit ought indeed to seek occasions of
employing his courage, and perform such Gallant actions as I daily did, but
that should be more just and honorable, and in a better cause. That he was
ashamed to see one, that ought to be at the head of Royal Armies, (the Command
whereof could not be wanting to me, which side soever I would follow, whether
France or Spain,) become the leader of a revolted people, that such an
employment, unworthy of me, would blast all the glory I could ever acquire, by
actions never so extraordinary, and that in the attempts I made I was to fear
all, and had nothing to hope for. That the Spanish Monarchy was so powerfully
established, and firmly supported, that none could ever expect to shake it
unpunished, that if the Consequences of my good fortune extended so far as to
disturb her, she would send such Forces both by Land and Sea as would soon
overpower me; That my ambition had already given so great jealousy to France,
that I was to expect no more assistance from thence, that the departure of the
Fleet made this apparent enough, which refused to land me any supplies, and
chose rather not to destroy the Spanish Fleet, which with ease and without
danger it might have done, than to gain a Victory would have been useful to my
establishment. That the designs of France tending only to possess her self of
the Kingdom of Naples, she gladly saw the people destitute of all assistance,
that necessity and despair might oblige them to cast themselves into her arms
That I should be considered as her greatest enemy, my particular interest
obliging me to oppose her advantages, and looking upon me as her main obstacle,
she would by all manner of ways endeavor my ruin, as I might have perceived
by the Conspiracy carried on against me by one of her Ministers. That the
people which now obeyed me with joy, would forsake me as soon as fortune ceased
to be favorable to me; That good events being the causes of their affection,
the contrary would render me not only odious but criminal; that they would
make me responsible for the first ill success; That the Example of the Prince
of Massa, must needs give me continual apprehensions, that I was daily exposed
to poison, assassination, and sedition, and that he better than I,
understanding their humor to be distrustful, inconstant, turbulent, and cruel,
assured me that in recompense of all the services I had done them, I should not
at last avoid being torn in pieces and dragged through the Streets; That by
such a bloody sacrifice they would hope to appease the indignation of Spain;
that there were in the Town persons discerning enough to judge they must one
day return to the obedience of their first Master. That the civiller and better
sort of people were already convinced of this truth, and as soon as the eyes of
the rest should be opened, they would have recourse to their Kings Clemency,
the effects of whose bounty they might (when they pleased) enjoy, for which he
would be responsible, and his head the security: That the care I took to
prevent assassinations and Plunderings would destroy me, since the rabble
finding no more profit in rebellion would be weary of the toil of it, and of
bearing arms without reward for their labors, and the first to submit, as
supposing they had nothing to fear, being a victime unworthy their masters
Justice, who having contempt for them would be satisfied with the punishment of
some of their Leaders. That the Nobility, without whose reuniting I could never
effect any thing, whose honor was equal to their birth, would never be enticed
from their duty, and would have an eternal hatred for me, looking on me as
their Countries tyrant, and an ambitious Prince that would attempt the
Sovereignty, that prevented their revenging themselves on the common people,
for plundering their houses, massacring their Relations, and all other outrages
received from them. That the long friendship he had formerly for my deceased
Father, and now for me, obliged him to conjure me seriously to take care of my
self, as being nearer a Scaffold than a Throne, that as I had just cause to
complain of France for abandoning me, so only Spain could give me
satisfaction, if I would have recourse to her, and that he would be
responsible, that as she had most powerfully assisted my Predecessors in the
time of the League, if I had any thoughts of revenge, as to speak freely the
usage I had received must needs incite me to it, I should find conditions of
the highest advantage. I replied that as I had disposed matters the Spaniards
were in greater dangers than my self, that I had already deprived them of
Correspondence with any part of the Kingdom, and consequently cut off their
Provisions, which I knew they wanted, and we in few days should abound with:
that in a season so contrary to Navigation bad weather would prevent their
receiving any by Sea. That they had been about to have abandoned all that they
were possessed of in the Town, and the Castles themselves for want of
wherewithal to maintain them, that they had been reduced to so great extremity,
that Provisions remained for no longer than four and twenty hours, had not the
Galley so fortunately supplied them; that such Miracles were not seen every
day. That though they had a powerful Fleet, he knew well it was useless for
want of Mariners and Soldiers, of whom they had not enough to man their Posts.
That their Galleys being by his imprisonment destitute of a Commander, and none
to be found of Experience sufficient for supplying his place, they could do
little or no service. That the French Fleet would quickly return its Officers
with so positive Orders, that they would not fail of their duty, nor any more
(as they had done) let slip an occasion of destroying the Fleet of Spain, which
would easily be recovered, since at their return they would find it more weak
and less provided than before. That I had sent a Gentleman into France to give
account of all that had passed, of which they had but confused notions; That I
was assured of all manner of supplies, that the Fleet went away only to water,
and join with a considerable number of ships that were arming in Provence, and
that it would suddenly return by the one half stronger than before. That it
conveyed me many Ships laden with Corn, Ammunition, and Soldiers to be landed,
and that before three Weeks were passed I should have a considerable body of
French, and the best Officers of our Kingdom, to land when I should command
them, and in such part as I should judge convenient. That the Court was too
well satisfied in my zeal and fidelity for the Crown to distrust me, and that I
acted not but according to the instructions I received. That the King had no
thought of invading the Kingdom of Naples, but would give its people all manner
of assistance, without other interest than that of protecting such as apply
themselves to him, as he had most gloriously made appear in so many parts of
Europe: that he would satisfy himself in driving the Spaniards out of a
Kingdom they had so long a time tyrannised, and leave to the choice of those of
the Country what Government they would erect, and what Master submit to, if
they judged it necessary to have one, and would own and support with all his
power, whomsoever they should raise to their Throne; that he would give no
jealousy to Italy, his designs tending only to its repose and liberty. That
the suppression of his enemies sufficiently elevated his power, and he would
gain enough by an alliance with all those Sea and Land Forces they should lose
with the Kingdom of Naples, which were the most considerable that had opposed
the course of his Victories. That his Galleys would find little resistance from
those of Spain, now they had lost so considerable an Admiral as the Duke of
Tursi: and that for what concerned my self who was more obedient than in former
times the Bashaws of Turkey, he doubted not of my bringing him my head with the
account of my actions at fight of the first Order he should send me. That the
ill Conduct of the Abbot Baschi was not to be imputed to the Court, no more
than the Conspiracy he made against my life. That our Nation never contrived so
horrid designs, which its generosity could not put in practice. That he, much
better than my self, understood what Genius inspired that Gallant, because he
was a Pentioner of Spain, that this truth should suddenly be made very
apparent, and I blamed to have let him go unpunished, which he should not have
done but for my respect to his Character. That the power of the Spanish
Monarchy was no longer to be apprehended as formerly, that it was exhausted
both of Men and Money, and could only make a feeble defensive War in Flanders,
Catalonia, and the Duchy of Milan. That he should quickly hear of the Siege
of Cremona by the Duke of Modena's declaring for us, and that he attacquing
them as vigorously there as I did in this Country, they would be in no
condition to make resistance. That I was already Master of the Field through
the whole Kingdom, and that I would suddenly be so of the City and its Castles.
That I had so many Forces dispersed in several Quarters, that whenever I
pleased to give them a rendezvous, I could draw together above twenty five
thousand men. That the enemies no longer daring to appear were blocked up in
their fortifications, which must of necessity fall shortly into my hands,
because unprovided of all things, and without men enough to defend them. That the
people of Naples were no longer cruel nor turbulent; that I had brought them to
my lure; That my care had reduced them to so good order and discipline, that in
stead of insolences and tumults, nothing appeared but respect and obedience;
That I was so far from fearing them that they feared me, and the considerable
services I had rendered them had so highly recommended me, that my power was
established upon the universal affection and esteem. That my authority was
questioned by none, and that nothing was disputed in Naples, neither were there
any Contestations amongst the people, but who should testify most respect to
my person, and greatest submission to my Orders. That the rabble had forgot
their outrages and plunderings, and the better sort acknowledged themselves
indebted to me, for preservation of their fortunes, and the honor of their
families, and had a greater zeal, respect, and affection for me than the
Lazares themselves; and for the Nobility he had not perhaps penetrated to the
bottom of their thoughts, nor discovered what was in their hearts, and that I
well perceived he was ignorant of my intrigues, secret negotiations, and the
measures I had taken with them; That they could not much longer keep Aversa,
whose loss would be followed by the disbanding of their Troops, and then the
greatest part of those Gentlemen would go to their houses, which would very
much alarm the distrustful humor of the Spaniards. After all this I left him
to judge by my whole discourse whether I ought to hope or fear; That for a
Throne I had never aspired to it, and for a Scaffold I was secure enough from
it, and in a condition to make whomsoever I pleased ascend it.

He seemed much surprised at what I had told him, and returning to his first
subject asked how I would dispose of him? Keep you safe, said I, and entertain
you with all civility imaginable. But in what, replied he, can a man of
fourscore years old be useful to you? Considering the necessity you are in, a
ransom would be of more advantage, of which if you will treat, you shall be
punctually paid in Genoua the sum we shall agree on. None can be high enough,
said I, to get out of my hands a person of your Consideration, and I can make
so great advantages by you, that what necessity soever I have for Money, it is
to no purpose to propose it, since I less value a Million than the having you
in my power. He conjured me at least to take Compassion of the youth of his
grandchild, the sole hope of his Family, and his only Heir. You are a man,
said I, of a Roman Constancy, I can discover nothing weak about you but in
this particular, of which I must make use, and he being so considerable and
sacred a pledge, I will not part with him, since your years considered, you may
suddenly die, and then your imprisonment will be useless to me. He besought me
to let them both go on their Parole, which I was very far from consenting to,
their presence being necessary to me for many reasons, particularly on
consideration that I expected my brother the Knight of Malta, who, should he
unfortunately light into the hands of the enemy in his passage, I should be
very glad to have an exchange ready to redeem him. What means is there then,
said he, sighing and with tears in his eyes, to get Liberty for my self and
grandchild? There is but one, said I, which I will not advise you to, nor durst
propound to you, if there were not an example for it in your own family, and
that of one of the greatest men of his time; That you do as did Andrew Doria,
who in the sight of Naples, left the service of France, with all his Galleys,
and turned to Spain, do you the same; he thought himself neglected, of which
you may with greater reason complain, who have been so slightly exposed for the
interests of their Crown. Ah! he cried out, you know me not, I will suffer a
thousand deaths rather than be guilty of such a weakness, and though I most
tenderly love my Grandchild, I would with my own hand cut his throat, did I
believe him capable of such a thought, and I at this instant lay my curse upon
him, if in his whole life, for what cause soever, he separate himself from the
service of the King my Master. You compelled me, said I, to give you this
affliction, but I freely tell you, there can be no other price of the liberty
of two persons so considerable.

Upon this I stood up, and supposing he might have need of rest, would have
left my appartment to him, which he would not accept, how much soever I pressed
him to it; but he besought me that he might lodge in some other Cloister, where
he might be more in repose, and free from the disturbance of the People and
Soldiers that had continual recourse to me. I sent presently to have the
Generals lodgings made ready for him in the Covent of Saint Laurence, and
sending for a Coach he was very glad to retire. I sent him Linen by two of my
Chamberlains, with order to stay and attend him; I drew out fifteen of my
Guards with an Officer to secure him, and commanded a Polonian Gentleman that
belonged to me, and spoke very good Italian and Spanish, to continue near him,
and having a continual eye over his actions, prevent his having communication
with any, and to suffer none to speak with him without my Order. The Officer of
my Guard was punctually to observe all such Orders as the Polonian Gentleman
should give him in my name. For Don Prospero Suardo I sent him to the Vicairie,
to be shut up and treated as the other Prisoners, because that very night he
attempted to negotiate with some persons he met. The Duke of Tursi would by no
means suffer his Grandchild to be separated from him, and therefore caused him
to lie in his own Chamber, though I had ordered another to be prepared for him.
My Officers immediately carried them a Supper, but the good old Man's heart was
so oppressed, that he eat nothing but a little fruit and a few sweetmeats, and
drank a Glass of water cooled with ice: Neither would he pull off his Clothes
to go into the Bed, but casting himself upon it passed the night without sleep
in great disquiet.

In the Morning I sent to visit him, and enquire of his health by the Knight de
Fourbin, and to know if he would hear Mass, if so, to accompany him, and tell
him that if he would take the air in the afternoon, I would bring my Coach and
endeavor to divert the displeasure of his imprisonment. After this Complement
he presented him from me twelve Basins of fruits and preserves, some fowl, a
wild Boar and other Venison that had been sent me out of the Country; I also
ordered him to be told, that if he desired to cause any of his servants to come
and attend him, he might do it, and write about his particular affairs; and
because he was my Prisoner, I returned into his possession all such revenues as
he had in the Kingdom, which I had caused to be sequestered, whilst he was in
Arms against me. He writ some Letters to Genoua to his Relations, and one to
his Steward to send him a Chamberlain and a Cook, which I sent away as soon as
I had perused them. He went to Mass, at his return from whence, seeing a great
many people gathered together, he began to make them an exhortation of the
fidelity they owed to Spain, but was quickly interrupted by those that attended
him on my behalf, who immediately brought him back into his apartment, and sent
me account of what had passed. As I went to visit him after Dinner, some of the
people (very much scandalized at his proceeding,) asking to what end I went to
him, he not meriting that honor, nor to give me so much pains, I sent the
Knight De Fourbin to tell him that by his indiscreet zeal, he had deprived me
of the liberty of waiting on him, and since he abused that which I had with so
great civility allowed him, if he were not afterward more discreet, he would
force me to put an end to it, and cause him to be shut up. And indeed such as
loved me not, and sought occasions to do me hurt, maliciously spread about the
Town, that his imprisonment was an artifice of the Spaniards, to give me an
opportunity of negotiating with them without distrust: for this cause I never
saw him any more all the time he remained my Prisoner.

Gennaro and Vincenzo Andrea seeking nothing more than to cause disturbances
raised a commotion, on occasion of the rumors, which, as I have said, were
spread abroad, and of which they were the authors. A great many people gathered
together, to go to Saint Lawrences Convent, and cut off the Duke of Tursi's
head: I made haste, and my presence quickly dispersed them: being returned to
the Carmelites, Gennaro came to make me a most honorable Proposition, that to
satisfy the people in their jealousy of the imprisonment of the Duke of
Tursi, which he thought was by consent, I should sacrifice him to that
distrust, and with him the Prince of Avella and Dom Prospero Suardo, causing
their heads to be publicly cut off in the Marketplace, That such a Spectacle
would be more agreeable to him, and give him greater joy, then the return of
the French Fleet, and landing all succors they stood in need of. I was
surprised at his brutality, and answered him, that did not his ignorance excuse
him, I would cause him to be punished for daring to propose to me so infamous
an action; That if hereafter he were not more discreet, than to mention such a
thing to me, I would not pardon him, but make him understand that I loved not
to shed innocent blood, but only that of persons convicted of crimes; that
this indeed might have become him or Mazaniello, who acted only as beasts,
without justice, reason or discretion.

Next Morning I sent the Knight de Fourbin to Complement my Prisoner, and
enquire of his health, with Order, if he would comport himself more prudently
than the day before, to accompany him to Mass: He promised it, but not able to
forbear preaching to the people, I no more suffered him to go abroad; and in
the afternoon caused him to be removed to the Palace of the Marquis of
Terracuse, which I had ordered to be very handsomely furnished. The Prince of
Avella naturally of a better temper than his Grandfather, made many instances
to him of the indiscretion of his zeal, by which they lost the Liberty I had
granted them. The Duke of Tursi sent to demand my permission for his Steward to
come to him that he might send him to Genoua, for which I gave him a Pass, as
also for the Officers of his Lands, with whom he was to regulate domestic
affairs, provided he spoke not to them but aloud, and in presence of the Knight
de Fourbin and his Keeper. He sent me word that the Marquis of Vasto his Nephew
had given him a pied Courser, the beautifullest of the whole Kingdom, which was
at one of his Houses, which I sent for and caused to be brought him, supposing
he intended to present him to Don John of Austria, but he sent him to me, and
desired me to keep him for his sake; I accepted him kindly, though to say the
truth, he gave me but what was mine own, for before my Order to fetch him, he
had been taken by some of my Officers that had sent him to me.

The sixth of January in the Morning came one of the enemies Trumpets, with the
Baron of Batteville's Pass, to desire that I would permit Don Pedro de la Molta
Sarmiento, chief Steward of Don John to come and visit the Duke of Tursi and
Prince of Avella in his Masters name, who had as great kindness for the
Grandchild as respect for the Grandfather, that had been assigned him by Spain
for a Counselor and Instructor, as a person in whom they much confided, and
of very great experience. I gave all Orders necessary for his reception, and to
have him brought to me, being very careful to make it appear to him, that we
wanted nothing, but on the contrary had very great abundance. He gave me thanks
in his Masters name for the good usage of my Prisoners, which he besought me to
continue, which would lay an Obligation on him in particular, their persons
being very dear to him. He afterward made me many Complements on his own part,
and told me he had received many Civilities at Bayonne from my deceased father,
(whose servant he was ever after) at the time when he accompanied the Duke of
Vzede, at the marriages of the Queen mother and late Queen of Spain. He desired
leave to acquit himself of his Commission, which I gave him, conditionally that
he should return to me before he went away. I caused him to be accompanied by
the Knight de Fourbin Onofrio Pisacani, and two other of greatest Reputation
amongst the people, to be witnesses of the Conversation of this visit, which
passed publicly, only in condolings of his misfortune, and offers of all
manner of Services. When he came back to me, I mentioned to him the good
Condition we were in, of which he was a witness, and of which I desired him to
make a true Relation. I assured him that I had advice of the speedy return of
our Fleet, which would perform its duty better than formerly, having very
precise Orders, letting him also know that I was not ignorant of the
necessities they on their side suffered. I told him that did I not doubt his
Master would impute it rather to Vanity than Civility, I would send him every
day ice, fruits, all manner of herbs, wild fowl, sweetmeats, new bread,
excellent wines, with a thousand other delicacies. He went away very well
satisfied with the Civilities he received from me, which, as I was told, at his
return he highly applauded.

In the mean time it being necessary to encourage all men's spirits, dejected by
the Fleets abandoning us, and so strange a deprival of all expected succors, I
applied my self to do something very extraordinary, and contrived ways of
bringing Provisions to the Town, the want whereof grew so great, that every
Morning cries were heard in several parts, Bread or Spain. But my presence
prevented these discontents from arising to a Tumult, the people after I had
spoken to them still crying out, that having seen me they thought no more of
Bread.

By the Correspondencies I held in Aversa, I understood there was a division
amongst the Nobility, of whom the greatest part thought of retiring, weary of
carrying on a war at their own charge, and so exhausted of Money, that for want
of Pay they could no longer keep their Troops together, nor prevent their
disbanding. There happened also a great quarrel between the Earl of Conversano
and Don Vincenzo Tuttaville Commander of the body of the Nobility, which went
so far that every one sided, and in fine, resolved no longer to obey him; the
Spaniards were therefore forced to take his charge from him, and leave the
choice of another General to the Nobility, which yet was not made till some
time after. I made an advantageous use of these disorders, and to give a
pretense for abandoning Aversa, to such as desired to retire, I ordered the
Baron of Modene to send five hundred Musquetteers to possess Lusciano, and
three hundred to Marchianisa, to shut them up more closely, and by a Post I
took near Voltorno, cut off their Communication with Capua. I sent also a
hundred Musquetteers to take in the Tower of Patria, a place famous for the
retirement of Scipio in the time of his misfortune, commanding them to entrench
themselves so very well in those three Posts that they might keep them. The
March of these Troops gave so great apprehension to the Nobility that were
assembled in Aversa, that after a long Consultation they resolved to quit it,
and retreat to Capua. This was a mortal, blow to the Spaniards, because I
became Master of a Town full of Corn, deprived them of the ways of getting any
by Land, obliged almost all the Nobility to retire to their houses, and freed
my self of a body of an army, the only one that kept the field for them. I
drew also great advantages from the jealousy this occasion gave the Spaniards,
of all the Nobility, not attributing it so much to necessity, as to secret
Negotiations and Correspondencies they thought I had managed. This opinion of
theirs being very useful to me, I endeavored to confirm it by all manner of
Probabilities.

This Miracle wrought by Heaven in my favor, so necessary to encourage the
people, and comfort them after the going away of the Fleet, happened on Twelfe
Eve. I received the news about ten in the forenoon with extraordinary joy, and
general applauses of the whole City; it was heightened by circumstances not a
little satisfactory to me, because the march of my Troops gave so great terror
to the body of an Army, I held, as it were, besieged, though very much stronger
than we, that it abandoned the place at daybreak, in so great disorder that it
left behind nineteen foot Colors, and some Cornets, of which I made use with
great modesty, making no triumph in Naples, nor carrying them thither, not so
much because they had been taken without a fight, as in regard they were Troops
particularly belonging to the Nobility, to whom I sought to be favorable in
all things, to oblige them by this moderation, (since to have done otherwise
would not have been to much purpose,) and free them of part of their shame and
resentment; That which seems to me most remarkable, and will appear very
extraordinary, is, that in the space of twenty days I made my self Master of a
great Town, supplied Naples with Victual, dispersed an Army of near four
thousand horse, and almost the same number of foot, enclosed in a Town which I
could only block at a great distance, having my self but four thousand foot, of
which fifteen hundred were without arms, and five or six hundred very bad
horse, with four pieces of Canon, and only four hundred pound of Powder: In
which condition yet I struck a terror in the Spaniards, and reduced them
almost to utter ruin.

I presently sent Orders to the Baron of Modene to cause Proclamation to be
made, that on pain of death none should plunder any house in Aversa, whose
inhabitants had so willingly opened their Gates to us, and instantly gave us
notice of the enemies retreat; to cause account to be taken of the Corn, and so
good order to be held, that at my coming thither on the seventh of January in
the Morning there might be no complaint. I could not go the sixth, because of
the arrival of Don Pedro Sarmiento, whom I could not delay, because I had sent
him a Pass, and was desirous to be present for preventing any disorder, or the
holding any Conference with him.

I imparted this good news to Cardinal Filomarini, that he might in the
afternoon sing Te Deum in the great Church, and our joy was published through
all the Town by ringing of Bells, the little Powder we had not allowing it to
be done with Canon, Vollies or Fireworks. The late dignity I had acquired
obliging me to something more of State, I took horse to ride to the great
Church, attended by my Guards and some Gentlemen that applied themselves to me,
by all Frenchmen that belonged to me, all Officers of the Army, and City
Captains, with other of the most considerable Citizens, my Company of Switzers
going before, which though it ought to have been a hundred could as yet be made
but fifty, this being the first time it marched. Te Deum ended I rid about the
Town to show my self to the people, and assure them that ere four days were
passed they should see abundance of, Corn in their City, and enjoy the effects
of my Negotiations and Address. That we should shortly receive very powerful
succors; but that, in case of delay, I would put them in a condition to attend
them with patience, and reduce the enemy to greater necessity than we were ever
in; that we could now justly style our selves Masters of the Field, since there
was no army that durst appear before us. My discourses were hearkened to with
very great satisfaction; The confidence and affection for me was in such a
manner augmented, that it had been very unsafe for any to have disputed my
authority, I passed the rest of the day in visiting all the Posts, and the
Evening in sending dispatches through the whole Kingdom, that I might take
advantage of the zeal this good news generally incited:

On Twelf day I was advertised that day Troops committed disorders on Aversa,
and Complaints being, made me I promised the Inhabitants to go thither the next
Morning, to cause restoration of whatsoever had been taken away; and give
Exemplary punishment to those that had disobeyed my Proclamation, that none for
the future might dare the like insolence. I took horse early, and came to
Aversa about ten a Clock; The Baron of Modene with the greatest part of the
Officers met me; He was very much surprised that I appeared somewhat cool at
his arrival; and told me it seemed I had but little Joy at the good success of
Aversa; which secured me from the danger to which the departure of the Fleet
exposed me, and put my affairs in an advantageous posture, gaining me honor,
and cause to hope well. I answered, that being to recompense no body, owing so
happy an event to fortune alone, my joy was but moderate, and exceeded by my
sorrow for my Soldiers disobedience, that in contempt of my Proclamation, had
plundered those that so kindly received them into their Town, and the
negligence of my general Officers that neither prevented nor punished it. He
replied, that no cause had been given for complaints, and that he knew not any
that had not exactly contained themselves within the limits of their duty. I am
not pleased, said I, to hear Guilty persons excused, when their punishment is
necessary to the establishing my honor and authority, I shall very well
discover the truth of all, and owing justice to those that seek it of me, will
cause my self to be beloved by the inhabitants of the Town, and feared by the
Soldiers.

And the Examples I will make before I go from hence, shall cause my Orders to
be hereafter exactly observed by all my Troops. After this I entered the Town
very much discontented, and went to the great Church to hear Mass. The Clergy
received me at the Gate with the usual honors, and afterward sang Te Deum. At
my coming out of the Church, a Priest cast himself at my feet, to demand
Justice for plundering the Linen of the Hospital of the Annunciati. I ordered
him to name those that were guilty of it without any fear, which having done I
sent presently to secure them, and causing their house to be searched the Linen
was found, which I made immediately be restored. After this a woman all in
tears presented her self; crying out, She was undone, and all that she had
taken from her; I assured her that if she knew the thieves, they should be
immediately punished. She pointed to one that by chance stood very near me,
whom catching by the Belt I disarmed, and put into the hands of my Guards, to
carry him to prison. The Canons opposed, telling me the Church ought to be a
Sanctuary; I answered, not for such actions, that if I suffered the insolence
of Soldiers, and my Orders to be disobeyed without punishment, I could secure
no house, nor the Churches themselves; that they ought therefore to reserve
their Intercessions and Privileges for worthier occasions, where pardon might
not draw on so dangerous consequences. From thence I went through the whole
Town to view it, and as I received Complaints, sent the Soldiers to prison.
Coming to the Bishops Palace where Dinner was provided for me, I sent for
Bernardo Spirito the Auditor General, and commanded him to have Gallowses set
up in the principal Streets of the Town, and one before the Gate of the
Hospital of the Annunciata, and causing five Soldiers that were Prisoners to
be confessed, see them instantly hanged for Example, no more formality being
necessary, since the Proclamation they had heard condemned them. The Baron of
Modene carrying part of my Company to dine with him, I bid him take care that
execution were done before I took horse to return. Many of the Town came to see
me dine, whom I caressed all I possibly could, especially the Gentry, of which
there are many families, and of the most ancient of the Kingdom, who, according
to the custom of Italy, dwell in Cities* After Dinner I caused an account to be
brought me of what Corn was found in the Town, with the names of the
Proprietors, and the Rates they would sell it at, of which having agreed, I
forbid the carrying any of it to any other part but Naples, and the selling it
to any but my self, promising punctual payment: and for that which the enemies
had amassed to make their Troops subsist, sending for Mules and Horses to the
Neighboring Villages, I appointed three hundred to be laden and sent me the
next day to Naples. Having regulated all as I ought I called for my Horses to
return, and going down met on the Stairs the Baron of Modene, who came from
Dinner followed by a great many Officers, I asked if execution had been made
according to my Orders; He answered, he knew not, and that he could not
willingly cause poor Soldiers to be hanged on so slight occasions, supposing
it inconvenient to displease them, our present necessity considered; to which I
briskly replied, that he should have done better to have obeyed me, than by so
great indulgence for them, have left their disorders unpunished, I regulating
my self by particular Maxims, on which he had not reflected as I had done. He
said he would obey me in all things, only in that besought me to dispense with
him, for he could not find in his heart to punish those wretches for so small a
matter; Resolved to satisfy the people, and disliking replies, it belongs not
to you, said I, to judge whether I have reason or no, but without Contestation
to do what I command you, of which if you fail I know very well how to make my
self obeyed, and teach you what belongs to the duties of the charge. He went
away somewhat concerned with the rigor wherewithal I treated him, yet without
complaint or murmr. The whole Town of Aversa gave me a thousand Benedictions
for this severe justice, was entirely satisfied, and lost all apprehension of
injury from my men for the future.

Sending afterward for the Baron of Modene I signified my regret to have used
him so roughly in public, but that he had forced me to it, by a too light
confidence in the kindness and goodness I had ever testified for him; that I
should have hearkened to his remonstrances had he made them in private, but
that our Soldiers might take advantage by his discourse, perhaps so as to
become more licentious. That a Campmaster General was to suppress not authorize
their excesses, which he in some manner seemed to do. That pardons were always
to be derived from the General, and not from any that was subordinate. And that
another time he ought to be more considerate, because being naturally somewhat
choleric, I might be in an humor not to pass matters by so easily; and that
it belonged to him to give example to all others of acquiescence in my Orders.
That he well knew the confidence I ever had in him, and the particular
affection I had on all occasions made appear. That he should govern himself
with greater Caution, and not compel me, do what I could to the contrary, to
undo him. I commanded him to be very careful to prevent any disorder in Aversa,
and to innovate nothing without my participation, to cause the Corn very
carefully to be preserved, and none of it transported without my Orders, which
he might twice a day receive, as well as in four and twenty hours my returns to
all intelligence he should give me: that in the Morning at day break he should
send away the three hundred Mules laden with Corn, after which embracing him,
and the rest of the Officers of the Army, and chief of the Inhabitants I took
horse for Naples.

In the mean time being good natured he easily gave too great credit to persons
ill affected toward me, who sought to exasperate, and taking advantage by his
discontent, to separate him from my interests. They insensibly engaged him to
actions that ruined him, the apprehensiveness of my humor considered, what
care soever I took to preserve him to me, of which his evil fortune suffered
him not to make advantage. He had a Secretary called Pepe Caetano capable of
all manner of Knaveries; A Colonel called Antonio Calco, a good Soldier, but
who having learned his Profession amongst the Spaniards, had still a kindness
for them, and some intention to do them service; a Colonel of Dragoons called
Marco Pisano, who could not overcome the inclinations to punderings and
insolence, to which he had been accustomed the long time he was a Bandito;
Andrea Rama, a Captain of Horse; who continued still the humors of a catchpole
which he had been in Naples before the revolutions: And the Cavalier Michellini
his adjutant, a person of wit and intrigue, that continually designed my
destruction, by it to give advantage to Prince Thomas, in his Pretenses to the
Kingdom of Naples, having secret and particular engagements to him. The poor
Baron of Modene placing all his confidence in those dangerous persons, and
studying only to make himself beloved by caressing the Soldiers, and feasting
the Officers, found himself precipitate ere he was aware, by being too easily
swayed by their Counsels, and giving them such liberty that many things were
done in his name, not only prejudicial to me, but to the whole party, which
obliged me to punish them, without any possibility of preventing his being
involved in their misfortune, though in effect he was not culpable. It is
easily imagined in what manner I was received at Naples, by reason of the
advantage the taking of Aversa brought us, and the great succors we might draw
from thence, having found there above thirty thousand charges of Corn.

The eighth of January the three hundred Mules laden with Corn arrived, which
caused an excessive joy in Naples, where no more remained then four or five
days Provision. I met this Convoy and led it into the Town my self: And coming
from Cappo de Chino, as far as which I was advanced, a thing very
extraordinary happened, which was seen by three thousand persons with me. At
four in the afternoon a Star appeared on my left hand, as great as one of the
most prodigious Comets, and seemed no higher elevated than they are usually, it
stood a quarter of an hour without motion, and then falling with extraordinary
swiftness, and traversing toward my right hand, stopped in the middle of the
way just over my horses head, and then separating into three great flames,
rejoyned about thirty foot from ground, and falling vanished. This Prodigy was
the subject of much discourse, but very few explained what it might signify. I
with much displeasure understood that the Baron of Modene, by advice of the
persons already named, and a too passionate zeal, had turned out of Aversa,
five and thirty Families, suspected to hold correspondence with the enemy, the
greatest part of them of the Gentry (and this by importunity of the people to
whom he thought it necessary to give satisfaction) and withal sequestered their
Estates. I had compassion on their misfortune, they casting themselves at my
feet, and ordered their readmission, which I gave them in writing, signed by
my hand; forbidding the Baron of Modene, under pain of my displeasure, to do
any more the like without my participation and particular order, commanding him
to send the heads of their accusation, with the informers, that I might take
time for examination of this business, which seemed of high concernment. They
returned very well satisfied with me, and especially with an order I added to
all such as had in their hands any thing of theirs, to return it within four
and twenty hours, on pain of their lives; and told them that upon notice of the
least delay, I would go my self to see justice done them, and give exemplary
punishment. The same Marchioness of Attaviana, of whom I have already spoken,
sent to complain to me, that her house had been plundered, with the particulars
of what had been taken away: I gave in her behalf the same Orders, and under
the same penalties, that she might be righted. But neither she nor the Exiles
found the dispatch I desired, and being impatient of delay (the Baron of Modene
acting slackly in it, by reason of his interest in his Officers exactions, who
being powerful in our Troops, he thought he ought not to displease them) I writ
him a thundering letter, by which I let him understand, that if my Orders were
not obeyed that very day, I would send Aniello Porcio whom I had made Auditor
General in place of Bernardo Spirito (whom I neither found vigorous nor
resolute enough) to undertake this business and give me information of all that
had passed; and that two days after I would go in person, to make examples of
such as should be convicted, without exemption or consideration of any. That
which had been omitted on my first Order, was now immediately performed out of
apprehension and respect of my humor naturally imperious and impatient of
neglect of my Commands. And as I had little satisfaction in their manner of
proceeding, I suppose they had not much in mine, and that they could hardly
forbear murmuring in private, because they obeyed me without pretending to
justify themselves, or alleging Reasons.

A little after this, I gave the Government of Nola to Sieur Antonio Tonti a
Gentleman of Rome, near which place there happened a Skirmish between the
Nobility and some of our Troops, which I had caused to be strengthened with the
militia's of the neighboring Towns, where Don Ferrante Caraciolo, Duke of
Castello de Sangre, a Person of great power and highly incensed against the
People, whom he ever treated with much rigor, was slain, with a son of the
Earl of Conversano, and another of the Prince of Ottaino of the Family of
Medici, which caused their men to retreat and afterward disband. In five or
six days time we received from Aversa above a thousand Load of Wheat, which as
much astonished the Spaniards as the ill news that came to them from all parts;
They no longer received any Provisions from the Country, and a Tempest some
days hindering the Navigation of their Galleys, casting away one with three
smaller Vessels laden with Provisions, had reduced them to what would supply
them only four and twenty hours. They looked on themselves as lost, when a
Gally laden with Meal arriving as by miracle, freed them from this Extremity,
to which they were afterward twice reduced. These good successes much rejoiced
the people, and gave them hope of a speedy liberty.

Gennaro that lost no occasion of endeavoring my ruin, having notice of all
that had passed between me and the Baron of Modene, and that he was very
sensibly concerned, hoping to make some advantage by his discontent, sent a
Priest called Don Carmine Castelli, in whom he had an entire confidence, to
offer him his service, and propose to him, that if he would engage with him, he
should under him command all the Forces of the Kingdom, being resolved to send
me into France, and again take the authority upon himself, which he could
easily do at the return of the Fleet, if he could but be assured of our Troops,
having in order to it a very good understanding with the Kings Ministers that
were at Rome. The Baron of Modene would not hear of this, but answered, that
when he knew I was no longer satisfied in his comportment, he would go home,
and give me advice of it by Pepe Caetano his Secretary. Gennaro finding he
could not engage him in his concernments, endeavored to give me a jealousy of
him, with false information that they were agreed, and held secret conferences;
which was maliciously seconded by Augustino Lieto, who thought, the other being
removed from me, he should afterward enjoy a greater share in my trust; Not
discovering this contrivance, I had some diffidence of him, which Aniello
Porcio, Auditor General, endeavored all that he could to fortify, making it
his business to give me jealousy of all Frenchmen, being himself a creature
and Pentioner of Spain, as he published after my imprisonment, and for which he
was well rewarded.

A great deal of Corn came every day from Aversa, and thinking it necessary to
supply the charge of the peoples Elect, long vacant by Cicio of Arpaia's
absenting himself, choice was made of Antonio Macella, an understanding and
rich man, born in Procita, who joining with Vincenzo Andrea and Gennaro, and
holding secret Correspondence with the enemy, gave me encumbrances I had much
ado to overcome, as in its time I shall make appear. After this I caused Papers
to be scattered amongst the enemies, in order to debauching their men,
promising a Pistol to every Soldier that forsook them, employment to such as
would serve, and Passes to those that were willing to retire. Two hundred came
to us in eight days time. They made report of the extremity of their
sufferings, and showed me a piece of their Bread, very black, and full of Sand,
and indeed so bad that I could not imagine how it sustained them, receiving but
nine or ten ounces a day. Amongst this number of desertors a matter of sixscore
desired to serve me, which I distributed amongst the body to keep them asunder,
except sixty Portugals, which I put into the Colonels Company of my Regiment,
till I might get a number sufficient to form a body. The Spaniards were very
much concerned to hear on our Posts in the night their Language spoken, and
invitations to run away, by representing the necessity they suffered, and the
abundance that was amongst us. That which I thought most pleasant, was that
they which were with us called the other the Rebels of the people of Naples.
Their most prodigious sufferings were every day more and more confirmed, by our
taking sometimes six or seven of those wretches, who having lost the shape of
men, went out of their Quarters to eat Grass like beasts, of which some burst,
when (having come to us) they had filled their bellies. This disbanding more
and more increased, and so far that apprehending they might be met with as
they went away, and stopped to strengthen the Garrison of Gaeta, and some
others of the Kingdom, I shut up in the Vicairy all those that would not take
entertainment with us; There was amongst them a Portugese of ill mien but good
wit, who by my Order going over to the enemy never came back without debauching
five or six of his Companions, and one time brought me seventeen; in this he
had success nine or ten Voyages, but being at last discovered, by imprudently
opening himself to a Sergeant, he was hanged, which broke off this little
commerce, and for a while prevented the desertion of their Soldiers.

The Spaniards now gave themselves for lost, and resolved to abandon the
Castles, and retire to Gaeta, and the other Forts of the Kingdom, in
expectation of succors from Spain, and Provisions from Sardinia and Sicilia,
from whence came three Vessels laden with Corn so opportunely, that at that
time they had not wherewithal to subsist above three or four days. This great
necessity put them upon all contrivances to oblige me to go out of Naples,
believing my presence alone to be the cause of all their sufferings, and that
my address, vigilance, and secret negotiations reduced them to this unhappy
condition. An accident, of which I made the best advantage, redoubled their
jealousy of the Nobility. The Duke of Andria having been with Don John and the
Viceroy, to get leave to go home, sent a Priest, in whom he had confidence, to
fetch him two thousand Crowns he had left in Naples with one of his friends,
and some Stuffs to make him Clothes. As he returned with all these things he
was taken and brought to me, as also some Letters found about him. After many
enquiries of his Masters health, I ordered him to make him many Complements in
my name, and caused the Money and Stuffs to be found out and restored without
loss of any thing, telling him in the presence of a great many, purposely that
it might become public, that I would my self correspond with his Master, and
all Persons of Quality that had affairs in the Town, or any thing to pretend
there, and that no man should better nor more readily acquit himself of all
their Commissions, desiring nothing so much as to serve them, concerning my
self more in their interests than in my own particular. I gave him two of my
Guards for his convoy, and caused him to pass in sight of the Spaniards, to
whom this manner of proceeding gave strange suspicions, supposing it to be the
consequence of a particular friendship I had made with him at our Conference.
He pretended himself much obliged to me, but stayed but little with the
Viceroy, who was in a mind to have secured him; which yet he durst not do,
apprehending that by means of the interest his Birth and Merit gave him amongst
the Nobility, his imprisonment would be followed by a general Declaration in my
favor: but this became so fixed in the thoughts of that revengeful and
distrustful Nation, that on doubt of some correspondence with me at my last
journey, a few days after my return, they caused him to be miserably slain.

One Morning, Don Carlo Gonzago, who kept very near me to get an employment,
demanded if he might speak freely to me; which having promised, he told me,
that a very honest man, a friend of his, entrusted with Credentials not to be
disowned, had desired him to come and found me, whether I would hear a proposal
in behalf of the Spaniards, on condition nevertheless that if I liked it not, I
should not enquire his name; to this he caused me to make Oath, which I
religiously observed. I was willing to hear him, that by the largeness of their
offers I might judge of the extremity they were reduced to. They were to give
me Finale and the other places of Toscanie in Sovereignty; with the
Principalities of Salerno, Piombino and Portolongone; for attacquing which they
would supply me with sufficient Forces, besides all such as my interests could
draw together in the Kingdom of Naples, if I would retire. That they would make
what they offered me worth three hundred thousand Crowns a year, for which I
should have sufficient security; and when I should be out of danger of exposing
my self, I should be umpire between them and the People; and knowing the
Pretenses I had by my Great Grand-mothers mother to the Duchy of Modena, they
would procure me to be put in possession of it by the Emperor, who should send
an Army out of Germany to join with that of the Duchy of Milan, and that to
revenge themselves of the Duke of Modena, they would abandon all affairs in
other places, and give me the command of such Forces, that I should find very
few rubs in my way, Italy having no cause to be jealous if I sought to make
good the right I had to that Sovereignty.

I answered, smiling, that he had done me a pleasure to make me understand by
his discourse, that the Spaniards were so near ruin, that I would prosecute
them the more vigorously, and that though my own were infallible, I would never
fall from my fidelity to the Crown of France, nor attacque its Allies, and that
I would most religiously observe the Oath I had made to the people of Naples,
never till death to lay down the Arms I had taken up for their Liberty: that I
was not offended with him for what he had undertaken, knowing that his
friendship for me was the cause of it, and that being an enemy to the
Spaniards, (as I had been informed) they having ever used him ill, and detained
him so long time Prisoner, I was assured he had an aversion for this
employment, and that he was too much a man of Honor, to advise me to fail of
my duty, and betray those I was obliged to serve: That he should give thanks to
his friend in my name, and assure him I would never enquire after him.

The Town the mean while was divided into six factions, which obliged me to be
extraordinarily scrupulous in my conduct, lest, whilst I inclined to one, the
rest might join with our enemies, which would have infallibly ruined me: but I
had influence over all those separated interests, without discovering my own
thoughts, and kept so good correspondence with them all, that I obliged them to
concur to the execution of my enterprise, which was not difficult. The first of
these factions was that of Gennaro and the rabble, which ever since their
hatred of the Spaniards had been so habituated to the plundering of Houses, and
all manner of insolences, that they could not now forbear them. These people
were enraged against me, because by my punishing such actions, they were forced
to observe the prohibitions I made: but they hoped for some disorder and
revolution, little caring from whence it came, nor who had the advantage of it,
provided they might rob and murder with impunity, being so accustomed to
blood, that they preferred the pleasure of shedding it above all other
advantages. They continued an irreconcilable hatred against the Nobility and
civilized people, whom they feared, because they had so often and highly
affronted them, they could expect no pardon. I kept this sort of people low,
and was their capital enemy, believing that if I permitted disorders, I could
not subsist long, I yet indulged them by the care I had to supply them with all
things necessary to life at easy rates.

The second was that which desired to submit to France, made up for the
greatest part of Artificers, who hoping to make their fortunes by our Nation,
and enrich themselves by our expense in Clothes, and all such other things with
which we are wont to furnish our selves more than other Nations, and pretending
to no Offices nor Employments, apprehended not subjection to foreign Dominion;
desiring that rather than any other, because by it they expected more profit. I
humored all that were of it, seeming to have no other thought, nor to labor to
any other purpose, but as I desired to continue in their good opinion, I was
also to be careful to keep secret that pretense, that I might not reunite all
other parties to join with our enemies, which must first be driven away: after
which it would be easy to attain our ends.

The third was composed of Monks and Priests, and others of the devouter sort,
who desired the reuniting the Crown of Naples to the Papacy; this I let them
understand was my principal end; that I was of a Family highly Catholic, very
much devoted to the Pope, with whom I had taken secret Measures, and made so
near a Conjunction that he was well satisfied of my intentions; That they ought
to concur with me to drive away the Spaniards, and keep their thoughts very
secret, lest we might meet obstacles, by the confederacy of those which desired
the contrary, and I promised that as soon as we had overcome our enemies, we
would submit our selves to the authority of the Church.

The fourth was more easily managed than the rest; for desirous of a King, and
signifying that they had made choice of my person, they were sensible of the
necessity of Secrecy, and the friendship they had for me, securing them of my
acknowledgements, they were altogether guided by my Directions, and acted
nothing but by my Orders. This Party consisted of such as aspired to the
honors and grandeurs of the Kingdom, every one according to his Quality, who
resolving never to become subject to a foreign Dominion, desired no money might
go out of their Country, imagining this the only way to enrich themselves, and
re-establish traffic, and that a King whom they had chosen, for his own
interest and preservation, would have no other Country but his Kingdom, nor
any confidence, love, or inclination but for his Subjects.

The fifth Faction was of those that desired a Republic, of whom the greatest
part understood not what they sought, mightily taken with the word, which they
scarce knew how to pronounce, imagining they should be subject to no body, and
that the meanest of the common people should have credit and power equal with
the richest and best qualified: I persuaded them that such an establishment was
my prevailing passion, that I looked on such a structure with affection and
delight, as the workmanship of my hands, since I had been the first proposer of
it; and that the Dignity of Duke, to which they had raised me, gave me the
first place, the principal authority, and all the Honors of a Sovereign. I
moved them to consider how much it concerned us to conceal this design, that we
might not incite against us all that were contrary, and that as soon as ever
the Spaniards were driven away, toward which we must with hazard of our lives
use our utmost endeavor; This form of Government would in a manner establish
it self, none being excluded, and every man in a possibility of finding
advantages and security, and making his fortune by it, of what quality or
profession soever he might be. In this manner every one of the five factions
took me to be of their party, and changing like a Camelion, according as I
spoke to one or the other of them, concealing my own thoughts, I discovered
theirs, to get light, and take unerring measures.

The last was of such as were addicted to the Spanish interests by reason of
those themselves had on the Gabels, where lay the best part of their Estates; I
gave them hopes of preserving them in case of a subversion of the Government;
and minded them that a greater jealousy being had of them than of others, they
ought to be more careful of their conduct, since the least of their motions
would be made criminal: These were obliged to me for preserving their fortunes,
and the honor of every one of their Families, whereof I assured them to take a
particular care, provided they did nothing to deprive me of the means of
protecting them. I commended their zeal and fidelity, and told them I affected
and esteemed them more than the rest, because they were persons of more honor.
These were very sollicitous for my safety, which they thought necessary to
their own, and their ruin being infallible on the least revolution, being
hated by the common people, and the Spaniards having no jealousy of them, they
gave me notice of all conspiracies against me, and all other enterprises,
fearing my fall and their own with me, if the success were dubious. These were
the men that served me to most advantage, and which I insensibly united to the
fourth faction, because they resolved, if they must lose their old Master, to
have no other but me. Thus I made advantage of the variety of men's
inclinations, governing all these Cabals, every one in a particular manner, and
with such address that none of the rest had the least suspicion of it.

In the mean time as all the Passages of my life have made me appear of an
amorous complexion, all the Beauties of the Town, and some Ladies of Quality,
sought to engage with me in correspondencies of Gallantry, some set on by the
enemy, to get some tie upon me, others by the Nobility to discover whether they
had any thing to fear from me for the future, that Nation being naturally
jealous, and apprehending on this account the humor of ours; others stimulated
by their own inclinations, and advice of their Relations, to make advantage by
their acquaintance with me, and hoping to govern me by it. But I shut my eyes
and ears against such charming Baits, being sensible that to justify what was
passed, I must stand more on my guard than another person, and be more vigilant
over my actions, which were penetrated by all the World. My conduct has given
the lie to all the false reports were raised of me, for I refused all
rendezvous that were appointed, nay, to receive particular visits at home, of
persons that would have exposed themselves to engage me in all manner of
hazards, and which one may assuredly say were worth enjoying. One adventure
happened to me which will not be impertinent to relate; but I must first tell
that being no longer in apprehension of the popular tumults of the
Marketplace, I thought I ought to quit that neighborhood, and lodge nearer
the heart of the City, that I might be readier to transport my self to all
parts where my presence should be necessary. I made choice therefore of the
Palace of Don Ferrante Caraciolo, one of the fairest of Naples, which I caused
to be magnificently furnished, where I appeared with more Grandeur, and all my
Court with greater splendor. It is situated before the Church of S. John of
Carbonnare, where is the Tomb of King Ladislaus, and Queen Jane his sister, the
Founders of that Convent, one of the fairest and most sumptuous edifices of
Italy. Before this Palace is a Piazza large enough to draw up four thousand men
in Battalia; here I ever after held my Residence. The day after I was settled
there, going to Mass at the Carmelites, where many Ladies were assembled
according to custom, and amongst the rest an Advocates daughter with her
mother, about seventeen years of age, one of the most beautiful Creatures of
the Town, as soon as I was on my Knees she arose, and coming blushing to make
me a handsome curtsie, presented me an embroidered Prayer Book, and afterward
retired. Mass being ended, her mother presented me a Petition which I granted,
and signed on the Rails of the Altar. About ten a Clock at night she was
brought to my Palace in a Sedan, and sent in word by one of my Chamberlains,
that the Party that in the Morning had given me a Prayer Book, was come to
desire a private audience according to my promise: I sent her word that I was
too far engaged in business to entertain her as I desired, that I thanked her
for her good inclinations, and besought her to continue them, and lest she
should meet any ill accident going home, caused her to be attended by two of my
Guards. I spoke not of this adventure that I might not prejudice her
Reputation, and had the like Moderation on several other occasions, that I
might not for a little Gallantry, which could not have been concealed, lose the
good opinion I had taken so great pains to acquire, thinking my self obliged to
give Examples of Discretion to all, it being my continual endeavor to cause
others to observe it, and contain themselves within the limits of their duty.

One Morning giving audience according to my custom Onofrio Pagano Captain of
la Pietra del Pesce, a man very insolent and intimate with Gennaro, that never
had any kindness for me, accompanied by a Fisherman, of such humor as himself,
that was his Alfieres, turning angerly every way, brutishly told me, it was
strange I could not be spoken to without being heard and crowded, which obliged
me to command my Swisse Guards to make place, and suffer none to come near,
that audience might be private, and un-interrupted: his Alfieres would needs
come on, and one of my Swisses stopping him, he gave him such a blow with his
fist on his Stomach that he fell on the ground. This impudence angered me, and
going to him I struck him on the head, which was bald, with my cane, in such a
manner, that I laid him all bloody at my feet. His Captain in an arrogant tone
told me my Guards began to be as insolent as those of the Viceroy. I answered
him fiercely, that I would make him know what was due to me, and that as much
respect should be given to my Switzers when they were about my Person, as had
ever been born to the Viceroy of Naples: then commanding his Ensign to be sent
to Prison, I swore to hang him without mercy. Their insolence was immediately
changed to submission, and falling on their Knees, they both begged my pardon,
and that wretch his life which I refused, and he was carried to the Vicairie.
Whilst I was at Mass, his Wife and Children with disheveled hair came to beg
his life, which I pretended to refuse, but applying themselves to the Ladies to
intercede for them, at their Requests I granted what was desired, and
conditionally that afterward he should be more respective, sent immediately to
give him Liberty; this they promised for him, and went away very well
satisfied. In the afternoon being at the Gate of my Palace expecting my Horses
to ride abroad, the People's Elect, who sought nothing more than to embroil me,
came in a great heat to tell me he would no longer exercise his office, because
it exposed him to affronts, and that my Proclamations were so little observed,
that one of the City Captains of the Suburbs of Loretto, who came followed by
thirty Soldiers to speak with him about business, had injured him in words,
and his Soldiers presented their Muskets at him: I promised to do him
justice, and the fellow at that instant passing before my door, with the same
train, I asked him, if he had not notice of the Prohibition I had made on pain
of death, to lead Soldiers in Arms about the Town, unless at the hours of
setting the Watch, and especially to go to the Magistrates followed by them; He
told me, Yes, but that being a man of credit in his Quarter he might do what he
pleased, upon which having caused him to be disarmed and carried to Prison, I
returned to my lodging, to speak about business with the Peoples Elect, and
entertain Marco Antonio Brancaccio, that was come to visit me. I was scarce
entered into my Chamber when a multitude of people assembled tumultuously in
the Piazza, and above a hundred of the hottest came up my stairs, making a
great noise in my Hall; and crying out, they must needs see me. I went to them
and asked what they desired of me, they told me that the people having notice
that I had imprisoned one of their Leaders, demanded his Liberty. I said that
to come in such a fashion was not the way to obtain favors of me; That this
might have done well with Mazaniello, or Gennaro, but that neither my humor
nor Quality could suffer it, and that it should cost their Camrade his life.
That I would have no Addresses made to me but on the Knee, and by Supplication;
Three of the Ringleaders arrogantly told me, the people would not have him
die, and would take Arms to prevent his execution. I drew my sword and being
about to run it into the belly of the most insolent, he fell on his Knees and
weeping besought my pardon. I told them all that to let them see I feared them
not, he should be hanged immediately, and turning to one of my Guards,
commanded him to give order to the Auditor General to cause him at that instant
to be led to punishment, and see him hanged in the middle of the Marketplace,
and told the other Mutineers they were the cause of his death, for otherwise I
would have pardoned him, and that I would therefore have them assist at his
execution, and be responsible that there should be no commotion: I will take
horse (said I) immediately, and if I do not find my self obeyed, or hear the
least murmuring before I come back, I will cause you all to be hanged. They
went away very submissive and much astonished; and a little while after I went
to see what passed, and found all things quiet, and my Orders executed, and
they that seemed most incensed, coming to me, said, You see how we have obeyed
you, and there has not been the least disorder. I was satisfied, and told
them, Now you know me, learn that I may be moved by Supplications made with
respect, but am ever inexorable to the insolent; go and be wiser another time,
and understand better what you owe me, and what I very well know how to oblige
you to pay me. Afterward I visited the Town and all the Posts, and returned to
end the day at home in my ordinary Employments. I ever comported my self in
such a manner, that tumults served only to add to my respect and authority

In the mean time Gennaro, Vincenzo Andrea, and the Peoples Elect, endeavored
secretly to cause more Insurrections, supposing that though I appeased many, it
was impossible but at length I must sink under some one; By new rumors which
they every day spread abroad, they incensed the rabble against the Duke of
Tursi, and published that I was on no other account so careful of his
preservation, but because he was necessary to my secret Correspondencies with
the Spaniards, and my Negotiations with them. Very few days passed in which I
was not obliged to go to his lodging, and drive away the multitude which
swarmed about it with design to do him mischief. I was weary at last of this
perpetual disquiet, and that I might provide the better for his safety, and
free my self from distrusting it, removed him to a house behind my Palace, to
the end that if the Corpse de guard at his Gate was not strong enough to secure
him from popular tumults, I might reinforce it with that which was before my
Palace, and which had order to march at the least noise should be heard. One
day sending the Knight de Fourbin to visit him, he made great complaints of the
Polonian Gentleman, who on all occasions was very insolent. My Guards
confirming this, to satisfy him, and punish the others imprudence, I caused
the Pole to be sent to Prison, and placed in his Room the Baron de la Guard, a
Gentleman of Provence, in whose Discretion and Vigilance we had both of us
great cause to be satisfied.

I am desirous here to justify my self of an accusation, that my want of Money
considered, I took not the advantage of his Ransom, which for two Reasons I
omitted, the first is that I thought it best to keep him, to have an exchange
ready for my Brother, in case he should be unfortunately taken in his journey
to me. The second, that making his offers to pay his Money at Genoua and no
where else, I should have had too great trouble in sending for it, Navigation
being very hazardous at that time of the year, that I had no Galleys, and
thought it not reasonable to venture so considerable a sum in Felucca's, and
more that he would not pay the Money till he should be arrived in Genoua, and
was a man likely enough to lay a design to take it back again upon the way from
those I should entrust to bring it to me.

I was afterward blamed that I had not sent him to Portolongone, because he
and his Grandchild would have been considerable enough to have redeemed me out
of the hands of the Spaniards, when a while after I was so unfortunate as to
fall into them. My enemies, that never lost any occasion of doing me hurt,
would have injustly accused me, that rejecting all dependence on France, I did
not enough confide in her to put so considerable Prisoners into her hands: Had
I been willing to have done this it was not in my power, because of the
necessity of my expectance of the arrival of the French Galleys, there being no
possibility of sending him by Land, and through the Popes Territories, and as
little of hazarding him on Felucca's, which might easily have been taken by the
enemies Galleys or Brigantines, neither could I trust Mariners, who might be
corrupted with the temptation of making their fortunes, or according to the
bloody inclination of vulgar Neapolitans, murder him and his Grandchild, when
they should be no longer awed by my Presence. All which reasons seriously
considered, make it appear there was no more ground for blaming me on this
occasion, than on the rest, wherewith on so slender probabilities they sought
to do so ill Offices.

The Spaniards perceiving so little success in the attempts they had made upon
me, the extremity of their affairs caused them to have recourse to all manner
of ways to preserve themselves from ruin, and they consulted the Nobility for
remedies to so pressing mischiefs: They sent likewise to Cardinal Filomarini
for his Counsel, who conferring with Vincenzo Andrea, founded Gennaro, and all
of them made this result, that the people having an extraordinary hatred and
distrust for the Duke of Arcos, all that had passed being laid at his door, and
the authority taken from him, and put into the hands of Don John of Austria, a
good effect might be produced: That the consideration of his quality, and of
the affection the King his Father had for him, would obtain credit to
whatsoever he should promise on his behalf, it being to be judged, he should
not be disavowed, and that a young and ambitious Prince, that was so
sollicitous a pursuer of honor, would be a religious observer of his Word, and
facilitate all things, that he might by any conditions how disadvantageous
soever, preserve to Spain a Crown that seemed already lost, the Spaniards
hoping that if they could once disarm the people, and put an end to their
seditions, they should in such a manner fortify themselves, that they might in
time re-establish their power, and restore all things to their first condition,
and observe no more of their promises than such as they liked, especially after
the peace with France, toward which their Ministers at Munster used all
possible endeavors. Though the execution of this design followed not till some
time after, yet its Negotiations and Projects being now set afoot, I thought it
not amiss to anticipate the relation a few days.

The Nobility entrusted the Prior John Baptista Caraciola a Knight of Malta,
Don Diomede ^arafa, Don Joseph de Sangre, and Don Marco Antonio Gennaro,
understanding and creditable persons to negotiate all their affairs with Don
John, and to represent to him, that he being in no manner blameable for the
disorders of the Country, nor the tyrannies exercised by the Viceroy, all the
World would with joy see the authority in his hands, and hope to receive all
manner of good usage under the Government of a young and liberal Prince, that
could not be imagined capable of avarice, nor of oppressing the Country to
enrich himself. That his person so courteous and agreeable, would win the
hearts of all men, as well as his birth cause all manner of respect, and that
none would apprehend the resentments of a Father, whilst so dear a son
mediated his affairs, and demanded favors would be joyfully granted, to gain
him greater affection and authority: and that this being the last remedy for
Preservation of Spain, their opinion was it ought to be made use of, so to
oblige all to comply with their duty; That the Duke of Arcos being unfortunate,
would be easily made appear guilty; that he could never regain the reputation
he had lost; That the rcsentment of all that was passed would easily light upon
him, that to dispossess him, though by his own consent, would look like a
punishment, which would satisfy the people, and calm their rage, which usually
ceases, as soon as a subject is held out on whom to divert it, and that they
would then without question, give a more favorable ear to Reconciliation, when
in stead of punishments, no mention should be made but of Clemency, Pardon, and
favorable Usage.

One Morning whilst I was at Mass at the Carmelites, a Priest was brought to
me, one of Cardinal Filomarini's Domestics, who had been taken returning from
the Spanish Quarters, with several Letters from his Master and others. He told
me his Master had sent him about particular business, especially to put an end
to some disorders happened amongst religious Persons, and that he came from the
Internuncio, to whom he had delivered certain dispatches from Rome. The people
was not satisfied with these poor excuses, and beginning to take heat, were so
far transported as with great exclamations to say, they would kill the
Cardinal in his Palace, since he betrayed them and held correspondence with
their enemies. I read some of the Letters, and judging, that what advantage
soever I might receive by letting loose the reins to the peoples fury, and
quitting my self of so dangerous an enemy, the consequences might be very bad,
and the death of a Cardinal exasperating the Court of Rome, would acquire the
Popes indignation, with Censures, Excommunications, and interdictions against
the whole Town, which by troubling the scrupulous Consciences of the people of
that Country would very much alienate their inclinations from us. That our
enemies might make use of this, and would rejoice in the death of a Cardinal,
in whom they had no entire confidence, and of whom they made use out of mere
necessity. I resolved therefore to secure him from violence, and endeavor
absolutely to gain him, by so essential an obligation. Therefore making a sign
to the people to hear me, I told them; You understand, my friends, that the
Cardinal our Archbishop ever tenderly loved us, as a true and indulgent Father:
that he has given us testimonies of this upon all occasions, that he ever
disapproved the tyrannical proceedings of the Spaniards, who incapable of
pardoning him, continually endeavor his destruction, of which they would enjoy
the advantage, and make us bear the burden of the indignation and Resentment
of Rome. What has now happened is no more than one of their usual Artifices,
imagining that without consideration we would suffer our selves to be
transported to that which would entirely ruin us: let us avoid this snare they
have so cunningly and maliciously laid; I understand the Cardinals inclination
for us, which he has often declared to me, let us love and respect him as we
ought, and distrusting the malice of our enemies, do the contrary of all they
expect: They would have us destroy him, let us endeavor to preserve him to us
in their despite, and discovering to him their enterprises against his life,
increase his hatred for them, and his friendship to us. I will go and inform
him of all and you shall see, that I will deal in such a manner with him, as to
gain us the friendship of Rome; let us then retort upon the Spaniards, that
odium they pretend to cast upon us. The people having ever had an extraordinary
affection and respect for him, I revived it in the hearts of them all, who
unanimously cried out, We own him for our Father, and instead of killing him as
the enemy would have us, we will love him more. He ever protected us, and never
gave us occasion to distrust him, give him this assurance in our name, and that
we will revenge him on the horrible perfidiousness of the Spaniards, against
whom for his sake we will make war without Quarter, and not put an end to our
resentment till we have the life of the last Spaniard that shall remain in the
Kingdom.

Leaving the people in the humor I had inspired into them, I went to him
taking along with me all the Letters, sending him word by a footman that I was
coming about an affair of extraordinary importance. I met him as he came from
saying Mass, and being seated and the Chamber door shut, that we might not be
interrupted nor over heard, told him, My Lord, you may judge whether my
friendship be useful to you, since had it failed, you had not been alive at
this present. I come from appeasing the people so incensed against you, that if
my credit and discourse had not pacified them, they had come tumultuously to
kill you, and drag you about the Streets. It is happy for you that the
authority is no longer in the hand of a Mazaniello or Gennaro, but in a man's of
my condition and inclination, that have all manner of respect for the Papacy,
and Veneration for the Purple invests you, with esteem and affection for your
person, and that being passionately desirous of your good opinion, will make
use of all manner of endeavors to merit it by serving you. This discourse made
him tremble, and drew tears from his eyes, and transported partly by fear and
partly by gratitude, he was ready to cast himself at my feet. You ought, said
I, to concern your self in my preservation, for whilst I live you need fear
nothing. I have allayed the storm that threatened you, and I will bring you anon
the best of the people to assure you of the general affection and respect of
the Town. I cannot but tell you that you were so near ruin, that none but my
self could have prevented it so easily and successfully. One that belongs to
you was taken bringing you Letters; for your sake I caused him to be dismissed
immediately, but it is just that you give me some light of your Negotiations,
and it is unreasonable that I should continue in danger, because I have saved
you from it. I very well perceive these Letters treat of something else than
affairs of Friars, and this Cloystera^ Canting is only to conceal considerable
Correspondencies and Negotiations. These words General, Provincial, Prior and
Proctor are appliable to more eminent Persons, and it is not the Surplice nor
Mysteries of Religion that are here intended; you ought not to be surprised,
but to deal with me more frankly and confidently, because my eyes are too open
to be easily lulled asleep in matters of such importance, which concern no less
than my honor, liberty, and life.

At last we read together all the Letters, of which I demanded the explication.
After a long amusing me by inconsiderable justifications, and frivolous
excuses, he was forced (finding I would not be so imposed upon) to make me a
general confession, and acquaint me that the renunciation of the Duke of Arcos,
and putting the authority into the hands of Don John was in agitation, and that
his sense thereupon being demanded, he had frankly given it. That as Archbishop
he thought himself obliged to employ his utmost endeavors to appease the
disorders of his Diocese. That the tyranny of the Spaniards, and rage and
brutality of the people, had always equally displeased him, that he thought by
this means Peace and Quiet might be established, and that casting back the
odium of all that was passed upon the Duke of Arcos, and imputing to him the
ill conduct of the Spaniards, and the violence of their Government, more credit
would be given to the word of a young Prince, authorized by his fathers
affection, that would concern himself to make good the Pardons, and maintain
the Privileges he had promised, That the Kingdom of Naples now so near its
ruin, would be by him preserved, at what price soever; that any conditions
might be demanded of him, to which he would most joyfully condescend, that he
might not lose all by pretending to too much. That I could not blame his
proceedings, since I would doubtlessly do the same my self were I in his place;
and for what concerned me, that my conduct had been so obliging and prudent,
that his first thoughts had been to provide for my safety, and that it was but
just to have a care of the Preservation of a Person, to whom both Town and
Country owed the Estates of the most considerable, and the honor of all
Families, since at the day of my arrival, devastations, plunderings and
murders ceased, I having established greater order and quiet, than the
Spaniards could ever do in their highest prosperity.

I answered him that this so vindicative Nation would not change its
inclinations with the change of a Governor, that Lions, though tame, are still
to be apprehended. That we could have no more confidence in Don John of Austria
than in the Duke of Arcos: that we very well understood Resolutions were not
taken by particular Persons. That nothing was done but by order of the
Councils, whose Maxims changed not. That their punishments were nothing the
less to be apprehended for being delayed, because they never failed to arrive
at last. That I had made the Neapolitans too sensible of these Verities, to
suffer themselves to be lulled asleep or surprised, that they could neither
enjoy Repose nor Safety as long as one Spaniard was left in the Kingdom, that
affection to his Country ought to inspire him with the same thoughts, that his
services would at last be recompensed with ingratitude, that recourse was had
to him out of mere necessity, and that the interest he had amongst some of the
people would be imputed to him as a capital crime. That he would one day suffer
on this account, never being able to obtain an entire confidence, nor (the
advances he had already made considered) escape the revenge of an incensed,
cruel, and bloody Nation. That I would gladly advise him to concern himself no
more (as he had hitherto done) in all their Negotiations, where he could not
observe so just a counterpoise but one or the other party being ill satisfied,
and jealous of him would equally put him in danger of his life, which I had now
saved, but perhaps another time should not be able to effect. That I conjured
him no more to expose himself to so great danger, but to sit still in
expectation of heavens disposal of all things, it being to no purpose for him
to go about to oppose its decrees.

He promised to make a good use of my counsel, and never forget the obligation
he acknowledged he had to me, but all his life concern himself in my security
and advantage; I told him he might very easily give me a convincing testimony
of this, by discovering to me what persons of the Town I might confide in, and
whom I was to distrust. I cannot, said he, break the Oath of secrecy I have
made, besides that possibly you would not believe what I should tell you. I
confess, said I, I have pressed you too far, and I understand well enough on
whom to fix my suspicions, and I earnestly beseech you to comport your self so,
that they may never settle on you. He gave me all assurances possible, and I
left him, thinking I had done enough, by preventing him (out of consideration
of the hazard he had run) from maintaining afterward any suspicious
correspondencies, which he a while forbore, if he did not exactly observe all
he had promised me.

In the afternoon I carried to him some of the principal Citizens, who
acquainting him with the danger he had escaped told him what I had done in
order to it, and assured him that this accident had augmented the peoples
confidence and friendship for him, and redoubled their hate and resentments
against the Spaniards. By this he understood how powerfully I could divert men's
inclinations by my address and credit.

The great want of Provisions amongst the Spaniards made me resolve to cut off
all possibility of their receiving any by Land, yet I apprehended lest despair
might oblige them to attempt to clear the way of Capua, from whence they might
easily pass to Puzzolo, but their way from Puzzolo to Naples was cut off by the
Village of Fora Grotta, in my possession, of which I thought they might
sometime or other make themselves Masters, if I had not the Tower of Pied de
Grotta, and consequently the Suburbs of Chiai, which, of all those of the Town,
only held for them. In order to this, the tenth of January, I walked to the
Convent of Camaldolis, seated on a hill, from whence I could at my ease
consider all that Suburb, and the Tower I designed to cause to be attacqued
next Morning. The Prospect of this Convent is one of the pleasantest in the
World, but that which best pleased me was that after a diligent observation of
the situation and avenues of the Tower of Pied de Grotta, a Pass so necessary
for my descent into the Suburb, I perceived the enterprise to be easy,
provided it were vigorously attempted. At night I sent for Jacomo Rosso, and
commanded him to take three hundred men of his Regiment and attacque it. It is
an ancient Roman building, adjoining to a Convent of Friars, and near Virgil's
Tomb, where something very remarkable is to be seen; the Tomb is of white
Marble, with a Spherical Arch, on the top of which, time out of mind, a Laurel
has sprung out of the Marble, without any earth for its preservation; and the
old one withering some years since, nature produced another, as if to eternize
the memory of so great a Person by the Prodigy of a Laurel, whose Branches have
in all times been made use of, as well to crown the heads of Poets as
Conquerors.

The attacque of the Convent and of this Tower were vigorously made and
seconded, from eleven in the forenoon till three after Dinner, when the
Garrison seeing no appearance of succor, and that the Gate was fired with
pitched faggots, yielded to discretion. There marched out ten Spaniards and
twenty Neapolitans, commanded by a reformed Captain; The Spaniards I sent
Prisoners to the Vicary, and the Neapolitans took conditions with me. This
having facilitated the entrance of the Suburb of Chiai, I commanded Sergeant
Major Alexio, (that had taken the Duke of Tursi Prisoner) with three or four
hundred men drawn out of Vomero, and Lantignano, seconded by the company of
Matheo d' Amore chief of la Vinara, which consisted of near upon two hundred
good men, to attacque the Convent of S. Leonard, where above sixscore men kept
Garrison commanded by Joseph Riva, Paulo Fioretti (who became afterward that
famous Bandite, that having drawn together seven or eight thousand men, in the
year sixteen hundred fifty five, made all the Kingdom of Naples tremble, and
gave so great apprehension too to the Spaniards) and Colonel Onofrio de Scio.
The fight was hot, and lasted an hour: fearing the enemy might attempt to
relieve it with Felucca's, this Post being of extraordinary importance, and the
Sea about it not deep enough for Galleys, I commanded twelve well provided
Felucca's to begin a little Sea Fight by beating back such of the enemy as
presented themselves, the advantage of which was entirely on our side. I had
sent Pione Captain of the Lazares with thirty of his men to carry Fascines, and
serve as Pioniers at this little siege, who beginning to fire the Convent on
all sides, the besieged having no hope of relief, nor able to defend themselves
any longer, were forced to yield to discretion: The Soldiers I divided amongst
my Troops, and the Officers tarried with me till I might have Employments for
them.

By the taking this considerable Post, standing on the Seaside, and whose
situation makes it naturally strong, and easy to be defended, I became Master
of all the Suburb of Chiay, and the Spaniards so streight'ned, that they had no
more communication by land with the rest of the Kingdom. My men encouraged by
this good success advanced to the very Gate of Chiay, where finding a weak
Guard they charged it so smartly, that they beat the men back and entered pell
mell amongst them. They were in a condition to have pursued their Victory to
the middle of the enemies Quarters, if the Baron of Batteville had not come in
with a considerable body of Spanish foot, and reformed Officers. A skirmish
began which lasted three quarters of an hour, the advantage inclining sometimes
to one side sometimes to the other: but at last my men were fain to give way to
the greater number, and retreat to the Convent of S. Leonard, and the Palace of
Don Pedro de Toledo, which we kept to the last. This was one of the
remarkablest and best fought actions that happened in Naples during all the
Revolutions.

The next day I visited these two Posts and walked in the Garden of the Prince
of Bisignano, one of the most pleasant of Italy, by reason of its abundance of
Orange Trees, very much satisfied in the acquisition of this Suburb, as well by
reason of its so greatly incommoding the enemy, as of its fair and delicious
Walks. The Garrison I left there began a chaffering with the enemy, which the
advantage I made by it obliged me to allow, which lasted till the Baron of
Batteville discovering it, broke it off, by causing two or three of his
Soldiers to be hanged. It was an exchange of Turnips and other roots for
Powder the Spaniards in their extremity of misery, for this small refreshment,
giving us all that was delivered to them for guarding their Post.

About this time a Physician proposed to me an enterprise upon Pitzo Falcone,
which I esteem more than the Castles, it being seated on an eminence,
perpendicular almost on every side; it commands the new Castle, and Castello
del Ovo, and with its Canon flanks all the Viceroys Palace. This I looked on
as a very handsome design, but having well examined it found the execution so
dangerous and difficult, that I thought not fit to attempt it. In the mean time
the Prince of Cellamare, Achilles Minutalo, and Caesar Blanco, the first Decon,
and the two others members of the Collateral Counsel, sent to me for saveguards
for preserving such houses as they had in the Spanish Quarters, foreseeing that
I should quickly be master of them, since they could no longer defend nor
continue in them, being unprovided of Victual, and their Soldiers become so
feeble by the misery endured, that they hardly had strength to perform any
duty; I was well pleased at this news, learning by it the extremity to which I
had reduced them, and my joy was augmented when two days after the same Prince
of Cellamare a Genovese, very much addicted to his interests, fearing he had
ill employed his Money in buying the charge of Postmaster General of the
Kingdom, the revenue whereof is very great, sent to desire of me the
Confirmation of it; of which I gave him hope, provided I might be informed by
him and his two friends of all that passed in the Collateral Council. And
indeed after this I had punctual advertisement of what was done there either by
them or other secret correspondencies I had negotiated.

The Nobilities Army being in a manner all dispersed, and the few Gentlemen
that continued together in Capua unable to suffer the command of Vincenzo
Tuttavilla, made continual complaints, having a very great aversion for him.
The Viceroy therefore and Collateral Council resolved to dismiss him, and
leave the Nobility the choice of such a General as should be pleasing to them,
who by his interest might hinder the falling off of the rest, and cause to
return to him a good part of such as had retired to their houses. They all
concurred to obey Don Lewis Poderico, whose Prudence and Valor had acquired
him a general esteem. This choice was approved by all men, and recruited the
body of their Troops before almost reduced to nothing, and that in horse and
foot could make but fifteen hundred men. In fifteen days time they made it up
three thousand, and the Spaniards giving them order to cause Corn to be sent
from Capua, they refused to obey it, that they might not disfurnish themselves
of the little that remained, scarcely sufficient to make their troops subsist;
this obliged the Spaniards to send to them the Baron of Goeslan with the
Burgundian horse, they having no more Provender nor Forage, and desirous to
discharge themselves of so many mouths, being reduced to the last extremity.
Being very solicitous to make advantage of all conjunctures, I negotiated an
intelligence with a Sergeant and three Spanish Soldiers, to deliver me the
Post of Donna Aluina. An agreement was made for five hundred Crowns, of which I
paid them two by advance. The day that this enterprise should have been put in
execution, the Sergeant either repenting of his treason against his Nation, or
desirous to keep to himself all the Money he was to share with his Companions,
went to the Baron of Batteville, and discovered all, after assurance of
indemnity, and to inherit the Spoils of his Camrades. The day the Post was to
be delivered, the Baron came thither, having caused the Traitors to be hanged,
and substituted reformado Officers in their places, who spoke with one I had
sent to discover, whether it was easy to execute that which had been
contrived. They showed him the weakness of the Guard, which Batteville had
caused to draw off, standing behind undiscovered with two hundred reformado's.
I distrusted the facility that appeared in the business, and the negligence of
the Guard on so considerable a Post; yet I caused the Troops to march at the
hour appointed, and the disguised Soldiers having themselves begun to slight
their works, I caused them to be narrowly observed by him that had treated with
the former in my behalf, who brought me word that these were new faces,
whereupon I ordered them at our arrival to be fired on, that their deceiving me
might be punished by their deaths. Batteville running to the alarm was received
by my men with a great Volley, and perceiving by their not advancing that he
was discovered, made it his only business quickly to make up his breast-work,
a skirmish following for about half an hour of little loss or advantage to
either side.

A lay brother of the Convent of Sancta Maria la Nova, one of the most
considerable of the enemies Posts, came to propose to me a design of surprising
it by introducing Soldiers through the Formal: this is a certain Aqueduct
which passes under all the Streets of the Town, carrying Water to the Houses
and Convents. I sent a Person of Trust to discover whether this were feasible,
where he was showed a place would receive two hundred men, and the Spanish
Court of Guard, so weakened by hunger, and tired by continual duty that they
could hardly support themselves. As misfortune would have it, an old Friar that
could not sleep, having by chance seen this young Brother bring a stranger into
the Conduit of the Cloister, gave notice of it to Don Alvaro de la Torre,
Lieutenant of the Camp-master General, who having caused him to be secured, by
force of torment made him confess all he had negotiated; Not coming to me next
Morning, nor hearing any thing from him in three days, I guessed my business
was discovered, and endeavoring to get information of it, learned that they
had put him to death, and that I had failed in one of the handsomest and most
important Negotiations that had been managed in Naples.

I resolved to give alarms on all sides three or four times anight, to tire out
the Spaniards, whom I knew to be very much enfeeblished by fatigue and want,
which reduced them so low that they could no longer handle their arms, nor take
alarms. By this means I hoped one day to surprise them, by advantage of the
negligence to which I had accustomed them. But seeing nothing at present could
be done in the Town, I resolved to attempt something abroad, and commanded
Jacomo Rosso to go to Puzzoli, the inhabitants having let me understand the
Garrison was weak, and that being seconded, though but slightly, they could cut
all its throats, and let us into the Town, which would give me a facility to
attacque the Castle of Baiae, of highest importance, by excluding the Spanish
fleet from that Haven, that of Naples being so open that ships cannot ride
there in ill weather. He marched with three thousand men, and the Townsmen
beginning a Skirmish with their Garrison, the Marquis of Fuscalda, entered in
his fight with considerable Supplies, which obliged my men to retreat after a
light Skirmish. Perceiving enterprises of war not to succeed very happily
with me, deferring them, I had recourse to address and negotiations, and caused
the Governor of Baiae, an old and covetous Spaniard to be sounded, who
sensible of the ill condition of the affairs of his Nation, hearkened to my
offers, and after many Messages to and fro, in which I spent fifteen days,
agreed to deliver me the place for twelve hundred Pistols; At the same time I
treated to possess my self of the Town and Castle of Gaeta, (where Monsieur de
Fontenay had been tampering before) for a hundred thousand Livers. Wanting
Money for two so important enterprises, I gave him advice of it, that he might
have these two sums in a readiness. But believing his own intrigues better
than mine, he returned no answer, and these gre^ and probable expectations
vanished.

In the mean time the taking in of the most considerable places of the Land of
Lavoro, and Frontiers of the Ecclesiastical Dominion, opened us a way to Rome,
and made it so free, that the Messenger passed twice, and amongst others
brought me the Knight des Essars, the Baron of Causans, the Sieurs de
Beauchamp, de la Breche, formerly Captain of Horse in the service of Pope
Vrbain, de Miniere, de Graville, the Baron de Rouzou, the Marquis de Chabans,
the Sieurs de Canherou, du Fargis, du Chalar, with seven or eight other
Officers and their Servants. This liberty lasted not long, Papone without
drawing his Troops together imprudently engaging Don Baltazar de Capua, Prince
of the Roman Rock, who beat him, and afterward took again all the Places he
had possessed himself of, except Fondi, and the Tower of Sperlonga, whilst he
was employed in rallying his broken Troops, and composing a new body of such as
had not been in the fight.

The End of the Third Book.
The fourth BOOK.
THe Spanish Ministers at Rome, and Cardinals of that Faction, having been
consulted about displacing the Duke of Arcos, and settling the Authority on Don
John, looking upon it as the only means of establishing their affairs, and
advising that such an expedient might not be neglected, it began to be very
seriously endeavored, and a few days after the Vice-Royalty was resigned, and
Don John took possession of it, with the general applause of the Spaniards, and
all of their Party; the other sacrificing himself to interest of State, and
resolving to take upon him the public hatred (that his King and Master might
draw advantage from it) made all ready for his departure, which happened on the
six and twentieth of January; the Castles, Ships, and Galleys giving him the
honor of a farewell by Peals of Artillery, and Vollies of Musketeers, which
lasted all day: the People no less solemnizing it by reproaches and
imprecations against him.

The next day Don John having received the usual Complements of the Statesmen,
Nobility, Soldiers, and People that were for him, made a stately Cavalcade,
accompanied by all those that could get horses to follow him; and showing
himself in all the Quarters, visited the Castles and Posts, of which we had
notice by Acclamations, Vollies, and Fireworks, that continued all Night. He
afterward caused a Manifest to be published, imputing all effects of the ill
Government to the pride and avarice of the Duke of Arcos, promising a general
Pardon to the People, with the preservation of their Privileges, and not only
the Confirmation of such Capitulations as had been made with them, but an
augmentation to their advantage, for which he offered himself to be security,
omitting nothing that might unsettle their resolutions. He writ also to
Cardinal Filomarini, the Elect of the People, Vincenzo Andrea, and many other
of the most powerful of the Town, the greatest part of whom brought me their
Letters unbroken open; but Gennaro saying nothing of his, he whom he had
entrusted with reading it to him, immediately gave me account of it, of which
for some days I took no notice, to see what he would do; till wearied by his
silence, one morning when he came to me, telling him I wondered he made a
secret of so important a Dispatch as he had received, he went immediately and
fetched it, saying he had forgot to bring it sooner, though his intention was
to have done so; I accepted this bad excuse, but afterward observed him very
narrowly, as one that held secret Correspondencies with the Enemy.

Two days after a Gentleman, that was a relation of Cardinal Filomarini, who
(though of the Spanish Faction) was my particular friend, never concerning
himself in any thing that was contrary to me, and that had so much kindness for
me, that he had given me very considerable intelligence of designs against my
life, which I always found to be true; coming to visit me, told me, that if I
would allow him liberty of speech, he would acquaint me with something of very
great concernment. I heard him, and he represented, that having considered how
I was abandoned, he looked on me as lost; that the People hearkened after an
accommodation, if which must be, it was best to do it my self; for if it should
be concluded without my privity, the first condition would be my death, since
it could not be done securely whilst I was alive; but that if I pleased, I
might be the Mediator and Moderator of it, and find my advantages in it: that
if what had been already proposed came short of my ambition, besides the
investiture of the Duchy of Modena, which should be given me by the Emperor,
Spain would furnish me with Forces sufficient to put me in possession of it. He
told me I might have the sovereignty of the two Calabria's if I pleased, all
the strong places of which should be put into my hands, and that I should have
for security the Pope and College of Cardinals, and such of the Princes of
Italy as I would make choice of. I made a faint refusal, seeming to be obliged
by his good inclination; supposing by such a dissimulation easily to discover
all designs that were in the Town, and all persons inclined to an
accommodation. The Peoples Elect, two days after came to acquaint me that the
Town began again to want provisions; that the People was weary to have
continued so long in Arms without making any advantage; that the succors of
France being slow and uncertain, and its Fleet likely enough to do no more at
its second arrival than formerly, it was to be apprehended, that France was
glad of the extremity they were reduced to, that so despair might oblige them
to cast themselves into her arms; to which that Kingdom would never consent:
more disliking the French than Spanish Government. That he thought it best to
hearken to the Proposals of Don John of Austria, who, he was assured, would be
more willing to treat with me than any else, and that it would be more safe for
him to do so, because otherwise my credit might interrupt all he should
undertake. That the People freely put all their Concernments into my hands,
because they could never distrust my Conduct; that I might obtain good effects
by a personal Conference, of which though I failed, the common hatred for
Spain, which every day became cooler, would be rekindled by it: And that in
such a Treaty (besides the honor to have usefully served the Kingdom of
Naples, by freeing it from utter destruction) I should find for my self
establishments capable of satisfying my ambition. That to this purpose a Truce
of three days was to be made, and if I consented to a Conference with Don John
of Austria, it would be accepted, he being very passionately desirous of it;
and that I being the more able and of greater experience, the advantages of
such an interview would be certainly on my side.

As this Discourse ended, Gennaro came in and proposed a Truce and Conference,
by which I discovered the bottom of their thoughts and their secret
Correspondences, and in my heart swore the death of them both; but I concealed
it, thinking it too hazardous openly to attempt their punishment, and answered
them, that I attributed their discourse, more to their zeal for their Country,
than their friendship for the Spaniards, whose humor (as arrogant in prosperity
as submissive in misfortune) I perceived they understood not. That their
promises ought not to be depended upon, nor we to be lulled asleep with their
fair words: That we could not forget, how after a condescension to advantageous
Capitulations, their Fleet arriving and they recruited, instead of the
Ratification they had given cause to expect, by so many solemn Oaths, they
attempted to burn and sack the Town, and put all its inhabitants to the Sword;
that their inclinations were not any other ways moderated than by the
extremity to which they were reduced, and that coming short of power to oppose
their destruction, that was so near at hand, and so inevitable, they had
recourse to Artifice. That we could not trust them: That they breathed nothing
but revenge, though their Cruelty disguised it self under the appearances of
Clemency and Moderation. That their two Persons would be made the first Victims
to their Resentments: That for my own part I resolved most religiously to
observe what I had promised, either to die with my sword in my hand, or drive
them out of the Kingdom, and procure it that liberty of which it had given me
the Title of Defender: I therefore exhorted them to follow me in so just a
design, which would prove more easy than they could imagine. That I was
clear-sighted enough to assure them of this, and would never willingly suffer
the People to be imposed upon; that I would unseel their Eyes, to give them a
clear Prospect of what they were to fear, and what to do for their security and
quiet; and that I declared to them, that I would look upon all such as
afterward hearkened to any Proposal of the Enemy (all whose offers ought to be
distrusted) as Enemies of their Country, and that I would persecute to the
uttermost, and inflict Capital Punishment on any that for the future should
make such discourses to me as they had done. That I pardoned the indiscretion
of their zeal, that had so grossly abused them; but in case they resolved to
continue my friends, they were to comport themselves more prudently, and have
more fidelity and affection for the good of their Country. That I would
advertise the People of all that had passed, but with so much caution, they
should need to fear nothing, nor be suspected of Treason and Correspondence.
They gave me thanks, acknowledging I was more discerning than they, and that
nothing was more just or true than what I had told them; and that convinced by
my reasons, they heartily detested the malice of the Spaniards, whose
destruction they would for the future, pursue with hazard of their lives, and
be ever ready to shed their blood for the Public and defense of their Liberty.

As soon as they were gone away I sent for the Chiefs of the People, and gave
them an account of this Conference. They seemed as much to approve my Conduct,
as to be dissatisfied with that of Gennaro and the Peoples Elect: Vincenso
Andrea more crafty and more close, appeared not at all in these matters; but I
held him not therefore to be the less dangerous. I gave charge to all those
Chiefs (every one in his Quarter) to inform the People of what I desired they
should know; to observe carefully all the motions and actions of those that had
given us so just cause of suspicion, and employed such as I most confided in,
attentively to watch and give me advertisement of all designs of the Enemy, who
(as I conceived) would ere long set on foot some enterprise. I caused a
vigilant Eye to be held on all that came from them by our Posts to return into
the Town. One morning I had notice (by means of my intelligence amongst the
Spaniards) that little Scutcheons of their Arms were to be distributed to all
such as were affected to their interests, that they might know one another, and
joining, fall upon our rear, in two or three attaques they intended to make,
for facilitating their entering the Town, and revenging at their pleasure the
sedition and disobedience of the People. One morning at daybreak, a Gardener
was taken about the Gate of Medina, coming from their Quarter with a great
Firre-Box under his Arm, which having caused to be opened, I found it full of
little Scutcheons of the Arms of Spain, about the bigness of the Palm of a
Hand, and questioning him what they meant, he told me he knew nothing. But
perceiving him very much astonished, I guessed the matter, and that they must
necessarily be Tokens, by which those of the Spanish Party might know one
another; as Straw had in like manner been made use of, on the day of the
disorder and burning the Townhouse of Paris. I sent him to the Vicary, and
ordered the Auditor General to go presently thither and put him on the Rack. He
confessed what I had suspected, and accused a Priest and two others of
distributing the like Scutcheons. I caused the Priest to be secured, the other
two going away to the Enemy, and a great number of the like implements being
found in their Houses. They were of that sort of men that being unmarried, wear
little Cassocks, and have their Heads shaved, to exempt them from subjection to
the Ordinary Justice, and be liable to that alone of the Nuncio; where their
wicked practices find great impunities, Ecclesiastical Justice being less
severe than the Secular.

The Priest, under torment, confessed the same thing the other had done, and
this being an affair of very great consequence, I resolved to have it examined
and determined in my presence; and to this purpose sending for the Auditor
General and three of the ablest Advocates in the Town, in whom I had
confidence, caused the two prisoners to be brought me in Sedans, they not being
able to go by reason of the torments they had suffered. I examined them my
self, and they confessed they had already distributed a great many of these
Scutcheons, and that more would yet be brought. That Twenty thousand men would
wear them in their Hats or on their Breasts, and that on the day appointed at
three in the morning, the Spaniards intending to attaque three or four of our
most important Posts, all of their party should with such Badges come in to the
Alarm, and charge our men in the rear; by which means they hoped to enter and
possess themselves of the Town. I demanded who were the Heads of such as were
thus to be employed? and they answered, that knowing they were to die, they
would not discover the particulars of the enterprise, that they might not cause
its failing, since all they could say would not save their lives; and that by
the success of the design they hoped to be revenged, and serve their King: on
which account they would die joyfully. I sent them back to Prison, and after
Consultation of what was to be done, they were condemned to die; but that first
of all the Auditor General should endeavor by force of Torments, to get
greater light of so dangerous a Conspiracy; and that they should be racked
(according to the usual Saying of that Country) tanquam Cadaver; and even to
the point of dying under the Torture. They were almost torn in pieces, yet
would confess no more than what they had done at first, and the next morning
were hanged in the Marketplace, with some of the Scutcheons about their Necks.
At the Gallows they began to preach to the People their return to the obedience
of Spain, which hastened their execution.

In the mean time, their Constancy (not without reason) much disquieting me, I
caused exact searches to be made in all suspected Houses, and in the greatest
part of the Convents, but no more Scutcheons were found, nor any body that
would carry the Arms of Spain. This had like to have caused great disorders,
and they that sought occasions of plundering, spread reports that Arms were
concealed in many places; that under pretense of searching Houses they might
rob them.

Gennaro acquainted me that in the Convent of the Jacobins of St. Mary de la
Sanita men lay concealed in Cellars wiih a great many Arms, to furnish the
Black Cloaks of the Virgins Suburbs, and that search ought to be made. The
People was disturbed at this news, and Gennaro offered himself (accompanied by
the rabble) to make the Visit. I instantly understood his meaning, and the
danger, least the animosities between the Black-Cloaks and Lazares should again
bring upon us the same inconveniences, which I once before found so much
trouble to remedy. I went therefore my self after dinner, forbidding on pain of
death any to go before, or follow me, such as I made choice of excepted. I
commanded Matheo D' Amore with his Company to possess himself of the Gate of
St. Gennaro, and to suffer none of what quality soever, to go into the Suburb.

After Dinner I took Horse followed by my Guards, and commanded Pepe Palombe,
Carlo Longobardo, Onoffrio Pissacani, Cicio Battimiello, and Peppo Ricco, all
Persons of Credit amongst the People, and in whom I confided, to accompany me;
and as I passed by St. Gennaro's Gate I took with me Matheo D' Amore, and
coming to the Convent of Santa Maria de la Sanita, having made my Guards secure
the Gate, I went in and told the Father Prior and the Provincial (who was at
that time there to visit) the intelligence Gennaro had given me, and the
intention I had discovered in a great many, under such a pretense to plunder
their Convent, which had obliged me to come in person to prevent any disorder;
but that they might be free for the future from the like accusations, which I
looked upon as false and malicious, it was necessary that the Father Prior
should set open all places of the Convent (even to the Granaries and Cellars
and other more private) to the abovenamed persons, whom I had brought along to
that purpose, and whom I would cause to be accompanied by the Captain of my
Guards, to hinder any thing of insolence. All the Keys were brought, and a
general search being made, nothing suspicious was found, nor so much as one
Firearms. I returned very well satisfied, and commanded those that had made
the search, to give the People account of what they had seen; and swore in
their presence, that if for the future any false informations were brought me,
I would cause such to be severely punished, as could not justify their
reports, without which we should be continually in an extraordinary confusion.

At my return home, having passed part of the Evening in my usual emploiments,
Grassulla de Roza Head-Jaylor, came to acquaint me that he had discovered a
great Conspiracy, and secured such as were concerned in it, to the number of
thirty, by carrying them prisoners to the Vicary. I pardon, said I, on account
of the indiscretion of your zeal, the action you have done; but if you ever
hereafter secure any without my Order, your life shall answer it. He replied,
he thought the business of great importance, and doubted the parties accused
might have escaped, if he had delayed to secure them; that he would be wiser
another time, and never afterward commit the like, since it was displeasing to
me; but that nothing could be more certain than this Conspiracy: and after
nomination of all the prisoners, he told me he had brought the informer with
him. I considered the Names, and having observed amongst them those of the two
persons (which accepting indemnity) had discovered to me the enterprise of
Tonno Basso against my life; I supposed his Confederates whose lives I had
spared, and who still remained prisoners in the Vicary, might have a great hand
in this, and that the intelligence given me was an effect of their revenge, and
perhaps of their money.

I sent for the Informer, and considering him seriously, observed something in
his countenance that gave me a very bad opinion of him; I therefore commanded
him to tell me the truth, without disguising any thing, telling him I suspected
his accusation to be false, and that he was corrupted with money, and that I
had sufficient proofs of it; that he should have a care, for he was never in
greater danger of his life; that in case he could make good his report, he
should be very well rewarded; and those he accused (though I took them to be
honester men than himself) severely punished; but on the other side if there
were falsity and malice in the case, I would cause him immediately to be
hanged. That he should consider well whilst his life was yet in his hands; for
if he told me not the truth before he went away, all the World should not save
him. I perceived he was surprised, and pressing him home, he cast himself at my
feet, and begging his life, promised to discover all he had done. He then
declared that a Notary called Calderino, prisoner in the Vicary, as one of the
Confederates in the attempt Tonno Basso would have made on my life, and another
prisoner convicted of the same Crime, had given him a hundred Crowns to accuse
all those whom Grassullo de Roza had imprisoned; supposing that (as it had been
in the time of Mazaniello and Gennaro) to accuse them would be enough to cause
their deaths without any farther enquiry. I caused Paper and Ink to be brought
him, and commanded him to write and subscribe all that he had told me, and let
him know, that if he would enjoy the benefit of the Pardon I had granted him,
he must justify (without wavering or going back) to the faces of those that
had promised him money, all that they had negotiated with him. I returned him
to Prison, and commanded the Auditor General to bring the two persons he had
accused face to face with him, and that his Testimony might be more valid, to
put him on the Rack, yet without winding it up or causing him to suffer any
torment. Calderino and his Companion had nothing to allege, and fear of
Torture making them confess their Crime, and subscribe the Depositions of it,
they confirmed all on the Rack, which they afterward suffered: of which as
soon as the Auditor General had given me account, I sent to free the Prisoners,
not thinking it just, that persons, of whose innocence I was assured, should
lodge in the Jail. The two that were guilty, were condemned to die, and hanged
the next day before the Gate of the Vicary, every one with this Inscription on
his Breast, False Witnesses and Disturbers of the Public Quiet. This speedy
Justice drew on my Head a thousand Benedictions, prevented false accusations
for the future, and revenge and envy from exposing the lives of the innocent to
danger, as they had done before the Sovereign Authority came into my hands.

The day after another Execution was made, which out of respect to Formalities
I could not prevent, though looking on it as unjust, I suffered it unwillingly,
and have ever had a remorse on occasion of it. It was the death of a wretch
that accused Colonel Melonne and Pepe Palombe of Correspondence with the Enemy,
which I ever suspected and at last discovered, but too late; I put him into the
hands of Justice; and failing to prove what he had declared, he was hanged.

The Enemies Fleet disfurnished of Mariners, wanting carining, and supplies of
Provisions, Pimienta its Admiral represented that these things could not be
made good at Naples, and that it must of necessity set sail for Spain. On this
occasion a great Council was assembled, which found the inconveniences very
great what resolution so ever should be taken; because that by a stay they
should remain altogether unprovided, and their ships, become heavy by their
foulness, unserviceable; and on the other side, by going away, they should be
reduced to the greatest extremities; wanting where withal to keep the sea open
from whence they received all their subsistence, and part of their Galleys
being gone with the Duke of Arcos, no Naval Forces would remain with them. The
Baron of Batteville was of Opinion that the Fleet should Winter at Messina, but
Pimienta still insisted for its return to Spain; it being impossible, in a
short time, in any other place to supply and repair it. His Opinion prevailed,
and Don John consenting to its departure, the Gallions set sail with a very
fair wind in the beginning of February. The destruction of the Spaniards could
not be more certain nor more near, since deprived of all communication by land
with the rest of the Kingdom, and the arrival only of twelve French ships
cutting them off from sea, they were driven to have thoughts of abandoning all,
which was thrice resolved in their Council, and that they should capitulate
with me, that when they had forsaken the Castles, they might retreat to Gaeta
and other maritime places, to attend succors from Spain, and the return of
their Fleet in the Spring; which at the time of their re-taking the Town they
were also resolved to execute, if the purchase of one of our Posts had not
succeeded, or if they had been beaten off at their entrance: they pressed
therefore all of their party to make all possible attempts, which gave me a
great deal of trouble and care.

In the mean time the Nobility to preserve themselves from being involved in
their ruin, protested, that being entirely wasted by carrying on a War at their
own Charge, as they a long time had done, they could no longer continue the
expense, but must necessarily take some resolution, and enter into a nearer
Correspondence with me. The Spaniards sensible of the justice of their
pretense, desired their patience till the end of March, by which time the Fleet
was to return; and the Nobility in testimony of their fidelity to the utmost
extremity, promised to hold firm all the Month of April, but on the first of
May, necessity dispensing with the Oath they had taken to serve and obey them,
they must do what should appear necessary for their preservation; I was
advertised of this, and that precisely on that day they would declare in favor
of me, or sooner, if leaving the Town I would march into Apulia and head them;
or in case the French Fleet returned, or I made my self Master of the Castles;
so that there was an extreme impatience on all hands of the success of affairs,
and on which side Fate and Fortune would declare. I earnestly pressed the
return of the French Fleet, and the journey of my Brother the Knight of Maltha,
that I might leave him to command in Naples, and go my self into the Field, to
join Forces with the Nobility, and returning from thence make the last attempt
toward the Enemies destruction.

Gennaro Anneze all this while holding secret Correspondences with Don John of
Austria, almost every night sent to him, of which I had punctual notice by
those I had gained about him; who having read all Letters he received, gave me
account of them: being certain, as I was, to discover all his intrigues, I
dissembled with him, waiting a convenient time to ruin him, when I should see
him at the point of executing some Design. His Negotiations never arrived at
any Conclusion, become sensible of the sweetness of power, and his ambition so
elevated him, that the first Point of his Capitulation ever was, to continue
Head of the People, to have Fifty thousand Crowns Revenue, with the Title of a
Duchy or Principality, and to be the next Person to the Viceroy, to have
Guards and be attended by them, to secure him from his enemies, and preserve
his life with his authority. The Spaniards discerning he had not credit enough
to put the Town into their hands, and reduce the People to their obedience,
went on slowly with him, amusing him by great expectations, that he might on
some occasion be useful to them, principally for an attempt upon my life; in
order to which nothing was spared, supposing that while I lived I would cross
all their Designs, and that after my death all would be easy; their safety or
ruin depending on my fall or preservation.

I was most sensibly afflicted, to learn by the Letters he received from France
and the Kings Ministers at Rome, that they looked upon him as so faithfully
addicted to the Interests of France, that by his means only they expected all
the advantages they pretended by the sedition of Naples; which he sought to
persuade that I opposed by my particular ambition, and that my endeavors tended
only to my own establishment and exaltation; so great Credit was given to all
his fabulous relations, that the truth of mine was distrusted. The Ministers at
Rome persuaded themselves that my jealousy of him, which was so justly
grounded, arose only from my Opinion of his near Dependence on France, and that
by it he prevented my being supplied. This prepossession caused all ill offices
imaginable to be rendered me at Court, where I passed for a person that
affected independance; that slighted all that contributed not toward making my
fortune, and that endeavored to drive away the Spaniards on no other account
than to raise my self to their Throne. His power was not apprehended so much as
mine, because they thought he might more easily be dealt with, his low birth
and little wit making him seem incapable of dissimulation, malice, or ambition.
Vincenzo Andrea, much abler than he, ever obliged him to cause me to be
suspected, so to prevent my supplies, and compel the People by seeing
themselves abandoned) to submit to their former bondage. He boasted the
confidence France had in him, and its distru^ of me, and by this Artifice every
day endeavored to raise new disturbances and conspiracies against my life.

Many dispatches from Rome, which accidentally fell into my hands, discovered
these intrigues to me, and to my sorrow made me ^ow that Monsieur de Fontena,
believing he served the Crown, acted to advantage of the Spaniards, without
perceiving it, and was innocently obliged (by his design to do me prejudice) to
betray its interests. He thought himself better informed in Rome than I that
had so near a prospect of these affairs, that labored in them continually, and
was exposed to all imaginable dangers, without any thanks for my endeavors and
all the perils I every hour underwent. He boasted his Negotiations, which
ruined all, and attributing to the Peoples animosities and aversion for their
ancient Tyrants (though these languished and were expressed only by injurious
words) all our successes, looking upon me as a happy Fantosme, that contributed
nothing but my presence to my good fortune, and did no more than what any body
else in my place might have done; whilst Gennaro Anneze though so great a
Traitor, passed for a faithful and good Frenchman, and I, whose respect,
passion, and fidelity, were no ways to be shaken, for a betrayer and enemy of
my Country.

After my coming from Prison, I was told by the deceased Cardinal Mazarin, that
the Court had been either ill or not at all informed of what passed at Naples,
but that above all he was surprised at their blindness in what concerned
Gennaro; when by irreproachable Witnesses I proved his perfidiousness. I
brought him from Spain the Baron of Batteville's Memorial printed in Madrid
after my imprisonment, in which (pretending recompense of his services from the
Catholic King) he alleged as most important, his secret Negotiations with
Gennaro before my arrival at Naples, and all the while I continued there;
particularising several advices of what he had managed and undertaken against
me for the service of Spain: and then Cardinal Mazarin blamed me that whilst
it was in my power I had not as well punished him as the Abbot Basqui, against
which I had nothing to pretend for my self but my respect to France, which
would have made an ill construction of my intentions, and accused me to have
sacrificed her Creatures to my Interests; and from thence have taken occasion
to have abandoned me. I thought I owed this Digression to my honor, to
disabuse the World of all the false reports that have been spread abroad
concerning me. But returning to my Narration, I must discover a dangerous snare
laid for me, from which I freed my self by immediate presence of mind, and an
address very extraordinary. Gennaro, by advice of Vincenzo Andrea, having
raised a Tumult on pretense of the kindness I had for the Nobility, sent
fourteen or fifteen hundred men, which drew up in Battalia in the Piazza that
was before my Palace, which fifty or sixty of the most factions entered,
accompanied by a Franciscan Lay Brother, who demanded to speak with me, about
Nine or Ten a Clock at Night. I gave him Audience, and he began to expatiate on
the Nobilities ill usage of the People, of whom many had suffered much in
Apulia and other Provinces; that all of them ought to be made a sacrifice to
their resentments, especially the Prince of Montesarchio and the Prince of
Troya his Brother, for whom he thought I had particular consideration; finding
his discourse to be very seditious, and tending only to incite the rabble
against me, I led him to the far end of my Chamber, that none might
over-hear-us. I endeavored to convince him by reason, representing that if I
did not separate the Nobility from the Spaniards (which could not be done but
by Caresses and all manner of good usage) the strength of their union, would be
so considerable, we should not be able to stand against it. This dangerous
Friar raising his voice, in a very insolent tone told me, that my kindness for
the Nobility was very well understood, who being much dearer to me than the
People, I intended to offer up to their animosities, as I had already
sacrificed Michael de Santis to the revenge of Don Pepe Caraffa's Kindred; and
that since I would not send an Order to Sabbato Pastore to cut the throats of
the Prince of Montesarchio and his Brother (which he might easily do) and to
other Bandites to massacre all the Gentlemen they could meet with in the
Kingdom, I declared my partiality for them, and consequently my self to be the
most dangerous enemy of the People; because I abused the Authority they had
given me for the others destruction. I answered him, That such a violence could
not be without much danger, but that I assured him I would punish all the
insolent, and such as tyranized or oppressed those of our Party. He grew
hotter, and putting his hand in his Pocket to take out some Letter he had
received, I perceived that all that were in my Chamber were moved, and near a
Tumult, and looking on it as a Plot to kill me, and that nothing but a pretense
was wanting, with my left hand, I seized that of his that was in his Pocket,
and taking him by the throat with my right, cried out, Ah Traitor do you
attempt upon my life, Guards* Guards! Austin de Lieto advancing, I put him into
his hands, and bid him search him, telling him he had a Knife in his Pocket,
which he was drawing to thrust into my Belly. The Captain of my Guards causing
him to be searched in my withdrawing Room, a very great Knife in a Sheath,
with a round Handle and a little Guard like a Dagger, was found about him;
which being publicly shown, they that were present, would have immediately
thrown him out at the Window: but I told them it was of concernment to have him
examined and brought to his Trial, to know who had engaged him to so desperate
an attempt; and calling for Pen and Paper, writ to Cardinal Filomarini, That
unwilling to enroach upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, I sent a Friar to
him that would have stabbed me; that I besought him to cast him into a Dungeon,
suffer him to speak with no body, and care to be taken that he might not
escape; to the end that so black an attempt might not pass unpunished, and that
his Confederates might be discovered: that I hoped this from his goodness,
which my respect for the Church might very well pretend to. Cardinal Filomarini
exactly performed what I desired of him, it being the least he could do on
account of the so late Obligation he had to me, for saving him from fury of the
People; the consideration of the danger he thought I had avoided, augmenting
his affection and tenderness for me. My address gave sorrow and confusion to
those that had sworn my destruction, and so well laid their designs, that they
thought it impossible for me to escape them.

In the mean time all Gennaro's Contrivances tending to my ruin, mine were the
same in his regard, and Augustino Mollo, who ever served me well, though many
suspected the contrary, having debauched the Captain of his Guards, brought him
to assure me he would do all I should ordain him, give me punctual
advertisement of all his Proceedings, and all theirs that negotiated with him;
he proffered to poison him when I pleased, if I would provide him wherewithal
to do it; but would not willingly undertake to poniard him, because that was to
declare himself too openly, and not handsome for a Captain of his Guard: but I
would not undertake it in such a manner that I might appear the Author of it,
least it should acquire me the indignation of France; who believing him
faithful to her, would rather attribute his death to my particular ambition (he
being the main obstacle in my way) than to the just punishment of his
disloyalty.

Next morning going to Mass at the Carmelites, I gave Order to the Knight de
Fourbin, wi^h thirty Horsemen of my Company of Light Horse, which he commanded,
that as soon as I came out of the Church and took Horse, as Gennaro accompanied
me to the Gate (he no longer daring to go out of the Carmelites Tower,
apprehending such a death, as the remorse of his Conscience caused him to judge
he had merited) with his men to thrust him out of the Church, where Mattheo d'
Amore, Carlo Longobardo, and Pepe Riccio, would be ready to cut off his Head,
and the noise obliging me to return, tell me, that they had punished his
Treason agrinst the People, and the Correspondencies he held with Don John of
Austria; that this should be justified by the Letters would be found in his
Lodging, the Captain of his Guards having discovered to me the place where he
had locked them up.

This Plot so well laid, had not failed of success, but for the disloyalty of a
Frenchman called the Baron of Rouvrou, who advertised him to have a care of
himself, become jealous of some passings to and fro that he had observed; and
because some that were of the Plot whispered It will not be impertinent to give
here the Character of this man, that what he did may be understood to be the
effect of a black malice and not of imprudence. He was a Gentleman of Normandy,
of as great wit as little judgment, very extravagant, naturally as great a
Cheat as Gamester, and that would not want money, by what means soever he came
by it, his Father not furnishing him to his mind; he had neither Honor nor
Conscience, yet was courageous and resolute. At the Siege of Air he had been a
Captain in the Regiment of the late Cardinal of Richlieu, where after having
lost all his Equipage at Dice, he played away his Company; and apprehending the
resentments of the Marshal of Meillerai, coming in the night to visit his
Guard, which was on an advanced Post, he went over to the Enemy and rendered
himself: where giving out that his affection for me had obliged him to seek me,
and follow my fortune, the Cardinal Infant sent him to me. My misfortune and
dependence on the Sedan Party, having engaged me in the service of the House of
Austria, in quality of General of the the Emperors Forces, he gave me advice
of the retreat of the Marshal of Meilleray, who having already slighted his
circumvallation, resolved to be gone as soon as the place should be taken. His
intelligence found to be true, we marched with all diligence (forsaking the
Heights about Teroane, where the Imperial and Spanish Armies had encamped, to
prevent a Convoy and the conjunction of a considerable body led by the late
Marshal of Gesvre) that we might fall upon the rear of the French, which might
easily have been done, but for the precaution of the Generals, who posting
themselves on an eminence, the day was passed over in a very hot Skirmish
instead of a General Combat, which the Spaniards would not hazard: The Cardinal
Infanta's sickness, which at last proved mortal, having obliged me to retire to
Brussells, on occasion of disputes about the Command, Rouvrou followed me
thither; but committed so many disorders, that I was fain to send him away: he
passed at last into England, where his ill Comportment caused him to be put in
Prison, with very great danger of his life. A year after he returned into
France, his Treason unpardoned. One day in time of the Queen Mothers Regency,
being in her Cabinet, talking with the Marshal of Meilleray, we saw him come
in, of which the Marshal intended to give the Queen notice, that he might be
arrested and punished; but I besought him for my sake not to do it, to which he
consented, on condition he should never afterward appear before him. I went to
him and gave him notice of this, with advice to go to his House, there being no
security for him at Court. A little while after his return into Normandy (it
being impossible for him to continue long quiet) he brought himself into
farther troubles, by cudgelling a Person of Quality of the Long Robe, out of
jealousy of a Woman, and without any just occasion of offense. At the request
of the Earl of Menfreville, my particular Friend and Kinsman, I gave him a
retreat in Meudon, unwilling to have him near me in Paris; where not thinking
himself safe, by reason of the Prosecutions made against him, he desired my
Letters to my Brother, whom the General Citation had obliged to go to Malta;
out of apprehension that the Turks would come and besiege it.

He went away with my Letter, and staying at Rome, made use of it to cosen the
Cardinal of Valence, and desiring Audience of the Earl of Ognate the Spanish
Ambassador in that Court, told him he durst not stay in France, that he had
wandered three years, and that his present necessity compelled him to have
recourse to his Generosity; the Earl, a Person of great Ostentation, caused
immediately a thousand Crowns to be given him: he got something also of the
Cardinals Montalto, Albornos, and others of that Faction; believing the misery
he suffered was on account of his services to Spain. Having made up a
considerable sum, he traveled the World, to practice his wonted Cheats in
other places; and hearing that I was at Naples, he came to me, having first
agreed with the Spanish Ministers for Fifty Pistols a Month, of which he
received two Months advance, to be their Spy upon me; persuading them I had
great confidence in him. They ordered him to make acquaintance with Gennaro,
and engage with him, which it was happy for him I discovered not till I was a
Prisoner: Being taken with me, he unhandsomely bragged he would soon be at
liberty, and full of money, no longer concealing his disloyalty, and causing
all other French Prisoners to be ill used; but being no more in a condition to
do the Spaniards service, because too well known, he was cast into Prison,
where he continued three or four years, with greater restraint and more
narrowly observed than any of my followers. It was well for me that I knew and
distrusted him at last, for he had otherwise done me a great deal of mischief;
toward which his good will was not wanting on all occasions.

About this time a Gentleman of Genoua called John Grilli, rich and powerful,
desired of me a Commission to command in the Plain of Sorriento, where his
Estate lay; and the Government of the Town that bears the same Name, if he
could take it; it being a place from whence the Enemy got part of their
refreshments: offering to make Levies and carry on the War at his own Charge.
This is one of the most agreeable and delightful Countries of the World, the
beauty of its Prospect and Sweetness of its Air having invited Tiberius (when
to refresh himself after the weighty Affairs and the Government of the Empire,
he abandoned himself to pleasure) to make choice of it; retiring a nights for
greater security to Capri a little Isle, in a manner desert, and only
recommendable by Quails, which are taken in such abundance that they raise the
Revenue of a Bishopric; which gave occasion to all the Historians of his time
to speak so much of the pleasures of it. In a few days he drew together a Body
considerable enough to take the Field, and oblige all the Towns and Villages
thereabouts to declare for us. He sent me advice of this, with a Present of all
delicacies produced by this Fertile Country; amongst which its Calves are
esteemed the best and most delicious of all Italy. Afterward he marched with
three Pieces of Ordnance to besiege the Town of Sorriento, but having none with
him but Militia's and new raised Troops, that wanted good Officers, as he
himself did Experience and Capacity to make War; when he had reduced the place
to great extremity, being attacqued by Three hundred Spaniards from Castelamare
under Command of Colonel Don Gaspar de Sultas, and the Lieutenant of the
Camp-Master General Don Michael de Almeyda (the besieged making a Sally at the
same time) his men were astonished and fled, and the Siege was raised with the
loss of his Artillery; yet he omitted not to rally his Troops and continue
Master of the Field, the Spaniards returning to Castelamare, out of
apprehension that their absence might give Cerisantes an opportunity to take
it, whom I recalled, finding he undertook nothing considerable; disposing the
Troops he commanded, part of them to Paul of Naples, and part to Polite
Pastena, who continuing to make himself feared in the hither Calabria, reduced
it entirely to our obedience; and having taken a Castle belonging to the
Marquess de la Bella, one of the best Horsemen of all the Nobility, found there
twenty Horses, of which he sent me six the best and beautifullest that could be
seen.

Monsieur de Fontenay omitting no occasion of negotiating in Rome with all
Neapolitans that were there, of whom the greatest part were of the Province of
Abruzzo, thought (with reason enough) that something considerable might be
attempted there, and to this purpose writ to desire Commissions of me (which I
sent) to distribute to such persons as he should like of; and as he thought it
necessary to encourage and regulate the Natives of the Country by oldiers and
Officers of Experience, he assembled as many as possibly he could, and sent for
Commanders the Marquess Palombara of the Family of Savelli, and Tobias
Pallavicini a Gentleman of Genoua, who had served as a Field-Marshal in the
Kings Armies; encharging them very strictly to receive no Orders but from
himself, and to have no correspondence nor dependence on me. But being Persons
of Honor, they gave me notice of it, supposing themselves obliged to an entire
submission to him by whose Commissions only they were to fight. Many Banditi in
this Province declared, of whom the most famous were Antonio Sisti, Martello,
and Soccia Ferro; and of the Nobility the Duke of Castelnovo, Baron of Quinzio,
the Baron of Juliana, the Baron of Bugnagno, the Baron Lorenzo Alfiere, with
his Brother, the Abbot Gasparo, Hieronimo Castiglione, and some others, that
caused almost the whole Province to revolt, took Chieti, Civita di Penna,
Celano, and to the very Gates of Aquila, except the Castle and Fortress of
Pescara; all which was not done without much time. Julio Pezzola a famous
Bandite, that ever followed the Spanish Interests, having received some
dissatisfaction from Don Michael Pignatelli President of that Province, held
Correspondence with the Kings Ministers at Rome; from whom having received
Letters directed to me, he sent them by an Express, that I might give the more
credit to him, and offered me (in order to revenge himself on his Enemy) to
surprise and take him with the Castle of Aquila, and to come himself to me with
Three hundred Banditi, men resolute and capable of all Enterprises. But being
in a continual diffidence, fearing his dis-satisfaction might be but a
pretense, on which the Spaniards thought to join him and his men with me, to
kill me; I made very much of his Messenger, and returned Answer that the
reputation he had acquired in Abruzzo, and his perfect knowledge of the
Country, made him more useful in that Province than with me; that he should
without loss of time endeavor the surprisal of the Castle of Aquila, which if
he could effect, I gave him the Government of it, and all Privileges, Lands,
and Revenues he should pretend to; supposing by this to discover the bottom of
his thoughts, and that if he treated with me without dissimulation, he might do
me important service and I hazard nothing.

In the mean time no day passed in which there came not from Aversa many mules
laden with Corn; and when I had drawn away the fifteen thousand load the Enemy
had amassed for their provision, I thought best to employ the money we had
received for the bread, that had been sold to buy the remainder of the Corn
that belonged to particular persons. But I was very much surprised, when taking
account of it, I found one half less than I had left in the Town at my being
there two days after it had been put into my hands: and that under pretense of
coming to sell it at Naples, a great deal had been conveyed away by passes, and
as some endeavored to persuade me sold, to the Enemy. This caused the people
to murmr, getting knowledge of it, what care soever I took to conceal it. I
sent then to the Baron of Modene on pre^nce of communicating something of
importance with him, he presently came, and leading him into my Cabinet to be
more private, assured him that my long knowledge of him would not permit any
suspicion of his correspondence with the enemy, nor of his being capable of
failing in his fidelity to me; but that upon the complaints and cries of the
people, I was obliged to inform my self how our Corn came to be wasted; in
which I could not imagine him to be any ways faulty, because I did not only
look upon him as a person of Honor, but would engage for his being such if need
were; and that he understood too much to be ignorant to what dangers want of
provisions must necessarily expose my self and him. He answered, that he had
been no less surprised when he found the Corn so much diminished: but that I
might consider, that the Town of Aversa (being very populous) together with the
Troops he commanded there, had consumed a good part: that the neighboring
Towns and Villages had by my permission carried away some which tended to our
advantage, the bread made of it having been sold in Naples. I replied that
these things might cause some, but not so great a diminution, but that I verily
believed his passes had been counterfeited, and that his Officers had suffered
greater quantities to be carried away than he allowed of; that his Secretary
being a Neapolitan, and having the reputation to be covetous, might be faulty,
whom, to set him right in the opinion of the people, I resolved to send to
prison, and cast the fault there, (if any was) it not being enough that I was
assured of his own integrity, but necessary that such suspicions of the Common
people, as the better sort would never entertain of him, should be removed.

This proposal seemed hard, since his Secretatary could not be accused without
some reflection on himself. I answered, that in pressing necessities we are
sometimes forced to abandon our Infantery, and afterward made him some little
reproaches, (yet in an obliging fashion) of what had displeased me in his
conduct, which I rather imputed to the niceness of my humor than his fault,
that since he understood me so well I prayed him for the future to let nothing
be done (though of the slightest concernment) without my participation and
order. That he might assure himself I continued my wonted friendship and
confidence in him, which nothing should remove, provided that on his side he
took some care to preserve it: that he should return to Aversa, and use all
possible endeavor to find out the cause of the waste of our Corn; that he was
too good, and ought by my example to learn to be more severe, since in matter
of command we are to consider no body, but do justice (without respect of
friend or foe) to all that merit either reward or punishment. That we ought
never to suffer Orders to be neglected or disputed: that this was my humor and
opinion, which I thought very reasonable, that he stould act on this
foundation, and then assure himself that nothing should make a difference
between us, how active soever malice might prove in order to it. Though Gennaro
and I were upon very ill terms, yet formalities continuing between us, I did
not forbid him to see him, and (his endeavors moved by the Council of Vincenzo
Andrea tending to dissatisfie all that had dependence on me, or give me
jealousy of them supposing me to be naturally distrustful) he craftily caused
me to be told that the Baron of Modene had visited him, with long discourse and
many compliments, so to make me suspect that they had made a combination, which
I afterward found was not so, but had been maliciously given out and seconded
by Augustine de Lieto, in order to the designs I have formerly mentioned.

The second of February being Candlemas day, having given the charge of Rector
of the Hospital of the Incurable to Father Capece my Confessor, he desired me I
would hear Mass there (which being the first time he was Pontifically to
celebrate) and order my Music to attend; There was a great concourse of people
and many Ladies. This Solemnity was very great, but that which made it most
agreeable to me, was the news brought me at the end of Mass, that the Admiral
Gally of Naples was come in to us: She as well as the rest of the Galleys was
very ill provided, and Gianettino Doria, who commandded the Squadron of Naples,
and since his Brothers imprisonment, all the rest that served Spain, having
gone ashore at Puzzole with all his Camerades, and greatest part of the
Officers, to hear Mass at a Church of our Lady of great devotion, the Slaves
seeing so fair an opportunity to revolt, killed their Boatswain, and forcing
such Officers and Soldiers as remained abord to guard the Gally, to leap into
the Sea, carried her away, and run her ashore at a place called la Gayole: I
sent immediately to endeavor to preserve her, she being the best and fairest
that was in the Mediterranean, but being extremely bruised by her shock against
the land, I was fain to let her be broken in pieces, being othewaies useless.
All the Slaves had their chains taken off, and the Turks having some days
wandered about the Town, I drew them together, with such as belonged to two
other Galleys that had rendered themselves to us, to preserve them to be made
use of when I should be in a condition to set out any Gally of my own, and that
they might not be idle the mean while, I made a Company of a hundred and fifty
Turks, and appointed one Salem belonging to the Admiral to be their Captain.
They were lusty and stout, and apprehending if they should be taken, to be
returned to the Oar, fought against the Spaniards with incredible ardor and
animosity, in such manner that this Company alone did me more service than any
four of the best in Naples.

I had attempted nothing in a long time, and was now weary of remaining
useless, and suffering the Enemy to be quiet. Instead therefore of small
attacques I resolved to make a general one, and at once endeavor to become
Master of all the Posts the Enemy held in the Town, and force them to shut
themselves up in the Castles. To this purpose I gave order to Paul of Naples to
bring me all the Banditi he could draw together, and to Polito Pastena to do
the like, and to the Inhabitants of la Cava and Nocera to join me with the
greatest number possible, choosing the tenth of February for my rendezvous.

In the mean time, to weary the Spaniards, and by continual fatigue make them
unable to fight, I gave them every night two or three alarms' and as many in
the day, at such hours as I thought they reposed; which added to their want of
provisions, brought them so low, that in all probability I was like to have
them good cheap on the day of my attaque; in order to which I expected the
arrival of the Banditi, and all the Troops I had sent for to execute this grand
design. Hearing every day of Gennaro's Commerce with the Enemy, and he
perceiving mine and the peoples jealousies, sought to amuse us by a false
appearance of fidelity. He came therefore to give me notice that he had
discovered a plot of some of his men to deliver the Carmelites Tower to the
Spaniards. The next day he caused Labati Gennaro, Francesco Giordano, and his
Brother, called Don Felice Giordano, though a Priest, to be hanged; accusing
them of correspondences, in which himself was most concerned, and consequently
only guilty. I did not yet accept this as current, neither did it abate my
distrust, being too well informed of all that passed; but it served him to
pacify the people, who persuaded by it of his good intentions, on the advanced
Posts called out in the night to the Spaniards, and asked why they came not to
the Carmelites Tower, where they were expected, and should find such
entertainment as their Confederates had already met with.

Shortly after, there happened a little disorder before my Palace, which was
instantly remedied A Colonel called Castaldo, a brutal and violent* person,
discoursing with a Captain close by the Corpse de Guard, heated by words that
passed between them, gave him a box on the ear, which the Captain (accompanied
by another that was his Camerade) unable to suffer, drew his sword, and
mortally wounded the Colonel in his thigh. The Guard immediately endeavored to
secure them, but their resistance making a noise, looking out at the Window, I
saw what passed, and above a hundred persons with their swords drawn; I went
down and instantly caused the two Captains to be disarmed, and brought into my
Palace, where I found the Colonel dying, the wound having happened on the
crural vein: the suddenness of his death freed him from the punishment his
insolence deserved. I caused the two Captains to be confessed, and a Scaffold
erected for cutting off their heads in the same place where they had been
unmindfull of the respect they owed me. Many applications were made for their
pardon, on pretense that a box on the ear deprives a Man of Honor of all
consideration: but I judged an example necessary for containing others within
the bounds of their duty, and preventing the like insolence for the future,
which any where else than within sight of the Corpse de Guard had been excusable.
Diego Perez their Colonel, represented to me that these two Captains being
gallant men and of experience, might do me useful service at the Attaque I
Intended to make, but I continued inflexible, and caused them to be brought
upon the Scaffold, and their eyes blinded. Execution being ready to be made,
Mazillo Caracciolo casting himself at my feet, begged their lives in the name
of all the Gentlemen end Ladies of the Town: I told him, that unable to refuse
any thing to intercessions so dear and considerable, I pardoned them, and after
a great repriment sent them to be let blood, of which they had need.

The Baron of Modene three or four days after his return to Aversa, sent me
word that matters had not been so much amiss as I had been informed; whether it
really was so, or that being of a good and easy nature* he would not accuse
his chief Officers, lest I should punish them, knowing my severity seldom
pardoned such faults, especially when made in contradiction of my orders, and
as well for fear of a commotion in our Army, which obliged him to conceal what
he had peradventure discovered. I resolved to send for him, that informations
concerning the waste of our Corn might be taken in his absence, the whole Town
(which was to be satisfied by some appearance of Justice) crying out against
it. He resolved to obey and come to me; and I was told that Antonio de Calco,
Marco Pisano, and Andrea Rama (fearing that if I took the command from him, I
might give it to some body that would be more severe, and not allow them so
much liberty) taking leave of him, assured him he should speedily return to
head them, because they would not obey any other, and that they had credit
enough amongst the Troops to oblige them to what they pleased, and compel me
(willing or unwilling) to continue him in his employment, all of them uniting
to depend on his fortune; that in case I should be still resolute to take it
away, they would carry their men to the Enemy, being assured to be followed by
them whithersoever they went. The Officers took this last resolution (which
they confessed at their deaths) amongst themselves, and would not communicate
it with him for fear he should acquaint me with it; but having given credit to
the relations, made me (on so probable appearances) that the agreement had been
made on the day of our attacking the Posts, which touched me very sensibly
(though with great displeasure) I resolved to secure him,

The Tenth of February in the Afternoon, Polito Pastena and Paul of Naples
having left their Troops on their March, came to me, and after many civilities
and assurances of my resentments of the important services they had rendered
me, I carried them with me to Poggio Reale, whither the beauty of the day
invited me to take the air. They presented me their Chief Officers, whom I was
very careful to caress; and each of them having given me account of what they
had done since their taking Arms on my behalf, I acquainted them with my design
to make a general assault on all the Enemies Posts, at once to make my self
Master of all the Town, and finish an affair I thought lasted too long.

Toward Night I returned to employ that Evening as I did others, and having
dispatched all business, shut my self up in my Cabinet, to resolve the manner
of executing my enterprise, and putting the Orders in writing: which were, That
Colonel Diego Passero falling out of the Custom-House, should assault the Corn
Office with Five hundred men, seconded by the like number of Nocera, commanded
by their Officers under the Conduct of Colonel Landerio. That Diego de Soriento
from Porto and Visita Paveri, should attacque Santo Bartholomeo, with the Five
hundred men of la Cava, which he commanded as Sergeant Major, seconded by Three
hundred men designed for the guard of those two Posts, and two Companies each
of them a hundred men, of the Militia of the People. That the Sergeant Major
that kept il Fundo de Cedrangulo, and he that commanded in Cirillo, should make
two false attacques to amuse the Enemy. That Colonel Pouca should attempt the
Post of Santa Chiara, with his Regiment, seconded by six Companies of the
People, each of them One hundred men. That Colonel John Dominico should
attacque the Convent of Donna Aluina, with Three hundred men of his Regiment,
seconded by the rest and three Companies of the People. That Santa Maria la
Nova should be attempted by a hundred commanded men drawn out of the Troops of
Polito Pastena, seconded by a like number of the Forces of the People; of whom
Mellone, Camp-Master General by Commission, should have the Command. That
Polito Pastena, with the Fifteen hundred of his men that remained, should
attacque Mount Olivetto and two other adjoining Posts, with such numbers as he
should judge convenient; causing them to be seconded by the remainder. That
Colonel Landi with his Regiment should amuse the Enemy by false attacques about
the Gates of Alba and Spirito Santo: That the Peoples Captains should do the
like on all Posts where they commanded, especially about the Gate of
Constantinople. That Colonel Hannibal Brancaccio should fall upon the Enemy
about Santo Dominico Soriano, with his Regiment, and cause the same to be done
by the Company of Turks at Sangue de Christo. That at the Gate of Medina,
Mattheo d' Amore, Carlo Longobardo, and Onoffrio Pissacani, whose three
Companies might make Five hundred men, should make a Scalado with thirty
Ladders, the Town walls thereabouts not being above eight foot high. That they
of Lantignane should give the hottest alarm they possibly could. That Colonel
Don Bernardino Castro Cucco with his Regiment, should by way of Vomero assault
the Outworks of the Castle St. Elmo. That three attacques should be made
toward Chiaya, each of them by Five hundred men, one at Santa Maria Parede, by
commanded men of the Body belonging to Paul of Naples, the other at St. Carlo
and Les Mortelles, Colonel Diego Peers commanding at them both; and the last at
Gli Angeli, a Nursery of the Jesuits, commanded by Colonel Alexio, and seconded
by a Thousand men of the same Troops, of whom Paul of Naples and Colonel Titus
de Fusco his Cousin should take care. A Thousand men were to continue as
reserve, from whom I would send succors as I should judge necessary; these were
to stand in Battaglia behind the Palace of the Duchess of Gravina, where I
would be my self at daybreak; it not being above a Musket Shot from any of the
three attacques, who were equally within sight of the Terrace of the said
Palace. That the Horse I had should stand by Squadrons on the Marketplace, or
before Porta Reale, that they might enter the great Street of Toledo, or push
up to the Piazza of the Palace, as soon as the way should be opened. In all
probability no resistance could have been made to the execution of so great a
Design (all things having been so well disposed of) had my Orders been
followed, my men done their duty, and my Officers been all faithful.

Having in such a manner disposed of all things, I went to Bed to take some
rest, believing I should have toil enough the day following. I rose betimes,
and after giving Audience went to Mass, then taking Horse, I viewed all the
Troops that were come to me from the Country, which I must acknowledge to have
been the best I ever saw; especially those of Paul of Naples. They were Three
thousand and five hundred men, of whom the oldest came short of five and forty
years, and the youngest was above twenty. They were all tall and well made,
with long black hair for the most part curled, Coats of black Spanish Leather,
with Sleeves of Velvet or Cloth of Gold, Cloth Breeches with Gold Lace, most of
them Scarlet, Girdles of Velvet laced with Gold, with two Pistols on each side,
a Coutelas (hanging at a Belt suitably trimmed) three fingers broad and two
foot long, a Hawking-Bag at their Girdle, and a Powder Flaske hung about their
Neck with a great Silk Ribbon; some of them carried Firelocks and others
Blunderbusses: they had all good Shoes with Silk Stockings, and every one a
Cap of Cloth of Gold, or Cloth of Silver of different Colors on his Head;
which was very delightful to the Eye. Polito Pastena had not above Two thousand
men, having left the rest to guard Salerno; they were as proper men as the
other, though not so well clad. They of Nocera and La Cava which were between a
thousand and twelve hurdred men, though less fine, looked more like Soldiers:
They seemed indeed very courageous and resolute, and had very fair and good
Arms, every one of them carrying a Fire-Lock five Foot and a half long, and
good Swords, which they knew how to use upon occasion I was very much satisfied
in this review, and made no question of being next day the absolute Master of
Naples. I sent them to refresh themselves, their Quarter being ready provided,
and ordered them to be supplied with all things necessary. I returned to dine,
and afterward taking Horse visited all the Posts, where I left in writing the
Order of the Attacque I intended to make next morning at break of day; having
commanded all the Troops to march at Two after Midnight, and be ready to fall
on, at the Signal I should give by ringing all the Bells of the Town,
especially those of St. Lawrence. I lodged at Marco de Lorenzo's, to order all
things in the Suburb of Chiaya, and to lie near the Palace of the Duchess of
Gravina, where I intended to be before day.

The Twelfth as soon as it was light, I made all the Bells be rung, and caused
the Attacques to begin. Diego Passero advanced to the Corn-Office and entered
it, but the Cannon of Castello Novo and the Haven caused him for want of earth
to abandon it and retreat. Diego de Soriento with the Cavaioli, made himself
Master of St. Bartholomeo, where the Italian Playhouse is, and keeping it till
I sounded a retreat, then fired it. They that made false Attaques, were ever
engaged in a hot Skirmish, and gave all the diversion and obtained all the
effects I expected from them. Pouca attacqued St. Clare but faintly, and
meeting some little resistance, retreated without doing any thing. John
Dominico did not much better at Dona Alvina, and all that passed was a very
easy skirmish. Mellone (who betrayed us) would not make himself Master of
Santa Maria la Nova, which the Spaniards discouraged began to abandon. Polito
Pastena having stormed the first Entrenchment of Mount Oliveto, kept it not,
his men taking a fright; and his Lieutenant, after possessing himself of an
adjoining Post, being too much advanced and not seconded, was taken prisoner,
wounded by a Musket shot in the leg, of which he died three days after. The
Turks did well, but seeing themselves abandoned, and that Hannibal Brancaccio
for want either of experience or courage retreated, were forced to do the like.
Mattheo d' Amore, Carlo Longobardo, and Onoffrio Pisacani caused their Ladders
to be fixed, four of which overcharged, broke under the weight, being too weak,
as the other were too short; so that their resolution and good intentions
became useless. Don Bernardino Castro Cucco took in a Half Moon of Castle St.
Elmo, on that side that is toward Chiaya. Diego Peers was Master of Santa
Maria Parede and St. Charles, and going about to cause the Banditi of Paul of
Naples to advance, they cast themselves on their Bellies behind a Wall, whither
I sent the Knight de Fourbin to cause them to march; who gave them a hundred
blows with his Cane, not sparing the Officers; yet could by no means make them
stand up. Alexio took Gli Angeli, which a panick fear caused him afterward to
abandon. The Baron Durand, the Sieurs Glandevez and de Villepreux took a
Palace defended by Germans, and were all three hurt; Villepreux under the Eye
by a shiver of a Window, Glandevez by a Musket through his Thigh, and Durand in
the Leg; they yet brought me two or three Prisoners.

All this while I did my uttermost for refreshing my attacques, and causing the
Troops that were to second them to advance, and sending the Knight de Fourbin
to cause Titus de Fusco to march, it was impossible for him to oblige him to
it; Fusco laying the fault on his Captains, they on their Alfieres's, and the
Alfiereses on the Sergeants, and was fain to drag all the Soldiers one by one
to possess a Palace the Enemy had abandoned. Castle St. Elmo all this while
continually shot at the Terrass, where the Enemy could discern me giving
Orders. They killed some near me, at which vexed, I drew out Three hundred men
to fall upon their Outworks; which were presently carried, and my men advanced
as far as St. Martins Cloister, and lodged themselves there. The Spaniards
became so tired by making resistance in so many places, that they began every
where to give ground; when they were re-encouraged by the coming in of a great
succor of such as defended the Posts of the Town; Mellone, Polito Pastena, and
the other Officers being gone off either as Traitors or as Cowards: Batteville
presently made toward us with the Reformado Officers and a Body of Spaniards,
to retake the Posts we were possessed of, without which they had been absolutely
lost; because we had cut off their Correspondence with Castle St. Elmo, and
were Masters of all their Quarters, coming on the backs of the Posts they had
advanced toward the Town. The Fight began to be hotter and more unfortunate,
and Diego Peers was shot with a Musket through the Neck, and being brought to
me, I caused him to be dressed in my presence, and the Bullet to be taken out,
which was only covered by a thin skin on the side where it had not entered.

Cerisantes came to me smiling, and very much satisfied that I had not the
success I desired; said, you have no good Officers, and will do nothing without
me: I will bring all into order, and certainly storm the Works the Enemies yet
defend. I answered him angerly that he should consider that men that boast like
him, and have so great a contempt for others, ought either to make good their
promises or die. He instantly went on, and either his heat or some other
pressing necessity enforcing him to put down his Breeches behind a Wall, a
Musket Bullet carried away his great toe; which gangrening, he died three days
after: and that his vanity might continue to the last, he made a Will and me
his Executor, leaving in Legacies and to Pious Uses above Twenty five thousand
Crowns, though he was not worth a Cardecu in all the world.

Our affairs were not yet in so bad a condition, but if Paul of Naples had
marched with his men, and but made a show of seconding the attacques, the
Spaniards had abandoned all and retired to Castello Novo, and the Post of Pitzo
Falcone there to have capitulated, as they since acknowledged to me. I sent him
Order for this by the Sieur de la Bottelerie one of my Adjutants; but instead
of it, he fell upon the Palaces of Chiaye, and especially on that of the
Prince of Montesarchio, which his Banditi began to plunder; and being told that
I would not suffer such a disorder, but would come in person to remedy it, he
insolently answered, that he brought not his men to fight, but to plunder
Naples; of which if the Duke came to hinder him, he would cause his Head to be
cut off, and putting it in a Basin, send it as a Present to Don John of
Austria. Mad at so insolent an Answer, I could not forbear to say that four and
twenty hours should make appear whose Head stood faster on its shoulders, his
or mine. I was sorry for this rashness, judging it fit for me yet to dissemble
with him; and at the same time hearing that Polito Pastena's Banditi committed
disorders in the Town, plundering all where they came, I caused a retreat to be
sounded: after a very obstinate fight for the space of three hours, wherein yet
there were not Three hundred men killed or hurt on both sides, the Adjutant of
the Regiment of Diego Peers being taken prisoner, they pretended to hang him;
but I sent them word I would do the like with the Adjutant of Colonel Cicio
Poderico, that we had taken, and they were exchanged three days after.

The Baron of Modene's ill fortune would so have it, that not having followed
me, Augustine de Lieto, in order to what I have already mentioned, told me he
had learned that he had in that time visited Vincenzo Andrea and Gennaro; this
gave me a jealousy that was increased by the arrival of Father Capece and
Cavalier Michellini, who rallying my misfortune, told me laughing, you see what
it is to want the Baron of Modene, without whom you can do nothing
considerable, as the People persuade themselves. I turned my back to them
without any Answer, reserving my resentments for a better occasion. I then sent
Order to Polito Pastena to draw his Banditi out of the Town, and quarter them
in St. Anthonies Suburbs, and to return to Salerno next morning at day break.
He went immediately away, without saying any thing, and left Gennaro sixty of
his Banditi to secure him, and undertake what he should please to order them.
All went about to persuade me that the People looking upon me to be responsible
for this bad success, my life was in danger; and that I ought not to return to
Naples: I slighted those vain terrors, resolved to return as I did that
Evening; and to make it believed that I had a considerable design to execute
that Night, I ordered all that could carry Arms to be at Eight a Clock in the
Piazza before my Palace and in in the Street of Saint John de Carbonara.

Paul of Naples in the mean time came to me to the Palace of Gravina with
extraordinary insolence, and told me that his men not being used to fight in a
Town, he resolved to lead them again into the Field, to conquer Apulia and all
the rest of the Kingdom; and to this purpose demanded a Patent as Vicar
General, with power to give Commissions to general Officers, Governors of Towns
and Provinces, and dispose of all Confiscations of the Goods of the Nobility. I
told him he should have it with all my heart, and that he should go home with
me, that I might dispatch what he desired; and to prevent his men's disorders in
the City, that he should send them into the Suburbs, where they had quartered
the Night before, to be in a readiness for their March in the Morning. He
promised to obey me, and taking Horse I returned to Naples, where I was
received by the People of both Sexes, with greater Acclamations and more
Testimonies of Respect and Affection than formerly, Lights being placed every
where against my Passage; all crying out that they understood very well that I
had been betrayed, that I was to be careful of my safety, and cause Traitors to
be severely punished. Perceiving by this that nothing could lose me the Peoples
good Opinion, my discontent ceased, and my hopes augmented; but looking upon my
self as still in extreme danger, I thought I was to endeavor by address to
free my self from it.

Paul of Naples, the mean while instead of sending his men to refresh, kept
them still in Arms, and posted them in the most considerable places of the
Town, himself having a Conference two hours together with Vincenzo Andrea and
Gennaro. Coming to my Palace, I found all the World alarmed, as well Lazares
as Black Clokes, at the Orders I had indifferently given to every Body to take
Arms; representing to me, that whatsoever my Enterprise were, if I brought them
to engage in the Night, their animosities against each other considered, it was
to be apprehended that they would fall foul one of another; and these two
parties coming to blows, which might infallibly happen, the Enemy would easily
prevail over both. I seemed to yield to their reasons, and extremely to lament
that by too great a complacency for them, I lost the handsomest and most
infallible Design I could ever undertake; that when I caused a retreat to be
sounded, it was not out of any distrust of the cowardice or infidelity of my
men, but upon advice that at Midnight two considerable Posts would be put into
my hands, which would easily make me Master of the whole City, the Enemies
being weakened by their wants, and so tired with the fight of the day, that
abandoning themselves to sleep all Night, they would not be able to take Arms.
Notwithstanding all this, they persisting in their Remonstrances, I suffered
them all to go to their several Quarters, with Order to continue all Night
armed, to resist the Banditi; who intended some disorder, and perhaps to
plunder the Town. I kept no more of my Guards about me than the number that
were always accustomed to pass the Night in my Hall.

As these things passed, two Deputies of Nola came to demand Justice of me for
the plundering their Town by Paul of Naples, contrary to their Capitulations,
without observance of any of the Articles I had granted them, when they so
franckly rendered themselves; believing I could do them Justice, now I had him
with me. A Woman also cast her self at my feet, to complain that taking a
liking to her Daughter of about sixteen years of age, and one of the fairest in
the Town, whom he saw as he passed by her door, he had sent fifteen or sixteen
of his men, who took her away by force, and brought her to his Lodging, that he
might ravish her. I told her her Daughters honors was safe enough, if all its
danger were on his side; that she should content her self and go home, and be
in a readiness to come to me as soon as I should send for her. I said the same
to the two Deputies of Nola, and going into my Cabinet writ three Notes, one to
the Auditor General, to go to the Vicary with a Confessor and the Hangman to
execute what I should command him; two others to Onoffrio Pisacani and Carlo
Longobardo, with Order to be both of them with Fifty Musketeers of each of
their Companies and two Sedans, at the Backdoor of the Garden of my Palace;
where they should receive farther Orders.

By this time Paul of Naples was come to me with Six hundred of his best men,
of whom he left Three hundred to be Masters of the Corpse de Guard at my Gate,
Two hundred to possess the Court of my Palace and the Stair-foot, and a
Hundred in my Guard-Chamber, that had every one of them Six Firearms. One of
my Servants came to me very much alarmed (as supposing me lost) to give me
notice. I smiled and told him it was the best News he could have brought me,
then calling the Captain of my Guards, and giving him his Orders, I commanded
him with twelve of his men to possess the foot of a private Stair, by which was
a descent from my Cabinet to my Secretaries Office, and to make a sign to me of
the arrival of Pissacani and Longobardo at the place I had appointed them. Paul
of Naples came into my Chamber, followed only by his Cousin Titus de Fusco, whom
he would have his Camp-Master General, and accosting me with a smile, demanded
all the favors already mentioned, adding the Confiscation of the Estate of the
Prince of Avellina, whose Tenant he was born, and whose Title he desired to
take upon him. I told him I admired his modesty, that would be satisfied so
easily after so important services as he had rendered me; that I had such
esteem and affection for him, that I could refuse him nothing; that I would
dispatch for him all he desired, and in such form as he best liked, at which he
seemed to be very well contented; within himself attributing all these obliging
words to excess of the apprehension he had given me. Augustino de Lieto making
sign to me that all that I had ordered was in readiness, I told Paul of Naples
that to the end his Commissions might be to his mind, it would be best that he
went and dictated them himself; and calling Inocentio the Chief Clerk of
Hieronimo Fabrani my Secretary, I commanded him to give Order that Paul of
Naples should be obeyed as my self, and all that he desired dispatched for him,
in such form as was most agreeable to him. Paul of Naples highly pleased that
all went so well to his mind, accompanied by Titus de Fusco his Cousin, and
followed by the Captain of my Guard, went down toward my Secretaries Office,
but as soon as they were at the Stair-foot, the Guards that waited for them,
laid hold upon them, and setting Daggers at their Breasts, threatened that upon
the least noise they would kill them. They begged they might not be put to
death without Confession, and were answered that the punishments I ordered were
not so sudden, nor without the formalities of Justice. They suffered themselves
to be led away without any resistance or words to the Backdoor of my Palace;
where they were put into two Sedans that stood ready for them, and carried to
the Vicary, guarded by a hundred Musketeers appointed for that purpose.

I sent immediately to the Woman whose Daughter he had forced from her, and to
the two Deputies of Nola, to go to the Vicary to depose against him. As soon as
he and his Cousin came thither, the Auditor General causing them to be stripped,
in order to their being put on the Rack, they cast themselves on their Knees
before him, begging they might not be tormented, and confessed more Crimes than
were sufficient to hang a hundred men. At the appearing of the Woman, he
confessed he had forced away her Daughter, who was still at his Quarter, but
that no violence had as yet been used toward her, having deferred it till his
return from my Palace. At the appearance of the two Deputies of Nola, he
acknowledged he had not observed their Capitulations, and had plundered their
Town. His Cousin being found to have a share in all his mischiefs, and
confessing them in like manner with him, they were both condemned to die, and
delivered to two Confessors; after which expecting Execution, they were
surprised to see themselves exposed to the Torture ordinary and extraordinary
which I caused to be given them. Amongst the Torments they confessed, that they
came to Naples only to plunder it, and not to storm the Enemies Posts, not
desirous to see so sudden an end of the Kingdoms disorders; that when they
threatened to cut off my Head and carry it to Don John, they really intended it,
in case I went about to hinder them from plundering, expecting a very
considerable reward from the Spaniards for such a Present; that they thought by
such a menace to have terrified me in such a manner, that I should have refused
none of their Demands; that the Authority of Vicar General, to which he had
pretended, would have given him opportunity to have securely drawn to himself
the money of all the Provinces, and the sack of all the Kingdom: after which my
Head should (at his pleasure) have purchased his Pardon of the Spaniards, or
else he would have retired with what he had gotten, to such part of the World
as seemed securest for him; that distrust of my securing his Person, prevented
his sending his men out of the Town as I had ordered; that he detained them,
expressly to terrify me, and made himself Master of my Palace, to compel me to
such Condescensions, as he knew I would never willingly yield to; that in case
of refusal he had resolved to have stabbed me, of which he had agreed (before
he came to me;) with Gennaro and Vincenzo Andrea; that before the attacque of
the Posts he had sent an Old Woman to Don John of Austria, to know what he
would give for my Head.

He afterward confessed Crimes, Sacriledges, and Abominations so horrible,
that the reading his Depositions amazed me. I caused him to be questioned about
his plundering the Castle of Avellina, caused an Inventory to be made of all he
had taken thence, and the names of the places to which he had transported it,
and where he had bestowed that which in the Morning he had taken out of the
Palace of the Prince Montesarchio, and other adjoining Houses; which he
confessed was at his Quarter to be packed up and carried away next Morning,
with all else that was good in the Town, which he owned he intended to have
plundered before his departure. The Auditor General perceiving no more could be
drawn from him, caused him to die, with his Cousin, and presently sent me word
of it.

In the mean time the Baron of Modene having asked my leave to return to the
Army, I bid him have a little patience, and I would dispatch him at Night. And
Antonio de Calco, Marco Pisano, and Andrea Rama, having been deputed by the
Garrison of Aversa, to desire me to send them back their Camp-Master General,
in whose place no other would be pleasing to them, the Sieur de Mallet
commanding during his absence. I told them I would do reason to their demand,
but that they should expect a while; that I had extraordinary News to acquaint
them with, which was that I had secured Paul of Naples and afterward cut off
his Head, demanding their Opinions, and whether they did not believe I had done
well? They answered yes, but looking upon one another seemed very much
surprised. Causing a Servant to take two Lights, I went into the Hall,
demanding of all I found there, what their business was so late? They told me,
they waited for their General. I told them that must be whomsever I should set
over them; because I had cut off the Head of Paul of Naples, for the many
Crimes he had committed; and they not being much better, ought to apprehend the
like punishment; but that if they would promise me to change their manner of
life, and become better, I would willingly pardon them, and cherish them as a
good Father does his Children. They fell all on their Knees, and besought my
pardon; after which I commanded them to retire, and let their Companions know,
that not one of them should be in the Town next Morning at Eight a Clock, on
peril of their lives; and that they took care they carried not the least
plunder away with them. All this was so punctually observed, that they left
behind them all that they had taken, which I caused to be rendered to the
Owners, after it appeared to whom every thing belonged. I sent then two of my
Guards to reconduct the Maid that had been forced away, to her Mother; no
violence having been acted against her.

The Captain of my Guards had caused a great many Sedans to be brought to my
Stair-head, as I had ordered, and going into my Cabinet, I told the Baron of
Modene, and those that accompanied him, that it was too late to dispatch them,
that they should therefore return in the Morning; that I had done enough that
day to oblige me to go to rest. As he passed through my Hall, he was arrested
by the Lieutenant of my Guards, and Antonio de Calco, Marco Pisano, Andrea
Rama, Cavalier Michellini, the Sieur Desinare, and his Secretary, by other of
my Officers; and carried all Prisoners to the Vicary. I writ a Note to Cardinal
Filomarini to acquaint him, that having caused my Confessor Father Capece, a
man turbulent and seditious, to be arrested, I sent him to his Prison, that I
might in nothing encroach upon Ecclesiastical Justice; desiring he might be
kept close prisoner, without conversing with any. Finding the Confessor in my
Chamber, I made him a relation of all that had passed. He was very much
surprised when he heard the Baron of Modene was Prisoner, told him he needed
not think it so strange since himself was partly the cause. He went about to
justify himself by plausible discourses, which I interrupted and reserved to
the next day, having great desire as well as great need to go to bed. As he
went out of my Hall at the Stairhead the Captain of my Guards secured him, (at
which he was much surprised) and putting him into a Sedan, sent him to the
Prison of the Archbishopric, accompanied by the Ensign of my Guards, with the
Note I had written to Cardinal Filomarini.

Thus ended the day of the attacque of the Posts, which I may say was very
great and very extraordinary, not so much for what happened on it, as what
followed, my escaping by my resolution and address so many different dangers,
and my so boldly and subtly making my self Master of a man, that thought my
fortune and life in his hands.

Next morning the heads of those that had been executed were set upon the Post
in the Marketplace, and each of their bodies hung by one foot, with an
inscription importing, That they had been convicted of Murders, Sacriledges,
Rapes, and burning houses; of correspondence with the Enemy, and attempts on my
person: that they had broken the Capitulation made with the City of Nola,
refused to fight out of cowardice, and designed to plunder Naples. Their
Treason published, the people ran in multitudes to see them, so abominating
them, that they could hardly be hindered from tearing their bodies in pieces.
And as I returned from Mass over the Marketplace, I received a thousand
Benedictions, the people kissing my feet, and making (if it were possible)
greater testimonies than usual of respect and affection: so that by means of
this unlucky ranconter, and of our ill success in the attacque of the Posts, I
saw my authority increased, with greater affection for me, and more hatred of
the Spaniards. This may make appear how great my fortune was, since even my
misfortunes proved advantageous to me.

I next of all sent away the Auditor General to take information of the waste
of the Corn of Aversa, and the ill comportment of the Officers; and it being
necessary that its government should be provided for, I gave it to Pepe Palombe
on pretense of confidence in him, to absent him from Naples, where his
negotiations with the Enemy gave me jealousy, and place him where he could do
me no hurt, and where I could cause his comportment to be more narrowly
observed, leaving him only a shadow of authority. I gave Calco's Regiment to
the Sieur de Beauvais a French Gentleman; and to St. Maximin (afterward
Quartermaster of my Guard) a gallant Soldier, and very faithful, a Company in
the same Body, and two others to two other Frenchmen: leaving this Regiment,
which I made up eight hundred men, in Garrison there. I caused all the rest of
the Troops to march out, whom, under command of the Sieur de Mallet, in quality
of Sergeant Major General of the Army, I sent to St. Mary's a league from
Capua. I sent de Fargis with a sufficient Garrison to Caiassa, having on the
other side of it Marchianese and Lusicano, which I had fortified with the Tower
of Patria, expecting only the arrival of the French Galleys to make my self
Master of Castle Vulturno, which though not very strong, being seated at the
mouth of the river, might be relieved by Sea: but I caused continual cruisings
to be made, to hinder the passage of provisions, which might easily by sea be
transported to the Enemies from Capua.

The Spaniards wants increased daily, getting no subsistence but what was
brought them from Castelamare by their Galleys, who could not always pass by
reason of ill weather, and were sometimes a fortnight ere they returned, which
reduced the Castles and Quarters of the Enemy to the utmost extremity: and when
the weather was fair, the Galleys were so ill manned, that causing them to be
followed by Brigantins and Fellucca's with Soldiers, they made no voyage
without great hazard, being forced to make use of the Citizens (for the most
part useless) instead of Soldiers: they therefore pressed their Correspondents
to an attempt on my person, it being the only way left for their preservation.

The Nobility was in the mean time very unquiet, some of them having possessed
themselves of Towns, and the enmity between the Duke of Martina and Earl of
Conversano, rendering them useless, most adhering to the latter, they busied
themselves only to oppose one another, instead of application to their common
interest: but their jealousies, which increased every day, were attributed to
my secret correspondencies, and it was thought that those that retired to
fortified places, or raised forces, did it that they might make more
advantageous conditions with me, in which perhaps men were not very much
mistaken.

Two days after the attacque of the Posts I went attended only by my Gards and
Domestiques to give God thanks at our Lady de l' Arco, a place of great
devotion, to see the mischief had been done by the last eruption of Vesuvius,
and to consider the miracle of the deluge of flames came from it, and made
toward the Sea, which separating rejoyned after having left that little
Chapel, as if in an Isle, though the natural channel, formed by the manner of
the hills descent, must needs have ruined and carried it away. At my return I
went to refresh my self at the house of Caspero de Romero, whose Garden is the
most delightful of those parts. Gennaro hearing I was there, came presently
thither with intention to kill me, followed by a hundred and twenty Banditi;
but whether it were that my time was not yet come, or that he wanted resolution
for so bold an attempt, I happily secured my self, and he with no less fortune
avoided the snares I had laid for him, which according to probability was
impossible. I discovered him upon the way at a great distance, and left but few
of my Gards without the Gate, placing all the rest within the Court, where they
appeared not, I sent the Captain of my Guards to receive him, who having
brought him into the house, caused the door to be shut, not suffering above
three or four to enter with him. In the mean time I sent order to Onoffrio
Pissacani and Carlo Longobardo with their Companies to possess St. Magdalenes
Bridge, by which probably he was to return. These were men I confided in, and
his enemies, and of the greatest credit in the Town, that might have killed him
without danger, or any distrust that it was on my account, but only because of
his correspondence with the Enemy. There was another way by which he might
return to the Town by the Gate of Capua, where by my order Mattheo d'Amore, and
Cicio Batimiello expected him with their Companies to the same purpose. I led
him round the Garden, and then going with him to a Terrace on the top of the
house, where there is the most agreeable prospect of the world, he became pale
and very much surprised to find himself so slightly accompanied amongst thirty
Centlemen that belonged to me, and as I conceived repented to have hazarded
himself so lightly. Seeing those that belonged to him with their arms in their
hands, I told him they ought not to be in that posture in presence of my
Guards, and that he should command them to lay down their arms and go off; the
fear that possessed him making him very obedient, he called to them to do the
one and the other, which was immediately performed. All that belonged to me,
successively asked me if they should kill him or cast him off of the Terrass,
which had been performed at the least sign I could have given. I positively
forbad this, and out of two considerations. The first that it being very
apparent that I was the Author of his death, the Kings Ministers persuaded of
his good intentions to serve the Crown, and believing he lost his life on that
account, and that I sacrificed him to my ambition, would have taken occasion to
have done me bad offices, hinder the return of the Fleet, and succors. The
other that I had not confidence enough in the courage of my Guards, for a
hundred and twenty Banditi appearing, and he perhaps having more which I had
not discovered, the hazard would have been too great; believing it might be
done more privately, and that his death would be infallible at his return.
After two hours discourse, which as much as possible he could, he sought to
abbreviate, and I to prolong, that such as I had sent to way-lay him might
certainly be arrived, we parted; he took horse very glad to be out of my hands,
and resolved (as he afterward made apparent) never to trust himself in them
again. Being very unresolved what way to pass, at last riding round about a
great Marsh, he reentred Naples by the Gate of Nola. After my discovery of this
I had not time enough to send to overtake him; and in this manner both he and I
missed of our design. Sending before to discover whether any ambuscade were in
my way, I returned home by the Bridge of la Magdalena, where I found Pissacani
and Longobardo mad to have lost so handsome an occasion, which we must with
incertainty wait for another time.

Vincenzo Andrea came to me in the Evening to tell me that their time being
expired, a new election was to be made of Captains of the Quarters, and that it
was of very great importance to make a good choice; I answered him, That by the
Capitulations made with the Duke of Arcos, the nomination belonged to the
People, and resolved not to infringe any of their Privileges, I reserved to my
self only the right of excluding such as I had cause to suspect. He replied,
that it belonged to me alone to make the choice, and that in the morning he
would bring me three Breviates of the Duke of Arcos, by which I might evince he
had done the like, after he had signed the Articles that left this to the
People. I appointed all those I confided in, to bring me the Names of all the
Pretenders, that we might carefully examine who were most proper for us. He
failed not to present me in the morning the three Breviates he had promised,
and employed all the rest of the day in making Cabals and incensing all men
against me, by representing to them that I played the Tyrant, and usurping an
absolute Authority, acted as a Sovereign, without any consideration of the
Peoples advantages; depriving them even of those the Spaniards had allowed
them: he hoped by this means to have caused me to have been slain in a
Commotion, not doubting but the Breviates he had delivered me, would have
incited me to a Contestation that my Authority ought not to be less than that
of a Viceroy. In the Evening having caused a great many People to draw together
in the Piazza before my Palace, he came to me at the head of the Magistrates,
having cast off his disguise, to declare himself; but I had luckily such
friends about me, as were not suspected, who having greater credit than he, did
me good service on this occasion. He told me, that the People very much admired
that I made Captains of the Quarters on my own Authority, the Election
belonging to them; that nothing could more highly offend them than to deprive
them of a Privilege for whose preservation they had taken Arms; that I ought
to consider well, that this destroyed the Cities liberty instead of restoring
it; making me appear rather its Tyrant than Protector. I immediately discovered
his design, because if I fell from what I had pretended, the thanks would have
been his, and persisting, he hoped to have caused me to have been slain by the
People. I answered him calmly, that I could not have imagined his malice so
black, nor his impudence so great; that he ought to recollect, that when he
spoke to me of this affair, I told him I would meddle no farther in it but to
exclude such as we confided not in, and that instead of lessening the Peoples
Privileges I pretended to augment them, daily hazarding my life for the
advantage and liberty of Naples; so far I was from thought of oppressing it:
that he should recollect that he had told me of how great importance it was
that I made the Choice of the Captains of the Quarters, to avoid the disorder
and misfortune that might follow, if any amongst them should be ill affected or
hold Correspondence with the Enemy; and that to let me see that none could
justly take offense at my making the Nomination after the example of the Duke
of Arcos, whose power was not equal to mine, he himself had brought me three
Breviates, which (taking out of a Book where I expressly kept them in readiness)
I showed to all the World; which was by it sufficiently convinced, as well of
his malice as my innocence. All that were affected to me, began to cry out,
That it was very hard that I should be suspected and calumniated without cause;
that the People ought to look upon me as their Father, being so tenderly
affected toward them, and daily exposing my self to so many dangers on their
behalf to procure them liberty and quiet; that they could not therefore have
too great respect or compliance for me: to this there was the general assent of
all that were present. Vincenzo Andrea perceiving matters went not according to
his expectation, craftily dissembling, told me, He had delivered the words he
had been encharged with, but that never having had the least distrust of my
proceedings, he intended to have published my Conduct to the People, and their
Obligation to me, for leaving that to them, which I might with so much reason
have pretended to, by the example of the Duke of Arcos his Breviates, which he
himself had brought to me I replied, That I was most ^ensibly obliged to him on
two accounts, the first for having given me opportunity to satisfy the public
of the sincerity of my proceedings; the second, that he had discovered his
subtilties, which I freely pardoned; but that I assured him I would another
time stand better on my Guard, and use greater precaution, when he propounded
any thing to me, or when I had any affair to treat with him about.

In the mean time I besought those that were assembled, since they were a
number capable of proceeding to the Election, to do it in my presence, that I
might (at least) give my sense for the exclusion of such persons as I should
either suspect or dislike. They all made protestation that they presented me
their Votes, and besought me to nominate such as best pleased me, with
assurance that they would all submit to it. I thought good to make a civil use
of their respect, and taking a List of the Pretenders, read all the Names* and
(the Friends I had beforehand prepared, excepting against all such as they
knew I disliked) writ before them such as had a general approbation, all being
very well satisfied with the Election. Then I took out of my Pocket my own List
of such persons as I thought fittest for us, and reading it to them, they found
it agreed with the choice they themselves had made. On this occasion I
expressed a great deal of joy, that all our intentions were so good, which
appeared by their being so conformable. I put the List into their hands, that
they might cause an Act of the Nomination to be drawn up in the usual Forms;
and at parting desired them all (every one in his Quarter) to let the People
understand the manner of my proceeding, and the cause they had to approve my
Conduct.

This malicious subtilty of Vincenzo Andrea, instead of ruining, having
augmented my credit, and lost him his; he was afterward as much distrusted by
all the World as he had justly been by me. Remorse of Conscience gave him ever
after continual apprehensions. He durst no longer go abroad in the Evenings,
nor eat nor drink in my Palace, as he formerly used to do, equally fearing
Sword and Poison, being sensible that he deserved death in what manner soever
it might be given him. He never afterward spoke of business to me but in
public, and (when possible) out of my Palace, we being equally cautious of
each other, and each of us designing to prevent the other.

Next day about Noon the Citizens complained to me, that the Butchers, contrary
to my Proclamation, kept Arms on their Stalls whilst they sold their meat;
affronting the inhabitants, and causing them by force to take that which they
desired to be rid of, in such quantities and at such price as they pleased. I
presently sent and secured one, who having committed more insolences than the
rest, had not only given ill language, but struck a Tradesman that had refused
to buy something that pleased him not, or that he thought tainted. The rest of
the Butchers mutinied and took Arms, of which having notice, I sent Mattheo d'
Amore with his Company to possess himself of one of the Streets that went to
the Shambles, and Onoffrio Pissacani and Carlo Longobardo with Two hundred
Musketeers of the other. I presently went thither followed by my Guards, and
caused Six-score Butchers to be disarmed, and tied two and two, and in that
posture led through all the Town, swearing that if I hanged not all of them,
the tenth man at least should become an example. Their Wives came and cast
themselves at my feet to beg their pardons, which I a great while refused, but
at last condiscended that none but he that had committed the greatest insolence
should die: but I was moved by the tears of his Wife and five or six little
Children, who begging only his life, and that I should cause him to be punished
in such manner as I thought fit; I contented my self to have him whipped about
the Streets, followed by all his Companions tied two and two as I already
related. His Family gave me thanks as for the greatest Clemency I could have
used, and this exemplary punishment had such an effect, that after it none had
ever the insolence to act contrary to my Edicts.

Vincenzo Andrea still contriving my ruin, made use of an artifice, against
which he thought it impossible for me to secure my self. He came to me
accompanied by the Prince of La Rocca a Cousin of Cardinal Filomarini, most
passionate for the interests of Spain, to serve which he never neglected any
occasion. He was that year Grassiero, which is an employment that gives him
authority over all that concerns Victuals, and is exercised every year
alternatively by a Gentleman and Gownman. They told me great abuses were
committed by the inhabitants of the Villages about Naples, who every day
brought plenty of Bread to sell; but held it at so high rates that the people
starved. They told me this must necessarily be moderated, or the Town could not
subsist. I quickly understood how malicious this Proposal was, because by
refusing a Regulation I should incur the public hatred, and if I ordered it,
no more Bread would be brought from the Country. I seemed not to discover the
malice, and bid them draw up a Proclamation, which I would publish. This having
been done, no more Bread came to Town; and the next day I was told that the
rabble in all Streets cried out, Bread or Spain. I immediately took Horse, and
showing my self in all the Streets, my presence caused this noise to cease; and
I promised them all that before night they should have plenty, informing the
People of the design to have famished them: then sending my Guards to all the
Villages, I commanded the Country people to bring in all the Bread they could,
which they should sell at their own prizes. Three hours after so great a
quantity came in, that during all the revolutions so much was never seen
together. I had a thousand benedictions from them all, which were redoubled by
the expedient I found to prevent the Breads being sold too dear, which was by
forbidding any to be carried back; and that all day they might sell it at as
high rates as they could, but that all that remained at night should be
confiscated. In this manner hope of profit made it come in from all parts, and
the Citizens not being too hasty to buy, but staying till toward night,
obliged those that sold it to take a reasonable price. This Order succeeded so
well, that I caused it to be observed ever after.

Intending to visit the Country, and fearing least in the mean time the
Spaniards, very well informed of what passed, should make some attempt in my
absence, I ordered Onoffrio Pissacani, Carlo Lombardo, Cicio Battimiello, and
Mattheo d' Amore, to make continual rounds through all the Posts, to re enforce
and second such as might be attacqued. The last of these going to the Gate of
Medina, and finding the Enemy sallying repelled him briskly, but engaging too
far, and perceiving he was cut off, cast himself and his Company into a strong
House, in which he defended himself above two hours; but his powder failing, he
found he could no longer resist, and resolving to die, refused Quarter: of
which as soon as I had notice, resolved to save so gallant and faithful a
person, I commanded the Guard of my Palace to run and dis-ingage him; but I
found no Officer to whom to give my Orders, the Captain being accidentally
absent: but Colonel Diego Peers (this being the first time of his coming abroad
after his hurt, which was not yet healed) thinking I would not send him, out of
conderation of his weakness, went down Stairs without saying any thing to me;
and taking his Sedan, caused himself to be carried thither; where his courage
supplying his want of strength, drawing his Sword, and creeping as well as he
could, he not only dis-ingaged Mattheo d' Amore, but struck such a terror in
the Spaniards, that they abandoned all the Posts they held on that side, he
advancing to the Court of Guard of the Viceroys Palace; which I could not
have believed, had not the Spaniards themselves acknowledged it to me in the
time of my imprisonment. I saw then the return of two persons that were very
dear to me, and to whom I was obliged for their valor and zeal to my service:
I failed not (by caressing them) to signify the esteem I held them in, and my
joy, that Heaven had preserved them to me.

I was very glad that Bread (though dear) was plentiful, but Vincenzo Andrea
would have deprived me of this satisfaction, by making it useless to me; and
did his best that the money I had coined, by his advice might be no longer
current; a great deal of it having already passed, and being in the hands of
poor people in a starving condition. But this was easily remedied by a
Proclamation that none should refuse it on pain of death. I was so absolute and
so much feared, that none durst disobey my Orders; they which did so, being
without remission, immediately punished. Thus his ill designs came short of
effect, and the mischief was prevented almost before it appeared.

There were no more disorders heard of in the Town, no robberies, burnings of
Houses, nor any other violences; but I satisfied not my self with that which
seemed so little to me, though any body else would have believed they had
effected impossibilities; and I resolved to re-establish Justice, and make
appear that I knew how to erect her Throne in the midst of a Civil War, and the
Noise of Arms. I assembled such as had formerly been Judges or were persons
capable of it, and in two days settled the Exchequer, where I made John
Camillo Caracciol^ President, a man of great experience, and the fittest of all
others for that Employment, and Francisco de Pati to assist him, in recompense
of the advice he had given me of the designs of the Abbot Basqui; and appointed
all other Officers necessary for that Court. I restored the Council of St.
Clare, formed the Civil and Criminal Vicary, ordered the Judges to wear their
Robes, and not fail daily to assemble at the Tribunals; and all businesses of
this nature were so carefully managed that more Lawsuits were decided and
terminated in two months, than had been formerly dispatched in ten years, and
with so great equity and punctuality, that all Sentences and Decrees made
during my Authority, were valid afterward, without any pretense and less
reason of appeal from them; which gained me so much esteem, that as long as
Naples stands, my memory will be honorable. The same of this went through all
Italy, causing admiration that in a time of so great difficulty, and a place of
so much confusion and disorder, I could in such a manner regulate affairs; of
whose effects I quickly became sensible. But that which obliged the Judges to
be so exact in their duty, was that every Wednesday and Saturday I took an
account of all their determinations, and finding a Sentence defective or
disputable, I caused a rehearing in my presence, and none was put in execution
till I had considered and approved it. Twice I altered what they had done, and
gave Sentence my self with Sovereign Authority; which appeared to be so just
and reasonable, that none could object against what I had declared: which was
put in execution after my imprisonment.

That I might get greater light of all the Enemies practices, I ordered
Augustino Mollo, and two or three of his friends, whom I could trust, to send
to desire the Viceroys leave to accept the Charges I had given them; by this
means augmenting the Enemies confidence in them, to enable them the more easily
to give me good and certain intelligence: and in like manner, by my Order, they
sometimes acquainted him with my secret intentions, when they were such as I
thought it an advantage to me to discover them to him. This proved very useful,
but caused the said Mollo to be suspected of Correspondence, and made the
People jealous of him: but I must needs give this Testimony of him, that no man
in Naples served me more faithfully; having discovered two or three
Conspiracies against my life, and secured me from many dangers that without his
counsel (which was ever successful to me) I could not have avoided.

The Nineteenth of February, the Spaniards received great mortification, and my
self and People extraordinary joy, by the arrival of Don John of St. Severine,
Earl of La Saponara, and afterward Prince of Besignano, chief of the
ancientest and noblest Family of the Kingdom, and whose grandeur could not be
suppressed by the persecution of many Kings; and particularly of Ladislaus, who
caused two and twenty of it at once to be slain in the Castle of Laina,
(whither they came on his Parole) incensed by their having drawn into the Field
in eight days Eighteen thousand Foot, all of their Tenants, and in four and
twenty hours Seven thousand Horse, by them to have secured themselves against
his oppression. As he passed over the Marketplace, the People ran to kiss his
feet, and I received him with open arms; he brought me the best News
imaginable, which was the general dissatisfaction of all the Nobility, who
expected only the example of some of the chief of their Order to follow it; and
very few or none at all being comparable to him in the advantages either of
Birth or Riches, he was desirous to be the first in demonstrating his affection
to his Country, by hazarding his life to second my good intentions, and
contribute to its repose and liberty. He told me he came to receive my Orders,
and obey them with as much submission as fidelity; that his Family had been the
last that followed the fortune of that of Anjou, from which being well informed
that I descended, he came to reverence in my Person the Blood of his ancient
Kings; since whose time the Country had been so cruelly oppressed by Tyrants,
whom he resolved to suffer no longer; that persons of his quality ought never
to lose occasions of breaking their Fetters, when Heaven and Fortune gives them
means to do it; that the Spaniards had done all that tended to the Kingdoms
destruction; that he abandoned them not, till they had abandoned themselves;
and that neither reason nor honor obliged the Nobility to suffer themselves to
be involved in their ruin, since all things well considered, they were rather
Usurpers than lawful Masters; that being well informed of the condition of
their affairs, he perceived their ruin to be infallible, being in a general
want of all things and no succors to be from any part expected; that nothing
was needful toward completing so great an enterprise as mine, which I had
carried on with such resolution and good conduct; but (besides the return of
the French Fleet) the possessing my self of one of the Castles of Naples, and
then the First of May, when the Nobility should be disengaged from their Oath
of Fidelity, by the Protestation they had made, they would most certainly
declare with us, for which he could be responsible, by the certain knowledge he
had of their intentions; and that then the ruin of the Spaniards was
infallible: that besides this there was another way to the same end, more
speedy and no less safe, which was, that abandoning the Town I should march
into Apulia, the fittest place for a rendezvous, because in the middle of the
Kingdom; that as soon as I should be there all the Nobility would come in to
me, and place me at their head; that I should then immediately raise a great
Army, with which returning to Naples, I might at once destroy the Enemy there;
that by this means I should free the Nobility from distrust, who, coming to me,
would suppose they reunited themselves with the People, whereas they desired I
should owe my fortune to them alone; that apprehension of the fortified places
of the Kingdom ought to give me no trouble, for they were entirely unprovided
of all things necessary for defense; besides that, there was not one of them,
in which some Gentlemen had not intelligence and credit enough, to become
Master: that I had nothing to do, but let a little time pass, after which I
should neither want Money, Men, nor Provisions; that on the Five and twentieth
of April, the Custom-House of Foggia would pay me down in ready money Six
hundred thousand Crowns; that if I would make him President of the two
Calabria's, he doubted not in less than three weeks to draw together Six
thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse, and to deliver me in Silk, Salt, and Oil,
the value of more than a Million of Gold; that for Corn I should find in Apulia
and Basilocata more than was necessary to supply the Town of Naples two years;
and that in a word he would be responsible for the Conquest of the Kingdom:
that there needed only a little time and patience to see the effect of the
Mines which were almost ready to be fired.

I must confess his Discourse charmed me, and that I used all endeavors to
give him testimonies of my acknowledgements, and how much I thought my self
obliged to him. I told him his arrival assured me of the Nobilities declaring,
whose intentions I never distrusted; though I ever thought such an example as
his necessary to confirm such as were yet irresolute; that I doubted not to see
him quickly followed by all persons of quality that remained; that this was not
the first time that the Family of St. Severine had influence over the whole
Kingdom; that I ever held it in very great esteem and Veneration, and should
be unworthy the Family of Anjou, from which I descended, if I had not an
hereditary affection for it; that I was yet more engaged by his handsome manner
of proceeding with me, for which I would never prove ungrateful; and that I
would never pretend a fortune, but on account of sharing with himself and
friends, all its advantages; that I was well informed of the extremities the
Spaniards were reduced to, whom I could no longer fear, and now I had him on my
side, contemned; that assuring my self of all he had told me, I (with pleasure
looked on the Conquest of the Kingdom, as in a manner perfected, and the design
I had undertaken of giving it liberty as infallible, yet without any other
interest, than the glory to have contributed toward it with peril of my life,
that ly I should afterward die with satisfaction, supposing my memory would be
eternal, I (by his assistance) becoming the most illustrious Person of my time;
that I expected the return of the French Fleet with as much assurance as
impatience, after which the taking of the Castles and driving away the Enemy
would be no longer a business; that my intention had ever been to have gone
into Apulia, to assemble the Nobility, as he had advised me, and would do it as
soon as my Brother the Knight of Maltha should arrive, whom I intended to leave
in Naples, which I should infallibly lose if I abandoned it, though I valued it
not but in regard of reputation being certain to re-take it without difficulty,
as soon as I should appear before it followed by the Nobility; that with a very
good will I gave him the Charge of President of the two Calabria's, and what
ever else he should desire of me, which was indeed only to present him what his
own credit and declaration for me put me in a condition to dispose of. He
tarried but two days with me, so great was his impatience to bring to effect
all the advantages he had given me hope of. He desired some French men might go
with him, and I gave him the Baron Durand and two or three others, with Don
Carlo Gaeti (whom with the Duchess his Wife I afterward saw here) for
Commissary General of his Horse.

Whilst he acts in Calabria, it will be best (not to interrupt the dependencies
of my discourse) to return to what passed with me in the mean time, and relate
the order I sent to the Sieur de Mallet, to post himself on the Voltorno, so to
streighten Capua, by cutting off its Navigation on this River, and
Communication with the Sea. He sent three hundred men toward Gracianisa, to
entrench themselves on the River side, who dislodged some Troops they found
there, and Dom Lewis Poderico having made an ineffectual attempt upon him,
returned with greater force, and caused some foot to fall on, which was
vigorously beaten off: but having made a show of retreating, he returned to the
attacque an hour after; and for encouraging his Foot, caused two or thrve
hundred horsemen to alight, which after a skirmish of half an hour, forced my
men to retreat, with the loss of thirty or forty slain on the place. Thus we
lost that Post which we had kept three days, and the Enemy understanding its
importance, caused it to be fortified and entrenched in such a manner, that the
difficulty of retaking it, caused us to lose the thought of it.

Two days after, a furious Skirmish happened near St. Mary's of Capua, which
lasted two or three hours with equal advantage to either side, The Sieur de
Mallet unable to imagine on what account Don Lewis Poderico had caused him to
be engaged, as soon as it was at an end, discovered, that while he amuzed him
by this Skirmish, he had caused the Mills of Morrone to be burnt, supposing we
should have been more incommoded than we were by it.

The next day the Sieur de Mallet sent me word that Don Lewis de Poderico had
intimated to him that he desired a personal Meeting, by my permission, which I
granted, with order to sound him as much as possible, and seek as well to
discover his thoughts as those of the Nobility that were with him in Capua.
Each of these endeavored to gain the other by many proposals and advantageous
offers: and after a Conference of two hours parted without concluding any thing
but a settlement of quarter between them, with many expressions of recriprocal
esteem and kindness.

Don John of Austria in the mean time perceiving his Troops very much weakened,
resolved to reform them, but changed his thoughts when he found all his
Officers ready to mutiny, and wanting money as well as victuals, which was
necessary to prevent his men's disbanding, he was fain to melt his Plate, to
give them something of satisfaction by that small assistance. The King of Spain
having no intimation of his having been declared Viceroy in place of the Duke
of Arcos, who he knew could no longer continue at Naples, and was become
useless to his service, by reason of the general distrust and contempt of his
person, sent him order to go away, and to the Earl of Ognate to command in his
place in quality of Viceroy. This being the only thing he desired, he
endeavourred to put himself into a condition of bringing supplies both of money
and victual.

He took up at Genoa two hundred thousand Crowns on his own credit, putting it
abord the Galley of Captain John Andrew Brignolle, and some little Corn on
another, himself also going abord, and intending for Gaeta, from whence he
dispatched Dom Antonio de Cabrera to Don John of Austria, to acquaint him with
his arrival, and the choice had been made in Spain of his person. Don John was
surprised at this news which he little expected, but comporting himself with
much discretion, concealed his resentments, and at his arrival on the second of
March, received him with as great demonstrations of joy, as if he had come on
some other account then to dispossess him of his authority. I expected that an
emulation between them would cause a division, by which I hoped to make
advantage; but whatsoever their thoughts were, they concealed them with so
great dissimulation, that nothing appeared. The Earl of Eril, Don John's high
Steward, returning from Madrid, whether he had carried the news of the Duke of
Arcos his renunciation, and the possession Don John had taken of the
Viceroiship, brought with him a Confirmation of his Authority, and an Order to
the Earl of Ognate not to stir from Rome: but having already resigned his
Charge, he would not reassume it, reserving only the badges and appearances of
the supreme authority, with the quality of Plenipotentiary in all Italy.

The arrival of this new Minister troubed me, apprehending his wit and active
spirit, and being (to my displeasure) sensible that Heaven has seldom failed
of a miracle in favor of the House of Austria, when at the point of
destruction. The arrival of these two Galleys prevented the effects of the
despair the Spaniards were reduced to, by bringing money enough to pay their
Troops a Muster, and some little corn, no more being left than was sufficient
for four days.

Reports beginning to be spread through all Italy of our Enemies wants and
weakness, of the dissatisfaction of the Nobility, and establishment of my
authority, all Princes thought it time to take their measures; and as there are
but very few of them that have not some considerable Revenues in the Kingdom of
Naples, they begin to apply themselves to me for their preservation, with good
words and wishes, but no assistance. My friendship was sought after, and
advises were sent me; and this in particular from a person very powerful and
well informed, that I should use all means to rid my hands of Gennaro, who
betrayed me, and was alone capable of precipitating me from the height to which
fortune had raised me. The best of Genoa, the greatest part of their fortunes
lying in this Kingdom, had recourse to my protection, signifying themselves to
be much concerned in my successes, and assuring me that whatsoever I pretended
from that Republic should be granted me. The Cardinals and other great persons
at Rome, moved by the same interest, sent me daily protestations of their
friendship and service. Nay Prince Lodovisio himself, as zealous as he had ever
appeared for the Spaniards, made application to me, fearing the loss of his
Principality of Venosa, which caused me to judge that he looked on my affairs
as in a successful posture. The Constable Colonna offered me, that if by some
Confiscation I would secure to him an equivalent of what he had in Sicily, he
would come and exercise under me the Charge of Constable of the Kingdom. The
Republic of Venice ordered their Resident to demand Audience of me (with I
thrice gave him) and to compliment me on the happy success of my Enterprise,
which I ought to complete by following my good fortune, with assurance, that
were it not for the pressures that lay upon them by reason of the Turkish War,
they would as well assist me with money as vows and prayers, conjuring me, (as
soon as I should arrive at a settlement, which they hoped to see very suddenly)
to permit them to make Levies in this Country to serve them in their present
necessity, and secure Candie against the attempts of the Infidels.

The Pope believing, that at the arrival of the French Fleet the Spaniards
would be forced to leave all, and informed that orders to that purpose were
already come, and that they were to attend the Succors of Spain in Gaeta and
other Maritime Towns, and that this resolution had twice arrived at the point
of being put in practice, apprehened that France making advantage by it, would
possess it self of the Kingdom of Naples. This giving him an extraordinary
jealousy, obliged him to flatter and encourage my ambition, by representing
that if I had thoughts of assuming the Throne, of whose ascent I wanted but one
step, all Italy would assist me; for whose liberty and my preservation he would
make a league; and that to testify the affection he had for me, he should
think himself obliged to more than counsels and prayers; and if I undertook
this glorious design, promised to invest me, and offered to lend me three
hundred thousand Crowns. Not transported by vanity I answered him, that his
affection laid infinite obligations upon me, that time would instruct me what
should be fit for me to do after the Spaniards should be driven away; but that
in the mean time I did not only accept the money he was pleased to promise me,
but (being in extreme want of it) most humbly besought him to supply me with it
suddenly, after which I assured him he should quickly see completed the
design I had undertaken, and advanced so far contrary to the opinion of all
the world. He reiterated his proffers, but the money came not, only his bare
advice that I should not forget what he told me at parting, with advertisement
to distrust all mankind, and above all equally to apprehend both France and
Spain, and have a great care of the security of my Person. All things
encouraged my hopes, and made me judge my self nearer the haven than I had
thought, since the world seemed so thoroughly persuaded of my good fortune, and
the enemies ruin. These appearances gave me some prospect of good success, and
I thought so intelligent and well informed persons, as all the Princes of
Italy, moved not in such a manner on my consideration, without discovering at a
distance, what the encombrance of the affairs that lay upon me hindered me from
discerning so clearly. I therefore thought I was to be more careful of my
Conduct, and to consider as well my own actions as theirs I was jealous of,
without neglect of the smallest matters, because the Spaniards being so near
their ruin, would leave no ways unattempted for procuring mine.

My just apprehension of Gennaro's practices, made me resolve to dispatch him
at the first opportunity, and to that end to endeavor to possess my self of
the Carmelites Tower. And doubting the Spaniards might by money get some of our
Posts* which for five months together had been commanded by the same persons,
which must needs discover to them who were corruptible, I put the people in
mind how much those persons must necessarily be wearied by so long a
continuance in arms, that therefore they ought to have rest, and their
fidelity and courage be reserved for important enterprises, without obliging
them to continual fatigue. My proposition was received with incredible
applause, and they resolved to put the Guard of the Town into my hands, and
trust their safety to me, pressing me to make such levies as I thought
necessary, and nominate the Officers, and they would find arms for the
Soldiers I should list. I had already a settled Stock for their subsistence,
and wanted money only for the Levies, which could amount to no great sum. I had
20000 Crowns at Rome, which I resolved to send for by Augustine de Lieto, to
whom I gave eight Felucca's well armed. He provided for his departure, but was
hindered by ill weather till the tenth of March. He had enriched himself by
many movables which he intended to take with him, as Pictures, Plate and other
goods of value, and as persons of low birth are most easily transported to
vanity, he would needs take with him a great Train and Equipage, with part of
my Music, and instead of a speedy return, stayed to divert himself at Rome,
and show his splendour and magnificence, which proved the cause of my ruin; for
if I had received my money time enough, after my Levies had been completed, I
would have changed the Guards of all the Posts every night, by drawing of lots,
by which means it would have been impossible for the Spaniards to have taken
any certain measures since they could not foresee who they were to deal with. I
now wanted not good and experienced Officers; for besides many Frenchmen which
came daily to me, most of the Neapolitans that served in Flanders, Catalonia,
and the Duchy of Milan ran away, and came to me in Troops; and (had not my
ruin been so sudden) not one of them would have continued in those Armies.

At this time France lost a most probable opportunity; for had she given me the
least assistance, the weakness of the Enemies forces in the Duchy of Milan
would have made its Conquest easy, whilst I deprived Spain of the Crown of
Naples, which by its Men, Money, and Naval Forces, alone maintained the War of
Catalonia and Italy, and the greatest part of the Charge of that of Flanders,
as well as the Embassies of Rome, Germany, Venice, and Genoua.

The Ninth of March Augustine de Lieto going to Posilippo to embark with my
dispatches, Vincenzo Andrea that waited an occasion to make the People rise
against me, seconded by Gennaro and the Peoples Elect, thought he had met the
best imaginable; giving out that having pillaged the Town, I resolved to be
gone; and that by the Felucca's that were ready to set sail, I sent before me
to Rome, whatsoever was rare and precious. About ten a Clock at night Augustino
Mollo brought to me Captain Ignatio Spagnuollo to acquaint me with Vincenzo
Andrea's Order to him to be ready with his Company. which consisted of Three
hundred Laborers, to kill me the next morning in my Palace; that the
resolution had been taken, but he assured me of his fidelity, and that he would
keep his men in Arms, to march whithersoever I commanded them.

The Tenth in the morning I visited all the Town, to take cognizance of
whatsoever was in agitation, and perceived the People somewhat altered, by the
apprehension had been given them of my design to plunder and abandon them. I
disabused very many of them, and sent Orders to Augustine de Lieto not to set
sail, before he received an important dispatch from me, which I would go about
immediately after dinner. Whilst I was writing, Hieronimo Fabrani my
Secretary, came in great disorder to tell me, that there was an insurrection,
and above Four thousand men in Arms in the Marketplace, all whose talk was of
coming to cut off my head in my Palace. He was enraged to see that instead of
concerning my self at this advice, I laughed at it as a trifle: another person
came immediately to confirm it with no less disquiet and apprehension than the
former: I therefore called for Horses, and sending for the Knight de Fourbin,
gave him Order to go to the Marketplace, and see what passed, and carefully
observing the countenances and actions of all, take notice what Leaders
appeared at the Head of these Mutineers, and what he could hear them say. I
called for Boots, but my servants were in such disorder, they knew not what
they did, and sought all up and down for what they had in their hands. By that
time I had put on my Boots, the Knight de Fourbin came to tell me that Five or
Six thousand men were in Arms in the Marketplace, and Gennaro and Vincenzo
Andrea at their Head; that they were much incensed, and continually cried, God
and the People. This News pleased me, because nothing of Spain being
intermixed, I knew it was no more than a Commotion, which my presence would
easily pacify. He hastened me to go down and take Horse, that I might be in a
condition to appear and defend my self.

At the arrival of the Mutineers, I heard a great noise before my Palace, and
looking out of my Window, saw all such of the People as had no Arms run away
for fear, and made a sign with my Hat to them to stand, crying out, That it was
nothing but a little disorder, which I would instantly remedy. I went down and
mounting a great and fiery Courser, took with me fifteen of the best Musketeers
of the Guard, which that day was of Diego Peers his Regiment, he himself went
along, and I commanded him to keep still before my Horse, to do what I should
appoint him: I then sent to all our Posts, that care might be taken of their
security, and that they might be very vigilant, to prevent the Enemies taking
advantage by the greatness of the disorder was likely to be in the Town:
afterward I marched, and had hardly gone Two hundred Paces, when, hard by the
Gate of Capua, over against a Chapel called St. Catharines, I perceived
Vincenzo Andrea with his Sword drawn, on an Isabella colored Horse with a
white Mane and Tail, which Polito Pastena had given Gennaro, who was likewise
himself at the Head of the Mutiniers on a Black Courser, continually crying
out, God and the People. As soon as I came within Thirty Paces, I fired upon
them, minding my Musketeers to take good aim, which they performed so ill, that
none was either slain or hurt; yet Vincenzo and Gennaro ran instantly away: the
last of these regained the Carmelites Tower, where he shut himself up with so
much fear, that he appeared no more that day, nor suffered any to enter; the
other by the swiftness of his Horse got to the Marketplace, from thence to
seek a secure retreat. I immediately rid up to this revolted People, and asking
them who had caused them to take Arms, and on what pretense? they told me they
had been informed, that I intended to go away and abandon them to the fury of
the Spaniards, carrying with me all that was rich and precious in their Town: I
replied, They might have easily observed, in the time I had been amongst them,
that avarice was not my vice, of which they should never have a pretense to
accuse me, but if they thought me guilty, and gave so easy belief to Traitors,
that cried me down, in order to their immediate destruction, or were
dissatisfied with my Conduct and Service, they might have let me know it
without coming tumultuously to murder me; and that having Felucca's ready at
Posilippo, and the wind favorable (if my misfortune rendered me disagreeable to
them) I would embark immediately, and they should afterward become sensible
whether Gennaro and Vincenzo Andrea (who had a sufficient influence over them
to cause them to take Arms against me) would prove more faithful and useful to
them, and whether they were able to save them from the revenge and cruelty of
the Spaniards, prevent the plundering and burning their Houses, secure the
honor of their Wives, and preserve their lives, as well as their Childrens, as
I had to that time done; or assure them of the liberty and quiet I promised
them, if they would afterward have more kindness for me, a greater sense of my
services, and less confidence in Traitors, that sought my destruction, only in
order to reduce them under the Spanish Tyranny.

All these Mutineers were mollified by my discourse, and cried out, They
deserved not the affection I had for them; that they would all die for me, and
that all such as loved me not, or refused to obey me, were to be dragged about
the Streets and hung up by the feet. Follow me then, my friends, said I, and
let us together pacify the disorder of the Town, I will establish quiet, and
employ the remainder of my life, to obtain you a lasting freedom from
oppression. I kept on toward the Marketplace, followed by them all with a
thousand benedictions and acclamations of God and his Highness, without once
mentioning the People, to make it appear that they looked on my interests as
the same with their own.

Coming to the Marketplace I spoke much in the manner I had done before, to
such as I found there, which was heard with the same demonstrations of respect
and kindness. Onoffrio Pogane, one of the highliest affected to Gennaro, and
all others that I suspected, was brought to me with twenty Rapiers points at
his breast, and I made his Company lay down their Arms, after a severe
reprehension for his having caused them to take them up without my Order, and
for his having been one of those that marched at the head of such as came to
attempt my life; giving me some marks of his penitence, or rather of his fear,
I pardoned him, with order to go to his Quarter, and take care that all might
be peaceable.

As I went out of the Marketplace, I saw a great concourse of people come the
length of a Street, and perceived it to be the Peoples Elect, who with as many
as he could draw together, came to join with Gennaro and Vincenzo. He was
carried in an open Sedan with his Sword drawn, and instead of appeasing the
Tumult, endeavored by his discourse to make a new Commotion. His surprisal at
meeting me was great, and augmented when he saw all his companions join with
those that followed me, and cry out, more than the rest, God and his Highness.
The people looked upon me, and by a motion of their hands demanded my
permission to cut off his Head, and drag him about the Streets, but I by
another sign let them know I would not have it done; and perceiving him a
little come to himself, asked him what he pretended? and whither he went? He
told me, that having heard there was a disturbance in the Town, he went to seek
me to receive my Orders, and know what was to be done. I then appointed him to
cause all the Inhabitants to lay down their Arms, and assemble the Magistrates
at St. Austins, and from thence come home to me, to know what I would command
him farther.

The Knight de Fourbin meeting Vincenzo Andrea, presenting his Pistol to his
Breast, asked, Who he was for? the other answered, For God and the People, and
this being that which was ordinarily said, he durst not fire; but thought to
bring him to me, which the other apprehending, escaped by the swiftness of his
Horse. It was my misfortune that I had not enough opened my self to the Knight
de Fourbin in this particular, who apprehending I might blame him for using any
violence without order, failed of ridding me of the most dangerous Person of
Naples, and whose death was the most necessary to me.

I afterward rid round the Town, which my presence and discourse quieted, and
returning to Porta, I was told that some were intrenching themselves at La
Pietra del Pesce, Onoffrio Pagano's Quarter; I sent two young men, Brothers,
called the Riga's, that were well beloved in the Town, to tell the Captain,
that if as I came that way I found not the Trenches slighted, or if I perceived
the least murmr or disturbance, I would cause him to be hanged by the foot.
He obeyed my Orders with all marks of respect and entire submission. Thus
leaving all quiet, I returned to my Palace, there to expect the Peoples Elect,
with the Captains of the Quarters, whom I had commanded to come thither, to
hear from me what they were to do on an occasion so difficult and dangerous.

This great Tumult vanished like a Fire of Straw, and as it began without
occasion, ended without effusion of blood, though in all appearance, its
consequences were likely to have been very fatal. The Peoples Elect coming to
me, followed by all the Captains of the several Quarters and Magistrates of the
City, I complained of his proceeding, and that his endeavors had tended more
to incense than appease the People; telling him that if for the future any such
disturbances happened, he was to know of me how he should comport himself and
receive my Orders; that the business being so well passed over, I would once
again give Testimonies of my Clemency, but they should be the last; for at the
next disturbance that happened I would make exemplary punishments. After he had
oftentimes besought my pardon, he also begged it for Vincenzo Andrea, to which
at the request of the Captains of the Quarters, I condiscended, with security
to come and acknowledge his fault, and cast himself at my feet. He came
presently after, and falling on his Knees before me, at first pretended to
justify himself and make excuses, but afterward acknowledging that his Crime
deserved the severest punishment, protested, that in consideration of his life
that I had given him, he would afterward be the most faithful and submissive
of all men. I told him he was to thank the Magistrates of the Town that had
interceded for it; for whom I had too great a respect to deny them any thing:
that his attempt upon my life merited the most cruel punishments; that he
should take are of his future comportment, that no faults of his could be
pardonable after so many relapses, and that he should be mindful of the
testimonies he had received of my goodness, and of his own ingratitude and
obstinate malice; that I would watch him narrowly, very well understanding all
his designs and intrigues, and that the least false step should expose him to
be punished as a Disturber of the public quiet, a Traitor to his Country, and
Correspondent of its Tyrants: afterward beginning to rally with him, I advised
him never to take Arms, since he carried his Sword so unhandsomly, that he
ought no (...) to appear in such a ridiculous posture; but content himself with
his Pen, which he could use better and which better became him.

I sent to Gennaro to come to me on my Parole, and that he should make haste
whilst I was in the humor of pardoning. He was willing to obey me, but fearing
the People would tear him in pieces by the way, sent to desire my Guards for a
Convoy, which was no more than necessary, the Women railing at him, and the
Common People every moment ready to fall upon him. At his arrival he fell on
his Knees before me, and kissed my feet, weeping and trembling, being naturally
very timorous; I let him continue a good while in this posture, unable to say
any thing more to me, than conjure me for the sake of our Lady of the
Carmelites and St. Gennaro to spare his life, embracing my Knees with all his
strength. At last I caused him to arise, with assurance that I had forgot all
his Crimes, and that he needed fear nothing, provided he became more faithful
and more discreet for the future. I reproached him that he could not deny that
had not my arrival at Naples prevented it, he had been put to death the next
day; that this was the third sedition I had pardoned him for; that he had
several times intended to attempt against my life, and that I knew the occasion
of his coming to seek me at Jasper de Romero's; that I was not ignorant of his
Correspondence with the Enemy, all particulars whereof I could tell him; that I
had information of his Negotiations with France to ruin me, by which he had
hindered me from being assisted, and the People supplied; that himself should
be judge what his ingratitude for me, and disloyalty to his Country merited.
He answered only with tears, and falling again on his Knees, incessantly
cried. Mercy, Mercy. I told him that for the sakes of the Magistrates I granted
it him; but let him know it was the last time, and that for my better security
I would place a Garrison in the Carmelites Tower; but would not nevertheless
take its Command from him, where he should continue with his Si^score men for
his Guard; but that I would send one of the Peoples Companies thither, which
should be relieved every night. By this, said I, we shall be out of fear of the
Enemies practices, you shall be Master there as long as you remain faithful,
and if you cease to be so, both your Tower and Person shall be in my hands. I
immediately commanded Mattheo d' Amore to march thither with his Company, and
Gennaro to send order for his reception; for security of which I kept him with
me, till I should have notice that I was obeyed. Thus I drew from this sedition
an augmentation of my credit, and possessed my self of the most important Post of
the Town. Mattheo d' Amore sending me word that his Company had admittance, I
dismissed the Magistrates and Gennaro, who never afterward came at me,
alleging for excuse that he was no longer safe in the Town, that the People
(on occasion of this last Tumult) had such a hatred for him, they could neither
see nor hear him named without horror. I sent after Augustine de Lieto, that he
should make all the haste he possibly could to bring me Money (which would
secure and soon complete my enterprise) and publish in Rome the good success of
this happy day.

The Auditor General being in the interim returned from Aversa, with the
informations, I caused the Tri^ls of Colonel Antonio de Calco, and the Horse
Captain Andrea Rama, convicted of design to debauch my men and carry them to
the Enemy to be made an end of, and they were condemned to die, and though they
offered Twenty thousand Crowns (of which I stood in very great need) for their
pardons, I thought an Example more necessary. Marco Pisano, who had been shaved
as a Clergyman, appealed to Ecclesiastical Justice, which I would not allow,
saying, I could not look upon him as a Priest, being an Officer actually in
Arms, and at the Head of Troops. The Twelfth of March Execution was publicly
made in the Marketplace, with general applause, and their Estates being
confiscated, I used all endeavor to discover the money they had offered me,
but they had hid it so well I could get no news of it, and had nothing
belonging to them, but a very fair and good Horse, which I gave the Knight de
Four-bin, that was killed under me the day I was taken Prisoner.

The Spaniards reduced to extremest want, not having Victuals sufficient for
their Troops and Garrisons of their Castles, desirous to free themselves of all
useless mouths, permitted all people that lived within their limits, to go to
us; by which means so many arrived in the space of two days, as made a great
discovery of the general inclination, We did our selves prejudice by the
reception of so many persons, who must otherwise have eaten upon the Enemy: but
after two days refusal, we not being in so great scarcity, I had compassion
for so many people perishing by hunger, and at the requests of their friends
and relations received all that came, because being of that Country, the
Spaniards had so great hatred for them, that they would gladly have seen every
one of them exterminated. I now thought my affairs in so good a condition, that
(with a little patience) I might assure my self to see them arrive at a happy
conclusion. I used all possible endeavor to get Corn enough to restore plenty
to Naples, and promising payment to the Proprietors, a hundred and fifty
thousand load was provided in Apulia, and fourscore thousand in Basilicata, on
which a moderate price was set; but there being some difficulty for bringing it
to me by reason of the Town of Ariana that lay in the way, I endeavored to
become Master of it, which proved easy, by a Treaty with the Marquess of
Bonalbergo, which (to my great sorrow) proved fatal to him: He sent a Friar to
assure me of his service, and propound the besieging it, that delivering it to
me, he might become my Prisoner of War, and that afterward being set at
liberty on his Parole, never any more to bear Arms against me, he might
unsuspected pass into Calabria, and making his friends and relations declare,
possess himself of the greatest part of the strong places of that Province,
where he had very great credit, being rich, and of the Noble and Ancient Family
of Spinelli. The joy I received at this welcome News may easily be imagined. I
presently caused Six thousand men to march, one thousand of them of La Cava,
commanded by Diego Sorrentino, whom I had made Colonel after the attacque of
the Posts, where he had behaved himself very well; as many of Nocera under
their own Officers, and the rest were of St. Severin and the Troops of Paul of
Naples, who after his death obeyed Horatio Vassallo, aad Diego Vassallo his
Uncle; and appointed the Sieur de Villepreux (at present Mayor of Bourdeaux,
whom I acquainted with my design) to command the whole. As (...) as Ariana was
invested, the inhabitants took Arms in my favor, and killing at the Gate the
Auditor Carlo Ruffo, that pretended to defend it, with Veneroso Secretary to
the Duke of Salsa, President of the Province of Monte Fuscolo that came
thither, after his having abandoned Monte Fuscolo, when Petro Crescentio
possessed himself of it. After the death of those two persons Ariana yielded
and was not plundered. The Duke of Salsa and his two Sons, the Marquess of
Bonalbergo, with his Son Don Carlo Spinelli, Don Lewis Cavaniglia and his
Brother, retired to the Castle, which they yielded on Articles, that their
lives being saved, they should be sent prisoners to me: but our soldiers
getting drunk at the joy of so good success, they that belonged to St.
Severine, accustomed to all sorts of villainies, disorders, and cruelties, by
the examples of Paul of Naples, seized on these Gentlemen, and (what ever the
Sieur de Villepreux could do to the contrary) dragged them to the Marketplace,
where these raskals having disarmed and bound them, killed the Duke of Salsa in
cold blood with three Musket-bullets, and cut off his head, doing the like
afterward to the Marquess of Bonalbergo, the best of my friends, and from whom
I expected great and considerable services; the Cavaniglia's and the Duke of
Salsa's Sons, about fifteen or sixteen years of age, with Don Carlo Spinelli
that was but fourteen, hardly escaping the fury of these Barbarians: who after
this horrible action cast themselves at the feet of the Sieur de Villepreux, to
beg pardon for the violence offered to his Person; protesting to be ever after
obedient to him, and that they had not gone so far, but out of fear he would
have prevented the Massacre they had resolved, after which he dismissed them,
reserving no more then such a Garrison as was necessary for the defense of
Ariana (whose Government I had given him) making choice of the best and
discreetest of the soldiers. It is easy to conceive my sorrow at receipt of
this strange News, which deprived me of all relish of so important a Victory,
which at that instant not only freed me from want, but secured me such plenty,
as could no more fail, the way being open to bring without Convoy enough to
serve us two years.

Two days after the prisoners were brought me, the two Cavaniglia's bound, the
others not so, because Children. I instantly discharged the Cavaniglia's, on
condition never more to carry Arms against me. I sent the Duke of Salsa's
Children to their Relations, after I had let them understand my sorrow for the
death of their Father, and proffered them all manner of Civilities, with
promise by serving them to mitigate the sorrow of the loss they so passionately
resented. I most affectionately embraced Don Carlo Spinelli, wept for his
Fathers misfortune, my Obligations to whom I promised to make good to the Son,
and to be ever his servant. I kept him with me till I heard from his relations,
to whom I signified by Letters the great share I had in their affliction, they
themselves not being more sensibly concerned. The poor youth, very handsome and
very witty, received so well these testimonies of my kindness and sorrow, that
he promised never to forget them, but to remain all his life inseparable from
my interests. After some days I returned him to his Grandmother, the Princess
of St. George, that sent for him; and I must confess that one of my greatest
regrets during my imprisonment, was that I wanted time to punish the Authors of
so horrid a Cruelty, on which account whilst I live nothing can comfort me.

The Banditi giving me new disturbances by the like actions through the whole
Kingdom, I resolved to take an opportunity to discharge my self of all their
Leaders; who by their outrages and plunderings, made useless all my endeavors
to gain the Nobility, as soon as any of whom seemed affected to me, they sought
to disgust them by ill usage. Polito Pastena was one of the forwardest on such
occasions, not desiring the Kingdoms settlement, knowing that then he might no
longer rob with impunity, nor continue his Authority in Salerno, and all the
farther Principality, where he reigned as Sovereign. I had given the Duke de la
Rocca safe-guards for some of his Lands, which he slighting, sent to plunder,
as incensed by the recourse had been made to me. I writ him a Letter something
blunt, to which he sent me an Answer by a Priest, whom I immediately asked if I
had been obeyed, and he going about to make excuses in his Friends behalf, I
refused to hear him, and tore the Letter he brought me without reading it,
telling him angrily that I admitted no reply to my Orders, but would have them
executed punctually and speedily: Polito Pastena it seems will be independent
and play the little Sovereign (said I)? tell him from me that if he continues,
I will teach him his duty, and punish him according to his desert: He shall
find no security against my power and resentment in Salerno, nor amongst his
Banditi, to what part soever he retires I will find ways to come at him, and
be as certainly Master of his head as I was of Paul's of Naples. But if for the
future he become more submissive and obedient, I will cherish and consider him
as formerly, and give him more Authority and Credit than ever. His Messenger
carried him back this Answer, which made him tremble, notwithstanding his great
confidence; which I perceived by his proceeding, causing instantly to be
rendered all that had been taken away, and without reply or delay complying
with all I ordered him ever since. The dissimulation of his discontent
diminished it not, but obliged him to a nearer friendship with Gennaro. He sent
him a dispatch to be conveyed to the French Ministers, offering them, in case
they would send the Fleet to Salerno, to put it into their hands, and to draw
together all the Banditi of St. Severine, La Cava and Nocera, to the number of
Six thousand men. This caused the misfortune of the enterprise of Prince
Thomas, of which the Spaniards having notice by this dispatch (which fell into
their hands after my imprisonment,) at the arrival of their Fleet, they
possessed themselves of Angri, which is the pass of the Mountains, and by it
preventing the meeting of the forces of the three Towns abovementioned, caused
him to distrust some treachery, since nothing they had given him hope of had
been performed. This obliged him to reimbark with a great deal of haste, and
but little honor, of which I cannot but acknowledge my self to have been very
glad, to see that (with all this powerful correspondencies, the Kings Fleet,
and a considerable Body of men to have landed) he could effect nothing, whereas
I alone, and without any assistance subdued a great Kingdom, and subsisted five
months, though my Conduct was decried, and I deprived of the honor of an
atchievment so extraordinary and incredible.

The Peoples Elect continuing his correspondence with the Enemy, I resolved to
punish him, but it being dangerous to do it publicly, and by the hand of
Justice (the authority his Employment gave him considered) I resolved on an
indirect way toward it, which should be performed with such adress as should
give no cause of suspicion, and his death seem the effect of a popular Tumult.
The Inhabitants of the Quarter of Porto gave me notice that intelligence had
been given them by some of their Pelucca's, that in the Island of ^rocita, of
which he was Native* he made provision of all manner of refreshments to send to
the Enemy. I gave credit to the report, and so far incensed them against him,
that they resolved immediately to cut off his head, which I expressly forbid,
promising to cause him to be secured that very day, and to bring him to his
Trial, and cause him to dye by Law, it being of great concernment to draw from
him by force of torments, the names of all such of the Cabal as corresponded
with the Spaniards. After this I sent them away recommending secrecy: and
desirous to make use of so favorable a Conjuncture, commanded Cicio Battimiello
and Peppo Ricco, Persons resolute and faithful, and fit to execute an affair of
this nature, to dine in that Quarter to keep the humor warm, and to have some
ready to follow them at the hour I should intimate. When I rose from dinner I
was told there was some disturbance in Porto, and that the Inhabitants took
arms. I went immediately thither, where finding a tumult, I asked the reason,
they told me that having discovered more treasons of the Peoples Elect, they
could no longer suffer him, and resolved to go to his house and cut off his
head, and drag his body about the Streets. I forbid them to undertake any such
violence, which as long as I commanded in the Town should not be suffered,
causing them to lay down their arms; and whilst I was on the way home, ordered
Batimiello, that went along to wait on me thither, to return and make them
reassume them, and go and execute their design, of which I could not be
suspected after having appeased the disorder: that he should lose no time,
because I was informed that Onoffrio Pagano was with him, who I was desirous
should run the same fortune.

As soon as I came home, I went into my Cabinet to entertain Marco Antonio
Brancaccio, with whom I had not a quarter of an hours discourse before my
Servants came to tell me, that a great noise was heard of abundance of people
that had tumultuously flocked about my Palace. Looking out at the Window I
perceived them, carrying a head on the point of a Pike, and draging a naked
body by one foot, the boys having torn off the clothes by the way, I called to
them to stand, and asked what spectacle that was? They told me it was the body
of Antonio Mazella the Peoples Elect, and that his head that was carried on the
Pike: Cicio Batimiello and Peppo Ricco marching amongst the foremost, I asked
them how they durst take the boldness, after the prohibition I had made, to
undertake such an action, for which I had a great mind to cause them to be
hanged: Falling on their knees they begged my pardon, and my leave to come
securely to me, which I granted them. They came up to my Hall, whether they
brought Antonio Mazella's two Brothers-in-law bound, telling me that after I
had appeased the Tumult of Porto, they had advertisement of a new treason of
the Peoples Elect, and of a conspiracy of his against my life, which was to be
put in execution the next morning. That incensed by this they had immediately
punished him, apprehending that my over great clemency would have pardoned him;
that they willingly submitted to what soever I pleased to inflict upon them,
and would die contented to have given a testimony of their affection to me and
their Country: I pardon said I the indiscretion of your zeal, but if you ever
do the like I will make you such examples, that none in Naples shall afterward
dare such an attempt. For terror to others I commanded his head to be set on a
Post in the Marketplace, and his body to be hanged on one foot; One of his
Brothers-in-law I caused to be discharged immediately, being assured of his
fidelity, and the other (to exempt him from fury of the people) I sent to the
Vicarie, and two days after sent him a pass to go whether he pleased, provided
he left the Town.

The Spaniards were very sensibly concerned at this tragedy, losing by it a
Person they very much depended on. Gennaro was most furiously alarmed at it,
and to avoid the like, resolved to embark with all his treasure on a Felucca,
and retire to Venice. I cunningly sent him Masters of Feluccas that pretended
to serve him, but that letting me know the time of his departure would give me
opportunity to seize upon him with all his wealth, which would have supplied my
necessities, and in a few days have made an end of our business; and
surprising him in the very act of abandoning the Town, and carrying away the
best things that were in it, I might have caused him to have been hanged with
the general applause of all the people. He could not have avoided this snare
that was so handsomely laid for him if the Baron of Rovrou, a diligent Spy
upon all my actions, that he might give him an account of them, had not told
him that I had given secret Audiences to Mariners, of which being jealous, he
so particularly informed himself, that he discovered they were the same he
intended to embark with, which made him abandon the design he thought to have
put in execution the next morning. This discovery driving him to despair,
obliged him to send one he confided in to conclude something with Don John of
Austria and the Viceroy, of which being informed by Augustino M^llo, I thought
I ought to rid my hands of him at what rate soever: but this was not easy, he
never going out of his Tower, and being on that account secure from being used
as the Peoples Elect had been, neither could any thing be undertaken against
him but by open force, and great effusion of blood, his party within being
equal to my Garrison.

Augustino Mollo to free me from this difficulty, came at night and told me, I
have brought you that will free you from Gennaro: his Treasons merit death, and
in what manner Justice be done on him is not very considerable: look on this
Vial full of so clear and beautiful water, in four days time it will punish all
his infidelities; the Captain of the Guard shall undertake to give him, without
his distrust, it having no taste at all. On the next day, which was Friday, he
caused him to drink it all at dinner; but whether the dose was too weak, or
that having eaten nothing but cabbage dressed with oil (which is certainly a
great antidote) he fell a vomiting immediately, which freed him from a danger
so evident, and that appeared so certain. He escaped with a head-ake and pain
in his stomach for four or five days, without any suspicion of the matter. I
discovered some abuse in my Secretaries office, of which complaints had been
formerly made, and a dispatch I had there refused, being a fourth time
presented to sign amongst several other Papers, I sent for Hieronimo Fabrani
my Secretary, and after a severe repriment threatened to hang him if he ever
committed the like fault. He laid the blame on his Clarks, whom I caused to be
all immediately turned away (exept Innocentio in whom I had a great deal of
confidence) ordering him to seek others, assuring him that another time his
Clarks should not excuse him, but his own person be responsible. Understanding
that in the time I had been at Naples he had gained forty thousand Crowns, I
asked him to lend me twenty thousand, promising to pay him out of the money I
had sent for to Rome. He told me that report was spread abroad to do him a bad
office, and that he had no money, the contrary of which was very hard for me to
make appear, he having hid what he had gained, the greatest part of it in
Religious Houses, that he might send it to Rome at the first opportunity. His
avarice caused my ruin; but he himself went not scotfree, it costing him not
only his wealth but his life, the Spaniards in the time of his imprisonment
discovering that he writ to Cardinal Mazarin (his Letters having been taken at
Rome and returned to the Viceroy by Cardinal Pansirolle) cut off his head: he
gave intelligence of the facility of surprising Castello novo at the return of
the Fleet by a negotiation he had managed.

The trial of the Prisoners of the Garrison of Aversa and the Baron of Modena
went forward: I had set it a foot to satisfy the people, though I resolved
when a handsome occasion should offer, to send the Baron into France, finding
him to be innocent, and guilty of no other crime but the misfortune that
oppressed him by reason of his good nature which betrayed him to faults, though
his intentions were always good.

A French Physician that belonged to me, being convicted of many pilferings and
cheats, I resolved (because he was my domestic) to have him hanged for an
example; but the women of the Town persisting many days to beg his pardon, I
could not at last refuse them; I therefore kept him in prison till I could find
convenience of sending him out of the Kingdom.

The peoples affection for me increased daily, with their joy and the Enemies
despair at the arrival of corn from Apulia, the first Convoy bringing three
hundred Mules, the second three days after five hundred, which still continued
augmenting till Thursday in Passion-week, when there came fifteen hundred,
which made me resolve on the first of May to abate the price of bread, to what
it had been at in the most plentiful times. I would not at once let the rates
fall so low, lest I might afterward be obliged to raise them, and that I might
get something above the price it cost me, toward a Stock of two hundred
thousand Crowns, which had wont always to be kept in a readiness to supply the
Magazins. Besides that there must be a considerable sum to make the first
purchases; I thought therefore of an expedient, which was to demand a list of
the names of a hundred of the best Merchants in the Town, representing to them,
that if want of provisions should once again imbroil us, they would be the
first sufferers, because their houses and estates could not escape plundering.
That to avoid such an inconvenience, every one of them should lend me a
thousand Crowns, and that for security of this money, they should nominate any
two of their number to keep the Keys of the Granaries, and repay themselves as
the Corn should be vended; that in this manner they would run no hazard, and
fifteen days return them the whole sum, and I gain fifty thousand Crowns, by
selling it for a third part more than it cost. This was generally approved, and
to put it in execution with greater order, I caused Donato Grimaldi to be made
the peoples Elect in the place of Antonio Mazella, to the satisfaction of all
men, he being a very rich Merchant, and a very honest man, not suspected of any
correspondence with the Enemy, who in the mean time used all possible
endeavors to avoid their ruin that appeared so near, and incited by despair,
laid hold on all appearances that presented to them. They sent Galleys to
endeavor to retake the Tower of Sperlonga, And drawing out of Gaeta Don Martin
de Verrio, that commanded in the Town, with part of the Garrison, causing
likewise the Troops of Capua to march, sent the Prince of la Rocca Romana, and
the Prince of Minorvina, to block it on one side, and our Banditi after the
defeat of Papone, not daring to stand in the field against them, they about the
end of March retook Fondi and Sperlonga, without much resistance.

Don John of St. Severin made a considerable progression in Calabria; and at
last becoming Master of the whole Province, drew together the Troops he had
promised, laid up Oil, Salt and Fish to the value of a million of Gold, and
made great provision of Saltpeter and Powder, expecting an occasion to draw me
into Appulia, that he might come thither to me, and bring all those things with
him. He made the Baron Durand Governor of the Principality of Stiliana, who
increasing daily in strength, had taken Tordamare, a very important Post in
Basilicata. A little disorder happened, to which I gave remedy that very
instant. Sabbato Pastore having drawn men out of the Garrisons of Lucera,
Foggia, and Troya, for a considerable enterprise, the Princes of Montesarchio
and Troya, the Garrisons of those three places being weak, surprised them in
his absence; of which receiving advice I ordered him to return, where he found
them abandonned by the Nobility that retired on the news of his coming back.
But the Spaniards, who are very distrustful, imagined that their hatred for
him was the cause of their taking in these Towns, and their affection for me of
their quitting them, at my request, and on assurance of satisfaction on all
occasions of complaint they thought they might have against him; and knowing
that I had secret correspondencies with the Nobility, they oftentimes suspected
such things as necessity compelled them to do, to be effects of their kindness
for me. I sought not to disabuse them of this error, which was advantageous to
me, it giving occasion of a perpetual jealousy that made them disoblige
persons of quality, who, what services soever they rendered them, could not
secure themselves from it.

The whole Kingdom inclined to me, and I every day heard of some or other that
came in; so that I wanted nothing but our Fleet or the arrival of my brother
the Knight of Malta, to end all in a day. I continually watched opportunities
of all designs that seemed attemptible; and having sent to discover the
condition of the Custom-house of Oil, and finding the enemy had no body in it,
I thought of an invention very extraordinary. I caused a way to be made under
ground from a remote and abandoned Garden, near the Convent of St. Sebastian.
Men continually wrought upon it, and carrying away the earth by Sellers, in ten
days I had made a Mine of fifteen hundred paces, wide enough for two men to
pass a breast, which led to the Cistern of Oil, the Stones of which wall I
caused to be three or four days bathed with Vinegar and Brandy, which by this
means softened, and as soon as rubbed, fell in pieces, without any noise, and
might be thrown down without any violence. Things thus disposed in order to the
execution of my enterprise, the Spaniards having no distrust, nor any body else
knowledge of it, such as wrought in the work excepted, I went thither to bring
two hundred men into the Cistern of oil, and from thence into the Court of the
Custom-house, drawing afterward the like number into the Cistern, and all
along the passage, men ready to second them, and then falling out of the house
to attack the rear of the gate of St. Spirito, the post of the Spanish
Reformadoes, and the most considerable they had. In the Piazza before that gate
I had drawn up three hundred horse, followed by two thousand foot who entering
by the street of Toledo, were to march right to the Viceroy's Palace (a general
alarm being the mean while given in all the Quarters) of which (whilst all
was in this disorder) I might possess my self without resistance. I had daily
assurance that they suspected nothing, never having heard the men work: that by
a hole which looked into the house, we might perceive there was no body in it,
and the Spies. I had amongst them let me know they were in great security. The
day before I intended to fall on, a young and very fair Nun that had a Brother
with the Enemy, perceiving men work, and not understanding to what purpose,
desired to give them notice of it, and having writ a little note, she went up
to the wall of St. Sebastian's Cloister, to throw it to them, but an
unfortunate Musket Shot killing her dead, the note was found in her hand and
brought to me, which obliged me to hasten the execution of my design. The night
of the twentieth of March seemed very favorable, being dark and rainy, with so
much wind, that no other noise could be heard. My Horse and Foot being drawn in
Battalia, I went to visit this Cave, and having caused the men appointed for it
to enter, made the wall be broken down and fall on. We had an alarm by a
Soldiers Bandeliers taking fire, all the chargers whereof burning made a great
deal of noise; but understanding what was the matter, it only gave occasion for
laughter, I went to the farther end of the Mine, and hearing knocking above my
head, listened and perceived we were discovered, which was clearer to me when
through a hole I saw two hundred men in the Cistern of Oil, that expected us
with a great deal of impatience. I then retreated, and by two holes they had
made they fired two Muskets I was informed a few days after that this design
had been discovered to them but three hours: I employed the remainder of the
night to fill up this passage, that the Enemy might not make use of our work
against us: and I was very much troubled after twelve days labor to have
failed (by reason of the treason of a Captain) of making my self master of all
the Enemies Quarters, which had been easy and infallible as they themselves
afterward confessed to me.

They began to form new Conspiracies against my life, and by assistance of
Vincenzo Andrea, laid a design which they so cunningly carried on, that I could
not possibly have avoided it, had it not been discovered to me. The twenty
third of March in the morning Augustino Mollo came to me at six a clock, and
brought with him a Sicilian Gentleman, an understanding and resolute person,
whom the Duke of Medina de los Torres, when he was Viceroy, caused expressly to
come to Naples to receive a Commissin to pursue the Banditi. He was an
acquaintance of Vincenzo Andrea, who out of his confidence in him declared the
secret, of which he came to give me an account, which was, that Vincenzo Andrea
had sent to Don John and the Earl of Ognate, to settle conditions and rewards
on Cicio de Regina, a Captain in the Regiment of Sebastiano Landi, who
commanded the Gate of Alba, and other his accomplices, who were to shoot me the
five and twentieth of March, as I heard Mass in the Church of the Anonciata;
and that if I carefully observed Gennaro Pinto (Son of the Master of the Poors
Bank) all Instructions and Orders would be found about him, the conduct of this
business being entrusted to him, as a person of wit, and friend of Vincenzo
Andrea; and he assured me to acquaint me as soon as he could inform himself
further. I gave all Orders necessary for securing the Traitor at his coming
back from the Enemy, but in vain, he (instead of coming by land) returning in a
Felucca; and landing at a little Sally Port at the foot of the wall of la
Pietra del Peste. The same Gentleman gave me notice of his return, and that all
having been agreed on, the attempt was to be made in the Church of the
Anunciata at the time of Mass, and that Cicio de Regina was the chief of the
Conspirators as he had before acquainted me. On the morning of this important
day I gave order to all such as I had confidence in to be ready to march with
their Companies on my first order. Cicio de Regina posted all his Confederates,
of which I had notice, having caused him to be very diligently observed. When I
was almost ready I saw him come into my Chamber, and (fixing my eyes upon him
to see if I could discover any thing extraordinary in his countenance) asked if
he desired any thing of me. He presented me a memorial which I attentively
read, and told him, your demand is almost impossible to be granted, and I have
refused it to many very considerable persons, but I know not how to deny one I
so much affect, and that is so zealous and faithful in my service; then taking
a pen I writ a favorable answer on his request: Is there any thing else, said
I, that you desire for your self or friends? for you can ask nothing that I
will not readily grant you. He answered there was nothing. I embraced him twice
or thrice to see if my kindness would cause any remorse, but could not perceive
any alteration in him: and asking whether I went to Mass to the Anunciata, and
would go presently abroad; I told him I went immediately to my Sedan; I will
therefore make have (said he) to attend you with my friends. I considered
whether I should beset the Church, and take him with all his Confederates in
it, but loath to shed blood there, and imagining they would not suffer
themselves to be taken without resistance, I went to mass to the Carmelites;
pretending something to be happend that obliged me to speak with Gennaro, I
commanded Sebastiano Landi, to keep near him all day, and bring him to me at
night, and having an eye upon him, cause him to be secured if he attempted to
escape, I sent for the Auditor General to come to me in the evening, and
Regina's Colonel having brought him thither, I let him know I would not see a
Murderer and a Traitor, and sent him to the Vicarie. I asked his Colonel
whether he had kept him company all day, and whether he had observed any thing
extraordinary in him; he told me no, but only that he had made a stand under a
Porch to make water, where he thought he threw down something, and set his foot
on it to tread it into the dirt. I sent to search, and Papers of a very
displeasing sent were brought me. I opened them, and found a Letter to me from
Don John of Austria unsealed, by which he let me know that the money he had
promised me was ready at Genoa, and that he thanked me for my good will; but
that the King his Father, loving the Neapolitans, though rebellious, yet his
children, could not resolve to enter by the two Posts I offered to deliver him,
to confound all in blood and fire, he having received express order to treat
them with all mildnese and clemency, the King aiming at nothing else but to
reduce them to their obedience, and pardon their sedition: Four of these
Letters had been distributed amongst the Conspirators, to the intent that the
first of them that could approach my body after my death, should pretend to
find it in my pocket, and by reading it prevent the resentments of the people.
I sent the Auditor General to put him on the rack, and as soon as he should
begin to confess to send every body out of the room, and write his depositions
himself, believing that to gain time he would seek to concern many considerable
persons in his crime, and perhaps some of the Nobility: but my self remaining
Master of his Confession I might pardon whom I pleased, and declare nothing
publicly but what I thought fit. At first he denied all, but yielding to the
violence of torment, confessed the artifice of the Letters I have mentioned,
that his attempt on my life might pass unpunished, and that making use of the
general consternation, he might work on the people to incline to Spain: That he
was to be rewarded with six thousand Crowns, and a Troop of horse in the
Province of Monte Fuscolo; the orders for which were to be found in a Convent
he named, as well as the Nun that had the keeping of them: Sending to search I
found them in the following terms.

I underwritten Cornelio Spinola promise to pay to Seignior Cicio de Regina the
sum of six thousand Ducats on sight hereof, by order of his Excellence the
Earl of Ognate our Viceroy, in testimony whereof I have written and subscribed
this Bill

Naples the 22 March 1648. CORN. SPINOLA.


His Excellence to Seignior Cicio de Regina.

His Excellence has commanded me to let you know, that in recompense of your
service he has given you a Company on the Department of Monte Fuscolo,
ordering you by virtue of this present Commission to be put in possession of it.

Naples the 22. of March 1648. DIEGO ROMERO.


These two Papers made a clear discovery of the whole enterprise, and he gave a
particular relation of the manner in which he pretended to execute it. The
Spaniards had caused thirty or forty Officers to come disguised into the Town.
Don Antonio de St. Severin when I was Prisoner at Capua told me, that he lay
ready with fifty men to have fallen out of some adjoining houses where they
were concealed, to second the Conspirators and help to make their retreat: But
several persons of quality have assured me he was not there, and that he
reported this out of vanity, to seem more zealous for Spain, and avoid
suspicion of correspondencie with his Brother Don John de St. Severin that
commanded for me in Calabria, and the Prisoner mentioned nothing of it. The
Marquis of Monte ^ilvano of the House of Brancaccio, was to have sent in his
Servants and Arms, having forgotten that my arrival at Naples freed him from
the Vicarie, and the hands of Gennaro. But this laying no particular
obligation, his liberty having been acquired by the common good fortune of all
the Prisoners, he did not perhaps think himself very much obliged to me for it.

Ottaviello Brancaccio was one of the Conspirators, and the Prisoner accused
many others, and amongst them some I very much loved and esteemed, whom he
named to prolong his life, by the confusion such depositions might bring upon
me. Thirty Conspirators were to have been in the Church with Blunderbusses,
posted round about the Seat provided for me, and that the less notice might be
taken of them, they were all at once to fire upon me, at the time of the
Elevatton of the Host, when all men's eyes would be fixed on the Priest, and
the sound of the Bell was to be the signal for discharging. Cicio de Regina and
the rest that were to be nearest me, had each of them a letter, which he that
could first approach my body, was to make a show of taking out of my pocket,
and amuse the people by reading it to them whilst his Confederates made their
escape. I caused him to be condemned, and keeping the informations by me, sent
for Marco Antonio Brancaccio, Uncle of the Marquis of Monte Silvano, Seignour
Joseph Brancaccio, and another of the same name, with Seignora Cicia Piussa his
Mother, and all the rest of the Nobility whom this Traitor accused, and reading
his depositions told them, that looking on the Neapolitan Nobility, as
incapable of so black an attempt, I would not have them so much as suspected,
but though they had been concerned in it, I too much affected them to dip my
hands in their blood, and in their presence burnt the informations. I sent
presently to set at liberty two Servants of the Marquis of Monte Silvano, and
concealed all the Blunderbusses that belonged to him, (on the most of which his
arms were engraven) so to stifle all jealousies that might be had of him, and
desired his Mother and Uncle to bring him to me at night, which they did: I
told him, that though I had a pretense of accusing him of ingratitude on
account of having preserved his life and liberty, of which Gennaro would have
deprived him the day after my entering the Town. I should satisfy my self in
this little reproach, knowing that shame and remorse of conscience, are the
greatest punishments a person of honor like himself can possibly undergo. That
I forgot what he had done, and pardoned his contributing, by his Arms and
Servants, to the assassination of a Prince that loved him, and was his
benefactor. That I imputed this to excess of zeal for his Kings service, which
yet he ought to have regulated better, and moderated more in what concerned me,
but that I would lay no punishment on him, but instead thereof give him all
testimonies of affection and confidence. That I begged his friendship, with
assurance that when he had promised it, I might more safely depend on it, than
on that of any other of the Nobility. This generosity moved him, and casting
himself at my feet, he promised never to lose the memory of so great and
extraordinary an obligation, and that he would employ his life in seeking
occasions of sacrificing it, in testimony of his gratitude. I affectionately
embraced him, and told him, that what had passed should never be any more
mentioned, since from it I derived the advantage of acquiring a person of his
courage, birth, and merit: I offered (in case he would stay with me) to look on
him as the best of my friends, and give him any employment he should pretend
to, and that if fortune ever put into my hands the disposal of the great
Charges and Governments of the Kingdom, he was only to intimate which of them
would best accommodate him, which I assured him on my word I would possess him
of with a very good will.

This manner of proceeding so contrary to the Maxims of the Spanish Policy,
increased the Nobilities affection and esteem for me, and so sensibly moved
him, that he embraced my knees, and made his acknowledgments in terms so
respective and passionate, that I perceived there was no dissimulation in them,
and that I had entirely gained him: but he represented to me that the Peoples
animosities would be a continual danger to him whilst he stayed in the Town,
and therefore besought me to suffer him to leave it, swearing never more to
draw his sword against me; and that as soon as persons of quality took horse to
follow my fortune, he would not only himself be one of the first, but endeavor
to engage his friends and relations. I then sent four of my Guards with an
Officer, to conduct him safely to one of our advanced Posts, that he might from
thence pass to the Enemy. His Mother and Kinsmen made so passionate and
grateful acknowledgments, that I want words to express them, and I doubt not
but as long as he lives, and in what part of the World soever he reside, he
will reserve in his heart on my behalf a great deal of affection, esteem, and
gratitude.

For Ottaviello Brancaccio, a person whom poisons and assassinations, in which
he had been concerned through the whole course of his life, had rendered odious
to all his relations (he being the dishonor of his Family) as well as to the
People, I used all endeavors to get him into my hands; being a most fit person
to be made an example of with universal applause. But all the care I took to
this purpose proved in vain, he escaping with the rest of his Confederates.

The next day, which was the Twenty sixth of March, Cicio de Regina was
sacrificed in expiation of his detestable Crime. He was drawn on a Sledge to
the Marketplace, attended by my Guards, to prevent his being torn in pieces by
the way, and his body hanged by one foot after his head had been cut off, and
set upon the Post in the Marketplace. The rage of the multitude, even of
Women, was so great, that they tore him with their teeth, and the Children
sucked his blood.

After this I showed my self to the Town, acclamations and benedictions being
redoubled on my account, as well as imprecations against the Spaniards. Their
condition at this time seemed altogether desperate; having neither Victuals nor
Credit, nor scarely any Troops, which decreased daily; but a ship which
unexpectedly came to them from Malaga, brought them Four hundred men, commanded
By Colonel Don Alonzo de Monroy. I on my side heard good News every day: All
the Towns of Sicilia, particularly Messina and Palermo, sent me assurance that
they resolved to follow the example and fortune of the Kingdom of Naples, and I
received a Letter from the King, by which he congratulated my advantages, and
the Peoples Election of me to be Duke of their Republic. I was promised the
return of the Fleet, which I might expect daily, with Galleys accompanying the
Ships, so that I could discern nothing to be feared, and much to be hoped; and
was more confirmed by Cardinal Filomarini, who visiting me on the Eight and
twentieth of March, as soon as we were alone in my Chamber, made me a long
discourse of the miseries of a Civil War not yet near an end; of the dangers I
had already escaped and was yet to undergo: of the jealousies France had of my
exaltation, the uncertainty of her succors, and of the arrival of her Fleet,
though she gave me daily hope of it; with the assurance of the return of that
of Spain, with considerable forces; and how much better it were, by laying hold
on a favorable opportunity, to apply my self to an honorable and secure
fortune, though some-wayes moderated, than to glorious and high incertainties,
attended always by much hazard, and most commonly by few or no advantages or
profits. I gave ear to all these plausible discourses without interrupting him,
to discover to what so long an Oration tended, which seemed to have been very
studiously premeditated: My silence encouraged him, and thinking me wavering,
he told me, My Lord, you have it now in your power to make your self the
happiest man of this Age, restore quiet to this unfortunate Kingdom and all
Italy, with peace and security to this City, and a solid establishment to your
self, capable of satisfying your ambition, which is not only so high, but so
well grounded, that it were not reasonable to offer to a Person of your Birth
and Merit, any thing below a Crown; and I am now to present one to you: This is
no illusion nor artifice to deceive you; I have Commission from the Pope,
College of Cardinals, and all the Princes of Italy, to tell you they will be
security for the performance of what I am entrusted to propound to you. First
of all the Spaniards make you the sole Arbitrator of this Kingdoms differences,
for settling whose Peace, and establishing whose Crown, which has been long
tottering, they will be obliged to you alone. They will give you Sardinia, the
strong places of which (during a Cessation of Arms) they will put into your
possession; till which be performed, you shall continue here in arms, and
endeavor to regulate all the affairs of this Kingdom: If what be propounded to
you, be not satisfactory, your self shall make conditions: and if the Spaniards
perform not what they have promised here, you can come from thence with greater
force to assist this People; by which both they and you are secured, all hazard
and dangers remaining on the Spaniards side.

I asked him smiling, Whether he were sure that all he promised would be made
good? he told me yes, of which if I desired Confirmation, he would show me good
Authorities, he not being a person to engage in any thing lightly, nor to
expose himself to the hazard of being disavowed. My Lord, said I, after all
these fair Proposals, I expected you should have demanded of me Passes for the
Spaniards to go away in safety, and my Parole (they leaving me the Kingdom of
Naples, in which they can no longer maintain themselves) to suffer them
peaceably to enjoy Sicilia and Sardinia, without design of driving them from
thence; which I must have taken some time to have considered, before I could
have resolved on; such a Proposal had been reasonable and handsome, but the
exchange you offer, I shall not easily condescend to. I know to what
extremities they are reduced, I expect the French Fleet in a very few days, I
have Provisions in abundance, and for more than two year; the Nobility is ready
to declare for me, all Provinces apply themselves to me, and know not what
other course to take. Before six weeks be over I shall receive Six hundred
thousand Crowns from the Custom-House of Foggia. I have the value of a Million
of Gold, in Silk, Oil, and Salt, drawn from Calabria. I have in all parts above
Five and twenty thousand men, which I can draw together in eight days, with
great quantities of Powder and Saltpeter. You may therefore tell them the
Conquest of this Kingdom is completed; that this Campania will with ease make
me Master of every part of it, by the end of which I will not leave them one
single Castle; that the next Campania I will drive them out of Sicily; after
which I will not satisfy my self by taking Sardinia from them, but ere two
years be over leave them nothing in the Mediterranean; that all this and more
is to be feared from a man, that alone and without any assistance, has reduced
them to the present extremity; and that if they desire to purchase my
friendship, it must be on other conditions than those you have offered me; that
nothing can draw me off from the interests of France; that I will perish a
thousand times rather than ever prove unfaithful to her; and to conclude, that
I love honor too well, to do any thing that may be blameable; and that if I be
liable to the temptation of a Crown, it must be of a better Kingdom than
Sardinia,

He answered, That he was very sorry to find me so much led aside by my own
opinion; and had great apprehensions for me. I replied, What remains there for
me to fear? Can my Enemies employ against me any thing more than Fire, Sword,
and Poison, which they have so often unsuccessfully made use of? Indeed my Lord
I never forsake a handsome undertaking, when I am once engaged in it; I can but
die, and am prepared for it. At my first arrival at Naples I resolved either to
perish or deprive them of its Crown. Events are in the hands of God, let him
dispose of all according to his pleasure, and how fatal soever the conclusion
prove, I will see it come without fear or disquiet; there is no more therefore
to be said: and thus our Conversation ending, he returned home, and I went to
Mass, my thoughts continually applied to finish what I had so happily begun.

The Earl of Ognate hearing that I had news of the speedy return of the French
Fleet, judging that (theirs not arriving time enough to oppose it) they should
be cut off from receiving any provisions by Sea, thought he was to use all
endeavors to keep Puzzolo, on whose preservation the Castle of Baiae depended;
which having a free Communication with Capua, might send him refreshments, if
he could force the Suburb of Chiay, the Castle of La Grotta, and the Tower of
La Piede de Grotta. He embarked foot on three Galleys, and taking the Baron of
Batteville with him, visited Puzzolo, and reinforced the Garrison, and passing
to Nicita, left a hundred men there, judging rightly that the French Galleys
could not ride securely before Naples, till the Spring should be more advanced,
nor find any safe Harbor, but between the Island of Nicita and the Point of
Posilippe. This put into my head a design to attempt it, which I executed a few
days after.

In the mean time whilst I was passing the Evening of the first of April,
according to my Custom, in answering such Petitions as had been presented me
that day, my Servants came to advertise me that something extraordinary
appeared about the Moon; the curiosity of seeing what it might be, obliged me
to walk out upon a Terrace that was on the top of my Palace, where I could
discern (the weather being fair and clear, and the Moon right over our heads) a
black Circle about a foot broad that environed her, all parts of it equally
distant from her body; and whose Circumference was so large, that it seemed to
encompass all my Palace. Some told me this was a bad Omen, and that they were
afraid it portended my imprisonment; I doubted the same thing, but concealing
my suspicion, told them, that the black Circle represented the Crown of Naples
(no longer in its ancient luster and beauty, and which the Spaniards should
quickly lose) that it appearing over my head, and vanishing (as it did) soon
after, signified that the loss they were about to make should be to my
advantage.

Next Morning as soon as I waked, notice was given me that Cucurulle the
greatest Astrologer of Italy, desired to speak with me. I caused him to be
admitted, and to sit down by my Beds-side, and he told me, that the Stars
having signified to him that fortune that had hitherto been so favorable to
us, began to turn to the Spaniards, he came to desire my pass and leave to
retire, because as a Student he sought only repose, and avoided all places
where he apprehended tumults and disturbances. I consented to what he demanded,
and questioning him about my fortune, he told me that a Conjunction of the Sun
and Mars threatened me with a very great danger, and were it not that ill
influences are mitigated by good ones, that (being the worst imaginable) had
directly struck at my life; but that the Sun in this my revolution, being in
the Tenth House of his Exaltation, casting a trine Aspect on the Moon in the
First House, mitigated the malignity; and that Mercury having a Sextile of
Venus in the Eighth House of Death, secured me from any that should be violent;
that this therefore was no more than a menace, but that I could not avoid
imprisonment, since Mars at the time of my Birth was in the Twelfth House,
which is a Prison. I answered him that this unhappy influence, tending only to
threaten, and not take away my life, I thought its malignity passed over the
Tenth of March, when I secured my self from that great Commotion; or at least
on the Twenty fifth, when I escaped the Conspiracy of the Anonciata. I wish it
prove so with all my heart, said he, but I am afraid that before eight days
pass you will be a Prisoner; and I discern this so clearly, that I would
venture all I have in the World that it falls out so. I have a respect (said I)
for Astrology, but knowing it is not infallible, I please my self with all it
tells me to my advantage, and take no alarm at the perils with which it
menaces me; and since wisdom and prudence are more potent than the Stars, I
believe I may by precautions avoid the mischiefs wherewithal they threaten me.
I beseech you therefore not to endeavor to disabuse me, because I am resolved
to believe I have nothing more to fear and very much to hope for. If my wishes
may have effect (said he) my Opinion shall prove erroneous, and yours
veritable; but give me leave to retire, and be pleased to sign the Pass I
present you: I did what he desired, and embracing him bid him farewell.

Whilst these things passed, Vincenzo Andrea seeing no way to avoid his ruin
but by mine, endeavored it by all means, and durst no more appear in the Town,
hearing of the Order I had given to search him every where, and bring him to me
alive or dead, as one of the Principal Confederates of Cicio Regina, whom he
had corrupted, negotiated his reward, and engaged to attempt my life.
Sebastiano Landi that commanded the Gate of Alba, tired by the delay of the
French Fleet, which appeared not for all the fair promises, wanting money,
yielded to solicitations, and promised to deliver the Gate of Alba for Five
thousand Crowns. This Treason surprised me, having no suspicion of it, he being
a person I less distrusted than any in Naples; having observed him to be more
zealous, careful, and vigilant in the guard of his Post than any other: He
could never be accused of any negligence, and was not only very punctual in his
Guards, but kept all his men in such a continual readiness, that at any hour
either of day or night, he had two or three hundred fitted to march whither
soever I commanded them. Vincenzo Andrea having agreed of all things with him,
gave advice to Don John of Austria and the Earl of Ognate; and Augustino Mollo
having told me that some new design was on foot, I took so much pains to
discover it, and carefully to observe all such as came to our Posts from the
Enemy, that causing one called Ferraro, who came from them with instructions to
be followed, he ran into the Capuchins, from whence (finding himself pursued)
he escaped by a back door, which was an effect of my evil fate; for had he been
taken, I had made a discovery of an enterprise the Spaniards undertook out of
despair, and had avoided the imprisonment wherewithal Cucurulle so positively
threatened me.

The Thirtieth of March an Express dispatched from the Marquess of Velade
Governor of Milan to the Earl of Ognate Viceroy of Naples, was brought to me,
and I opened his Letters, which imported that all the Neopolitan Troops, ran so
fast from their Colors, that he could make no state of them; that the Viceroy
should therefore endeavor to send him more, for else it would be impossible
for him to take the Field, or resist the attempt France prepared to make on the
Duchy of Milan, at least without he sent him money; that he had not
wherewithal to pay his Troops that were ready to mutiny; that since the last
Campagna he had received nothing of the Sixty thousand Crowns a Month, that
Naples had wont to furnish for preservation of that Dominion; which being the
only Stock he had to maintain the War, he looked on himself as lost without a
sudden remedy. I was very glad of this good news, and thinking to give a mortal
blow to John of Austria and the Viceroy, by acquainting them with an extremity
they knew not how to remedy (being themselves generally unprovided of all
things) after I had read the Letters I returned them to the Bearer, and let him
pass, to increase their despair, by the knowledge they would find I had, that
instead of hopes of receiving supplies, succors were so pressingly demanded of
them. They then thought themselves irrecoverably lost, and I believed my
enterprise would quickly be perfected, by the arrival of our Fleet or my Money
from Rome, either of which had secured me from the traitorous sale of the Gate
of Alba, which it was impossible for me to prevent, having no intelligence of
it. I was not so blind but I perceived ^omething was in agitation, which I was
very ^ndustrious to discover, but in vain. I knew Vincenzo Andrea's Messages
sent by Gennaro Pinto, and Ferraro, both of which twice escaped my hands by
miracle; but humane prudence cannot prevail against the Decrees of Heaven.

My intelligence in the Collateral Council, and the Spies I kept amongst the
Enemies serving me faithfully, informed me of a Junto (a word the Spaniards use
for their more secret Councils) of War and State that had been held, where all
expedients that might probably prevent their ruin were propounded. The first
was to endeavor to become Masters of the Town by storming one of its Posts,
which yet appeared impossible without some Correspondence, and the Viceroy
pretended not to have any; and if this advice should be followed, that very
little was to be left to hazard, but that at the first opposition they should
entrench themselves, without advancing any farther, for fear of being
overpowered by the multitude, to whom their forces, not being numerous enough
to resist, must of necessity give place; the second was to abandon the Posts
they held in the Town, and (leaving some few men in the Castles) to take the
field, sending order to all the forces they had in the Kingdom to join with
them, and causing the Nobility to take horse, to starve me, by cutting off my
provisions; depriving me of all communication, and blocking all the passages of
Apulia, from whence came to me securely and without any need of Convoy, as much
Corn as I had occasion for, they themselves in the mean time being blocked up
and in a starving condition. But this seemed very difficult to be practiced, it
being doubtful whether the Nobility would obey their Orders, having already
made protestations of their incapacity of continuing the War any longer, having
neither Money left nor Credit; otherwise this expedient seemed the best and
surest, they believing I wanted forces, especially Horse, to dare to venture
out of Naples, and give them battle; the inhabitants of that City being good to
defend their Houses, and fight behind Walls, but not at all fit nor capable to
march out and hazard a battle in the Field against disciplined and regular
Troops. The third, which seemed the most secure, was (least our Fleet should
cut them off from Sea, they not having Ships nor Galleys enough to engage it,
and having no expectation of the return of their Fleet to them in this last
extremity) to use their utmost endeavor for recovery of the Suburb of Chiay,
and taking Vomero, with the two Villages of the Grotta, so to free the passage
to Puzzuolo, which having communication with Capua, provisions might be brought
them by land, and all that could be had from Sardinia, Genoua, and the
Ecclesiastical Dominion, landing at Gaeta, might be carried from thence to
Capua, from Capua to Puzzolo, and from Puzzuolo by way of Chiay to their
Quarters, without any hindrance by our Army; that by this means they should
prevent our attempting Baiae, which they could relieve at their pleasure;
besides all which, the season not being yet favorable for Galleys, that those
of France either would not come, or coming, being unsecure in the Bay, would be
forced to retire, wanting both the Haven of Baiae and the shelter of Nicita, of
which I should be deprived when they had fortified these Posts. These three
designs were long deliberated on without any result, but plurality of Voices
inclined to the last; and all the resolution they took was (in case such of the
three as they attempted should not have success) to blow up the Castles, and
retire to Capua, Gaeta, Ischia, Baiae, and other Maritime places, which they
would garrison with such Troops as they had, and there attend supplies from
Spain, and the return of the Fleet.

I received the news of this with a great deal of joy, and considering the
three Propositions, judged the first impossible, our Posts which they had so
often in vain attempted, being so well fortified and in so good a condition,
that I thought I had nothing to fear on that account, not suspecting any
Treason, nor seeing any appearance of it. The second seemed no less so, being
assured the Nobility would no more take horse against me, believing the
Spaniards ruined, and that to arm in their behalf, was to expose themselves to
the entire loss of their fortunes, by making of none effect their Negotiations
with me; that they would therefore content themselves to sit still in
expectation of what the Month of April might produce, to declare on the First
of May, as they had resolved, on that side that should seem strongest and most
secure. And I thought they would certainly fix on the last of the three, which
I admire they were so long ere they resolved on; there being no other means of
getting Provisions, and rendering our Fleet useless: I thought also that I was
(without loss of time) to attempt Nicita, that I might remove all pretense of
retarding the return of our Galleys, when I should have a secure Haven to
present them. Having seriously considered the necessity of inclining to this
resolution, I applied my self to nothing else but to put it in execution.

The End of the Fourth Book.
The Fifth Book.
FRiday the third of April I went to visit the Posts, caused all to be added
that I judged wanting, and made them so defensible, that Women might without
danger have kept them against forces much stronger than those of our Enemy. I
enquired of all Officers what they stood in need of, gave them Powder enough,
and three days advance for subsistence of their men; recommending to them to
be exact in their Guards, and serve me with the same affection and fidelity
they had to that time testified, and then thought I might go out of Naples
without apprehension or danger during my absence. The Gate of Alba above all
the rest seemed so well fortified, that I did not judge any possibility of
attempting it; and Colonel Landi, whom I ever found the most careful, faithful,
and zealous of my Officers, so well confirmed my confidence of him, that I
ordered him still to keep men in a readiness, as he had wont to do, to second
all other Posts, as they might have occasion to be reinforced, after which I
went home very well satisfied to leave Naples in so secure a condition. Sending
for the Peoples Elect, and Captains of the City Quarters, I ordered them to
increase the weight of Bread and diminish its price, so to secure my self
against any tumult or sedition, by contenting the People; and to give me speedy
notice of the least alteration that might happen. I commanded Onoffrio
Pissacani, Carlo Longobardo, Cicio Battimiello, and Mattheo d' Amore, to visit
our Posts twice a day, and to be ready to march with their Companies at the
least alarm; to make re-inforcements wheresoever they should be necessary. I
charged Augustino Mollo to hold a vigilant eye over all Gennaro's actions, to
observe his Correspondence with the Enemy, and to give me notice of all that
passed in Naples. I provided Powder (of which I had lately received some
quantity) for my march the next day, with four Pieces of Cannon and five or six
hundred foot, chosen out of the best I had in the Town.

Saturday the Fourth of April, after dinner, I caused my Foot and Artillery to
march, and having taken leave of Cardinal Filomarini, and made my Prayers
before the Head of St. Gennaro, and kissed the miraculous Viol of his blood,
took Horse, and followed by my Guards, marched right to Posilippo, and from
thence, till my Troops arrived, took a view of the Island of Nicita: I observed
there was a Tower in the midst of it that contained the greatest part of its
Garrison, and between the Island and Continent, on a Stone Arch, or rather the
point of a Rock, a House called the Lazaretto, where such as come from places
suspected of infection are obliged to continue forty days; that near the Haven
there were five or six Houses, in wihch the Enemy had posted five and twenty or
thirty Musketeers, and two Fieldpieces, to prevent landing; that the arm of
the Sea between Nisita and the Point of Posilippo, which is called de Coroglio,
was not above two hundred paces over, I resolved to place two Pieces of Cannon
at this Point, by means of such a Battery to dislodge the Enemy that was posted
in those Houses, and in Felucca's pass over such men as I should command to
attempt a landing. I caused also another Battery of two Pieces of Cannon to be
made lower at the Seaside, to beat on the Flanck of those Houses, and drive
away the Musketeers that defended the passage.

As soon as my men arrived, I set them to work on these Batteries, and leaving
enough to guard my Cannon, night coming on, and no attacque to be made without
Felucca's, I ordered all to be in a readiness against next morning, contenting
my self for that night to have dislodged the Enemy from the Lazaretto, and
placed thirty Musketeers there. I went afterward to sup and lie at Posilippo,
all the inhabitants whereof I commanded to be ready to march with their arms,
in case of an alarm; having intelligence that the Enemies that night intended
to make themselves Masters of Vomero.

The next morning having sent for ten armed Felucca's, my Cannon played from
both Batteries at daybreak, which had not been fired above twenty times over,
before they dismounted the two Fieldpieces the Enemy had in the Island. They
suffered much by my Artillery, which beat down all those little Houses, and
overthrew their Corpse de Guard: perceiving them in disorder, I sent thirty men
in Felucca's, to endeavor to land under favor of my Cannon, and the continual
fire of thirty Musketeers I had lodged in the Lazaretto, and others from the
Point of Coroglio: They found some resistance, and inclining to come back
again, I commanded the Sieurs de St. Amor and St. Andre Clapied, Cornet and
Quartermaster of my Company of Light Horse, with thirty French Horsemen to
force a Landing, causing them to be followed by thirty or forty Musketeers; St.
Amor had his right arm broke by a Musketshot, of which he died four days
after, and two or three of the Horsemen were wounded; but St. Andre Clapied
leaping ashore with his Sword in his hand, followed by his men, after a
Skirmish of half a quarter of an hour, drove the Enemy from those Houses Being
thus become Master of the Landing place, I sent an hundred and fifty men to
pass over, who forced the Enemy to retreat to the Tower that is in the middle
of the Island, to which they had made some slight Outworks, which were stormed
with very little resistance: I caused my men to be seconded, and we lodged at
the foot of the Tower with small loss. I summoned those that were in it, but
expecting relief, they refused to parley, pretending themselves to be resolved
and in a condition to defend it.

About this time Gennaro sent me a Complement and his desires to learn the
condition of my little Siege, but not so much out of curiosity of this, as to
get assurance whether I would come back to Naples that night, that he might
give the Enemy notice, with whom holding Correspondence, he knew they were to
have a Post delivered them, and that they would endeavor to enter the Town,
and make themselves Masters of it. I told his Messenger that I hoped to take
Nisita in two hours, and intended to return. John Battista Tiradani Play Master
of my Troops in place of Nicolo Maria Mannara, whom, after the death of Pietro
Crescentio his Kinsman, I had sent to command the Banditi he had assembled in
the Province of Monte-Fuscolo, gave me notice, that he had heard at Cardinal
Filomarini's, that the Enemy were about some attempt, but could get no
particular information what it might be, which persuaded me they would seek to
make themselves Masters of Vomero, and obliged me to a resolution of staying
where I was, that I might be the readier to oppose them. Presently after I
received a Note from Augustino Mollo in the following terms: Naples concerns
you more than a barren Rock, make haste back or you will lose it, the Enemy
having resolved to make some attempt this night.

I sent answer I would not fail to return, and ordered him to give out so; then
I sent the Knight de Fourbin thither to visit all the Posts, and send me
account of their condition, and in case of appearance of any alteration, to
advertise me of it. That he should in the mean time tell every body that I
would be there within two or three hours, by such an expectation to keep them
to their duty: The people having so great a confidence in me, that they thought
my presence could remedy any disorders, and that all must of necessity prove
advantageous to them when I was upon the place. I then caused the Tower to be
undermined, and attempted to set fire on the gates with Bavins, upon which they
that were in it demanded to treat, and sent out hostages. The Earl of Ognate
sent a Gally to relieve them, but the men it would have landed were beaten back
by mine, and hearing no more shooting went home thinking the Isle already lost.
The Hostages presented to me desired they might have good conditions, and I
gave them all they pretended, which was that they should march out the next
morning at eight a clock, with arms and baggage, provided they were not
relieved in the mean time by a Body able to force my men and raise the Siege,
toward which they were not to contribute, it being neither permitted them to
take up arms, nor shoot during such a Combat: They were allowed to give the
Viceroy intimation of these Capitulations, and to that purpose I was to suffer
whomsoever they would encharge with such a Commission to pass to him, but I
caused the Messenger to be detained all night at my lodging in Posilippo.

I was then in very great incertainty whether following the advice received
from Augustino Mollo I should return to Naples and leave the Officers of Nicita
in this condition, and suspended my resolution till I heard from the Knight de
Fourbin, supposing it might be the Enemies cunning, by false alarms to make me
give over my Enterprise; I therefore resolved to lie all night in my Battery,
to prevent the arrival of any relief, judging the taking of Nicita to be of
great importance. I know not whether I ought to impute this resolution to good
or evil fortune, and the more I consider, the less able I I find my self to
determine it.

Gennaro weary to be any longer uncertain of my resolution, sent a second time
to endeavor to discover it, and I was told, in my imprisonment, that as he
desired not my return, lest my presence might hinder the Spaniards from
executing their enterprise, so he wished it that he might certainly kill me,
intending at the first alarm to send sixscore Banditi, who pretending to rally
about me, should shoot me in the fight. Half an hour before day I discovered
two Galleys making toward Nicita, whom I saluted with* two Cannons, which I
levelled and fired my self, so happily, that one of them being shot through
between wind and water, was fain to go off to refit, and the other had three or
four slaves killed. I caused the Guns to be immediately charged again, and did
them mischief with two other shot, which made them turn back, and persuaded me
that Nicita was mine, after which nothing could retard the arrival of the
French Fleet, since the excuse of the Galleys wanting a Haven could be alleged
no longer.

The Knight de Fourbin had sent me word in the mean time, that he found all our
Posts and Guards in a better condition than usual, that our men were all in
arms and very resolute, especially at the Gate of Alba, where Colonel
Sebastino Landi appeared more zealous and active than ever; the Captains
Onoffrio Pissacani, Carlo Longobardo, Mattheo Damore, and Cicio Battimiello had
gone Petrouils the greatest part of the night through the whole Town: this very
much troubled the Enemy, and caused them to resolve if the Rounds continued an
hour longer, to defer the execution of their enterprise to another time. But
as soon as they had notice that they were given over, and by that time Fourbin
had given me account of the good condition of all things (which very much
satisfied me) they advanced to the Gate of Alba. Part of the wall had for eight
days together been continually washed with Vinegar and Brandy, that it might
at once be reversed as it was, and a breach made sufficient for horse to pass;
all this was done without noise, and Landi keeping continually thereabouts, to
prevent his men's suspecting any thing (so that I could have no intelligence of
it) the Enemy entered, and became Masters of three works without any alarm but
at the last, where a Captain being killed, the Soldiers that ran away fired
only three Muskets. As soon as the Enemy got into a broad Street they drew up
in battallia, and marched straight to St. Aniello, which they possessed. I will
not trouble my self to relate the order of their march, nor in what manner they
became Masters of the whole Town, it not being my business, and they having
more than enough divulged it in all their relations: I shall only tell that
they gave out that I had agreed with them, and was at that instant with Don
John of Austria. My absence made many believe this, by which the People became
dejected in so extraordinary a manner, that none of them went about to make
defense. They continually cried out, Peace! Peace! no more Taxes: Let Spain
live, and France and the ill Government die: and the Spaniards waving their
handkerchiefs, the women out of the windows answered with napkins, and every
man's business was to hide himself. The Spaniards afterward set Guards in all
parts of the Town, and marched to the Vicarie to make themselves Masters of it;
Vincenzo d' Andrea placing himself at their head; their next business was to
possess themselves of my Palace, where some opposition was made by my
Domestics; I cannot forbear to relate here the resolute action of a young
French Tailor, who having fortified himself alone in my Chamber, perceiving the
door to be broken open upon him, shot dead Captain Don Joseph Moya that entered
first, and afterward giving fire to a barril of powder he found there, he blew
up the Roof with seven or eight of the Enemies, and afterward leaping out of a
window broke both his legs, of which he died two or three days after for want
of looking to. My Palace was plundered, and the Knight de Fourbin having taken
horse at the alarm, and noise of the bells of St. Lawrence, which the Spaniards
caused to be rung as soon as they entered, went to get together what men he
could, sending one called Chusin, to tell me what had passed, who was taken by
the way, before he came to me: He met only Cicio Battimiello, with about four
and twenty men that went to guard the Duke of Tursi, who was escaped before
they came, and gotten to Don John with the Prince of Avella, who received them
with much joy, and great testimonies of esteem and friendship. Battimiello with
his men got behind a little wall that served as a brest-work, and the Knight de
Fourbin's horse falling under him, he forsook him, and before he had gone a
hundred paces met a Battallion of Spaniards, and a Squadron of horse that
demanded who he was for, he answered the People and his Highness, and
endeavoring to fire his Pistols, they both missed, whilst nine or ten Muskets
were discharged against him, one whereof wounded him in his thigh; a Surgeon
that had followed him from his lodging seeing the Enemies in so great numbers
ran away, and he perceiving himself to be alone and wounded, got to the
Archbishops Palace, where finding the door open, he bolted it after him. The
Spaniards went about to fire it, but a Priest coming in accidentally opened it
for them, Fourbin then going about to defend himself with his Sword, the
Officers offered him quarter, which (being surrounded with a hundred men) he
was forced to accept of. Matheo d' Amore, gallant and faithful, with thirty
Soldiers of his Company ran valiantly to the alarm, and meeting three hundred
Spaniards, gave no answer to their Who are you for, but his Highnese and the
People, and refusing quarter (crying out he would die for me and his Country)
was slain fighting, after he had been wounded by seven or eght Musket Shot; a
death too glorious for a man of so mean descent.

All their Troops being by several passages arrived at the Marketplace, Don
John and the Earl of Ognate prayed Cardinal Filomarini, that was come to them,
to go to Gennaro, and give him their parole for his security, and the punctual
performance of all that had been promised him, and sending three hundred men to
possess themselves of the Carmelites Tower, in this manner recovered Naples,
without resistance, and almost without any any effusion of blood, incited by
despair, which cast them upon an enterprise, of which they expected not any
good success, resolved (had it failed) to have abandoned the Castles the next
day, and have retired to the marime Towns there to wait for supplies from
Spain, having provisions left them but for four and twenty hours, and no hope
of relief from any part. This they often acknowleged to me in the time of my
imprisonment.

Whilst all these things passed I (without any knowledge of them) attended the
marching out of the Garrison of Nicita, till the Adjutant of Landi's Regiment
came to tell me that the Post of Alba was taken, and the Spaniards entered the
Town; which he did so loud, and in so despairing an accent, that I had like to
have caused him to have been killed to prevent his discouraging my Troops, as
the Prince of Orange did at the Battle of Newport, to him that in the morning
brought him news of the defeat of his Van. I immediately ordered Colonel Meloni
to draw off the men I had in the Isle of Nicita, and put the rest in order to
follow me, going before my self to see if there were any possibility of giving
remedy to so great and unexpected a mischief. I crossed through the Town of
Possilippo, where I found all the Inhabitants in tears and a mortal
ashonishment* I caused them to recover their courage, and reassume their arms,
and marching toward Vomero perceived the Soldiers had abandoned there Post,
and prepared to be gone: and they seemed to me to consult whether they should
not fire upon me. I rid up to them, and demanding whither they went, they told
me they thought of nothing but securing themselves since the Spaniards were
become Masters of Naples. I told them it was a false report, and commanded them
to their quarter; that there had indeed happened some disorder in the Town, but
that I was going to put an end to it by my presence. Upon the first report I
had sent the Sieur de la Bottellerie, one of my Field-Adjutants to see what
passed, and return to give me account, to which purpose I sent two of my Guards
with him, that he might dispatch them one after another, till he himself had
made a nearer discovery of the matter: He passed by the Schools, and advancing
as far as St. Gennaros Gate, perceived a Battaglion of the Enemy, and that all
the Virgins Suburbs had already rendered to them; in his return to make me this
sad report, his bridle was laid hold on, and his Cane snatched from him; but
making his way with his pistol in his hand, he hastened back to me as fast as
his horse could run, seeing in his way the heads of my two Guards that he had
sent before him. I perceived by him that I could not that way get into the
Town, and met Marco de Lorenzo, that had great kindness for me, who cried out
poor Prince fly* you are lost, you have been betrayed, and the Spaniards are
Masters of the Town, I go home to endeavor to secure my house from plundering,
then weeping and embracing me, galloped away.

The Knight des Essars propounded to me me to return to Possilippo, there to
get Felucca's to carry me to Rome. I looked angirly on him and told him, till
now I ever thought you my friend, but I find the contrary: there remains no
more to be thought on, but to die with our swords in our hands; and I swear
that if any be hereafter so bold as to mention an escape to me, I will run my
sword through him. I struck into the field to fetch a compass about the Virgins
Suburbs, and endeavor to get into the Town by the Gate of Nola, and passing a
deep way between two high banks, saw a very ill looking fellow on the top of
one of them, with fourteen or fifteen Muskteers, who asked me for his Highness,
not knowing me because my Cloak was thrown over my face. I asked what his
business was with him? he answered, pay him my respects and kiss his feet: I
replied he was coming behind, and kept on my way: the fellow soon after seeing
a Captain of horse called la Breche, with a Buffcoat, and Sleeves and Breeches
embroidered with gold, caused five or six Muskets to be fired at him, by which
both he and his horse were killed. Having recovered the plain, I rid straight
to the gate of Nola, which I found to be in the Enemies possession, and turning
toward the entrance of St. Anthonies Suburb I met two Gypsies, who told me
that the Gate of Capua was not only taken, but that I should find Musketeers at
the Barricado that was at the entrance into the Suburbs. I resolved to see
whether they told me truth, and was quickly confirmed by a voley as soon as I
came near it. I thought it was possible the Enemy might not be advanced so far
as the Marketplace, and that passing through the Suburb of Loretto, and
entering by the Gate that is under the Carmelites Tower, by rallying some of the
people, I might either die at their head, or repel the Enemy, causing by my
presence all the Inhabitants to take arms, and the general consternation of the
whole Town to cease, by means of their confidence in me: but coming to the
Suburb of Lorettto, I saw seven or eight Spanish Colors planted on the top of
the Carmelites Tower, by which understanding my misfortune to be irrecoverable,
I resolved to make toward St. Mary's of Capua, to dis-engage the Sieur de
Mallet, and rallying all the Troops he commanded, endeavor to pass the River
Voltorno near Caiazzo, where I had a Garrison, to go from thence into Abruzzo,
to join with the Troops that carried on the War there by my Commissions.

Some Neapolitans propounded to me to take the way of Benevento, from whence I
might afterward pass to any part of the Realm I should choose, but I was not of
this Opinion, judging that the Enemies had possessed themselves of the
Streights of La Cerra, by which they might probably expect I would pass. All
that were with me began by degrees to go away and shift for themselves; the
Abbot Laudati was sollicitous to provide himself of a safe retreat; Jomo St.
Apollino, the Master of my Horse, returned to Naples, on a very fair Courser he
rid, hoping not only to obtain indemnity but a good reception, by presenting
him to Don John of Austria. My Neapolitan Guards slipped away one after
another, after they had thrown their Colors into a Ditch; and before I had rid
two Leagues, one half of the Sixscore Horse that had attended me, left me.

Coming in sight of Juliana, I thought not good to take the way of Aversa,
distrusting Pepe Palombe that was Governor; and having left my men about five
hundred paces from Juliana, whilst I rid alone very well mounted to enquire
whereabouts I might pass a little Brook, I heard the noise of a fierce
skirmish, and met the Nephew of Jacomo Rosso, who told me that his Uncle a
sworn enemy of John Andrea, Curate and Head of the People of that Town, a man
courageous and resolute, was gone with seven or eight hundred men he had drawn
together, to kill him, he having revolted to the Enemy; that his Uncle had
already forced two Houses, where he had slain some of those that opposed him,
and amongst the rest cut off the head of Captain Tullo, John Andrea's Brother
in Law, whom he had besieged in his House, which he vigorously defended. I told
him that I was very glad his Uncle in that manner executed my Orders, that he
should make sure to take him dead or alive, that he might be punished for his
many Crimes, making a show that he acted by my Order, and the other (of whose
fidelity I was assured) in opposition to me. He asked me if the report were
true that the Spaniards were Masters of Naples, of which they had notice by the
ringing of all the Bells of the Town. I told him it was true that by means of
some Correspondence, they had been let in at the Gate of Alba, and advanced as
far as the Schools; but that I arriving with Troops from Posilippo, had beat
them back, and forced them to forsake the Town, with loss of many of their men;
for joy whereof I had commanded all the Bells to be rung. He asked whither I
went? I answered him that the greatest part of the Garrison of Capua being
marched out on some enterprise, the people taking arms had driven the remainder
into the Castle; that they had sent me word of this, that I might come and take
possession of the Town, which they would not deliver but into my own hands, for
fear my Troops might commit some violences, which my presence would prevent;
that for that reason I came so slenderly accompanied, that I might arrive the
sooner; and since I intended not to go to Aversa, where I knew I should be
obliged to stay some hours, I told him he would do me a pleasure to show me
where I might pass the River. He pointed to a little Village on my right hand,
where was a Bridge hard by a Mill. I ordered him to acquaint his Uncle with the
good news I had told him, and returning to my men, went forward, very glad to
have been informed of the way I was to follow.

As I passed through this little Village, I was met by a Countryman that knew
me, who presently carried news of it to Pepe Palombe Governor of Aversa, which
persuaded him of the truth of the report that the Spaniards had entered Naples;
he therefore writ immediately of it to Don Lewis Poderico, that commanded in
Capua, and that if he sent to secure the passages of Voltorno, he must needs
take me Prisoner, that being the way I took for my escape; the compass I was
fain to take to avoid passing by Aversa, gave him time enough to send this
dispatch by an Officer he confided in, accompanied by three other persons. As
soon as I got into the great rode to Capua, discovering at a good distance four
men a horseback that went before me, I took along three of the best mounted of
my followers, and having commanded them, (observing me very well) to do in all
things like me, galloped after and quickly over-took them, and my self riding
side by side with the Officer, each of my followers in like manner accosted his
man. I enquired what news at Aversa, and after a little discourse surprising
him, clapped my Pistol at his head, and commanded him to alight, every one of
my followers doing the like to every one of his Companions; I made him confess
that Pepe Palombe had sent him to Don Lewis Poderico, with Letters, which he
delivered to me. As soon as the rest of my men came up, I caused all the four
to be searched, to see if they had any more Letters than those they had given
me. I would not suffer them to be killed, but to prevent their carrying any
news of me, caused them to be bound hand and foot, and thrown into one of the
Ditches on the Highway-side. I commanded such of my men as were worst mounted
to take their horses, and causing those that were left to be ham-stringed, rid
toward St. Mary's of Capua; being certain the news of the surprisal of Naples
could not be arrived there, and that I must needs see and secure any Messenger
that should pass by to carry it.

As soon as I came within a quarter of a league of St. Mary's, I sent the Sieur
de Bottillerie before, to desire the Sieur de Mallet to meet me, because I had
something of very great importnnce to acquaint him with. He could not so
readily obey this Summons, by reason of a very hot Skirmish at that time
between our Horse and those of Capua. The Sieur de l' Isola a Neopolitan, that
had quitted his employment in the Duchy of Milan to come to me, hoping to
obtain pardon by bringing news of my retreat, being mounted on a very fair
Courser of mine, leaped a great Ditch that was on the left hand of our way, and
desired my permission to ride up to two of the Enemies Centries, which appeared
on a little Hill, which I granted because it would have been to no purpose to
have forbidden it. He was the cause, by the intelligence he gave, that Horse
were sent to follow me, and Orders to all Villages on my way, to take arms
against me; and that the Prince of Forino was ordered with his Company of
Dragoons to possess himself of the Pass of the Ferry. Hieronimo Fabrani my
Secretary, went into St. Mary's of Capua so affrighted and besides himself,
that it was very discernable he brought ill news.

The Sieur de Mallet at our meeting acquainted me that our Troops being engaged
against the Enemy, it would be very hard to draw them off, without obliging
them to follow me; that it was therefore best whilst they were busied, to get
over by the Ferry before it were seized on. I commanded two Captains of Horse
that accompanied him, whose Troops were in their Quarters, to cause them to
mount and follow me; and the Sieur de Mallet serving us for Guide, we took the
way to the River. As we came near the Castle of Caserta I perceived a Squadron
of Horse come out of a Wood that was on our left hand, and immediately put all
the men I had with me in order, who made not above five and forty or fifty
Horse, the rest having left me; and perceiving the gray horse I rid to be
weary, who at his best was not very fleet, I gave him to the Baron of Rouvron,
and taking another on which he rid, very good and extraordinary swift, rid up
to view the Squadron that came toward us. As soon as I came within thirty
paces of it, the Officer advanced toward me with his hat in his hand, telling
me that was the Company of Cicio Ferbingere, General of our Horse, whose
Lieutenant he was, who had commanded him to take horse according to my Orders,
and that he came to know what I had to command him. I told him he should follow
me as a Rear-Guard. This Company had already revolted from us, and the Officer
advanced to me on no other account but to prevent my seeing an Adjutant of the
Enemies called Battimiello, who rid at its head, but at my approach fell back
into the first Rank.

As soon as I was returned to my men, I caused them to march, and after half an
hour (descending a very steep and stony hill, hard by a Village called Morana)
heard some behind me cry Kill, Kill, and looking back, perceived that the
Company that brought up my Rear charged me with Sword and Pistol, discovering
three other Squadrons of Horse on the top of the hill, I called to my men to
gallop as hard as they could out of that narrow and difficult way, to gain a
Meadow I saw at the foot of it, where casting off my Cloak I drew them up, and
charging the Enemy that pursued me disorderly, routed them, and whilst they
rallied having discovered a great Ditch about a thousand paces from thence, we
leaped it and placed ourselves in a Body on the other side, charging the Enemy
as he attempted to come over to us, and having disordered them in the like
manner as before, we got over another Ditch, this Country being cut off by
frequent Ditches and Torrents, still turning head as soon as we had passed any
of them, and having disordered the Enemy getting to another; in such a manner
making our retreat three quarters of a league. At last coming to a Bank covered
with stubbed Wood, where we must needs fall into a File, and having on our left
hand a Hedge lined with thirty Musketeers, I thought that coming hindmost I
could not escape their Volly; wherefore casting the Bridle on my Horse neck,
and taking my two Pistols in my two hands, I rid right up to them, to cause
them to fire with greater precipitation* it succeeded according to my
expectation, for firing all at once and very high, the Bullets passed over my
head, hurting only two of my Company of those that rid last and one horse.
After this we advanced another half league, the Enemy still pressing upon us,
and we defending our selves as before: In the mean time the Country was
raised, by ringing the Bells of all the Villages, and the Country people
possessing themselves of all Passes, we could neither come near hedge nor bush
without being fired on. We were to pass through a Meadow encompassed with a
little ditch, and a hedge lined with Country people, which was very difficult;
the men had lain under contribution of the Sieur de Mallet, and knowing him and
calling by his name, desired him to come and alight and speak with them. He
prayed us to ride on as fast as we could, whilst he amused them, and (a gray
Mare he rid being very good and very swift) overtook us. The Horse that
followed us, told all the Country people they met that we were French
Traitors, that were making our escape after we had plundered the Country, that
they ought not to give us Quarter, and commanding them to fire upon the Sieur
de Mallet, that rid from them as fast as he could, they broke one of his Mares
legs, which fell upon him, he finding no possibility of recovering himself.
Hearing this, I cried out, it were unhandsome to suffer so gallant a man to be
lost, that had sacrificed himself for us, and that such as had honor should
follow me to dis-engage him, which I did with but five to accompany me; when I
came within twenty paces of him, the Knight de la Visseclette seeing him on the
ground without motion, told me he was dead, and that therefore it was to no
purpose for us to hazard our selves, and that we lost a great deal of time. The
Country people having indeed gained time to charge again, fired upon us and
hurt some of our horses, and mine amongst the rest; I know not whether it was
by a shot of the Carabine of Visconti, Lieutenant to the Cuirassiers of Don
Diego de Cordoua, who commandded the Enemies Scouts, or by a Musket Shot of
those Country people.

I must needs here relate the proposal made me by the Marquis de Chaban and the
Knight de la Visseclette to stay both of them to make good some of the Passes,
to gain me time for my escape: Though they pressed this very much I would never
consent, and told them that I had not so great a value for my life, as to
preserve it by the abandoning two so brave and generous persons, and that I
would either die with them, or they should escape with me.

In the mean time the Country being very much enclosed with ditches and hedges
lined with Musketeers, we were fain to pass through a discharge they made upon
us. The Baron of Rovrou's horse was shot through the rains, which obliged him
to leave him, and creeping into a hedge cover himself over with leaves, and
almost enterr himself to avoid the Country people: The Sieur de Graville
received a bullet on the crupper of his Saddle, that so much drained his rains,
and made so great a confusion, that he a great while thought he had been shot.
The horse of the Sieur Miniere, a young man of Paris, fell into a ditch, and
his Master using no endeavor to get him out, followed us a foot with so great
apprehension, that he became distracted, and (nothing prevailing to recover
him) died mad: He cried out to me that the enemy pursued him, and besought me
to command some one or other to alight and give him his horse: I told him all
the courtesy I could do him was to cause another to take him up behind him;
which I commanded the Sieur de Bar to do, who rid a great bay Courser of the
race of the Stilliani. The horse of the Sieur de la Chaise being shot, fell,
but he raised him again by spurring him in the buttock, and leaping upon him
endeavored to follow me. Then the Sieur de Marests, one of the Canons of St.
John of Liege, my Almoner, came up to me to know if I would be confessed: I
answered him it was too soon, and that I had yet a great many other things to
do. A black Spanish horse of the Knight des Essars had lost all his shoes, as
his Master said, by riding still before to discover the passes. We were now
come to the Marshes, and wanted but a quarter of a league to the river and
safety; our Troop by reason of such as fled and died could not make above five
and twenty horse, when mine was shot into the body with a Musket, which made
him fall to the ground, yet I got him up, but found he had not strength to
support himself. Turning then to my Company, I told them, you see Gentlmen we
can do no more, all our horses are lame or tired let us join in a Body and
dying handsomely, sell our lives as dear as we can; we are pursued by five or
six hundred horse, all the ways are flanked by foot, and all the passes cut
off: then turning to the Sieur de la Chaise, go said I and demand of the
Enemies if they will give us good quarter, if so, we must accept it, if not,
let them know they shall not kill us so easily as they imagine. He had no
sooner spoke to them but they cried out All manner of civiltiy and good
quarter. I asked if there were an Officer, because I would not yield to any
other. Visconti a Lieutenant of Cuirassiers advancing to speak to me, a Country
fellow, fired his Musket within ten paces of me, crying No quarter. I would
have rid up to him with my sword, but my horse was so weak that he sunck into
the mire, and I had much ado to get him out; the Country fellow ran into a
Wood, and Visconti firing his Carabine at him missed him. Coming back to me we
began to parley, when two men arrived, one of them on a gray horse with a black
Velvet Coat, the other in Mourning on a bay. Visconti told me that one of them
was Carlo de Falco, and the other Don Fernando de Montalvo, Cousin to the late
Marquis of St. Juliana, slain at the skirmish of Aversa; that they were both
Captains, and therefore his authority ceased. I offered them my Sword, but they
told me they had too great respect for me to disarm me, and that they would
have presented me theirs, if mine had either been lost or broken. I offered
them my Pistols, which they refused, telling me they would not take them till I
alighted. But each of them desiring some token that I had rendered my self to
them, I gave them two ribbands out of my hat, one green, the other Isabella. I
desired them to secure such as were with me from being ill used or plundered,
which was punctually observed. They took only their Swords, and not visiting
their pockets they might have kept their money, had not they themselves very
much pressed an acceptance of it. The Knight des Essars had a Cross of Diamonds
worth a thousand Crowns, which he let fall into the field, and was very much
troubled next morning after he had sent to seek it to no purpose.

The Baron of Gouland, Colonel of the Burgundian horse, came in quickly after,
with Don Prospero Tuttavilla, who commanded the Party; as also Don Joseph
Caetano, and three or four other Gentlemen, who offered me many civilities,
with another horse, mine own being unable to stand any longer. I gave them
thanks, telling them, that he had done me so good service that I should be glad
not to a light from him, but that he might die between my legs; that my haste
was not so great to go to prison, and that how pressing soever their occasions
might be I knew they would not leave me behind. They could not forbear laughing
at this answer. The Knight de la Visseclete mounted on a vigorous Courser which
he had presented me, and I refused, because he was restie, and would never
leave his company, told me (whilst I was in the middle of these Gentlemen) that
as long as he thought my life in danger he forsook me nor, and staid to have
died with me; but seeing that secured, and thinking he might be more useful to
my service at libery than in prison, he attempted to escape, and spurring his
horse, which contrary to custom started freely, and with an incredible
swiftness, though followed by above fifty horsemen escaped them, and alighted a
league off, where he cut off his hair, and getting to a Convent of Capuchins,
put on one of their habits which was charitably given him, and in that equipage
had the good luck to get to Rome. Three other persons that attempted the same
thing were slain by the Peasants. I was brought to Capua, with the Sieur
Marsilli, a Gentleman of Bollonois, and Joseph Scopa an Italian Priest, that
had caused the Duke of Tursi to be taken, with seventeen Frenchmen, who were
the Knight des Essars, the Baron de Causans, the Marquis de Chabans, de
Canherou, de la Chaise, d'Eureux, de la Botelerie, de Souillac, de Bar, de
Beauchamp, Larche, de Graville, de Minieres, Compagnon my Steward, Desmarests
my Almoner, Branion my Surgeon, and Dominico my Chamberlain.

After we had rid a league, those Gentlemen asked me if I would drink, and eat
a bit of bread with some fruit, which I readily accepted being very dry. Joseph
Scopa sensible they spared him but in order to hang him, with an hundred
Chequins that he had about him deboised a Burgundian Horseman, that willing to
go for his Country was glad of such an occasion, and faithfully conducted to
Rome. We heard a noise in a Hogstie, and as soon as the door of it was opened,
(not without great joy) I saw the Sieur de Mallet come forth, whom believing
dead I had most passionately lamented, as one that had endeavored to save my
life and liberty. I tenderly embraced him, the Gentlemen whose Prisoner I was
doing the like, having had a very great kindness for him ever since the
Conference they held with him. I desired to hear his adventure; and he told me
that his horse having been killed, and falling upon him, he counterfeited
himself dead to escape the fury of the Peasants, till seeing an Officer of his
acquaintance pass by, he rendered himself to him, who brought him to the place
where we had found him. We passed the way in discourse very gallant and
pleasant, Don Joseph Caetano going before with a naked sword, and causing all
the Peasants to cry Viva la Spagna: I could not but vex my self to hear these
Rascals lament they had missed carrying my head to Naples, imagining to have
gotten a considerable sum for it, though it made my il fortune very
supportable, in that I was fallen into the hands of people of quality.

By that time I came within a mile of Capua it was night, where I found Don
Lewis Poderico with torches and a Coach to receive me; he alighted to meet me,
and as I did the like, my foot was no sooner out of the stirrup but a trembling
seized my horse, after which he fell dead at the Boot of the Coach. Many
embraces having p^ssed between us, we took Coach, and I was received into
Capua, not as a Prisoner, but with all honors I could have expected if I had
made my entrance as Master of it. Monsieur de Poderico brought me to his House,
before his door I found a Company of Spanish foot; he presented me the Captain,
and afterward all the Gentry and Officers of his Troops, and having brought me
to my Chamber, caused the Captain to stay at the door, that he might not be
troublesome: he asked whether I would sup privately or in company, and leaving
it to his choice, he said if it were acceptable to me, the chief of the
Nobility would be overjoyed to wait on me. After this he told me he thought I
would be glad to enjoy some privacy and refresh my self, that if I would write
any Letters concerning my particular affairs, he would send them away that very
night by an express, to what part soever I desired; then taking his leave, and
none but Frenchmen remaining with me, he sent me Paper and Ink, and ordered a
fire to be made: and as soon as he came down caused to be proclaimed, that all
Frenchmen that could be met with should be brought to Capua, not misused nor
stripped on pain of death: he ordered a list to be taken of all Prisoners, and
lodged the Gentlemen amongst the best of the Nobility, and the rest by billet,
allotting each of them a Centry to follw them, that so they might visit one
another, and come to me as often as I pleased. Every man sought to give good
entertainment to his Prisoner, striving with emulation who should pay them
greatest respect and civility. As soon as I found my self alone, my first care
was to burn a Letter I had received in the morning, which if taken would have
cost the lives of many persons of quality, and which I durst not tear lest the
pieces might have been recollected. Then I writ to Rome for money, with the
account of my misfortune, and some Letters into France, after the style of
Francis the First when he was taken prisoner at Pavia, that I had lost all but
my life and honor. I sent them open by the Knight des Essars to Don Lewis
Poderico, with my seal to enclose them when he should have perused them, but he
would not look on them, and immediately sealing them, sent them away by an
Express to Rome. We used the Paper that remained to make Lampoons on our
misfortune, and such as had shown most fear: all that were taken with me can
bear witness, that no alteration could ever be observed in my countenance,
neither in my retreat, whilst I was taken prisoner, nor during the time I was
at Naples, the different accidents of my good or evil fortune never giving me
any disturbance, acting continually with as much tranquillity as if I had been
no ways concerned: which is rather to be attributed to a natural
insensibility, than to a constancy of resolution that armed me against all
events.

After this Don Lewis Poderico sent to know whether he should not incommode me
by a visit, and having returned, that he should do me a very great favor, he
came followed by many persons of quality: he first signified his sorrow that
his respects were to be paid me on so displeasing an occasion, and that he was
no less sensible of my misfortune than I could be my self; I answered, that men
that wear swords, being ever liable to such accidents, ought not to be
surprised at them: that good and ill success depending more on fortune than
merit, persons of quality and courage that are above her should never be
concerned in her inconstancy: that my greatest sorrow for my imprisonment was,
that I was no longer in a condition to be useful to the interest of the
Neapolitan Nobility, which I preferred above my own, and that my only
consolation was the good usage I received from them, being naturally pleased to
have obligation to persons I esteemed, and passionately desired to serve. Some
of the Company replied, that though I was to be pittyed, they themselves were
much more so, because my loss of liberty brought them into fetters, much
heavier than they had ever been laden with. Don Lewis Poderico interrupting
this discourse, told me, That having received no order from Naples to secure
me, nor yet any advice of what had happened, at the time of my arrival at St.
Mary's of Capua, if I had sent him a Trumpet to have desired to pass into the
Popes Territory, he should not only have granted it, but himself with all the
Nobility would have accompanied me thither, and after he had given me his word,
no authority should have been sufficient to have made him break it. We had
notice that Supper was served in, which obliged us to go and take out places.

All were very pleasant at Supper, and now and then rallyed the people of
Naples, whom I excused on pretense of their natural inconstancy, and declaring
my true meaning, said, that though I had a kindness for them, my intention ever
was to have restored order, and brought them under the authority of the
Nobility as they had been formerly, and as was just and reasonable: that my
present misfortune happened to me because so few Gentlemen had declared on my
side: That I had so great a value for those of that Kingdom, that I assured my
self if I could once have appeared at the head of them, I should no longer have
apprehended the power of Spain, nor have feared all Europe joined together. All
those Gentlemen obliged by my esteem and good opinion returned their thanks, as
well for my care in preserving their Estates and Houses from plundering, as
themselves and their relations from the peoples insolences during the time of
my command. After this, glasses were called for, and my health ceremoniously
drunk, and our wines being the best in the world, we sat long at Table, with a
great dealth of mirth, freedom, and reciprocal testimonies of esteem and
friendship. Some of them told me, that since my life and honor were preserved,
I was to hope, that fortune who is only constant in inconstancy, (her
displeasure being now over) would become favorable to me: I answered, that this
world being fitly resembled to a Play, the first Act of mine was begun with a
good cudgelling, as is ordinary in Italian Comedies; but that I hoped I might
come again upon the Stage with different success, and before I died make my
self considerable in Europe, by acquiring some esteem, and perhaps some
advantage. These discourses held on both sides, with very little
circumspection, were reported to the Spaniards, who interpreting them according
to their jealous humor, redoubled their suspicions of a very great
understanding between me and the Nobility; which went so far, that they
believed they had twice assembled to deliberate whether they should set me at
liberty, and whether it were not their interest, as soon as the French Fleet
should arrive, to declare and place me at their head? This was often told me in
the time of my imprisonment as well at Gaeta as in Spain, and I in vain
endeavored to dis-abuse them of an imagination as ridiculous as improbable.

After Supper they all brought me to my Chamber, where new discourse began, and
rallying Don Lewis Poderico, I told him I was to make him many excuses, for
having so long delayed the delivery of a Letter I had for him, and more for the
boldness I had taken to open it, which yet might be pardonable in a person
naturally of so great curiosity as my self. I then gave him Pepe Palombe's
Letter that was directed to him, which I had taken from his Messenger on the
way. He read it aloud, and smiling told me, he expected not that I should have
been the Bearer of such news; that that of my retreat had been brought him by
one called l' Is^la, thinking so to save his life, which he the more deserved
to lose, by being unfaithful to both sides; that he had been an Officer in the
Duchy of Milan, which service he deserted on report of the disorders of
Naples, and went to me, whom now he had betrayed, that he might again return to
the service of Spain; but it being just to take advantage of treason without
loving the Traitor, he had accepted his intelligence, which yet should not save
him from hanging, so to revenge both of us; me of a Traitor, and himself of a
Runnaway. This had a general approbation, and there was not any in the company
that did not solicit his execution instead of interceding for his pardon.

After this something happened very ridiculous; Hieronimo Fabrani, my
Secretary, of all the men in the world the most avaricious, more concerned for
the loss of his money than liberty, and almost distracted, besought me in
presence of all those Gentlemen to write to desire Don John of Austria, to
cause twenty thousand Chequines that had been taken from him, to be restored I
answered him laughing, that before I so far hazarded my credit, I thought best
to try him in something of less importance, because I loved not to expose my
self to the affront of a denial; but that to deal freely with him, I thought
his fear had made him mad, since he forgot that ten or twelve days before,
when I would have borrowed only half this sum, which might have secured us both
against our present misfortune, he told me he had no money, and believing he
durst not tell me a lie, I supposed what he told me at present was the effect
of a frenzy. He took a great deal of pains to persuade me the contrary, but I
still persisting, he conjured me at least that his Tapistry and other Movables
might be restored. I let him understand that my credit could not extend so tar,
because the Movables and Tapistries coming to be owned by the Proprietors,
none would for my sake be so unjust as to detain them from them. He went away
murmuring in great discontent, and all things seeming to contribute to our
mirth (though there was little appearance of any cause for it on my side) we
were surprised to see coming out of a withdrawing room the Sieur de Miniere
stark naked, his hair tied up on the crown of his head like a bunch of Herons
feathers, with a red ribband, his Boots on his shoulder like a Knapsack,
falling on his knees before me, his fear (which I formerly mentioned) having
turned his brain: I asked what he sought of me in such an equipage? He answered
that desiring to be my Chief Secretary, he came to take his Oath in such manner
as the Romans did to their ancient Emperors. This though pleasant, moved
compassion, with admiration of the effects of fear of death in weak heads. I
desired care might be taken of him, and that he might have a Bed. Fabrani whose
drowsiness was not overcome by the displeasure of his loss, leaning against a
Table, fell on the floor, so heavily, he might have broken the boards, which
was another cause of laughter. Don Lewis Poderico told me, that it being late,
he feared the like might happen to him or some other of the Company, that it
was therefore better to bid me good night, than give a new occasion for
laughter; and going away, our prisoners also went every one to his lodging,
none of my servants staying, but such as were to lie in my withdrawing room.

As soon as I was in Bed, the Spanish Captain that guarded me, desired to see
me and bid me good night, that he might be sure he left me in my Chamber, after
which he locked the door. I had toiled very much all day, and not slept the
night before, which now recompensing I awaked not till Nine next morning As
soon as I was desirous to rise, the Captain opened the door, to bid me good
morrow, and see me in my Bed, afterward going out to leave me to my liberty.
Don Lewis Poderico sent to enquire of my health, and whether it would not be
inconvenient to visit me as soon as I should be ready, sending me linen and a
Coat, knowing I had nothing on but Buffe in which I had been taken, and the
weather being yet cold. A little after he came into my Chamber, with the Prince
of St. Severe his Nephew, the Prince de Forina, the Marquess de la Bella, the
Prince de Supina* the Prince de Chiusana, Don Camillo Caraffa, Don Joseph
Caetano, Don Caesar de Capua, and many other Gentlemen. He asked if I would go
to Mass, whither they would all accompany me, causing the Spanish Guard to stay
behind as unnecessary, whilst so many Persons of Quality went with me. All the
French Prisoners came to me, and we went to a Church hard by, where I received
all Honor and Civilities I could have expected if at liberty, and all about me
seemed rather persons that followed to make their Court to me, then such as had
a care to guard and secure me.

After Mass and a Walk I was brought home, and Monsieur Poderico having drawn
me aside, told me, that care ought to be taken of preserving my life, the worst
being to be distrusted from the cruel and jealous humor of the paniards; that
the Nobility were too much obliged, and had too great esteem and affection for
me, to suffer me to run any hazard; that they would assuredly all rather
perish, than let me continue in danger: but that I must be helpful to my self,
and seek to get time, the best remedy on such occasions; that I was therefore
to express great dissatisfaction against France for having abandoned me, with
equal intention to revenge my self: that I must make a show of engaging with
Spain, and above all seek to persuade them of my Title to the Duchy of Modena,
and that I doubted not to be able to recover it, if I might be seconded by
their forces, and invested by the Emperor: that their hatred for that Duke
(greater than for me) joined to their desire of being revenged on him, would
oblige them to hearken to my Proposals, which I was to be sure to make
considerable enough, to dazzle the eyes of Don John, a young and ambitious
Prince, and of the Viceroy, naturally a Lover of Negotiations, so to oblige
them to send sn account of my Offers to Madrid, which would gain much time, the
first fury of their resentments being alone to be apprehended, as in the Case
of Marshall de Strozzi in the Terceras.

His advice seemed good, and I desired him to write to Naples that some body
might be sent to hear me, because I had matters of extraordinary importance to
deliver. He dispatched a Messenger immediately, and we had news next morning
that the Bishop of Aversa, a person of wit and capacity, Brother of the Prior
of La Rocella, and of the House of Caraffa, was appointed to confer with me. I
dined alone that day, he excusing himself by reason of the many affairs that
pressed him, and the Orders he was to give after so great a change of fortune.
Having reposed a while after dinner, some of the Nobility came to entertain me,
and falling into discourse of what had passed, and of their interests and mine,
we engaged so far, that we entered upon a very considerable Negotiation, from
which I might assuredly have drawn great advantages; when a Spaniard came in,
whom I saw not, my back being to the door; but one of those Gentlemen pressing
my foot, I instantly changed discourse; which yet I could not do so handsomely,
as altogether to prevent suspicion: going out he immediately writ to the Earl
of Ognate, that after I had so long maintained the People in rebellion, I
sought to debauche the Nobility, in which (if some speedy prevention were not
used) it was to be feared I might have success.

In the evening the Prince of Avellina came to see me, and return me thanks for
the care I had taken in preserving the plunder of his Castle, and for punishing
Paul of Naples, who born his subject, had committed all imaginable insolences
against him. I told him I was sorry I could not render him services more
considerable, but that in my present condition, all I could do for his
interests, was to advise him to make haste to Naples, to save his Movables,
which I had carefully gathered together; but being laid up in my Palace, the
Spaniards would infallibly plunder it: on which account I very much lamented,
that my intentions for preserving what belonged to him, gave occasion for its
being more exposed to hazard. He thanked me, and taking my counsel, went away
immediately to give order in his concernments.

After this the Prince of la Rocca Romana came to see me, whose company was
very disagreeable; for he was a great talker, and all his discourse consisted
of protestations of fidelity for Spain, with recital of his services to that
Crown, and his joy to see heaven declared in favor of it. After a very slender
complement relating to my misfortune, he took his leave.

The Spaniards in the mean time assembled, to deliberate what resolution was to
be taken in my behalf. Opinions differed. All the Members Of the Collateral
Council voted my death, alleging this reason, that I had acquired so great
credit, and so general an esteem as well amongst the Nobility as People, that
it was to be feared that as long as I lived, the Kingdom could never be well
settled, and that the recovery of my liberty would again embroil all* that
malcontents would always keep alive in their hearts a secret hope, which
fomenting the seeds of rebellion that remained, would produce effects on the
first occasion; that understanding the natural clemency of their King, they
could do him no better service, than to deprive him of the means of making use
of it toward a Person so dangerous, and where its consequences might be so
fatal; that by this they should free him from the importunities of all the
Princes and Potentates of Europe, to whom I appertained by Blood, Alliance, or
Friendship, who would certainly intercede for my life and liberty; that I had
ascended so near a Throne, that my ambition could not be satisfied with any
establishment below it; and that Naples had come too near my heart, to be ever
forgotten by me: that as long as I lived, I would aspire to the possession of a
Crown I thought I had lost only by the effects of hazard and misfortune, and
that I had looked upon as mine own: that the proceeding of the Marquess of St.
Cruce in the Case of the Mareshal of Strozzi in the Terceras was to be
followed; that this execution was not to be delayed, least France should render
it impossible, by avowing my actions and laying claim to me, as a person sent
by her; and that had acted only by her Power and Order: that they ought to mike
no difficulty of following the example Charles of Anjou made of Conradin, and
that by the counsel of Pope Clement the Fourth: that if such a proceeding
seemed cruel, yet it would be very safe; and that when the establishment of a
Kingdom comes into consideration, the most violent resolutions are best: that
besides all this, my death would serve as a great example, to deter and
prevent ambitious persons from concerning themselves in the insurrections of
Provinces, to which the Spanish Monarchy might be more liable than any other,
having so many different Nations under its Government, and its Dominions so
extended, divided, and at so great a distance from each other.

Zeal for their Country inclined them not so much to this, as their shame of
having had recourse to me for preservation of their Estates and Charges, and
their having held Correspondencies with me, they thought could not always be
kept secret, unless by my death, and the removal of an irreproachable witness
of their infidelity and treason.

On the other side the Duke of Tursi that owed me his life, thought himself
bound in honor, to requite me, by saving mine, and to that purpose alleged
all the reasons that Policy or Morality could suggest. They were seconded by
Don Melchior de Borgia, who being my Kinsman (he by the Duke of Candie
descending from Pope Alexander, and ^ by Lucretia de Borgia his Daughter,
married into the House of Ferrara) thought himself on that account engaged in
honor to preserve me: he therefore omitted nothing to that purpose, embracing
my interests with all imaginable zeal, in it complying with his natural
inclination, which is sweet and obliging. These were persons of another manner
of consideration and credit than those of the Collateral Council, both of them
of the Council of State of Spain, and deputed by the Catholic King as
Counselors to assist Don John, by whose advice he was to regulate himself, and
to do nothing without their. Participation; they added that if they were to be
tied up by examples, the most honorable, and such as had the best and most
general reception in the world were to be followed: that the Marquess of St.
Cruce was much blamed, and that his violence and precipitation might have cost
Spain very dear, had not troubles arose in France, which secured it from her
resentments: that the cruelty of Charles of Anjou had been very much condemned,
and blasted the high reputation his Valor had acquired him, of which he
repented at leisure, by the bloody war that action drew upon him, which he was
ready to sink under; that in the end he lost all Sicilia, and the head of his
own Son (without a miraculous escape) had paid for that of Conradin: that the
authority of Pope Clement's counsel cannot justify it, he having been a
declared enemy to Conradin, whose resentments and power he apprehended, and
whom overliving but a very few days, his death seemed an extraordinary
punishment of heaven for so violent a counsel; that the History of England
offered another manner of example of King Edward the Third, who by his Clemency
acquired a reputation that will last as long as the world: The Lord Percy being
in rebellion against him, Archibald Douglas on his own account, and without the
authority of the King of Scotland his Sovereign, entered England in Arms in
favor of his revolted friend, beat up King Edward his Quarters in a morning,
and forced him to shift for himself barefoot; but the King in that great
battle he won against him, by which he re-established his Crown, having struck
him from his Horse with his Lance, and taken him prisoner, after a severe
punishment of his rebellious subjects, his Council being of opinion that he
should cause Douglas to die, as a particular person that unowned by any Crown,
had come to foment rebellion in his Kingdom; that great and wise Edward
answered, that not being born his subject he had no lawful authority over him,
that his death would be a poor revenge, and blemish the glory of his victory,
and that judging by the hurt he had done him, how much he might be capable to
serve him, if he became his friend, he resolved to give him liberty, which he
did, desiring his friendship, and tenderly embracing him, with high
commendation of his virtue and courage; an action certainly well-becoming a
most generous Prince, and that raised him in honor above all his
Contemporaries: they advised them therefore without passion to consider which
of these two examples was to be imitated by so potent a King as their Master,
who feared nothing from any private person, whom his generosity might for ever
engage to him, besides the acquiring the admiration of all Europe.

The Earl of Ognate subtle and politic, inclined to the first Opinion, which
he fortified by many reasons; but would not take the burden of it on himself
alone: besides being extremely in love with Negotiations, he thought nothing
could be lost by hearing what I had to say, which could not cause any long
delay, and after examination whether my Offers were of greater or less
importance to their Monarchy than my death, either would be in his choice, as
absolutely depending on him; and he so highly satisfied himself that hazard
recovered Naples, that he would not lightly hazard his reputation, nor do any
thing that might appear blameable; it being an ordinary Maxim amongst the
Spaniards, That time and patience never prejudice affairs, which precipitation
often ruins.

Don John of Austria, a young Prince, brave and generous, suffering himself to
be led by his own inclinations, joined with those that had honor on their
side, making a long and curious discourse, such as could not have been expected
from his youth, but rather from a person grown old in affairs, that having
fixed all his thoughts on glory, governs the advantages of his Nation by high
and splendid proceedings. He said, That the actions he had seen me perform,
having gained me his esteem, he could not hinder his affection from joining
with it; that he could not (without too sensible an affliction) see a Prince
(whom it was in his power to save) die miserably: that he should think this not
only infamous to himself, but contrary to the honor of the King his Father,
who might draw greater advantages from my life than punishment: that such a
Clemency would draw on his head a thousand Benedictions, and the applause of
all Europe, and that he could never find a subject that merited it more than I,
and that in my person alone he might oblige all the Princes to whom I was
related: that it would be injurious to the Spanish Monarchy to discover to the
eyes of all the world, that she sacrificed my life to her security; that she
was too well established to be any ways shaken by any private person; that we
lived not in the Age of Romances, when a Knight Errant by his personal valor
was able to destroy Kingdoms: that I were indeed an enemy to be apprehended, if
I had the disposal of the power of France, but that she had sufficiently
discovered that she would neither contribute to the exaltation or establishment
of my fortune: that she abandonned me at a time when without danger she might
have deprived them of a Crown; and that it was very apparent she chose rather
not to weaken her enemies than to suffer me to profit by their spoils; that he
saw great advantages in this so extraordinary Maxim, because France alone
being unable to make considerable and remote Conquests, and that People very
improper to conserve them, Spain needed neither fear the seditions nor revolts
of any of her Dominions, time being always favorable to her; besides that her
subjects would never be forward, to fly to a protection, that in this
conjuncture showed it self, so useless; and that no Princes would
thence-forward engage in the concernments of a Nation that would not suffer
them to help themselves, and that looked with envy on the advantages acquired
by serving her, though at the cost of the enemy: that judging my thoughts by
his own, he believed me incensed by the refusal of assistance in so glorious an
enterprise, and so far provoked, that I breathed nothing but revenge, nor
desired to preserve my life, but in order to it: that his Opinion was that this
was to be fomented, and endeavors used to gain a person that might be so
considerable to them: that the greater my ambition seemed, the greater
confidence they ought to have in me, for perceiving France would never give me
wherewithal to satisfy it, I would inseparably engage my self to Spain, who at
its own charge would assist me with all things necessary to advance it: that
they ought not to ruin me on account of my having concerned my self in the
revolutions of Naples, beause it is honorable for a courageous Prince to seek
his advancement, which he cannot do with greater reason and justice than
amongst the enemies of his Country: that he could not blame that in me which
he would have practiced himself, if he had been in my place, and that it cannot
be imputed a Crime, to seek to acquire a Crown, from a Monarchy opposite to
that to which we are born subjects: that he discerned nor the reason why
particular actions when glorious, should pass for more criminal than general
ones, being as useful and sometimes more to the advantage of our Country: and
that those he had seen me do, being so eminent, obliged him to wish me well, it
being just to love virtue even in the persons of those that fight against us,
and which for that cause we hate: that he thought himself concerned to exempt
me from this number, and having made appear by his discourse how easily and
safely I might be gained, he should prejudice the service of the King his
Father, if he used not his uttermost endeavors toward it: that by what I had
done without supplies and assistance, might easily be gathered what I could do
in my Country amongst my Relations, seconded by their Power, and animated by a
spirit of revenge, in a Kingdom so turbulent and ever ready for revolutions:
that his opinion was not only for saving my life, but giving me liberty: that
having honor, I would questionless become faithful to Spain the remainder of
my days, receiving so considerable and undeserved favors from her, France
instead of recompencing my services having ingratefully abandoned me: that
their hatred and animosities for the Duke of Modena were much more reasonable
than for me, who after the so good usage of the King his Father, without any
cause of complaint, or dependence on or engagement to any other, had proclaimed
war against them voluntarily, and attacqued the Duchy of Milan, for enlarging
his own Territories; but that things were very different on my side; that I was
born a Frenchman; that war had been proclaimed between the two Crowns, and was
not brought by me to Naples, that came thither only to seek my fortune, by
assisting such as had already taken arms against the professed enemies of my
Country: that it was good policy to revenge our selves of one enemy by the
hand of another, and that I might most fitly be made use of against the Duke of
Modena; that the Emperor had cause enough to dispossess him by the Imperial
Ban; and my investure in that Dominion being procured, to give me forces
sufficient to punish him, which he himself could not do without provoking the
opposition and jealousy of all Italy; that this policy would seem new to all
the Council, but we must change according to Occurrences, and when it should be
examined without prejudice, he thought it would find a general approbation,
without the contradiction of the King his Father. This discourse suspended the
opinions of all the Council, it was not followed because too favorable to me,
neither durst any persist in that which was contrary, two Counselors of State
having voted for the preservation of my life: The result therefore was to send
to Rome for the advice of the Cardinals of the Spanish Faction, and to
determine nothing concerning me till the receipt of their Answer.

Marco de Lorenzo in the mean time to testify his zeal for me, resolved to
hazard a message to get news of me, and send me an account of what passed in
Naples, he entrusted this employment to a Musician he had, who had the cunning
(for all my Guards) to get to me in my Chamber, where he told me, that the Town
made no opposition to the entry of the Spaniards, nor durst take arms, because
of the report industriously spread abroad that I had made an agreement with
them; of which when they came to be disabused by the news of my imprisonment,
the public sorrow and despair was unimaginable: that though the inhabitants
were not yet disarmed, the intention was to do it: that they were flattered by
many fair promises, with hope of the confirmation of their Privileges and
exemption from Taxes: but that refusing all those advantages, they had
unanimously answered, That having so essential Obligations to me, they could
not look on my misfortune, nor the great peril to which my life was exposed,
without a most sensible concernment, and that therefore renouncing all other
pretenses, the people were ready without contest to submit to whatsoever the
Viceroy should please to impose upon them, provided I might be set at liberty,
and that they would freely sacrifice their lives and estates, with their wives
and children, to my interests. The concernment of the City of Naples for my
imprisonment, and my fidelity to them, were great consolations to me: And
though I apprehended my life to be in a great deal of danger, this relation was
very agreeable, and I desired the Messenger to assure his Master of my
acknowledgments, and to tell all his acquaintance that my misfortune afflicted
me on no other account but in that it prevented me from delivering them from
oppression, according to my promise and most earnest desires.

In the afternoon the Bishop of Aversa was brought to me by Don Lewis Poderico,
and after the complement, to which my condition obliged a person of his
generosity, we took Chairs, and having caused all to avoid the room, he told
me, That in order to my demand that some body might be deputed to hear the
Proposals I had to make, Don John of Austria and the Viceroy had given him
Commission for it: that he had accepted it with joy, as an occasion of doing me
effectual service, that I might at least assure my self of this, that it could
have been put into the hands of no person of better intentions, and that he
would employ the uttermost of his care and address, to free me from my
misfortune, or at least to consolate it.

I told him that I came not to Naples without the participation of France, and
the assurance that it was the best service I could possibly render her: that a
resolution had been taken that I should have embarked on the Fleet and
commanded it, so to carry the people all the assistance they had desired but
that the extremity to which they were reduced not permitting them to tarry so
long, the French Ministers at Rome had pressed me to hazard that passage, which
succeeded not without a great deal of toil and danger: that I would without
regret have sacrificed my self for the interests and glory of the Crown to
which I was born a subject: that the King had not only approved my resolution,
but had by his Letters testified an extraordinary obligation to me, with
assurance that he would assist me with all things necessary, and send me a
potent Fleet, with men, ammunition, money, and victuals: after all which the
envy and malice of my enemies, or rather the treachery of a Pensioner of Spain,
had caused me to have been miserably abandoned; but thinking my life could not
be spent better than for the advantages of my Country, neither my courage nor
good intentions became less on that account; and he might probably have heard
what offers I had refused, it being impossible for me to be biased from my
duty: that all my endeavors were recompensed with a Prison: that by so unjust
and hard usage I was discharged both in the sight of God and men of all
Obligation and Allegiance: that my resentments were as great as just: that I
would therefore cast my self absolutely under the protection, and into the
interests of Spain, who, by what I had done against her, might easily judge
what I could undertake against France, (even at the point of an insurrection)
when seconded by her power: that I had friends and relations very much
dissatisfied, who would concern themselves in the wrongs I had received, my
fidelity having been distrusted, and the advantages of the Crown neglected,
only in order to destroy me: that in some Provinces I had powerful
Confederates: that I had some Towns in my own possession, and could engage
others very considerable, it being now become a custom rather to serve our
friend than our King; that I offered in order to my revenge, to make use of
whatsoever was in my power: that none could be more fit to punish the Duke of
Modena, against whom they were more justly animated than against me: and to
make appear that I would be very serious in this Engagement, (if they thought
fit to make use of and put confidence in me) I would begin by the pacification
of the Kingdom of Naples, the infallible ways to effect which I understood:
that my Proposals carried their security along with them, because being a
prisoner my life was to be responsible for them: then descending to the
particulars of what I have reported, they appeared so advantageous to Spain,
that he assured me they would be received with open arms, and that he thought I
should obtain all manner of satisfaction, and my liberty, which he would go and
endeavor with a most zealous application and affection: that he hoped to bring
me answer in three days if I stayed so long at Capua, or else with Don Lewis
Poderico come to me to Gaeta, if the resolution of conducting me thither should
have effect.

My life being concerned, I omitted nothing that I thought might flatter the
Spaniards, and made the ruin of France appear so easy, that (they being soon
persuaded of what they desire, to which their natural vanity, with the contempt
of other Nations and all power but their own, inclines them) I perceived my
Proposals would be sent to Madrid, where matters never being readily determined
on, during an infinite number of Junto's and a great deal of time, I might set
so many hands on work toward my preservation, that my life would be secure,
fearing only the first heat, which cooling, I could have no apprehension of
their cutting off my head at the end of three months. Having thus gotten time
I entertained hope.

The Express sent to Rome being arrived there, the Cardinals of the Faction of
Spain and its Ministers assembled often to deliberate on an affair of so great
importance: the Pope so tenderly affected me, that he wept at the report of my
misfortune, and knowing that my greatest danger lay in being disowned by
France, (Monsieur de Fontenay giving out that my undertakings had been with his
participation, but not by his Order, supposing this would hasten my ruin, of
which he was desirous, to quit himself of an enemy his Conduct had dis-obliged,
and that could never pardon him; as indeed my resentments could not have been
overcom but by the mediation of persons of very great power, whom I valued so
much I could deny them nothing, with the consideration of an alliance he made
into a Family I particularly love and esteem; with which yet I complied not
without very great difficulty and contestation within my self.) sent for
Cardinal Albornos, and told him he wondered to hear that France had not only
abandoned me, but that her Ministers disowned all that I had done for her
service and by her order, though her Ambassador the day after my embarking,
came in the name of the King to acquaint him with it, and to assure him that I
should be powerfully assisted, and that a Fleet was making ready in Province,
to be sent with all manner of assistance to me; which he offered to justify to
him, supposing he durst not deny what he had acquainted him with, at an
extraordinary Audience which he had expressly desired to that purpose: He
ordered him to write this into Spain, and to let them know that he concerned
himself in the preservation of my life, as much as if I were his Nephew: and
not satisfied to have told the same to all the Cardinals and Ministers of that
Faction, and engaged them to write to Naples that nothing should be attempted
against my person without the Orders of the Catholic King; himself dispatched
an Express to him in the most obliging and pressing terms imaginable, begging
my life, as the greatest and most sensible favor he could possibly receive.

The Court of Rome (always in a perfect tranquillity) is a place where affairs
are more attentively considered than in any other part of the world, and where
greater respect is had to the consequences of them; these Cardinals solicited
by all their Companiors, who had a great deal of kindness for me, became very
moderate, and writ to Spain and Naples in such a manner as I my self could
wish. This gave France time not only to own what I had done, but to threaten
the like to all the prisoners in her hands, or that she should take afterward,
if my life were attempted. All the Princes of Europe, to whom I have the honor
to be related, concerned themselves for me. And the Duke of Lorrain, hearing of
my misfortune, told the Archduke and the Earl of Fuensaldagne very smartly that
he would never serve those that should dip their hands in the blood of his
Family: that the services he had done the House of Austria merited
consideration might be had of his mediation, and my life be granted him, which
he would accept as the greatest recompense he could pretend to: he represented
the same at Madrid by the Captain of his Guard, whom he sent expressly thither.

These powerful Mediations, with the Proposals I made to serve Spain, obtained
such effect as I could wish, judging, that since Kings ever incline to
Clemency, he of Spain would never command my execution, when it was become
apparent to all the world that it depended only on his will, and could not be
done but by his particular Order. Orders for my removal to Gaeta were brought
to Capua, but deferred till they should have chosen a person to take charge of
me, and had provided a Galley to transport me.

Don Lewis Poderico brought me to the Nunneries, where all the Ladies and
people of the Town crowded to see me, with extraordinary demonstrations of
kindness and sorrow.

On Easter Day I heard Mass and did my devotions in the great Church, where
something very pleasant happened to me. I made my Confession to the Sieur de
Marests my Almoner, and accusing my self to have put many persons to death, to
which perhaps I had been more moved by consideration of my own safety, than
zeal for justice; he answered in choler, I was at Naples with you, and know you
caused not enough to die, and can bear witness that had you not spared so many,
we might have been there still, and not prisoners here. I must acknowledge that
this answer, which I expected not from a Confessor, made me smile: as soon as I
came home I told it to the company, who after having a while laughed at it,
declared their opinions that he had told me the truth.

My familiarity with the Nobility, and their friendship for me, which was daily
augmented by conversation, made the Earl of Ognate apprehend some bad effects
of it, not looking upon them as very well affected to him, and therefore he
resolved to suffer it no longer. He sent an Order that none should
particularly, nor with so much liberty visit me. He entrusted the Prince of La
Rocca Romana, in whom he had an extraordinary confidence, to command a little
body, without any dependence on Don Lewis Poderico, which so much offended him,
that he quitted the employment he had till then managed, and on Monday morning
came to tell me, that he was very sorry he was no longer in a condition to
serve me, his authority being at an end; that he was to put me into the hands
of Don Caesar of Capua, Governor of the Town, of whom yet he could give me
assurance, being a very worthy person and his particular friend, and one from
whom I should receive all manner of civilities, and then went away for Naples,
to complain of his usage, which seemed very much to discontent him. Three days
after, they carried me and all the rest of the prisoners to Castle Voltorno
(where I was to meet a Galley to transport me) in Coaches, the greatest part of
them drawn by Oxen, in regard of the bad way: I was guarded by a Troop of Horse
that, as soon as they had delivered me at Castle Voltorno, were to return all
night.

Don Lewis Poderico having dispatched his business at Naples, and received
Order to draw out all the Troops he had left in Capua, and march instantly into
Abruzzo, to drive from thence Tobias Palavicini and the Marquess de Palombara,
who commanded in that province, and reduce it to obedience; a Burgundian,
Lieutenant to the Camp-Master-General, took charge of me. At my arrival I found
that the Galley that should take me in, was not come, by reason of bad weather,
which hindered it two days longer; during which time I had no other Guard but
a Foot Company, the greatest part of the Soldiers being Burgundians,
Lorrainers, and Frenchmen; and what I thought something extraordinary, a
Soldier standing Centry at my Chamber Door, speaking French to me, told me he
was of Joinville, offering all he possibly could do for my escape, telling me
that the greatest part of the Company being Lorrainers, he was confident they
would gladly do the like, and that all his Camerades having been taken
prisoners and listed at Rome against their wills, would be very glad to forsake
the service. I ordered him as soon as he should be relieved to found the
inclinations of his companions. Two hours after he came to tell me in their
names, that I might assure my self of them to what intent soever I pleased, and
that if occasion were I might make use of their arms: that which I thought most
strange was, that the Lieutenant of the Camp-Master-General continually railed
at the Spaniards, by whom he said he had been ill used: that he came so short
of a recompense for thirty years service, that he had hardly bread to eat, and
that he sought only a good occasion to retire. He endeavored very
sollicitously to inform himself whether I had any money at Rome, hoping to make
his fortune by me; this was reported to me by all he talked with, and
afterward confirmed by his helping Compagnon my Steward to make his escape,
for fourteen or fifteen Pistols worth of trifles he had about him. He permitted
me to walk by the Seaside as far as a little Chapel of our Lady of great
Devotion, about a quarter of a league from Castle Voltorno, followed only by
four Musketeers, though we were two and thirty prisoners, all French, except
the Sieur Marcili, who was an Italian. This number was augmented from Capua
during our stay here, the Baron of Rouvron, de Fargis Governor of Caiazzo,
Beauvais Colonel in Aversa, St. Maximin Captain of Foot, and others having been
brought in after Sieur Poderico's Proclamation, of which I have already spoken.

Some of our People walking on the Haven saw there six Felucca's provided with
Sails, Oars, and Rudders, of which they presently gave me notice. The Sieurs de
Mallet and d'Eureux, propounded my escape, which, after having brought a little
victuals aboard, might be done in an hours time. The Sieur D'Eureux a good
Seaman, that had a long time commanded as Lieutenant of one of the Galleys of
France, assured me that putting off at the beginning of the night, which we
might do without opposition or difficulty, he would land me the next morning in
the Popes Dominion. The easiness of this design discouraging my attempting it,
and recollecting the Spaniards subtilty in preventing the people of Naples from
taking arms, and defending themselves that night they made themselves Masters
of the Town, I could not imagine it possible for them to be guilty of such
negligence as to leave things in a condition of giving me so much facility to
get out of their hands; and that therefore many people would persuade
themselves that this was a connivence, and done expressly, together with the
order given to the Troop of horse that conducted me to Castle Voltorno, to
return as soon as they had seen me there, and the placing in Garrison there a
foot Company of Lorrainers, Burgundians, and Frenchmen, whom I might easily
debauch, and make use of the advantage of the delay of the Gally that was to
carry me to Gaeta, and of those Felucca's. I thought these things would seem so
probable that I should find it difficult to justify my self, and that they
which had prevented my being assisted would endeavor (in excuse of their evil
conduct by which I had been abandoned) to persuade all the world of them. That
it would be impossible for me to put this opinion out of the heads of the
people of Naples, and the greatest part of Italy. I resolved therefore what
danger soever I might undergo, rather to continue Prisoner, than to get my
liberty so easily, and by a way that might give some jealousy that I had not
acted with fidelity and honor. I think very few persons in the world have done
as I did. but I am so scrupulous on such occasions, that I cannot suffer the
least shadow of distrust. I conjured all my Camrades to make their escape, it
being unreasonable they should suffer for my obstinacy and nice humor. Their
generosity suffered them not to abandon me, but they used their utmost
endeavors (though in vain) to convince me, by representing that time and my
actions would sufficiently justify me, and that I had acquired too high an
esteem to be lost so easily, neither could any part of it be hazarded by making
use of a favorable occasion, presented me by heaven and my good fortune, which
once lost was irrecoverable. I continued unmoved by all these reasons, and
notwithstanding the tediousness of my sufferings, when I make reflection upon
it, I cannot repent my doing as I did, to have preferred my honor before my
life and liberty.

Next morning the Spanish Galley appeared, but the shallowness of the water not
suffering her to come near the land, she kept her self about two hundred yards
at Sea, and Dom Alvaro de la Torre Lieutenant of the Camp-master-General, with
some Reformadoes came ashore in the boat to receive me. All my company and
Servants were most sensibly afflicted: They had been told that I should have
been allowed the choice of eight or nine persons to have taken with me, to have
kept me company at Gaeta, and a great emulation arose who should make up that
number, but Alvaro de la Torre soon put an end to it; for after a very slender
Complement in the name of the Viceroy, he told me he had order to take but two
persons along with me, namely a Chamberlain and a Cook; but having no Cook, and
the permission being for two, I desired it might be a Gentleman and a
Chamberlain. He rudely answered it could be no more than one of them, and the
Knight des Essars being already come into the Boat, unwilling to oblige him to
go out I took my place, and they rowed off, all whom I left on the shore
despairing of ever seeing me again, by their cries and tears expressed so much
sorrow, that I was more sensibly concerned at it than at the unfortunate
condition to which I found my self reduced, A Capuchin was seated next me,
which I looked on as a bad omen: and I overheard a Spanish reformed Captain
called Ambrosio Fermandez say it was strange they suffered me to live so long,
which I could never forgive him to this day. I continued a while silent, making
reflections on my present misfortune. Don Alvaro de la Torre, naturally very
uncivil and very indiscreet, applied himself then and ever after to give me all
discontent imaginable, of which taking little notice I began to rally, in which
he interrupted me to tell me, that the Council had assembled twice to
deliberate of my life, and had not Don John of Austria opposed it, (my death
being necessary toward the settling the affairs of Spain, and reestablishing
its authority in the Kingdom of Naples) I had already mounted a Scaffold to
punish my insolence for pretending to a Throne: that the result of this was
deferred till the return of an Express sent to Rome, for the opinions of the
Ministers and Cardinals of that Faction; that I was therefore to prepare my
self for all events. I answered him laughing, that it was happy for me that his
opinion had not been demanded, since I perceived it would not have been
favorable; but that my head was too well settled on my shoulders, to be shaken
by the humor of private persons, and that the blood of those of my quality used
not to be shed without the participation and precise order of Kings.

This entertainment, not very agreeable, ended not till we came to the Gally,
which did not salute me, and into which they caused me to ascend not only
without ceremony, but common civility, the Spiniards using very little with
Prisoners of what quality soever. As soon as I came into the Cabin, they
seated me between two Capuchins, who busied themselves to entertain me with
such discourse as is usually addressed to persons that are to prepare for
death: yet all those Ceremonies gave me no alarm, they seemed too affected to
be much apprehended, and I only told them with a smile, that at that time all
things were so indifferent to me, that I was incapable of fear: That in spite
of my Enemies nothing should make me sad, and that my life being in the hands
of God, I would make no inquiry into the duration of it: but of this I was
resolved, that whilst I could preserve it I would make it as agreeable and
pleasant to me as possibly I could.

The Knight des Essars something more apprehensive than my self, was not at his
ease, the Companion of the Capuchin that entertained me telling him, that my
life was at an end, and that he being a Switzer, and on return to his Country,
would willingly take upon him to go into France to carry my last Testament to
my relations. He could not hear this without extraordinary concernment, and
came to tell me of it with a great alarm; I answered; (bursting out into
laughter) that he was very silly to contribute to the diversion of those
people, that studied all our postures, to deride afterward the weaknesses we
should discover, and turning to Don Francisco de la Cotera, Captain of the
Gally, told him, Sir, our discourse is very serios for persons that have not
dined, I fared very ill at Castle Voltorno, and am very hungry, and you will do
me a kindness to let me have something to eat. Such persons as I, accustomed to
travel the world are not bashful, but freely demand what they have occasion
for: he gave order, and quickly after Dinner was brought in. Being a person of
honor he told me he had such an esteem for me, that he could not see my ruin
without sorrow, and that he was obliged to wish me well, by reason of the
acquaintance I formerly had in Flanders with his Brother Don Pedro de la
Cotera, Colonel of foot and Governor of Gueldres, and on that acount to
acquaint me with the danger I was in, from which yet I might easily free my
self, by appearing very much animated against France, and resolved to embrace
the interests of Spain, which would make great advantages by acquisition of
such a person, whose courage and address might be very useful to her. I thanked
him for his good advice, and told him, that what he had mentioned was not only
my greatest passion, but that it had been already propounded to Don John of
Austria and the Viceroy. He seemed glad of it, and assured me, (that being so)
not only of his confidence of my obtaining liberty, but establishing a glorious
fortune.

After dinner going upon the Deck, I began to put in practice what he had so
kindly advised me to; which I looked upon as the general sense of their whole
Nation, so many persons having agreed in it. As soon therefore as I returned to
the Company, I said that notwithstanding the great hatred I perceived they had
for me, the King of Spain was more obliged to me than to any other person in
the world, for having preserved so flourishing a City as Naples from sack and
fire, and preventing that whole Kingdoms being plundered of all its wealth,
toward which I had labored more successfully than all his Ministers, that I
would yet do more by making it peaceable to him, which would be very easy for
me, and impossible for any other. That it was but reasonable that in order to
so important a service he should grant me his protection, and revenge me of
France for having abandoned me, and thwarted my fortune, which would have
raised me to be the most glorious person of my age had I received the least
assistance: That I therefore desired nothing so passionately as to kindle a
fire there by an Insurrection, which would not be difficult to me. This
discourse met a general applause, and the greatest part of the Spaniards having
very little knowledge of the affairs of the world, and being easily flattered
by what appears advantageous to them, they seemed already persuaded of the ruin
of France, and looked upon it to be in my power. This was so agreeable to them
that I perceived they began to use me with something less incivility.

By this time we arrived at Gaeta, where landing they put me into a Sedan and
carried me to the Castle, with Guards round about me, who took an exact care to
let none come near me, and prevent me from seeing, or being seen. As soon as I
came thither they brought me to the Chapel, and from thence up a pair of
stairs, as I ascended which, I would have turned into an appartment on my left
hand, but I was told it was higher, but seeing no stairs I went out upon a
Terrass, which they caused me to pass over, from whence by a little Gate I
mounted a very dark pair of stairs, where I found another little Terrass
fourteen or fifteen foot broad and twice as long, where they placed nine or ten
Musketeers; but I could see no Chamber, till in a corner they opened a great
iron gate which I had not perceived, which with another that was within it, and
a grate, gave me entrance into a Tower, whose walls might be twenty or two and
twenty foot thick, and whose Windows could be approached no nearer. This was
the honorable appartment they had provided for me: There was an ugly Bed
without Curtains, and Sheets on it, in which a Cousin of Massaniello's, whom
they had hanged five or six days before, had lain two months. I desired clean
ones might be brought, which they refused, telling me I was but too well, and
that a man that had so few days to live ought not to be so curious, I only
laughed at this bad entertainment: the thing that alone seemed insupportable to
me, was that at the Beds-head stood a great pot full of filth, which had not
been emptied in three Months: I desired it might be carried away, the stink
being so abominable that it overcame me: I was told, that they would see what
might be done next morning, but for that night they would not meddle with it.
The Capuchin I had seen in the Boat presenting himself at the gate of the
Tower, the Knight des Essars took alarm, and asked what it meant, and was told
it was to confess me, and seeing him accompanied by an Officer of Majorca of
very bad mien, he took him for the Hangman, and in disorder cried out to me we
are now ruined; Let them alone (said I) to act their farce, they shall not have
the pleasure of affrighting me. I was guarded by four Reformado Captains, and
as many Alfieres and Sergeants relieved every day. One Captain and two Alfieres
(one of which was Don Alvaro's man, whom he had appointed to serve me) with a
Sergeant, never suffered me to be out of their sight, and lay in my Chamber. I
told Francisco de Herrera, who as the eldest took the first Guard, that
perceiving I was to tarry long, I would not afflict my self, nor give those
that loved me not occasion to rejoice at my melancholy, but would seek my
diversion by all ways, and to that purpose desired him to do me the favor to
help me to some Books. He told me they had none in French, but answering him,
that speaking Italian and understanding Spanish, I should be satisfied with one
in either of those languages: He sent to seek, and the first that was presented
to me was in Spanish, and the Title, A Preparation to well dying: I returned it
to him without looking any farther, as standing in no present need of it, nor
being devour enough to please my self in such contemplations, and prayed him to
help me to some Comedies or Histories: They brought me that of Naples, and my
natural curiosity obliging me to look on what is marked in a Book, I found
where a leaf had been turned down at a great print of the beheading of
Conradin, and laughing at all these affectations, told them they had done me
the greatest pleasure imaginable, that I had heard his tragical adventure
spoken of, but ignorant of its particularities, should be very glad to learn
them. I laid up the Book in a corner of the Tower, and asked for Supper, that I
might afterward lie down to rest. A most wretched Supper was brought me, that
my entertainment might be suitable; it was a piece of meat dry and burnt, and
I think had been purposely drawn through the ashes, a stinking salad, seasoned
as I thought with the Oil of the Lamp of the Chapel; the bread was very dry
and musty; for dessert I had two wrinckled apples and nuts; the wine only was
passable: that which I eat did not over-charge my stomach. The nastiness of the
Bed permitted not unclothing, I only caused my Boots to be pulled off, and
after they had brought an ill-favored Quilt for the Knight of Essars and the
Captain that guarded us, they shut the two iron gates upon us, with a very
great noise of locks and bolts. I believe another man would hardly have slept
in so bad a Lodging, and near so ill scents, but my weariness preventing any
great reflection, I slept till day entering at the windows awaked me.

Next morning about ten a clock, Don Alvaro de la Torre came to me, and asked
if I would go to Mass? which having accepted, he brought me to the Chapel and
afterward returned me to my Lodging. As we passed over the Terrass I desired
him that we might walk there till Dinner time, which he refused, permitting me
only to stay and take a little air, on that that was before my Chamber Door. I
continued there almost an hour, encompassed by the Officers of the Guard and
nine or ten Musketeers, after which Dinner was brought into my Chamber, where
he stayed to bear me company, as he always afterward did; he, the Knight des
Essars, and the Captain that had the Guard, still eating with me: our cheer was
not altogether so bad as at Supper. Our discourse was very pleasant, by it Don
Alvaro discovered his ignorance and little wit, with insupportable vanity. He
told me he was first of all a soldier at the skirmish of the hills of
Orbitello, and that he had afterward seen all that passed at Naples, from the
beginning of the revolutions to my imprisonment; that he was not troubled that
he had seen no more, because he learned more by this than he could have done in
thirty Campagna's in Flanders, Milan, or Catalonia, there having happened more
extraordinary actions, and gallant encounters, than are to be found in all
History. I answered him, smiling, that I had not perceived so much, though
probably I must needs have seen more than he, because he was still confined to
the guard of some particular Post, and that all the concernments of the party I
had taken depending on me, it was necessary I should be every where: that my
opinion was, that toward well learning the profession of a soldier, most of
the passages of so irregular a war were to be forgotten, where nothing new or
rare had been practiced, but to fight like Cats in gutters. Above all, he
seemed very joyful to have learned how Mines are made, of which till then he
had no notion: I replied, that I had made none for want of powder, neither had
I perceived that any had been made on his side. He told me he had lost a
soldier whom he very much lamented, one of the greatest Miners of Italy, who
had done him the pleasure to cause one to play before him. I could not imagine
where this could have been, till he told me that toward Sancta Maria la Nova,
nine or ten men of the party of the people, having lodged themselves in an
upper Chamber, under which he was, that soldier bringing a Barrel of Powder,
and laying a train, fired it, and with the floor and roof carried them into the
air: that this seemed very handsome and very strange to him, and having been
told that Mines were made in such a manner, by digging under ground, it so much
troubled him, that he was night and day alarmed at the least noise he heard,
and was so vigilant, that he once took the nibbling of a Mouse for the working
a Mine: that his care and the experience he had acquired in five or six months
time had gained him the favor of the Viceroy, who entrusted to him the guard
of the Carmelites Tower, where he passed two or three days very unquietly, for
fear of being surprised; but after he had well fortified it, he slept in
repose. I asked what works he had caused to be made? because understanding the
strong and weak parts of that Post, none could better judge of them? He told me
with the greatest gravity imaginable that he had set up two Turn-Pikes to
hinder the people from pressing to the gate. He passed over the rest of the
Meal in such fopperies, which sufficiently discovered his incapacity and folly

After Dinner he told me he had received Order from the Earl of Ognate to hear
the Proposals I had to make, and give him account of them. He called for Paper
and Ink; and writ down all I encharged him with. Then I perceived I had
happened on the right means of saving my life, and prolonging affairs. I made
him a description of the condition of France, not such as it really was, but
such as the Spaniards desired to have it: I assured him of the general
discontent of Persons of Quality, and the disposition of all Provinces to an
Insurrection: that there were few Governors that might not be easily be gained,
that many of them depended on me, that some, and those very considerable,
belonged to me: that the Armies inclined to mutiny: that the Parliaments
jealous of the authority of the Chief Minister, were desirous of novelty: In a
word, that all men being reduced to despair, there wanted only a head toward a
general subversion: that I was of a Family very well beloved, very considerable
and powerful, as had appeared in former ages: that being incensed by ill usage,
and by having been abandoned in the enterprise of Naples, I was resolved for
the highest undertakings, being certain to be followed by the gallantest and
considerablest of the Nobility, who would freely concern themselves in my
resentments, and contribute to my revenge, could they see the least appearance
of being assisted. I added all things that could appear probable, making them
seem so easy, that he persuaded himself I had greater credit than all my
Predecessors ever had, and that I stood in need of nothing but the protection
of Spain in order to all I pretended, the particulars whereof I in such a
manner set out to him, that he should no longer have believed himself to have
been a good Spaniard, if he had been capable of distrusting them. From this
passing to discourse of the affairs of Naples, I offered to settle the whole
Kingdom in a very few days, to supply the Town with provisions in abundance,
disarm the people, and prevent all foreign correspondencies, yet with this
reservation, that I would never discover any secrets that had been entrusted to
me, being a Person of too great honor to do so, how dissatisfied soever; but
for all such things as I had pried into by my address, and which endeavors had
been used to have concealed from me, I would declare with joy, so to ruin all
designs that might be a foot; not able to endure that others should make
advantage by my shipwreck, or persons not so considerable as my self succeed in
an enterprise in which I had not been assisted. At last making appear to him my
Title to the Duchy of Modena, I brought him to acknowledge I was most proper
to deprive the Duke of it, if I might be invested by the Emperor, and have
forces sufficient to put my self in possession. He was over-joyed to have an
affair of such importance in his hands, and looking on himself as a very great
Statesman, returned me thanks for having given him so handsome an occasion to
make his fortune, and after abundance of complements took leave to go and make
his dispatches.

Three or four days passed, during all which he continually entertained me on
the same subject; discovering that he made great projects, and doubted not by
means of the intrigues I had put into his hands, ere he died to obtain the
dignity of Grandee of Spain. I fomented this vanity, because it procured me
better entertainment, and contributed toward diverting me, taking pleasure to
make him ridiculous: that time expired, he came to make me a complement in
behalf of the Earl of Ognate; telling me he had received Order from him to
provide the best appartment of the Castle, commonly called the Kings, to lodge
me. They furnished it very handsomely, and caused me to descend into it after I
had lain fourteen days in the Tower. I had a very large Hall, a fair Chamber,
and a Closet, all on a Floor. The Guard continued all day at the Stair-head,
and I had the liberty of the whole appartment to walk in, which had Windows on
both sides, one whereof looked into the Court of the Castle, where I had the
pleasure of seeing people go in and out, and the other toward the Sea, with a
very delightful Prospect, where I could every day see them fish, and all Ships,
Galleys, Brigantines, and Feluca's that passed to and fro between Rome and
Naples. My Windows were all bolted close in the night, and the lock of my door
fortified by two great bolts and a chain, fourteen or fifteen Musketeers lay in
my Hall, a Captain at my Beds-feet, and two Alfieres and a Sergeant in my
Closet. They made me good cheer, and I understood by this change of
entertainment that my Negotiations began to have effect, and that if my life
was not altogether secure, it was not yet in very great danger; and had it not
been for the uncivil humor of Don Alvaro, whose ignorance and brutality every
day gave me some vexation, my Prison had been very easy. They already spoke to
me of the Spanish interests, as if I had been very much concerned in them, and
I laughed within my self to find I had to do with people that would suffer
themselves to be abused so grossly, and believe so lightly. As soon as the Earl
of Ognate had received that dispatch, he sent me a Cook, and an Officer to
serve me, on condition they should always stay below, and never come into my
appartment.

One of my servants called Caillet, not freed from the apprehension he had the
day I was taken prisoner, finding no Horse at Posilippo when I went from
thence, followed me two leagues a foot, at the end whereof he was taken, and
falling into the hands of the Country people, a Butcher came to cut off his
head with a great Knife, the Curate of the Town confessing him, the Butcher
wearied with the tediousness of his Confession, knocking with his Knife on a
Block that was there purposely for that execution, called out to him to
dispatch, when an Officer very luckily coming in, saved his life, taking him
out of their hands, to carry him with the rest of my servants to prison to the
New Castle in Naples.

Don Alvaro came to make me a complement in the name of the Viceroy, and to
tell me that he would send my Proposals into Spain, and return me answers as
soon as he received them. I should have been very much satisfied by seeing my
affairs in so good a way, had I not been troubled by the news I received that
some of my servants, especially the Footmen I brought from Rome, were
condemned to the Galleys. I complained of this injustice, representing that if
I were a prisoner of war, my servants were to be returned to me, because I
would pay their ransom; and if I were a prisoner of State, that it was unjust
that they should suffer, because they served me not as Counselors, nor gave
any occasion for my coming to assist the people of Naples, and favor their
revolt. These reasons (though just) were not taken into consideration, and that
tyrannical resolution was executed, which provoked me to revenge, and on which
the oftener I think, the more violently I resent it: but dissimulation being
necessary (after all applications had proved useless) I spoke no more of it;
and to persuade them of my dependence on the interests of Spain, I complied
with the request the Viceroy made me, to give him my opinion in what manner he
was to comport himself in Naples.

I sent him a Breviate of all the Corn I had laid up, with the price and places
where it was, and taught him the expedient of raising a Stock of Two hundred
thousand Crowns, by causing a hundred Merchants, whose Names I sent him, to
lend him every one of them Two thousand, to buy what should be necessary, that
the People feeling no more want, might be pacified; and that I might cause the
deaths of those that had designed against my life, who were most capable of
giving him trrouble, as the Correspondents of Gennaro; I sent him the names of
about five and thirty, with assurance that if he caused them to be hanged, he
needed not fear any Commotion in the Town. This was put in execution in all
points, and I had the satisfaction to see him revenge me on those I had not
time to punish my self. A few days after, with a great deal of joy I heard
news of the execution of Gennaro and all his Confederates. As for Onoffrio
Pissacani, Carlo Longobardo, and Cicio Battimiello, who always served me
faithfully, I sent him word he might confide in them, that I would be
responsible for them with my head, that they should advertise him of all that
passed in the Town, discover foreign Correspondencies, facilitate his
disarming the people, and keeping all quiet; and that I might lay an obligation
upon them to do this, I writ to them that having passed my word for them, they
ought most exactly to make good what I had promised, which otherwise my head
must answer, and that doing so they had nothing to fear. In such a manner I
ruined my enemies, and preserved three persons that were very dear to me: and
the Viceroy having made use of my counsel to his advantage, persuaded himself
that I was very faithful to Spain, and my preservation necessary to him; but
his pride and the absolute submission he required to all his humors quickly
embroiled us.

They sent me from Rome Cloths, Linen, and other Necessaries, with Two
thousand Crowns in money for my present occasions. He ordered my Guards should
first be paid out of this sum, which Don Alvaro de la Torre so punctually
executed, that he took for himself and his Officers a Quarters Pay by advance,
with the charge of the reparations that had been made in the Castle of Gaeta,
to accommodate his Lodging and mine. He ordered Household Stuff to be made for
me, and so entirely consumed this sum, that more must needs be sent for for
me to live upon. I told him that no prisoners ever paid for their Guards in
France, neither would I, which I might be blamed for, as giving an example of
ill consequence: that the French and Spanish Ambassadors at Rome might regulate
this difficulty, to whom I would submit; and that in the mean time he ought to
treat me well, because he had money enough in his hands to do it. He told me
there was nothing left, the pay of my Guards having been deducted, which must
ever be done in the first place from what money soever I should receive. I
assured him that till this controversy were decided, I would give notice that
no more money should be sent me, but what was absolutely necessary to keep me.

Two days after, having received Letters from the Viceroy, he told me that
point was to be no more contested, nor referred to any; that the Earl of Ognate
would be obeyed, and give no other reason for what he did than his will to have
it so; I replied he was not Master of my will, nor could dispose of it, though
my person were in his power; and that since it came to a Contest which of us
two should be most obstinate, I would yield in nothing, resolved to preserve
the only liberty that remained to me, which was that of my will. This laid me
liable to a great deal of ill usage; they refused to deliver me the Clothes and
Linen that had been sent me, and for the space of three months I was all in
rags, wearing the Boots I had been taken in for want of shoes, eating nothing
but Bread and a little fresh Pork (and not my Belly full of that) unless on
Fasting-dayes, when (Fish costing nothing) we made a little better cheer,
supposing they should overcome me by this bad usage: but thinking my self
concerned in honor to suffer it patiently, I made Don Alvaro mad to see my
contempt of this, telling him that instead of dis obliging, he did me the
greatest pleasure in the world, by giving me a trial whether I were as able to
endure the famine of a Siege as I thought I was to resist the attacques of it.

His spite against me was augmented by a very pleasant adventure. The Great
Duke sending a Gentleman to complement Don John of Austria and the Earl of
Ognate, on their happy recovery of the City of Naples, writ to me also on
occasion of my misfortune, and fearing it might give some alteration to my
health, sent me a Cabinet of Medicaments of his own Laboratory. Don Alvaro de
la Torre had Order to deliver me both these, and receive my answer in token of
it. As soon as he understood that Gentleman was gone from Naples, in order to
his return for Florence, he sent Captain Francisco d' Herrera to me one
morning, to demand to have the Cabinet in his custody, of which I might keep
the Key. I answered I would send for it after Dinner to give it him, and doing
so, I told him, I see Sir that you are afraid there may be something in this
Cabinet to poison my Guards, or cast them into a sleep, or to mollify the Iron
Bars of the Windows: I assure you it contains nothing but defensive arms, and
if you had any suspicion, it had been handsomer never to have delivered it me,
than to demand it again after seven or eight days; but I will satisfy you, as
it is reasonable I should, and opening it before him, having read all the
superscriptions of the Viols and little Pots, that were in it, broke as many of
them, one after another, as were for Wounds, Cholick, Ill Stomach, Burnings,
and the like, but finding an Oil and Powder that were good against Poison,
smiling told him this may be useful to me, therefore be pleased that I may keep
it; neither shall you have it but by force; which when you go about to make use
of for taking it from me, I will call for a Confessor: This discourse surprised
him, and he asked me if I thought the Spaniards capable of such actions? I very
calmly answered him yes and of worse, which is much against their will that
they have not made me sensible of to my cost, but my good fortune secured me.
He replied in heat, If the King my Master had any intention to take away your
life, he needed not have recourse to such a manner of doing it, for if he
commanded me, I would poniard you. Then looking on him with contempt, I told
him, Your Nation respects too much appearances, to act so public violences,
and do not think that I either fear or esteem you the more for what you have
told me, you have only let me know that you are fit to do that which the
Hangman does commonly. He went enraged out of my Chamber, to write a Letter of
much complaint, to which he received no other answer but that he was to blame,
and that he ought to have more discretion than to say any thing that might
provoke a displeasing answer.

We had another quarrel five or six days after, something hotter than the
former. Having been bred Page to the Duke of Medina de los Torres, he could not
imagine that under Kings there was any thing in Europe equal to his Master, and
told me very unseasonably, that he could not comprehend what it was to be a
Prince, which well considered was but a Chimera and mere imagination; and that
the Grandees of Spain were at least equal to Princes. I told him I pitied his
ignorance, and therefore would instruct him, that I thought he was not so ill
informed but he knew what it was to be a Sovereign: that to be a Prince it was
not enough to be descended of a Sovereign Family, and from a Sovereign Head,
but there must be a capacity to inherit a Sovereignty: that there was a great
deal of difference between Princes and Grande's of Spain, because Kings could
not make Princes but in Bed, and that for making a Grandee of Spain, there
needed no more but to cause the meanest fellow in the World to put on his Hat:
that therefore they gave their Infanta's to Princes, which they never did yet
to any Grandee. He transported himself too far on this Subject, and perceiving
him begin to talk very impertinently, I told him, that the misfortune of a
prisoner of my quality was great enough, without the augmentation of
disrespect, which I desired he would not continue, least he made me forget that
I was a prisoner, and be more sensible that I was a Prince: and that to what
condition soever I might be reduced, I could very well cause that to be
rendered me that belonged to me. He making an insolent reply, I struck at his
head with the Candlestick, which I had broken, had he not had the luck to have
ducked betimes. He made haste out of my Chamber, and drawing the door after
him, locked me in. He saw me not in two days, in which time he waited for the
Viceroy's answer to his complaints, which was not very satisfactory to him,
because he was commanded to come and ask my pardon, which he did putting one
knee on the ground as I went to Mass two days after. I embraced him with
assurance that I had forgotten all that had passed, and very willingly pardoned
him, provided he would be more discreet for the future.

I could never pass over five or six days without some such encounters either
with him or his Officers, whose humor when I had discovered, I resolved to
suffer nothing from them, but on the contrary to hold them in a great
subjection. The Spanish Genius being always insolent to those that live
civilly with them, and fawning to such as use them with contempt.

I will not repeat all Negotiations that passed during the time of my
imprisonment, not designing to extend my Memoires so far; I shall only relate
some more than ordinary adventures that happened, for my particular
satisfaction, and to publish my usage and the impertinence of my Keepers, with
the manner also of my dealing with them. Three or four months after, a man
called Harpin was sent by my relations to visit me, he was admitted, and
brought me Three hundred Crowns for three Months Diet, I not permitting any
more to be sent me, because my Guards would have it, to whom I had no
obligation, they not allowing me so much as liberty to walk on the Terrasses of
the Castle, and instead of diverting gave me still the inconvenience
(notwithstanding I was locked up) to be maliciously looked upon by three or
four ill-favored and very uncivil fellows. After Harpin had made me the
complements he had been encharged with, Don Alvaro very hungrily asked him what
money he had brought? He answered only Three hundred Crowns for three Months
Diet, the King not consenting that I should pay my Guards. Don Alvaro replied
he would take that sum upon account for himself and them. I forbid the
Messenger to part with it, and commanded him to return and carry it back with
him. I had forgotten to tell how, (that I might be no more seen in such
disorder as formerly) they had delivered me the Clothes that had been sent me
from Rome three Months before. Don Alvaro enraged to find nothing to content
his insatiable avarice, turning toward Captain Ambrosio Fernandez, that had
the oversight of my provisions, told him, to morrow let there not be so much as
a loaf of bread for the Duke of Guise. I said, His Nation would lose too much
by the death of a prisoner of my consideration, and that I was sure he would
not refuse me ammunition bread, which was allowed to the meanest soldier in the
Garrison of Gaeta. He replied, He had no Order for it, and I, That I resolved
to try whether he would starve me. Harpin having taken leave greediness of the
little money he had brought, obliged Don Alvaro de la Torre to send Captain
Ambrosio Fernandez after him, to demand the Three hundred Crowns in my name,
telling him I had changed my mind for fear of dying for hunger; which he
himself acquainting me with, I ranted him for having made use of my name
contrary to my intention, and he replying insolently that I used him very ill
for a Reformado Captain, laying my hand on the guard of my Sword, which they
had not taken from me, I went up to him threatening to make him leap the window,
which caused him to make haste to the door, in some days after never daring to
appear before me. I desired leave to pawn my Clothes for Victuals, which was
permitted, and I did it, even to Silk-stockings, pieces of Ribbon, perfumed
Gloves, and Hat-bands, which I fed on almost three months; after which writing
to Rome to have my Clothes redeemed, it was done conditionally, that I should
pawn them no more.

In the mean time the Prince of Cellimare, to whom I had Order to address my
self in my concernments, writ to me to oblige me to submit to the Viceroy,
after which he assured me I should be better treated, and allowed more liberty.
My answer consisted in tart railleries, to enrage them against me. He sent me
every week from Naples Lemmons and Sugar, with which I made Lemonade, with
Cheese, and very good Wine which I kept in my Closet. Once he sent me six
Capons and as many Gammons of Bacon, on which I feasted as long as they would
last: besides which, in what indisposition soever I found my self, I could not
obtain so much as a mess of Broth: and he was sent to to make me no more such
presents. Donna Elvira wife to the Lieutenant of the Castle, that had some
kindness for me, and was touched with compassion to see me so ill treated,
furnished me with Wheat, of which my Servants made me passable bread, and now
and then sent me Chocolate and some dish of meat that she prepared very
deliciously, but this was not suffered long.

There were not above thirty men in Garrison in the Castle of Gaeta, some of
which were Portugueses: this caused me to resolve to endeavor to gain them,
and try whether I could make my self Master of it. I wrought so cunningly and
with such success, that, notwithstanding the strickt Guards that were upon me,
I made sure of nine soldiers, the most of them Portugueses, of two Sergeants of
my Guard, and two other of the Garrison, which joining with us five Frenchmen,
made in all eighteen persons; my design was when we went to execute our
enterprise, to set at liberty five or six Neapolitan prisoners, and at the
return of the French Fleet, which was a third time expected, send one of those
Sergeants (which often passed between Gaeta and Naples to carry Letters) to
give notice to him that commanded, that he should sail right for Gaeta, where I
had so well prepared all things, that nothing could prevent my making my self
Master of the Castle, by cutting the throats of all the Garrison. I intended to
begin with the four Officers that lay in my Chamber, whom the Knight of Essars,
my man and I were to kill in the night while they slept, having provided rasors
to that effect. But having waited two months for this without any news, the
Sergeant I most trusted, and that had liberty of going to Naples, apprehending
that the business would be at last discovered, desired his Pass and became a
Capuchin.

This design so well laid, and which I thought infallible, failed in this
manner, after having been carried on with so much fidelity and secrecy, that
there was no discovery, nor the least suspicion of it: which makes appear that
noting is impossible to resolution and courage; and that Prisons enlarge men's
inventions, and cause them to undertake such things as they could never once
imagine if they were at liberty.

My servants troubled to see me fare so ill, could not forbear murmuring; and
Don Alvaro that treated himself very well in his Chamber, and came afterward
for form's sake to eat with me, one day at dinner complained of it, and asked
if it were by my Order that my men said it was impossible that it should be by
command of the King of Spain, or consent of the Earl of Ognate, but that
probably it was himself that obliged me to those Fasts, that he might keep the
money appointed for my Table. I answered him that persons of quality would
never value the discourse of servants, and that mine were more excusable, if
the irksomness of the prison made them utter some impertinences, he knowing I
conversed not with them, and therefore could not be responsible for their
words. I prayed him to speak no more of it, because not worth the while: but
persisting to repeat over and over the same thing, and earnestly demanding of
me what I thought of it, I answered, that he pressed me too much, and compelled
me to tell him, that the imprudence of servants sometimes published that which
their Masters with a great deal of reason thought, though their discretion
obliged them to conceal it. He went out of my Chamber very dissatisfied, and
returning an hour after acompanied by Don Martin de Verrio, a Colonel and
Governor of the City of Gaeta, with two Captains of the Garrison, told me he
had brought them to be witnesses of the explanation he would make me of our
late discourse. I replied, that neither my quality nor humor could receive it,
and that it was very unhandsome for him (the condition I was in considered) to
have such a thought. My honor (said he) is concerned, and therefore I desire
(in presence of these Gentlemen) to hear your opinion of me. I have too good a
one, said I, of the Viceroy, to attribute to him the ill usage I receive, and I
believe (as it is probable) that he has appointed all things necessary to my
service (in such manner as belongs to a prisoner of my quality) the failings of
which must needs proceed from you, by diverting the allowance to your own
particular profit. Incensed by my reply, he hastily told me that he was a poor
soldier, but did all things with honor. I believe, said I, that you are poor,
since you comport your self like a man that would very fain become rich; but
for soldier, God having forbidden us to judge rashly, and never having seen you
on service, it is not fit that I say any thing. He cried out, you attacque my
honor, but if you were in another condition, I would let you see I want neither
that nor courage. You use me so ill, replied I, that I will have nothing to do
with you, for you make me lose all consideration: but if you have such courage
and honor as you would have us believe, persist, and put me in a condition to
give you satisfaction, and then I shall learn, either at your cost or mine own,
what opinion I ought to have of you. He grew mad with choler and vented a
thousand impertinences. Don Martin de Verrio, a very discreet and gallant
person, told him, he fondly brought trouble upon himself by his imprudence, and
that the Viceroy would not approve his insolence and loss of respect to me on
all occasions. I besought him to be a witness of what had passed, and to
consider whether it must not of necessity be very insupportable, besides the
rigors of a Prison, to be every day liable to such extravagancies; afterward
they took leave, and Don Alvaro's passion was so high, that he saw me no more
in two days, which I could very well have excused; not thinking it any loss to
have been deprived of his entertainment: but then Don Martin de Verrio bringing
him to me as I went to Mass, he cast himself on his knees to beg my pardon,
according to the Order he had received from the Earl of Ognate, beseeching me
to forget his imprudence and want of respect, which I promised, provided he
would afterward be more discreet.

Four or five days after he came to me to ask my counsel, whether he should
not wrong himself, by accepting the command of the Viceroy's Company of
Gendarmes, made up of Reformado Officers, the greatest part of them Captains of
Horse. I seriously told him he should do himself a very great injury, and that
it was too much below him; that I might not prevent him from breaking his neck,
as I saw he went about to do. He held himself to be obliged by my counsel,
which very much pleased him, because it suited with his own opinion, and
thanking the Earl of Ognate for the honor he pretended to do him, besought him
to have the goodness to allow him time to advise with his friends, whether he
could with his honor, and without prejudice to his reputation accept it: but
if he pleased to bestow upon him the Government of Reggio he should like it
much better: that in the mean time he should highly oblige him by giving him
leave to go to Rome to confer with his Brother, who was Spanish Agent in that
Court. By this answer he perfectly lost the Viceroy, who sent him word he had
done him more honor than he deserved, having preferred him to persons much
more considerable than himself; that he would see to make a better choice: that
the Government of Reggio being already given, it was to no purpose for him to
pretend to it, nor to any other favor that depended on him: that he should do
very well to go and visit his Brother, of whose instructions he had a great
deal of need, to make him more wise and considerate for the future.

Whilst he was on his journey, Order being come from Spain to send me thither,
the Viceroy caused the Galley of John Andrea Brignolle, the best of the Duke of
Tursi's Squadron to be made ready, sending the Prince de Cellimare Deacon of
the Council to give all Orders necessary for my embarking, with all possible
civility and honor, as had been expressly commanded by the King of Spain's
dispatch, signifying his desire to see and confer with me about the Proposals I
had made, which had been sent him. He caused him to be accompanied by a
Secretary of his a Burgundian, called Don Edward de Francalmont, whom I had
formerly known in Flanders, who made me a great complement in his name,
excusing himself of all the ill usage I had received, which could not be
dispensed withal, because I was in a Kingdom whose rebellion I had a long time
supported, and where authority and obedience were not altogether settled: but
had I been any where else he should have dealt with me in a very different
manner, and by his care to serve and oblige me, have made it appear how great
consideration he had for a person of my merit and quality. I answered these
civilities with all imaginable acknowledgments. He told me afterward that his
Master had a great esteem and friendship for me in Rome, though he looked upon
me at that time as the most dangerous enemy of the Monarchy of Spain, which
obliged him by the rules of policy to seek my ruin by all ways:
notwithstanding which he had taken care of my preservation, in several times
refusing the offers had been made to attempt my life by sword and poison.

Having at that instant about me wherewithal to prove the contrary, so vain a
dissimulation offended me, and I answered him that I was very much obliged to
the Earl of Ognate for his good inclinations toward me, to have refused to
take my life that had been so often offered him: but that as several hours of
the day bring several changes upon us, he had perhaps forgotten that he caused
a promise of Six thousand Crowns to be given to Cicio de Regina, and a
Commission for a Troop of Horse (which I showed him) to have killed me the
Twenty fifth of March in the Church of the Annunciata, which I learned by the
Confession he made on the Rack, and confirmed at his death: that I had no
prejudice for him on account of it, it being just that he should serve the King
his Master; and the condition into which I had reduced his affairs considered,
I could not blame him to have recourse to all manner of means for ridding
himself of me; but yet I could not choose but tell him that I should have
thought my self much more obliged if I had found greater sincerity in his
civilities, and that they had not been carried on to so great an excess, that I
had unfortunately in my hands wherewithal to contradict them. Francalmonte
desired me to give him the two Papers I had shown him, that he might burn them,
and eternally destroy their memory: but I replied, that were to do his Master
ill service, for I intended to show them to the King of Spain, to make appear
to him that he had a Viceroy in Naples that omitted nothing to do him service,
and settle his Throne, that had been so long time tottering.

The Prince of Cellimare spoke of nothing to me but the good usage and caresses
I should receive in Spain; where I was expected with great impatience: that I
should not be long without my liberty, because my credit, courage, and
resentments were very much depended on, the present disorders of France
considered: that I should have all necessary assistance to drive them to the
uttermost extremity; and that Spain hoped great advantages from her confidence
in me; where I should also find my establishment and fortune. After this he
told me he was sorry to acquaint me with the imprisonment of some Gentlemen of
my friends, whom he named to me, that were in danger of their lives, for their
too near correspondencies with me, of which if I pleased I could give him a
more particular account. I answered him discontentedly, If the Viceroy be
curious to enquire into the intrigues between me and the Nobility, Caesar
Blanco, Achilles Minutulo, and you Sir can inform him, because you were the
Mediators of them, and you very well know that I had promised all three of you
the preservation of your Estates and Employments. He was surprised with fear,
conjuring me not to ruin him, and above all not to mention in Spain what had
passed. I told him you do not take the way to prevent me, you move me against
my friends, insult over my misfortune, and your self and two Camerades being of
the Collateral Council, voted the cutting off my head, hoping by my death to
prevent the discovery of the Negotiations with me. My life, God be thanked, is
safe in despite of you. I go into Spain, where they will entirely confide in
me, and believe a^ I shall report of what is passed: I can reve^ (...) my self
and undo you, but I am too gener^ (...) go about it: quiet you thoughts, you
ar^ (...) if you have no othet harm to fear than that which I can do you: but
on the other side I expect, dealing so well with you, that you shall employ
what credit you have, to free from trouble all such as you know had any
kindness for me, without which you are to apprehend my revenge and just
resentments. We promised one another what was desired on either side, and he
became secured against the apprehensions I had taken pleasure so long to hold
him in.

Don Alvaro de la Torre, hearing that I was to be transported into Spain, made
haste from Rome, that he might have the conduct of me, expecting some great
reward before his return, which the Prince of Cellamare having acquainted me
with, I told him that though my joy was great to begin a Voyage that probably
might restore me to liberty, I would not go (unless compelled to it) with a man
that had dealt so ill with me; and that they must carry me bound into the
Galley, or I should never embark. He answered, If that person were disagreeable
to me, another should be appointed, because they resolved to give me all manner
of satisfaction: they therefore chose in his stead Don Antonio de Areazano, who
shortly after obtained the government of Gaeta, vacant by the death of the
Prince of Ascoli. Dom Alva^^ la Torre, who by his ill comportment had ^ed
himself both with me and the Viceroy, (...) in very great confusion, augmented
by my refusing him to take leave or come in my presence at my going away. He
was absolutely lost, and had nothing to pretend, when Don John de Morgareio
Lieutenant of Castello Novo in Naples, died happily for him, and the Duke of
Medina do los Torres his Master, who is perpetual Governor of it, made him
Lieutenant.

I drew this advantage from my imprisonment, that I made it apparent to all
Christendom (what opinion soever had passed to the contrary) that my credit and
particular considesideration only maintained all in arms in the Kingdom of
Naples; for at the news of the taking the Town by the Spaniards none were
discouraged, but as soon as ever they heard of my restraint, they laid down
their arms, in testimony that my interests alone and not the public hatred
kept alive the war: and as soon as I was out of condition to act, they all
returned to their fetters, without any thought of delivering themselves, but
under my command and authority.

As I went out of the Castle of Gaeta I was showed the Body of Charles of
Burbon, which stands upright in a Press over against the Chapel, leaning on a
Generals Truncheon, his Hat on his Head and booted, with a Coat of Green Velvet
laced with Gold: It is very little decayed, all the features of (...) Face are
still remarkable, his mien is fier^ and such as might become a Person of so
great merit and undaunted courage.

The Galley being ready and the wind favorable, I embarked about the end of
May, with the consolation to see the affection of all the people of the Kingdom
of Naples, justified by that which they of Gaeta made appear (what care soever
was taken to keep the knowledge of it from me) and the Galley having weighed,
we launched out into the Main (all the Cannon both of the Town and Castle
firing) to make for Spain, where I hope for an end of my misfortunes in my
liberty.

The End of the Fifth and last Book.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 16. for devotion r. disposal. p. 44. line 14. read in the School:
p. 46. l. 30. leave out having. p. 50. l. 15. leave out, and, r. One day. p.
75. l. 14. for apprehending, r. conceiving. p. 112. l. 32 for men r. mien. p.
121. l. 11. r. carried. p. 156. l. 15. r. imprudently. p. 175. l. 27. r. three
Captains with the Sergeant Major of the p. 240. l. 11. leave out having p. 280.
l. ult. r. Ot^i^es or wards of; p. 284. l. 28. r. came. p. 348. l. 7. r. their.
p. 354. l. 17. r. gave. p. 404. l. 10. r. must. p. 464. l. 7. r. thrice. p 475.
l. 4. in stead of department r. Division of Montefuscolo. p. 501. l. 6. r.
affairs* p. 517. l. 30. r. contusion. p. 553. l. 19. r. discouraged.

Some other over-sights which wrong the Style more then Sense are recommended
to the Readers courtesy.


