SOME REFLECTIONS ON A Pamphlet, ENTITLED, England and East India Inconsistent
in Their Manufactures.

LONDON, Printed Anno MDCXCVI.

SOME REFLECTIONS ON A Pamphlet, ENTITLED, England and East India Inconsistent
in Their Manufactures.
IT would require more time than I have at present to spare in Writing, and I
fear, more than the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled can now well
spare, in deliberately Reading and Considering all that might be said on this
Subject, and particularly in Replying to what has been Answered to a Treatise,
Entitled, An Essay on the East India Trade; and the Author thereof, though no
Trader, has written on the Point, with so much solid Judgment, that he is well
able to defend it, if he thinks any thing considerable that is offered against
what he has laid down. My Business at present shall be only to take notice of
what seems to carry any weight in the last Answer to the Essay. In a former,
Entitled, An Answer to a late Tract, Entitled, An Essay, etc. the Author
ingenuously confesses, in his Address to the Clothiers and Weavers, That he has
not strength of Judgment to manage Controversies; which he has in his Answer
fully enough proved, though, I think, he gives but little Proof for the Cause he
has undertaken; and almost his whole Book consists of Quotations out of the
Essay, and offers of overthrowing the Computations made in the Essay, which he
entirely mistakes. So that upon the whole, that Answer has little in it, as
they who will take the trouble of sedately Reading and Comparing one with the
other will find. The last Answer is more regular, and looks more plausible, but
being Examined will not, I think, with submission, appear to carry any great
weight, and will be found to contain many Mistakes.

The Author asserts, That it has been said formerly by the Advocates for the
East India Trade, That their Manufactures and Toys were not spent in England,
but Transported to Foreign Markets, and thereby occasioned the Importation of
more Bullion than ever was Exported; and that therefore that Trade was no
damage to England; but that the Truth is now owned, That half of the said Goods
are consumed at Home, which, he says, was formerly denied. But he ought to
have given more Proof thereof then only saying so, before he had grounded such
an insinuation thereon; as if what is said in Defense of the East India Trade
needed to be supported with Falsities. For my part, I believe there has been no
other Argument made use of in its behalf, but what was then, and is still true,
That the East India Trade is the means of bringing much more Bullion into
England than it carries out; which I shall endeavor to prove. And I must deny
what he asserts also in the beginning, That the India Manufactured Goods do
hinder the Consumption of what are Fabrickt by our own People to that degree,
or in that sense, which he suggests. But with the Author I do agree, That the
Landed Men are more concerned in this Contest than the Weavers: For if the
Proposed Prohibition pass it will only enrich a few Master Silk Weavers, and
their Factors, and at the same time take away the Means of Increasing the Stock
of the Nation, which alone can raise the Value of the Lands of England. I go on
therefore to consider the East India Trade.

The Author of the Answer, pa 4. finds fault with the Computation of our
Exports to India, and the Profit upon the Returns, and offers another Account,
which I conceive very Erroneous, at least it is far from warranting the
Conclusion he draws, That this Trade has exhausted 400000 l. per Annum of our
Treasure, pa. 6. which shall be examined presently; in the mean time, I can by
no means agree with him, That nothing is the Treasure of a Nation but Gold and
Silver. The Treasure of a Nation not only consists in Money, but in Moneys
worth. Silver and Gold serve as the measure of other Commodities, and is
valuable only in proportion to them. Jewels, Lead, Tin, Iron, Silks, Woollen
Goods, Shipping, etc. ought to be Valued according to their worth; that is,
what they would yield in Money; and all go to make up the Riches and Stock of a
Nation. The Nation that has in it Five Millions of Pounds Sterling Silver, and
Ten Millions worth of any Goods or Commodities whatsoever one Year, and the
next Year shall have Eight Millions of Money, and but Four Millions worth of
Goods, is poorer the last Year than the former, by Three Millions. If it were
as the Answerer says, That Goods are not the Riches of a Nation, till by
Exportation to Foreign Countries they are converted into Gold and Silver. No
more then is Money Riches; for you are not sure you shall purchase with that
whatever you have occasion for. There is no other use of Riches but to purchase
what serves our Necessity and Delight, or to enable us to preserve our
Possessions when they are gotten; and some Goods are more acceptable in some
Countries, at some times, than Money, and therefore are as well adapted to
answer the aforesaid ends, though as the Author says, they are not so convenient
for Trade; and whether they are perishable or not, their Value is according to
what they will yield in Money.

I think it does not concern the Truth of the Proposition, That the East India
Trade is Beneficial to the Nation, (though as to the quantum it may) whether
the Computation in the Essay be exact or no, nor to examine the Grounds of the
Answerers Account; though, by the way, I must note, that the last Answerer, pa.
7. as well as the former, pa 14. quite mistakes, in saying the Essay asserts,
That the Nation did increase in Riches from Anno 1656 to Anno 1688, Two
Millions per Annum; and upon that Mistake both seem to triumph: But if they had
perused the said Treatise more carefully, they would have found, that the
Author of the Essay only says, That he believes from about Anno 1656 to Anno
1688, this Nation has every Year gradually increased in Riches: And that about
Anno 1688, the increase and addition to the Wealth and general Stock of
England, arising from Foreign Trade and Home Manufactures, was at least Two
Millions Yearly: Which intimates only that about that time there was such an
Increase, and not Yearly from Anno 1656. So that all the Answerer says, on
that Mistaken Head, falls to the Ground.

I shall therefore leave both the Accounts, because I think the certainty of
the Sum does not so much concern the Point in question, as the Proportion; and
I will take the Matter both ways: First, Suppose that One Thousand Pounds be
sent out to India to part in Goods, it will be allowed me on all hands, that
the Value of about Four Thousand Pounds, that is, Four for One more or less,
shall be Returned in Indian Silks, etc. If all these should be spent at Home,
yet is not the Thousand Pounds lost to England, because the said Commodities
serve in the room, either of others that are much dearer made at Home, and must
else have been used in their stead, or of others from European Countries, which
also come much dearer: So that here is Three Fourth Parts Additional Return,
out of which the Shipping, and Provision, and Furniture, and Seamens Wages, and
others employed therein, the Customs and Overplus is a clear Advantage to the
Nation. But to this the Answerer, and others, who plead for the Prohibition,
say, What Foreign Commodities are spent in the Nation, add nothing to its
Stock: And at the same time acknowledge, That what is spent at Home of our
Manufacture adds nothing neither to the Nations Stock; which is true: Only say
they, By wearing your own Manufacture you employ your own People. But if the
Case be, as is owned by all, that we want People for our Work; and not Work for
our People, then the bringing in Foreign Manufactures at half the Price we can
make them here at Home, whilst at the same time we can find Employment for our
People, we by that Means save so much Money. This I take to be very clear. And
the only Question is then, What other Employment we have for our People? And
the Answerer says in pa. 24. and again in pa. 31. that it should have been
told: Whereas the Essay, page 36, 37. does give sufficient Hints, to which I
shall add, That we want Seamen, we want Hands in the West Indies, we want
Husbandmen, we want many more Hands in the Woollen Manufacture that it might be
wrought Cheaper, and carried on to such a degree as it is capable to be
improved; and the Linen Manufacture which the Answerer thinks may do well here
in time will employ more hands; not to mention the Fishery and other things.

That there are many Weavers now that want work, I believe, and so there is of
many other Trades: This tedious War falls heavier upon some than others, and
when Persons enter into a Trade they must be content to take their Fortune in
it. Some thrive most in time of Peace, and some in time of War. But what was it
increased the number of Weavers so much? Was it not a good Trade which they had
even at the time when East India Goods came in in greatest plenty, and were
sold at half the Price they now are, as the Answerer also owns page 33. and did
not the Trade visibly fall off last Summer, when there was the greatest
Scarcity of East India Goods that has been known for many Years? The Seamen who
have increased in their numbers this War time, when it is over, may as well
Mutiny if Goods and Passengers are permitted to come and go by Land Carriage,
and not by Sea; or that one fourth part of their number in English Ships are by
the Act of Navigation allowed to be Foreigners, because they are now become
Seamen, and when Peace comes there may not be employment for them all, and some
must starve, or turn their Hands to something else, but this complaint I
believe would not be countenanced, and it seems as unreasonable now upon the
complaint and uneasiness of the Weavers to Ruin a great number of People whose
livelihood depends not only on the fetching and vending these India Goods, but
in the further Manufacturing them here at home for their sake and advantage
whose present want of Work, is apparently not occasioned by the late coming in
of India Goods, but by the dearness of Silk, the alteration of the Coin, and
Calamities of the War, and the Distress brought upon a great many Families by
it. This as to what East India Goods are spent at Home.

Then as to the Computation of what East India Goods are Exported to Foreign
Markets, whether it be one half or no is not much material: All Merchants know
that a considerable quantity goes abroad, and even to France it self, though
they, as we, do not openly permit them to be brought in by any other Nation
than their own. In this Case then, if only one quarter part goes abroad, that
being the prime cost in India upon the aforementioned supposition; the other
three fourths remaining to be spent in England is clear gains to the Nation,
and the hands that would have been employed to make such things as are supplied
by the East India Goods, by that means are or might be used in other Work,
which turns to the Profit of the Nation.

The Answerer says, page 9. That it does not appear that 200000 l. worth per
annum of East India Goods were ever Exported to Spain, or any Country from
whence we usually Import Bullion; and thereby seems to insinuate as if it were
not the same thing whether we send them to Spain from whence Bullion comes, or
to Holland or France from whence it comes more seldom: But surely he
understands that our general balance of Trade and the Profit made by it, is to
be made as the general Balance of a Private Trader. If by the Course of our
Trade to Holland, we take more Goods than we send, and so want Money there, we
must send the balance from hence in Specie, or have it remitted thither from
Spain or some other parts where we have Effects. So that if upon the general
Trade of England to all Parts, we Export a greater value then we Import, the
rest comes in in Bullion; and on the contrary, if our Imports exceed our
Exports, the balance must be sent out in Money. So that let our East India
Goods be sent to what place soever, their produce will be answered to us in
Money at long run, if our other Trades do not require that Money abroad; for
all Goods now in all parts of Europe are sold for Money. And if I send
East India Goods to Holland, I receive Money for them, and may bring it over if
I will; but if others upon their Trade for Goods from thence, or the King for
payment of the Army, want the Money there, I deliver it to them, and receive it
here; and to this purpose serves the Exchange. I think what has been said,
clearly removes the Objections page 9, 10.

The Answerers, I think, both mistake the Essay as to the Profit made by the
East India Trade, which they seem to take as meant so much Profit to the
Company, whereas it is plain it is intended so much advance to the Nation; as
in the said Essay, page 52. it is expressed, That into that advance comes in
the King for his Customs, Owners of Ships, such as got by Victualling them,
Seamen for Wages, and lastly Factors and Servants both Abroad and at Home. And
so distinguishes between the Gain made by the Company, and the increase to the
Nation. So that all the Answerers Observations drawn from thence are to no
purpose.

The Answerers and Favorers of this Prohibition make a great cry, as if the
Woollen Manufacture is prejudiced by these Goods; whereas the Woollen
Manufacture has great advantage by it on sundry Accounts.

1. A great quantity of Woollen Manufacture, and our Native Product, is
Exported to the East Indies; and at China, which is a cold Country, they like
our Woollen Goods, and the Expense thereof is like greatly to increase, if we
our selves be not the hinderance.

2. It keeps the Workers of Wool to their own Employment, which they would
else in probability leave, and turn to the Silk-Weaving Trade as some have done.

3. The Freedom of Trade here causes People to Flock into England, whereby the
Expense of our own Product and Manufacture is increased: Our Wool needs not
Fall to nothing as the Answerer says, Page 17. to keep on our Woollen
Manufactury, but Wool may bear a good Price, if the working it up be Cheap as
it ought to be, and as every one agrees, and as the Committee of Trade in their
answer to the Honorable House of Commons have very well observed, and then
there is no fear of loosing our Woollen Manufactury, but I am afraid that will
not be the way to have Wool wrought up cheap to employ the Hands that should
do it, in other Manufactures, and it is a sign we want people and not work,
since the price of Labor and Servants Wages is no where in Europe so dear as
in England.

The Answerer by what he said, page 17. about Wool led me to that head before
it came regularly on according to the Answerers Order and Method, but this was
not designed a full, exact, and methodical Discourse for the reasons mentioned
at the beginning. However I shall not need to repeat any thing, only shall
further add, That when those who are of Opinion with me say, That it is not the
Interest of the Landed Gentlemen that Wool should be dear; the Answerer, as
many others have done, mistook, when they suggest, that we do not think it most
for the advantage of land for Wool to be dear, if the expense would continue
as great and the Price keep up, but our meaning is that it is not the Interest
of Landed Men to raise their Wool for a Year or two to a High Price, whereby
the Expense would be lessened, because the Consequence would be* that then it
would fall much lower than before; and therefore all that is intended by not
desiring Wool to be dear is, that it is best to be kept at such a moderate
Price as may not discourage the Working it up; and that being Wrought up, it
might come so Cheap to Foreign Markets, that others might not under-sell us,
and so lessen its future Vent.

The Answerer is mistaken in his Assertion, pa. 21. That the generality of
Merchants will own that they have not got by Trading in Woollen Goods for these
Thirty Years past 6 per Cent. per Annum, the Insurance of Adventures paid: The
contrary whereof many Merchants know; and greater Profit might be made thereby,
if our Wool was Manufactured Cheaper: and the way to have that done, is not to
draw off our People from that Employment to other Manufactures: For, the Poor,
if Two Days work will maintain them, will not work Three: And our Manufactures
are never so well Wrought as in a time of dull Trade, when we pay less for
Workmanship, and yet the Poor live as well then as in time of greatest Plenty,
if they have but a full stroke of Work. And it is too true what an Advocate for
the Weavers ingenuously confessed before the Honorable House of Commons, That
in times of Plenty (which is when the Price of Work is high) they will spend
the more in Drinking, and thereby indeed increase the Kings Revenue, whatever
the other ill Consequences of it are.

The Answerer pa. 21. desires to know in what places we can consume more
Woollen Goods Abroad; and I must acquaint him that very often in Germany,
Holland, Portugal, Spain, Italy and Turkey, as well as in the West Indies, our
Woollen Goods are scarce, and therefore sold dear, and much more would vend if
they were upon the place, and yet more considerable quantities if we could
afford them Cheaper; which might be done by the Method the Author of the Essay
proposes, pa. 27. And whereas the Answerer says, pa. 21. That the Manufactures
of Wool are increased in Ireland, Holland, France, Germany, Spain, and
Portugal, and our Manufactured Goods become a Drugg beyond Sea. It is more than
probable that the taking off our People from the Woollen Manufactury to other
Manufactures, has been in a great measure the occasion of it. I confess I
wonder to find the Answerer call it a Project, to work up our Woollen
Manufactures Cheap, and to doubt whether that would increase their Expense
Abroad, to the lessening of that of other Nations. I wish there had been no
more uncertain Projects set on foot in Trade in this Kingdom, and then, I am
apt to think, our Trade would have been in a better condition. I think the
Project of Ruining immediately a great number of Tradesmen, and others, that
depend upon the East India Trade, and putting the Nation to 3 or 400000 l. per
Annum certain greater Expense then at present it is at, and running the hazard
of losing all, or the greatest part of our East India Trade, only to employ
People at Home in a Silk Manufactury that would be with more Profit to the
Nation employed in the Woollen Manufacture, is by far the more dangerous and
doubtful Project. The Instance which the Answerer brings, pa. 23. of a Country
Gentleman that has all Conveniences about his House of his own, and should
instead of using them for himself and Family, send his Money to Market to buy,
and then send his Products Abroad in hopes of making Money of them, though he
do not know of any Market or Buyer for them, will prove just the contrary of
what he intends it for, if it be rightly applied to our Case; for it is
certainly the Country Gentleman's Interest so to do, if he can buy at Market
what will serve himself and Family for half the Money for which he can sell his
own Products; which is plainly our Case: For we never want some Price or other
for our Product and Manufacture. And if we can sell them dearer to others then
we can in their room purchase other Necessaries, it is a clear Profit to us.

The Answerer does again, pa. 23, 24. as he often does beg the Question, when
he says, That we spend Indian Goods at Home that we may save our Woollen Goods
to have the more for Exportation. We say that the Indian Goods do very little
interfere with our Woollen Manufacture; and by the bringing in of Indian Goods
more of our Woollen Manufacture, which goes toward the Purchasing of them, is
consumed, then would be at Home in their stead: And the Answerer himself, pa.
25. acknowledges, that the Consumption of our English Cloth was never
understood to be much prejudiced by these Goods. And then again he takes up the
Mistake of very great Gain made by the East India Trade, taking it in another
sense then the Essay intends; and his Suppositions drawn from thence need not
therefore to be considered.

The Answerer, pa. 25. and elsewhere, seems angry, without Reason, that the
Dutch are quoted in this Controversy. Though they are our Allies, they alone are
our chief Competitors in the East India Trade: And if they never had done any
thing to supplant us in any part of our Trade, we should have the less Reason
to be jealous; but since their and our Interest in Trade is distinct, if not
opposite, I think he shows himself no great Friend to England that will not
calmly admit the English to argue on that Head; and it is so natural and
necessary a Consideration to the English in all Foreign Trade, that I wonder
any one should be frightened at the mention of it, as the Answerer seems to be,
pa. 25.

Upon the second Head, pa. 26, 27. the Answerer again mistakes the Essay, when
he says, Silks and Linen Manufactured in India are no more the genuine
Offspring of this Kingdom, than our Silks and Linen Manufactured at Home: For
I take that to be a Mistake in any one that writes, when by his Answer he
perverts the design and meaning of him he answers. The Essay did not, as it
seems plain to me, intend to oppose English Silks to Indian Silks, as if the
latter were more the genuine Offspring of this Nation than the former, as the
Answerer seems to take it; but he opposes English Silks and Linen to English
Woollen Manufacture, and thence argues, with great Reason, that the Woollen
Manufacture ought above, and before all other Manufactures to be encouraged.

How it can ruin young Gentlemen (as the Answerer alleges, pa. 28) to spend
Foreign Product that cost them but half the Price, rather than our own, which
costs at least double, I own is a Paradox to me; and I think there is nothing
of boldness in the attempt, to persuade the whole Nation to do the like, whilst
our own will find vent Abroad, and our People Employment enough at Home, as
they may certainly do

Pa. 28. and 29. Again he falls to arguing upon his old Mistake, of the Gains
of the East India Trade, being 300 per Cent. and asks why the Author of the
Essay does no propose the opening the East India Trade A Subject he was not
upon. I may as well ask, why the Answerer does not in his Discourse give
Arguments to oppose a General Naturalization, if he thinks our People want work.

What the Answerer says about the Linen Manufacture, pa. 30. I pass over,
because I would not lengthen out this Discourse; and cannot allow what he says
pa. 31. That the original or chief cause or means of Riches must be from the
Labor of our People. By which, without doubt, he means the Labor of the Hand;
for it is evident, that a People may grow Rich without much of such Labor. It
is the Product of the Earth, and the well and advantageous Management of Trade
in and to Foreign Parts that is a means and great means of enriching a Nation.
I confess if a Nation be well Peopled, employing the Poor in Manufactures
rather than to live in Idleness is an addition to the Riches of a Nation: for
what any one, or any number of Persons get more than they spend, adds so much
to the Stock and Riches of the Nation: And if 10000 People living in England
could get more at the Years end by driving a Trade from Holland to the
East-Country and back to Holland, then the same 10000 People could get by
Working, or Manufacture, it is more the Interest of the Nation, and a greater
increase to its Riches, that these People continue that Foreign Trade (whilst
their Gains come over to England, as it must do) then to employ them in
Manufactures. Nay, if they Trade only with Money, and the Dutch (if I may not
offend the Answerer with naming them) will find at the winding up their
Account, that the Money they have during this War sent over hither, and Lent
the Government, and otherwise, at excessive Interest, will bring a considerable
addition to the Riches of their State without the Exporting their Product for
it, or the Labor of their People.

What the Answerer argues under the Third Head, I think has not much in it,
only the continual cry of sending out Money to the East Indies; which is taken
notice of before; and he, or any other, that will take the pains but to make up
an Account in Figures (and not loosely in their Heads by speculation, which
causes many Mistakes) will find that 10000 l. sent out in Specie to the
East Indies, and Returned in Goods to the value of 40 or 50000 l. and those
Goods Exported, or but one quarter part of them (though much more of them are
sent out) and the rest used here at Home in the room of others to be Imported
from Abroad, or in the room of others made here in England, whilst our Hands
may be otherwise employed than in the Silk Manufactury, as certainly they may,
though our People were double. I say, they will find that this is a certain
Increase, even to the Money in Specie to the Nation. But it has been asserted
in Tracts concerning this matter, and the truth is as has been
beforementioned, that the Importation of these East India Silks for wear in
England, as well as for Exportation, has bettered the Trade of the
Silk-Weavers, by lowering the Price of Silk, and whetting their Industry and
Inventions, and on many other Accounts. But this, and many Arguments brought on
the side of those who are against a Prohibition, the contrary Party are pleased
to take no notice of.

The Answerer commends the frugality of the Dutch, and no doubt it is a
commendable thing, but where People grow Rich, they will spend more largely,
and it is better they should do so than to slacken their Industry and Diligence
in Trade. When the Dutch come once to enjoy their great Increase in a long
Peace, you will find them extravagant in one kind of Expense or another as well
as other Nations, but it would swell this beyond my intention to enlarge on
this Head, therefore I will only add, that in discoursing of this the Answerer
I think would have done well to have told what the Essay desires to know why
upon the same, and much stronger Reasons we don't prohibit Wine, Fruit, Spice,
etc. but indeed three quarter parts of the Essay and the Reasons there set down
are left unanswered, and therefore I shall not I hope be blamed in not Replying
particularly to every Passage in the Answer, though I think whatever is
material will have been Considered in what has been said before, and what will
be Subjoined before I end.

The Answerer again Page, 56, 57. again asserts what he should have proved,
that we send out 600000 l. per Annum in Bullion, and it has never yet been made
out that those Goods bring us back again in Bullion the Vallue of 200000 l. and
then Argues upon it; whereas all Traders in the Exportation of India Goods know
the Fact to be quite otherwise, and therefore not to swell this too much I
shall only add some Articles which the Opposers of this Prohibition offered to
the most Honorable House of Lords to prove upon Oath before them, and
distinguish between what part of them the Weavers Advocates in their Printed
Answer allowed, and what part they Contradicted, though the Persons Concerned
are yet ready to prove and make out the whole.

1. That near half the Woollen Manufacture sent to India, is vended at China,
Surrat, Fort St. George, and the Bay of Bengal, as well as at Persia, and is
used for Covering of Rooms, Tents, Covers for Camels, and abundance of other
uses, as well as Garments; And that the Indians like our Manufacture so well,
that the Vent thereof is Daily increasing, and the Goods proposed to be
Prohibited, are in great part the Product of the said Woollen Manufacture.

2. That the Value of One Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum, in Woollen
Manufacture, and other the product of England, has actually been Exported to
India.

3. That a great Quantity of Money is sent to Turkey to help off our Woollen
Manufacture, as well as to India.

4. That in Holland there are many more Looms going than in England, and
notwithstanding they have a Manufacture of their own much nearer to the Indian
than we, yet they not only Import these Goods from India themselves, but permit
them to be Imported into Holland from all other Parts.

5. That the Weavers in Holland, some Years since, Petitioned the States to
make such a Prohibition as is Proposed here: But upon a full Hearing of the
Matter, it was rejected.

6. That the French have mightily Courted the Trade from India, and Settled the
Company Trading thither, with great Advantages; and in France these Goods are
every where Publicly Sold and Worn: So that either there is no such Edict in
France, as is pretended, or it is Dispensed withal, or some New Edict has been
since emitted.

7. That the Weavers had a good Trade here in England, and increased in their
Numbers, whilst these East India Goods came over in greatest plenty, and when
they were sold at half the Prices they are now at; and there is at present a
Duty of 20 per Cent. upon them more than was then.

8. That it is not the Importation of these Goods which decays their Trade, if
it be Bad, but the Calamity of the War, Alteration of the Coin, and Scarcity of
Money, which equally affects other Trades. For that upon the Alteration of the
Coin, our Weavers Goods fell in their Prizes, and their Work fell off; whilst
at the same time East India Goods being scarce, grew dearer and dearer.

9. That at this present Time, at Norwich they begin to have a brisk Trade, and
their Goods are Risen 10 per Cent. lately, and in great Demand, notwithstanding
the Companies late Sale of Silks, which they Complain of.

10. That though Mercers bespeak Goods of the Weavers, the Weavers will not
make them, but keep their Men out of Work, that they may Clamor for this Bill.

11. That it is only the Silk-Weavers that are concerned in this Matter, and
not the Staple VVoollen-Manufactury, which this Bill will rather lessen and
obstruct than promote: So that the Clamor about the Woollen Manufacture is all
out of doors in this Case. For if this Bill pass, many Weavers of Wool would
turn to be Silk-Weavers, as some already have.

12. That the Weavers concerned in this Affair are nothing near so Numerous as
is pretended: And, That the Linnen-Drapers, and other Trades depending thereon,
who would be Hurt by this Prohibition, are as Numerous, as those who would
receive Benefit by it.

13. That the Indian Wrought Silks are very much Improved here by a further
Manufacturing; and great Numbers of our People Employed therein.

14. That the Poverty and Misery amongst the Weavers is very much
misrepresented; and that it is no greater, in proportion, with them, than
amongst other sort of poor Trading People.

15. That notwithstanding all, the Master Weavers have in few Years last past
got great Estates, and continue to Thrive well.

16. That if East India Silks are Prohibited, and not those from Holland,
France and Italy, and other Parts, We shall only Wear the latter in the room of
the former, to the far greater Expense of the Nation.

17. That if this Bill pass, these Goods will be made and imitated in Holland
so like, that it will be impossible (when Sold here) for the Drapers to prove
they are not East India Goods.

18. That great Quantities of these Goods are sold for Exportation to Cadiz,
Lisbon, the Canaries, Mader as, and other Foreign Parts, under the Value of 50
l.

19. That if this Bill pass for Prohibiting the Selling and Wearing Persian
Silks, it is probable the Persians will Prohibit Our Manufactury, which will
not only affect the East India, but also the Turkey Trade.

20. That a Ship lately in China could not put off our Manufactury without
taking their Manufacture: And that if this Bill passes, we shall probably lose
the Trade for Saltpetre, as well as the other part of the Trade to India.

I would not alter any thing from these Articles as they were delivered to the
Lords and offered to be proved, only in the second, after Woollen Manufacture,
is added, And other the Product of England, which was by oversight omitted
before, but alters not the Case, for that Tin, Lead, and such like is as well a
Manufacture of England as Woollen Goods; and you have the Articles, or such
part of them as the Friends of the Bill in their Printed Paper deny, Printed in
an Italic Letter, to distinguish them from the other Articles, and such part of
them as they allow. And I shall only add, That I wish the Lords or Commons
would be pleased now or hereafter, to give an opportunity to have the whole
matter publicly discust before them, and to have such things enquired into as
would give the best light to make a Judgment thereof, I should not doubt but
it would plainly appear, That they are very wrong Notions of Trade that are
advanced in favor of this bill. And that the East India Trade, and
particularly this part of it, is of very great advantage to this Kingdom. Nay,
if our Silk Weavers should have twice the Work they have usually had, they
would increase soon to twice the Numbers, which would not only as is said
before draw them from Employments more Beneficial to the Nation, but upon any
sudden Emergency, as War, etc. their Numbers being increased, their distress
would be also increased.

FINIS.

