The True and Perfect SPEECH OF Mr. James Guthrey LATE Minister of Sterling As
It was delivered by himself immediately before his Execution, on June 1. 1661.
at EDINBROVGH.

Sent from Edinburgh, And printed for public satisfaction, and to prevent the
disperssing of false Copies. 1661.

THE SPEECH OF Mr. James Guthrey, LATE Minister of STERLING.
Men and Brethren,
I Fear many of you come hither to gaze rather then to be edified by the
carriage and last words of a dying man, but if any have an ear to hear, as I
hope some of this great Confluence have, I desire your audience as to a few
words: I am come hither to lay down this earthly tabernacle and mortal flesh of
mine; and I bless God I do it willingly, and not by constraint, I say I suffer
willingly, if I had been otherwise minded I might have made a diversion, and
not been a prisoner, but I being conscious to my self of nothing worthy of
death or bonds, I would not stain my conscience with the suspicion of
guiltiness by my withdrawing. Neither have I wanted opportunity nor advantages
to escape since I was a Prisoner: Not by the fault of my Keeper, God knows, but
otherwife. But neither for this had I light or liberty, least I should reflect
upon the Lords Name, and offend the Generation of the Righteous.

And if these men have not been mistaken or dealt deceitfullie in telling me
so, I might have avoiced, not only the severity of the Sentence, but also had
favor and countenance by complying with the course of the times: But durst not
redeem my Life with the loss of my Integrity, God knows I durst not.

And that since I was a Prisoner the Lord has so held me by the hand, that he
never suffered me to bring to debate in my inward thoughts, muchless to
propound or hearken to any Overtures in that kind.

I did judge it better to suffer then to sin, and therefore I am come hither to
lay down my life this day, and I bless God I die not as a Fool, not that I
have any thing wherein to glory in my self: I acknowledge I am a Sinner, yea
one of the vilest and greatest that has owned a profession of Religion, and
one of the most unworthiest that has preached the Gospel, my Corruptions have
been strong and many and has made me a sinner even in all things, yea even in
following my Duty: And therefore righteousness have I none of my own, but I do
believe that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners whereof I am the
chief, through faith in his righteousness and blood, have I obtained mercy,
and in him and through him alone have I the hope of a blessed conquest and
victory over sin and satan, and hell and death, and that I shall attain unto
the Resurrection of the just and be made a pertaker of eternal life, I know
whom I have believed, and he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day.

I have preached Salvation through his name, and as I have Preached so I
believe, and do commend the riches of his free grace and faith in his blood
unto you all, as the only way whereby you can besaved, and I bless God as I
die not as a fool, so also I die not for evil doing, not a few of you may
hapily judge that I suffer as a Thief, or as a Murderer, as an evil Doer, or as
a busie-body in other men's matters, that was the lot of our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and has been the lot of many of his precious people and servants, to
suffer by the World as evil doers, and as my soul stirs not at that, but
desires to rejoice in being in conformity to my blessed head, and so blessed a
company in these things, so do I desire in prayer that I may be to none of you
to day on this account a stone of stumbling, or a Rock of offense.

Blessed is he that will not be offended in Christ, and his poor servants,
because of their being condemned as evil doers by the World, God is my record
that in these things for which sentence of death has passed against me, I have
a good Conscience, I bless God they are not matters of Compliance with the
Sectaries, or designs and practices against his Majesty's person, or
Government, or the Person or Government of his Royal Father, my heart I bless
God is Conscious of no disloyalty, nay Loyal I have been, and commend it to you
all, to be Loyal and Obedient unto the King, true piety is the foundation of
true loyalty, a Wicked man may be a flatterer, and a time server, but he will
never be a loyal Subject, but to return to my purpose.

Matters, for which I am condemned, are matters belonging to my calling and
function, as a Minister of the Gospel, such as the discovery and reproof of
sin, and pressing the holding fast the Oath of God and the Covenant, in
preserving and carrying on the work of Religion and Reformation, according
thereunto, and denying to acknowledge the civil Magestrate to be the competent
Judge in matters Ecclesiastical, that in all these things which God so ordering
by his gracious providence are the ground of my sentence and death, I have a
good conscience, as having walked therein according to the light and rule of
Gods word, as does become a Minister of the Gospel. I do also bless the Lord
that I do not dye as one not desired, I know that of not a few I have never
been nor am desired: It has been my lot to have been a man of contention and
sorrow: but it is my comfort that for my own things I have not contended, but
for the things of Jesus Christ, and for what relates to his Interest and Work,
and well being of his people, in order to the preserving and promoting of these
I did protest against, and stood in opposition to those Assemblies at St.
Andrews, and Dundee, and Edenburg, and the public resolution of bringing the
Malignant party to judicature, and Armies of this Kingdom, as conceiving the
same contrary to the Word of God, and to our Solemn Covenant, and Engagement,
and to be an inlet to defection, and to the ruin and destruction of the Work
of God, as it is now manifest to this day to men's Consciences. I have not
therein been mistaken, and was not fighting against the man of straw, I was
also desirous to have some poor Endeavor, to have the Church of God purged
from insufficient, scandalous, and corrupt Ministers and Elders.

For these things, I have been mistaken by some, and hated by others: but I
bless the Lord, as I had the testimony of my own conscience, I am there in a
approving, and in the conscience of many of the Lords people and precious
servants, and how little soever I may dye not desired by some, yet by these I
know I dye desired, and their approbation is of more value to me then all the
contradictions and reproaches of the other: I do with all my heart forgive
them, and wherein I have offended any of them I do beg their mercy and
forgiveness, and do from my soul wish that my death may be profitable unto
both, that the one may be confirmed in the sweet way of the Lord, and that the
other (if the Lord will) may be convinced, and cease from those things that are
not good, and do not edify. But yet there is one thing I would warn you all
of, that God is wroth, yea very wroth with Scotland and threatens to depart and
remove his candlestick. The Causes of his wroth are many, and would to God that
were not one great cause, that the causes of his wroth are despised and
rejected by a great many. Consider that case that is recorded Ier. 26. and the
consequence of it, and tremble and fear. I cannot but also say, there is a
great increase of wroth by the deluge of prophanity that overflowes the Land,
and has reins loosed unto it every where; in so far that many have lost not
only the use and exercise of Religion, but even morallity and common civillity,
that is to be found even among heathen.

Secondly, The horrible treachery and perjury that is in the matter of the
Covenant and Cause of God, and work of reformation: Be astonished ye Heavens at
this, shall the people break the Covenant and prosper, says the Lord? Shall
the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with God, which frames mischief by a
Law. I fear the Lord is about to bring a Sword on this Land, which shall aveng
the Covenant.

Thirdly, Horrible Ingratitude after ten years oppression and bondage. He has
broken the yoke of Strangers from off your necks, but what do we render unto
the Lord for all his kindness? Most of the fruit of our deliverance is to work
wickedness and strengthen our selves to do evil.

Fourthly, Most fearful Idolatry and sacrificing to the creature. We have
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the Image of a corruptible man,
in whom many have placed almost all their salvation and desires, and have
turned that which might have been a blessing unto us (being kept into a due
subordination unto God) into an Idol of jealousy, by preferring it before him.

5. God is also wroth with a corrupt and carnal generation of corrupt and
carnal time-serving Ministers; I know and bear Testimony, there is your true
and faithful Ministers; blessed be God, we have yet many who study their duty,
and desire to be found faithful unto the Lord; and I pray you to Honor,
Reverence, and Esteem much of those for their Work sake; and I pray them to be
encouraged in their Lord and Master, who is with them, to make them an Iron
Pillar, and Brazen Wall, and a strong Defenced City, in their faithful
following of their Duty: But O that there were not too many that mind Earthly
things, that are enemies to the Cross of Christ, who push with the side and
shoulder, who strengthen the hand of evil Doers, who make themselves
Transgressors, by studying to build what formerly they did destroy, I mean
Prelacy, and the Service Book, and the Mystery of Iniquity that works on us,
whose steps lead us to the House of the great Whore, and Mother of Fornication;
and whoever he be that builds this Jericho, let him take heed of that Curse of
the Flying Roll mentioned in Zach. 5. and let all Ministers take heed that
they walk and be steadfast in the Faith, and quit themselves, and be strong, and
give seasonable warning concerning sin and Duty: Many of the Lord's people do
sadly complain of the fainting and silence of many Watchmen; and it concerns
them to consider what God calls for at their hand in such a day; Silence now in
a Watchman, now when he is called to speak, and to give his Testimony on the
peril of his life, is doubtless a great sin: The Lord open the mouths of his
Servants to speak his Word with all boldness; That Covenant Breaking may be
discovered and reproved, and that the Kingdom of Christ may not be supplanted,
nor the souls of his people be destroyed without a Warning. I have but a few
words more to add; All that are profane among you, I ^xhort to Repentance;
for the day of the Lord's wrath hastneth, and is near; but there is yet a Door
of mercy opened unto you, if you will not despise the day of salvation. All you
that are Malignant, and Reproachers of Godliness, and of such as live godly,
take heed what you do; it will be a hard matter for you to kick against pricks;
you make your selves the Buts of the Lord's fury and flaming Indignation, if
you do not cease, and repent of your Ungodly deeds: All that are Neuters, (...)
Indifferent Lukewarm Professors, be zealous, lest the Lord spew you out of his
mouth. And you that repent for all the abominations that are done in the City,
and in the Land, and that take pleasure in the stones and dust of Zion, cast
not away your confidence, but be comforted and encouraged in the Lord, he will
yet appear for your joy; God has not cast away his people and work in Britain
and Ireland; I hope it shall once appear and revive by the power of his Spirit,
and take root downward, and bring forth plentiful fruit upward; there is yet a
holy Seed, a Root whom God will preserve, and bring forth; but how long and
dark our night may be, I do not know; The Lord shorten it for the sake of his
Chosen. In the mean time be you patient and immovable, abounding in the work
of the Lord, and in love one to another: Beware of Snares, which are strowed
thick; Cleave unto the Covenant, and Work of Reformation; Do not decline the
Cross of Christ; Choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season; and account the reproaches of the
Lord greater riches then all the Treasures of Egypt. Let my death grieve none
of you, it will be more profitable and advantageous both for me and you, and
for the Church of God, and for Christ's Interest, then my life could have been;
I Forgive all men the Guilt of it, and desire you to do so also: Pray for them
that persecute you, Bless them that Curse you, Bless I say, and Curse not.

I dye in the Faith of the Apostles and Primitive Christians and Protestant
Reformed Church, particularly that Church of Scotland, whereof I am a Member
and Minister, and bear my Testimony and Witness to the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church of Scotland, by Assemblies, Synod, Presbyteries, and Societies;
Popery, Prelacy, and also their Trumpery of Service and Ceremony I do abhor,
and bear my witnessing unto the National Covenant in Scotland, Solemn League
between the three Kingdoms; the Sacred Solemn and Public Oath of God I cannot
believe can be loosed by or dispensed with by any Person or Power, or any one
on earth, but are still binding on these Nations, and will be for ever
hereafter, and are Ratified and sealed by the Conversion of many thousand Souls
since our entering therein: I bear my witness unto the Protestation against the
Contraverted Assembly and their public Resolution. To the testimony given
against the Sectaries. Against that course of defection that is now in the
Land, and all the branches thereof in that.

In the last place I bear my witness to the Cross of Christ, and that I had
never cause, nor have cause this day to repent of any thing I have suffered or
can suffer for his Name; and I take God to Record upon my Soul, I would not
exchange this Scaffold with the fairest Palace or Miter of the Greatest
Prelate; blessed be God who has showed Mercy unto such a Wretch, and has
revealed his Son unto me, and made me a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel,
that he has dignified me in the midst of much Contradiction from Satan and
the World, to fulfill my Ministry on the hearts of not a few of his People,
especially in the Stage wherein I last was, I mean the Congregation of the
Presbytery of Sterling, God forgive that poor vain empty man that did there
Intrude my labor, and has made a prey of many poor Souls, and has exposed
others to reproach, and oppression, and a famine of the Word of the Lord, God
forgive that misleader of the poor People, who tempted them to reject their
alone Minister; the Father of Mercy pity that poor mislead people, and the
Lord direct the Congregations and Presbyteries of Scotland once more with
faithful Pastors, and grant that the Work of the Lord may be revived through
all Britain and over all the World: Christ is my Light and my Life, my
Righteousness, my Strength, and my Salvation, he is also my Salvation and all
my desire is in him; I do with all the strength of my Soul commend him to you:
Blessed are they that are not offended in him; Bless him O my Soul from
henceforth, and for ever rejoice, rejoice, yea rejoice all that love him, be
patient and rejoice in Tribulation; blessed are ye, and blessed shall you be
for ever, and everlasting love and Eternal Salvation is yours, all are yours,
ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Remember me O Lord with the favor thou bear to thy one People, direct me
with thy salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen therein, that I may
rejoice with the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thy
Inheritance; now let thy Servant depart in peace, since my eyes have seen thy
Salvation.

FINIS.

