ADVICE TO THE CLERGY Of the DIOCESE of LINCOLN.

By the Right Reverend Father in God JAMES Lord Bishop of that Diocese.

In Order to his Primary VISITATION.

The Second Edition with Additions, Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street. 1697.

My Brethren,
I Choose to take this Method of sending some Advices to you before my
Visitation, rather than to speak to you on a sudden at the respective places
appointed for you to meet at. But because this is a new Method, therefore I
think it not improper for me to give you my Reasons for so doing; Which are
these.

I. To make my own Duty and Business more easy to my self, and the better to
secure my Health and Strength which otherwise might be impaired and weakened in
7 or 8 Weeks travailing together, and performing those Episcopal Offices which
are requisite to be performed at the several places of Visitation, so that it
may be expected some times to happen, that through weariness or other
indisposition (the season of the Year being usually hot, and the places of
Visitation many) I may be hindered from speaking so much, and so fully, as I
might otherwise be willing and desirous to do. Besides, there is one particular
Office, viz. that of Confirmation, which I design to take the Opportunity of
performing in my passage from one place of Visitation to another, at the great
Towns that lie in, or not far out of my way, of which I intend to give timely
notice of the day and hour, to the Ministers of such Towns that they may be
ready to present such Persons to be confirmed, as are within their own, or
their neighboring Parishes, which will take up no little of my time and labor.

II. But I have not regard to my self only in this Method, but to you also; for
by this means some that may be hindered from coming to the place of Visitation,
by Sickness, or very Old Age, or unavoidable and necessary Business and
Attendance elsewhere, may be acquainted with what I think fit to lay before
those that are concerned to appear upon these occasions. Where these Excuses
are unfeigned, they are reasonable and sufficient, and those that are forced to
use them, by having this Paper of Advice by them, may see what I have to
propose as well as they might have heard it, if it had been spoken, and they
themselves present. But I hope that none, but those that are so indisposed, as
I now mentioned, will absent themselves.

For as it is the Duty of a Bishop to Visit, so it is the Duty of the Clergy to
appear at such Times and Places where the Visitation is appointed. Those
Pretenses that cannot excuse a Bishop, before God, and the Church, and his own
Conscience, from Visiting, can less excuse the Clergy of his Diocese from
appearing. A Bishop may ordinarily allege his Age, and the Indisposition that
usually attends it, Debility of Body and Voice; The hazards of Health by
continual motion, it may be, in ill Weather, not conveniently accommodated, and
for many Weeks together; so that a Bishop, especially in this Diocese, that
would study his ease and health more than his obligation, might color his
Omission by these, and the like Pleas, and satisfy himself with being quiet at
his own Habitation; But the Clergy of the Diocese, except the very aged and
diseased, cannot in like manner excuse themselves for their Omission; The
weakest may have Strength enough for one days Journey, without running any
hazard, and for the Younger and more healthful, which are the greater Number,
they have so little to say in excuse of themselves, that one would be apt to
think that their absence proceeded either from Sloth, or Envy, or Prejudice,
or, it may be, some Scismatical or Political Principle, for what else can
hinder them?

Nay, may they not propose to themselves many things that may induce and
encourage them to come? They may be present at the preaching of a Sermon fitted
and prepared for the occasion of their Meeting; They may have an opportunity of
seeing several of their distant Friends and Acquaintance; They may contract
Acquaintance with such as are but newly entered into the Neghbourhood; They may
oblige one another in stricter Ties of Brotherly Love; They may animate one
another in the faithful discharge of their Office; They may excite one
another's Zeal and Fervency in promoting the same common Interest of the
Christian Religion; They may direct one another in the Knowledge of Modern
Books and Treatises of Religion; They may enter into combined Resolutions to
defend the Church of England in its Doctrine, Worship, and Government, as it is
established, against all Parties that divide from it; They may encourage one
another to oppose vigorously the Vices and the Factions of the Age, and to
advance Holiness and Peace and Submission to Authority; In a word, They may let
this Atheistical and deluded Age see that they are unanimously bent to maintain
the Doctrine, to pursue the Service, and to promote the Honor of the blessed
Savior of the World, whose Servants they are and whose work and business of
reconciling Men to God they have avowedly undertaken; If the Clergy were
sensible that they might attain to these good Ends by meeting their Diocesan at
his Visitation, what considering Man would absent himself? So that I hope the
sending of this Advice to be read, and to lie by you, will be so far from
hindering you from coming to the Visitation, that it will rather prevail with
you to come; and I hope that the serious and deliberate perusal of it may be of
more Use and Benefit than a transient Discourse; for I have observed that
sometimes such Discourses have not been heard by all present, either by reason
of the weakness of the Speaker's Voice, or the noise and talk which may
occasionally happen; or if they have been heard, they have been soon forgotten,
so that many profitable Instructions have been dropped and lost; whereas, by this
way, they may not only be communicated to all, but also be preserved and
reviewed upon occasion.

And now having given you the Motives that induced me to transmit these Advises
from the Press, rather than to mention them at our Meeting, I shall proceed to
hint such Things, as by your kind and unprejudiced Reception of them, may, with
God's blessing, make this Visitation useful for the Ends for which it is
designed.

Which, in General, is to know the State of this Diocese, to see how all
Persons behave themselves in it, with respect to their several Duties either as
Christians in general, or Ministers in the Church of Christ, or Subjects of the
Civil Government. For Episcopal Visitation has an Eye both to the Clergy and
Instrument of Inhibition, Clerum and
Laity, but principally to the Clergy, to whose Cure and Conduct, in order to
their eternal Salvation, the Populum.
Laity are committed.

This is a vast Business in this large Diocese, and requires great diligence,
and application of mind; and I have often been much concerned and grieved, that
I want that assistance, of which the Constitution, and external Regiment and
Administration of the Church has been provided; I mean, The Assistance of Rural
Deans, which Office is a part of our Constitution, and is yet exercised in some
Dioceses of this Kingdom, but has unhappily been disused in this, (for how long
time I know not) to the great loss and hindrance of Ecclesiastical
Administration.

By the impartial and diligent Execution of this Office, the Bishop might be
eased in a great part of that Duty, which is too heavy a Burden for his own
Shoulders; The Ignorant, the Factious, the Scandalous, the Negligent, the
Dissenting, might easily be detected in a small Deanary; and being signified to
the Bishop, or rather first of all and immediately to the Archdeacon, might be
timely and duly corrected, and reformed; For the Archdeacon inhabiting within
his Arch-deaconry, as it is most proper, might easily be resorted to upon
occasion, and so Hear and Amend many Faults, which might be brought to him by
the Rural Dean, without Application to the Bishop.

If a Bishop of this extensive Diocese was provided of active and faithful
Persons in the several Deanries, which retain the name yet, his Business might
be manageable, and his Authority and Government useful, whereas for want of
these, no Bishop here can do so much and so well as he might be willing and
glad to do.

But in the defect of these Assistances, it is in your Power, My Brethren, to
give me ease and satisfaction in my weak Endeavors. If you would do what you
have declared, and promised, and resolved to do in the presence of God and the
Congregation at your Ordination, it would discharge me of a great deal of care
and trouble.

Where there is a formed and settled Church, as this of the Church of England
is, with known Rules and Measures, by which the Clergy are bound to exercise
their Ministry, one would think, if Men were sincere, they could not fail in
performing this part of their duty, for they cannot, or, at least, they need
not be ignorant of the Obligations that are laid upon them, by the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the Canons of the Church, not to mention here the Obligations that
they have laid upon themselves; But it is too true that there is a Failure in
some Persons as to the discharge of those Obligations, which if it be frequent
and habitual can proceed from nothing but Prejudice, or Sloth, or
Inconsideration, in all which there is a spice of Insincerity. I know some will
plead want of Health, and others an Obligation to officiate in several places
for a bare Competency: But one may easily distinguish whether these be the true
Reasons, or whether their Omissions proceed from other causes; To be sure, they
themselves know; I wish their Pretenses were always sincere; However the
unaccountable Negligence of some, and the Immoralities of others are the
subjects of the Bishop's Trouble and Inquiry. If there were none such, a
Bishop's Visitation would be easy and comfortable.

It would have been well if such Persons had been stopped at the first door, that
of Ordination, but having been let in there, where the door was too wide, they
are the Men that make the greatest disorder and trouble within. If these Men
had come so disposed and qualified into the Ministry of the Church as they
professed themselves to be, affirming at their Ordination, that they trusted
they were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them the Office and
Ministration of Deacons to serve God for the promoting of his Glory and the
edifying of his People; They would behave themselves after another manner;
whereas practicing so disagreeably to that Declaration they made, they give
occasion to the World to believe that it was a false and groundless
Presumption, and a sort of Lying against the Holy Ghost; Or else, that if they
had any such good Motion, they have quenched it since by their unworthy and
disagreeable Behavior.

If such Men would bethink themselves, and reflect upon the solemn Profession,
Promise, and Vow which they made at their Ordination, it might be a means to
revive that holy Fire within them, (if it was ever kindled in their Hearts)
which they have so heedlesly extinguished. I would for that reason advise them
frequently and delibrately to read the Offices of Ordaining Deacons and
Priests, where they may see not only their Work laid out and set before them,
with the Dignity and Usefulness of it, but also the Obligation they have laid
upon themselves to perform it, and if there be any Ingenuity remaining in them
agreeable to their Liberal and Learned Education, any Sense of Goodness, any
Regard to the Love of Christ and his Church, any Hope of reward for their due
attendance to their Duty, any Fear of the extreme Punishment that will
certainly follow upon the neglect of it, it cannot but affect them with shame
and trouble, which would awaken within them servent Desires, and hearty
Resolutions, and careful Endeavors to discharge then Obligations for the
future.

And if there be any that have entered into Orders without feeling, or
pretending to feel any such secret motion of the Holy Ghost, but solely for
secular Ends and Advantages, however they have made a false step at their
Entrance, they may yet recover themselves, if by serious and timely
consideration, and begging the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, (who presides in,
and takes care of the Church of Christ, and is ready to Cooperate with those
that serve the Lord Jesus in the Work of the Ministry) they could be prevailed
upon, out of an hearty sense of their Duty, to apply themselves faithfully and
diligently to the practice of it, according to their Natural Faculties and
Abilities, the Improvement of which would prevail with God to bestow more and
greater.

In short, the best and most proper Disposition for the work of the Ministry in
the Church of Christ is Simplicity and Sincerity of Heart. This Disposition our
Savior preferred in the Election of His Apostles, excepting only one whom he
chose for a particular reason. Men thus qualified will serve their Master
Faithfully in all Circumstances, and be the outward condition of the Church
either Afflicted or Prosperous, they will be true to the Interest of it,
knowing how to be abased and how to abound.

If the Church of Christ was provided of Ministers so qualified in all places,
the Visitation of a Bishop would be no Burden either to himself or them. It
was so provided in the first Ages after the Apostles; And in the succeeding
Ages, during the time of the Apostasy to the time of the Reformation, this
Nation produced not a few Persons very illustrious and eminent in this
Character: I shall do no wrong to many others to instance in one particularly,
a Robert Grofthead Bishop of Lincoln.
Bishop of this Diocese, who amongst many other excellent Indowments, both
natural and acquired, was especially remarkt for Integrity and Probity; This
made him Magnanimous, resolute and fervent, in resisting and oppugning the
corrupt Practices of the Court of Rome, although it exposed him to the neglects
and censures of that Court, notwithstanding he was the greatest Man of Learning
and Industry in that Age.

The same Spirit and Disposition began and carried on the Reformation in the
Western parts of Christendom in a wonderful manner, through many difficulties
and hazards. It was indeed an happy Direction of Providence that at the same
juncture, many of those upright and sincere Reformers, were also Men of better
Capacity and better Learning than the common Romish Clergy; and where Learning
is joined with Integrity and Simplicity, there can be no better accomplishment
for the Work of the Ministry. The present Age abounds with many Helps and
Assistances of Learning, and the Church of England is provided of many
Clergymen eminently Learned: I will not accuse any of want of Sincerity, but I
am apt to think that if that was generally the reigning and governing
Disposition in the Clergy, there would be lesser need of Inquiry and
Reformation than I doubt there is.

This would make them careful to observe the Vows and Promises they made at
their Ordination; This would make Rectors and Vicars tender of those Souls who
are committed to their Cure at their Form of institution. Curam ^nimarum
Parochianorum tibi in Domino committimus.
Institution; This would make Curates Sollicitous for the Flock with which they
are entrusted, although they have not Institution; This would restrain all
sorts from the immoderate pursuit of Pluralities, and reconcile them to
Residence, making it acceptable and delightful to them; This would engage all
the Ranks of the Clergy to be zealous and earnest in regaining the Seduced, and
reclaiming the Vicious, and improving all. This is that salt which not only
preserves the Clergy from Corruption, but also seasons all their Performances.
In short, this makes them acceptable to God, and useful to the Church; This
therefore is that Grace or Disposition of Mind, which you should beg of God to
bestow upon you, and use your greatest Endeavor to acquire; which if you be
endowed with, it will appear not only in the Holiness of your Lives as you are
Christians, but also in the Faithful performance of your Offices as you are
Clergymen. This I shall make evident by instancing in the Principal Offices
which your Holy Function does oblige you to perform.

The first of which is Prayer, by which I mean the public Liturgy of the
Church. To this you have promised to conform, and subscribed your Hands to that
Promise; as also to the 2d of the 3 Articles mentioned in the 36th Canon. That
the Book of Common Proyer contains in it, nothing contrary to the Word of
God, and that you your selves will use the Form in the said Book prescribed, in
public Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and none other. Does he
make good these Subscriptions who reads the Common Prayer very seldom, or not
in order, or not the whole, but only some parts and pieces, or if he do read
the whole, reads it so hastily, or so slightly and awkwardly as that an
impartial Hearer might be apt to think that he had no good liking to it?

Whereas a Man that is sincere and in good earnest in this partof Religious
Worship would be careful to read it, leisurely, Q. Eliz. Articles. 1559.
plainly and Q. Eliz. Articles. 1559.
distinctly, well remembering that he addresses himself, as the Mouth and Leader
of the Congregation, to that God who knows, and who requires the Heart in all
such Services; He would also use his best Endeavor to read with such proper
and becoming Tone and Accent as may best excite attention, affection, and
fervor in himself and others.

There is indeed a natural Indisposition in some Men to all kind of vocal
Harmony, even to that which consists only in the Elevation and Depression of
the Voice in proper places and periods; I call them proper, not only with
regard to the art of Music, but even to the sense of the Words; But I shall not
urge this further than the natural capacity of men will bear; There is
certainly a felicity in Voice and Accent, which they ought to make good use of
to whom God has given it, and those that want it, can only use their Endeavor
to attain to such a degree, as to avoid at least all gross, absurd, and
ridiculous pronunciation.

But such as do not think this worthy their Laboring after, I am sure they
cannot excuse themselves in neglecting, omitting, or altering any part of the
public Offices; And though they read them not with that propriety of Utterance
and Accent which may promote attention and devotion, they ought at least to
perform the Offices as they are directed and prescribed, for nothing less than
this can Answer their Subscription, which will remain in the Bishops Custody as
a witness of their Insincerity.

This is to be understood not only of the Offices of Morning and Evening
Prayer, (which if they could be daily performed in all Parishes would be of
great use to breed in Peoples minds a sense of their dependence upon God from
day to day) but also all Occasional Offices, the Administration of the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, Matrimony, the Visitation of the
Sick, and Burial of the Dead. All these ought to be performed seriously,
solemnly, and deliberately, and in the expressions and order in which they are
directed, which can only satisfy the Conformity which you have promised.

As to one of these Offices, that of public Baptism of Infants, I must advise
you to use your utmost Endeavor to prevail with your Parishioners to bring
their Children to Church to be Baptized, and not feign Pretenses for having
them baptized at their own Houses; or, if there be a real Danger, and that
Sickness, or other need compels them so to do, if the Child live, you must not
fail to admonish them that it is expedient (as the Rubric directs) to bring
the Child to Church afterward. This is a part of that conformity to the
Liturgy of the Church of England, to which you have subscribed.

I shall add one Word more upon this Subject, which is the Observation of the
Fasts and Feasts of the Church which are directed in the Books of Common
Prayer; the neglect of which has proceeded, in some places, as much from the
Minister, as from the People; the Minister is to give notice of all such Days;
and why is that? But that the People may know that such Days being appointed
for the more than ordinary Worship and Service of God, they ought to forbear
their Labor and Work, at least at the Hours of Worship, and repair to Church,
where, if there be no Minister to officiate, to what purpose should they come?
This is an unaccountable Neglect and savours of Insincerity.

Now from that part of your Duty which relates to God, as you lead and conduct
your Congregation in the Offices of Public Worship, I proceed to that part of
your Duty which relates to the Congregation, as you are to teach and instruct
them; And this comprehends Reading the Holy Scriptures, Preaching, Catechizing,
opposing all Erroneous and Strange Doctrines contrary to Gods Word, using
public and private Monitions and Exhortations as well to the Sick as to the
Poo within your Cures, as need shall require, and occasion be given. As it is
in the Offices of the Ordering of Priests, to which such as are ordained
Priests have promised to be ready to do with all faithful Diligence.

This is the Doctrinal and Instructive part of your Duty as it respects Men;
and the Rule of this Performance is the Holy Scriptures; for you have declared
at your Ordination that you were Persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity for Eternal Salvation through
Faith in Jesus Christ; and that you were determined out of the said Scriptures
to instruct the People committed to your Charge, and to teach nothing (as
required of necessity to Eternal Salvation) but that which you shall be
persuaded may be concluded and proved by the Scriptures. The Ministers of the
Gospel are the Ministers of Revealed Religion, as were the Prophets under the
Law from Moses the great Prophet till the ceasing of Prophecy; the standing
Revelation which God has made to mankind is contained in the Scripture, which
is therefore called the Word of God; and it is our Business to Study, to Read
and to Explain this.

All Christians indeed are bound to Read and Understand the Scriptures so far
as they are capable; but all Christians are not bound to Read and to Explain
them publicly in Christian Assemblies; Nay they are bound not to do it, unless
they be Separated and Appointed thereto by proper Authority; because our
Savior at the first Founding and Erecting his Kingdom did Separate Men for
this purpose, and did require such a Separation to be continued so long as his
Kingdom should continue upon Earth, it being necessary for the useful Ends of
Instruction, and Order, and Peace, and Edification, and the Salvation of the
Souls of Men.

Now this Separation is made at Ordination, by which there is a general
Authority or Commission given to Read and to Preach the Gospel; but not every
where, or in all, or in any place, or at any times, or to any Congregation or
Society of Christians, as the Ordained Person pleases; this is impracticable,
and would occasion great Disorder and Confusion; But it is limited to certain
In the office of ordering of Deacons. If thou be thereto Licensed by the Bishop
himself. In the office of ordering of Priests. In the Congregation where thou
shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.
Conditions, of which Licensing is one; And this gives me occasion to speak of
Licensing to Preach, which some Men are prone to censure as an unnecessary
Imposition upon the Clergy; and here I shall offer something, first concerning
the Necessity of Licensing. 2ly, Concerning the Person who is to License.

1. As to the Necessity of Licensing; By the Canon XLV. Singuli Beneficiati in
Beneficiis suis residentes (dummodo sint legitima Authoritate admissi) per
singulos, etc. Canon XLVI. Omnis Beneficiatus ad Concionandum non admissus,
Concionem per Concionatorem legitime approbatum haberi procurabit, etc.
Canons of 1603. it appears that all Beneficed Men were not allowed to be
Preachers I take it that Beneficed Men are such as have Institution to
Benefices, so that in the Judgment of the Convocation, by which that Body of
Canons was compiled, Institution alone did not Authorize Men to be Preachers,
But Preachers were to be Licensed; therefore there is a Necessity of Licensing
even as to Beneficed Men; And though there is not (God be thanked) that real
Necessity that, it may be, there was at the time of that Convocation sitting,
there being since then a general increase of Learning and Knowledge; Yet still
there is a necessity as to the observation of the Canon, and a great
Expediency, if it was more used, as to the regulating of Preaching, which,
within the compass of our own Observation and Experience, has been made an
Instrument, not only of promoting Error in the Church, but also Sedition and
Rebellion in the State.

Institution then does not authorize Beneficed Men to preach in their own
Benefices unlicensed; so that if neither Ordination, nor Institution give
sufficient Authority to preach, I mean, as to particular Dioceses and Churches,
without License, then there is a necessity of Licensing all Preachers.

But if it should be granted that Institution does authorize a Clerk to Preach,
it can be only in that Benefice to which he is Instituted, and where he has
Instrument of Institution.
curam Animarum Parochianorum, not in any part of the Diocese or Archdeaconry
besides; and therefore still there is a necessity of Licensing, to enable Men
to Preach in other Churches of the Neighborhood, or in other parts of the
Archdeaconry, or Diocese, as there may sometimes be occasion, by the Temperary
Supply of other Men's Cures, upon Absence, or Sickness, or Suspension of the
Incumbent, or Voydance by Resignation, Deprivation, or Death, which sort of
Supply an unlicensed Man ought not to undertake. So that it is very evident,
that there is a Necessity, or at least a great Expediency, in requiring
Preachers to be Licensed.

II. As to the Person who is to License, it is only the Bishop of the Diocese
himself, in which the Licensed Person resides. This as to Deacons seem, very
plain by these Words in the Office of Ordination, which the Bishop uses in the
Delivery of the New Testament to the ordained Person. Take thou Authority to
Read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to Preach the same if thou be thereto
Licensed by the Bishop himself. Which I take to be the Bishop of the Diocese
where the ordained Person has a Title to officiate; and therefore if a Bishop
of one Diocese, by virtue of Letters Dimissory, ordain a Deacon who has a Title
in another Diocese, that Bishop, in whose Diocese the Title is, ought to grant
the License, and not the ordaining Bishop.

But that for which I mention this, principally is, That the License is to be
granted by the Bishop himself:

This addition or limitation being made at the Reformation, when the Forms of
Ordaining Deacons, Priests, and Bishops were purged and altered. It was then
judged requisite to restrain the Authority of Licensing Readers and Preachers
to the Bishop himself, knowing what ill use had been made by the Ecclesiastical
Officers before the Reformation, they being then under no restraint for
granting such Licenses, so that this limitation was made on purpose to restrain
any other Officer, or substitute.

And as to Deacons, so also to Priests, as it seems evident by the xxxvi and
xxxvii Canons. The xxxvi Canon requires Subscription to the 3 Articles there
mentioned before Ordination. The xxxvii. Canon Requires, that notwithstanding
the general Power given to the ordained Person at his Ordination, when he comes
to Reside in any Diocese, he shall not be permitted there to preach, etc.
unless he first consent and subscribe to the said 3 Articles, in the Presence
of the Bishop of the Diocese wherein he is to Preach, etc. It is said in the
presence of the Bishop; It is not said of the Ordinary, for so the Chancellor
of the Diocese may be, but of the Bishop: And that by the Bishop here is meant,
the Bishop only exclusive of any Ecclesiastical Officers is plain by the 48
Canon, where it is thus ordained. No Curate or Minister shall be permitted to
serve in any place without Examination and Admission of the Bishop of the
Diocese, or Ordinary of the Place, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in
writing under his Hand and Seal, having respect to the greatness of the Cure,
and Meetness of the Person. Where it is to be observed, 1. That it is said no
Curate or Minister, which I take to include all the Licensed Clergy, and may be
urged further in confirmation of what I said before concerning those that have
Institution, as well as those that have not. 2. That Admission to serve
Curacies is to be in Writing under the Hand and Seal of the Bishop, and if the
Ecclesiastical Officers Seal may be alleged to be the Bishops Seal, his Hand
cannot be said to be the Bishops Hand. 3. That Examination ought to precede
this Admission, that the Bishop may Judge of the Meetness of the Party, which
every Officer employed in this matter is not qualified to perform. 4. That no
Man shall be permitted to serve in any place, but one that is thus examined and
admitted by the Bishop, or Ordinary of the Place having Episcopal Jurisdiction.
By the Ordinary of the Place cannot be meant the Ordinary of the Diocese, but
such Ordinaries as have Episcopal Jurisdiction by virtue of some Ancient Grant
from, or Composition with the Bishop, such as Deans, Deans and Chapters, sole
Prebendaries, and, it may be, others, in the Ancient Foundations, who have a
Right to exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Peculiars belonging to their
Dignities, which is very well known in the Church of Lincoln particularly;
These are the Ordinaries of the Place here meant. And the Bishop and such
Ordinaries have the sole Authority of granting Licenses to Preach and serve
Cures under their Hands and Scals.

Pursuant to this, is the 8th Article in his Majesty's late Injunctions, where
it is required, That they who keep Curates have none but such as are Licensed
by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in exempt Jurisdictions by the Ordinary of the
Place having Episcopal Jurisdiction -- and that no Person shall presume to
serve any Cure without License from the Bishop, or such Ordinary, upon pain of
suspension.

So that the Form of Ordination, which is confirmed by the Act of Uniformity,
the Canons, the Kings Injunctions, all agree in this, that no one can License
Persons to Preach or serve Cures, but the Bishop of the Diocese himself, or
such as have Episcopal Jurisdiction in Peculiars, and exempt Places. This I
take notice of that the Clergy may not be imposed upon, by false, insufficient
and uncanonical Licenses, as I know too many are; And to show the great Care
that the Church has taken, that the Bishop of every Diocese, may know the
Clergy of his Diocese, their Character and their Abilities to preach, and be
satisfied of their Orders and their Conversation, which he cannot be, if
Ecclesiastical Officers may grant Licenses, especially upon Sequestrations of
vacant Livings, and Supply of Curates and Lecturers, at their pleasure. How can
the Bishop tell whether Men so Licensed have Subscribed to the 3 Articles
mentioned in the forecited xxxvi Canon, especially if the Licenser keep no Book
of Subscriptions, or make no Return to the Bishop of them, as some do not? Or
indeed, how can the Bishop tell whether such Licensed Men be ordained, or how
they have behaved themselves in the place of their last Residence?

Where such Power is assumed, any illiterate, corrupt or covetous Surrogate may
grant Licenses to unordained, unqualified, and insufficient Men, and the Bishop
never know it. Many small Livings are held only by Sequestration; and if the
Serving of the Cure, together with the power of Sequestring the Profits be
granted at the pleasure of the Surrogate, the Bishop not knowing, unworthy Men
may easily get into Curacys, and if they can but screen themselves at the Times
of Visitation, they may continue undiscovered.

This is a Practice of very ill Consequence; for Preaching the Word of God,
comprehending as before mentioned, is not to be entrusted but to Men well
qualified for their Learning and Knowledge in the Holy Scriptures; And the
Bishop, who has the first care in this matter, ought to be satisfied that they
are so, and particularly of Curates, whether they officiate by virtue of
Sequestration in vacant Livings, or under Beneficed Men, who by reason of their
Age or Sickness, or Necessary absence, or being possessed of two Benefices,
stand in need of such Assistants.

And now having said thus much as to the Authority requisite for public
Preaching, and the due and legal Permission of the Exercise of it by the Bishop
himself in granting Licenses; I return to what I hinted concerning the Subject
Matter to which your Preaching is restrained, which is the Word of God. This is
that Storehouse which contains all things necessary to be believed and
practiced, so that all the Articles of Faith and all the Rules of Life and
Practice are to be drawn from hence. The Fundamental Articles ought to be
explained carefully and evidently from proper Texts of Scripture, the Belief of
them being necessary to eternal Salvation; I hese may be handled conveniently
upon the great Festivals, and other Holy Days in which we celebrate those more
illustrious parts of our Savior's History, of which we profess the Belief as
Christians; But at all other Seasons the practical Heads of the Christian
Religion are the properest Subjects for the Pulpit, and there is less danger of
misurderstanding and misrepresenting these, especially if one read the
Scriptures with that sincere and plain intention of which I have been speaking;
otherwise many Expressions there used may be wrested to support erroneous
Opinions, and countenance evil Practices, as we have seen and still see in the
present Age. Men bring their Notions and Opinions with them to the reading of
the Scriptures, and then they will not fail to find them there, and if they
think they find them there, they presume they may vent them openly and
confidently, and produce that Holy Book to vindicate them, out of which it is
much easier to confute them.

God forbid that we should take that course to Remedy this, which the Church of
Rome does, by locking up the Bible in a Language unknown to the unlearned, and
to prohibit the Reading of it; or that we should draw so wicked an Inference
from hence, as to argue, or but think, that because so many senceless, absurd,
and irrational, as well as impious and blasphemous Errors have been pretended
to be drawn out of this Fountain, that therefore it cannot be the Word and
Revelation of God, but a corrupt mixture of humane Inventions; No, such men
bring their Poison with them, they do not find it there; If they did partake of
that Spirit by which it was indicted, they could make no such ill use of it.

Now this being that Book which you, My Brethren, are authorized to Read and to
explain publicly, you should not only study it diligently, and with great
caution and reverence, but with the like honest and sincere Intention which the
holy Writers had in penning it, considering the gracious End for which this
Revelation was made by God, namely to reimplant his Image in men, consisting in
Holiness and Purity, which was defaced by Apostasy, and rendering them capable
of a better and more glorious Immortality than that they have lost. For this
purpose the Law of God was given, and holy Prophets sent into the World, and at
last the Great Prophet of all, the Eternal Son of God. And for this purpose did
he Erect his Kingdom upon Earth, and appoint Stewards and Officers to Minister
in it; And for this purpose were you Ordained and Separated that you might
carry on that great and charitable Work of Redeeming and Saving Mankind.

The Deliberate Consideration of this would excite in you an eager and fervent
Desire to have as great a Share as you could in this most charitable and
God-like Undertaking.

The Kingdom of Christ was erected in Opposition to the Kingdom of Satan, who
is styled in Scripture the Prince of this World; Your Business is to Resist and
Countermine him, and all his Stratagems. This you cannot do but by the faithful
Discharge of that Trust which is reposed in you as the Servants of Christ in
administering and promoting his Kingdom.

And here I must charge upon you, That you deliver faithfully the whole Law of
Christ, by which the Church is to be Instructed, Edified and Governed.

The Laws of Christ's Kingdom comprehend not only the eternal and immutable
Laws of Holiness and Righteousness, but also some positive and ritual instances
which Christ himself instituted here upon Earth for the necessary conduct and
management of his Kingdom. These are the Two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper. The first is the Rite of Initiation or Admission into the Church
of Christ. The second is the Rite of Communion or Fellowship with Christ in his
Church, whereby Baptized Persons, by the Distribution and Reception of Bread
and Wine, consecrated in Memory of the Death of Christ, are made Partakers of
his Body and Blood.

Both these are great and valuable Privileges, and peculiar Rites of the
Christian Religion, and you are entrusted with the Administration of them.

These have been most scandalously and profanely neglected by some that
pretend themselves to be the Ministers of Christ; especially that of the Lord's
Supper; for instead of inviting and exhorting Christians to be Partakers at the
Lord's Table, they have made it their great Endeavor to deter them from it; in
which they dealt very unfaithfully with the Souls of their Hearets; for they
vehemently inculcated the Danger of unworthy Receiving, without acquainting
them with to Danger of not Receiving at all; This Omission you must be careful
to Supply, and to set before the People committed the your charge the Danger on
both hands; for certainly the profane Neglect in not Receiving, is as
dangerous and damning as the Receiving unworthily; for as they are no
Christians who are not baptized into the Name of Christ, so they are no good
Christians who neglect to partake of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lord's
Supper.

These things you should Preach and Exhort, and thereby show your selves
faithful to your Lord and Master, who has ordained these Two Sacraments to be
perpetually used and administered in the Church until his coming again.

For which purpose as there is in every Church a Font for Baptism, so there is
a part of the Church, very convenient and proper, and generally fitted and
prepared for the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, which we call the Chancel.
Here the Communion Table may be placed, and the Communicants Receive, with
greater Order, Decency and Convenience for Devotion, than in the Body of the
Church, and the Seats there.

I doubt not but you, My Brethren, are sensible of this and satisfied in it,
finding great inconvenience in Consecrating in so strait a place as an Ally of
the Church, and delivering the Bread and Wine in narrow Seats, over the Heads,
and treading upon the Feet of those that Kneel; When by removing into the
Chancel at the time of that Solemnity, every one may Kneel without disturbance,
and receive with easiness, and see the whole Office performed.

This is so proper and so becoming, that one cannot but wonder, that the
Parishioners in any place should be averse to receive the Sacrament in this
Order, and that Rectors as well Impropriate as Propriate, should not take more
care to fit their Chantels for this purpose, but that some lie wholly disused,
in more nastie manner than any Cottager of the Parish would keep his own House:
Others are employed for keeping School, by reason of which, the Seats,
Pavement, and Windows are commonly broken and defaced, not to mention other
rudenesses and undecencies which are not fit to be permitted in a place set a
part for God's Worship.

But the Reason that some give (as I have been informed) why they except
against the use of the Chancel at the time of Celebrating the Lord's Supper, is
still more to be wondered at; They lay it is Popery, and that Ministers that use
their Chancels for this office are Popishly inclined: But why Popery? Is it
because the Romish Priests before the Reformation made use of the Chancel to
say Mass? So they used the Body of the Church to perform other parts of the
Popish Service, and for that Reason they may as well except against the use of
the Church for Reading the Scriptures and Preaching, as against the use of the
Chancel for Administering the Communion; and there want not those who carry the
Argument so far as to cry down the use of Churches in general; But how weak and
how unreasonable is this? What if the Popish Priest said Mass at the Altar in
the Chancel, may not the Ministers of the Church of England for that reason
perform the Communion Service there without the Imputation of Popery? If there
be any Popery it must be in the Communion Office, and if that have any thing of
Popery in it, why do they receive the Communion in the Church? If it have not,
why may they not receive it in the Chancel? For there cannot be Popery in the
Fabric, nor in the Seats, or Table; it must be in the Office, or no where; and
one may safely affirm that no Man can prove it to be there.

But the use of the Chancel for the Communion Service is so far from being
Popery, that the Papists, and Popish Impropriators in England permit the
Chancels where they are concerned, to lie the most disorderly and ruinous of
any other, as I my self have seen in several places; they are not careful to
repair or clean them; nor can they be brought to contribute to the Reparation
of Churches, but by mere compulsion, and they would be well enough satisfied to
see all the Chancels and Churches in England lie in Ruin, for this would be the
most certain way to overthrow the Reformation and bring in Popery, which being
planted again by Authority would soon oblige that Party to rebuild the
Churches. This I thought not improper to mention, concerning this matter, upon
this occasion.

But to return to Preaching; under this Head I comprise Catechizing, which was
an early Practice in the Church of Christ and of great use for the Instructing
of the younger sort, and prepare them thereby both for Confirmation, and
Receiving the Holy Communion. If you consult the LIX. Canon, you will see that
you are bound to this Duty of Catechizing, under the Censures of sharp Reproof
first; and upon willingly offending again of Suspension; and upon the
contemptuous continuance in the neglect of it, of Excommunication. So careful
and so concerned has the Church been in this method of Instruction or Preaching.

But a sincere and well designing Man would cheerfully discharge this Duty
though there was no Ecclesiastical Censure to enforce it; for he would consider
that as the time of Youth is the most proper time to begin Instruction, so
Catechizing is the most proper way to instruct them in Religion; It is the Age
in which they learn Arts and Sciences, and how do they learn them, but by the
frequent and familiar Instructions of their Masters, examining, repeating,
inculcating, and explaining, as there is occasion and capacity for it? After
the same manner must they be taught the Principles of Religion which are
contained in the Catechism; It is not sufficient that they Repeat the Words by
Heart, but they should be taught the meaning also; and this cannot be done but
by explaining the several Heads more copiously, and in the most easy and
familiar manner; And he that is sensible of this, and of the Duty that he owes
to the Children of his Parish, as well as to the elder sort, would no more fail
to Catechize than he would to Preach; for he knows that he ought to Feed as
well with Milk, as with strong Meat, and as a Faithful Steward, to give the
Children, as well as the rest of the Family, their proper and (...). Luke 12.42.
proportionable Diet.

And here I may fitly take occasion to acquaint you, That I would not willingly
Confirm any Children but such as have been Instructed in the forementioned
manner, and such as you your selves believe to have a competent Knowledge of
the Principles of Christianity; This Knowledge must not be measured by their
Age, nor by their ready utterance of the Words of the Catechism, but by their
capacity and ability to answer such Questions, and to render such an account of
their Faith, as, you may hope, proceeds from a right Apprehension, and true
Understanding of the Sense of the Catechism. And therefore I must earnestly
desire you to take more than ordinary Pains, before the times of Confirmation,
and that not only in the Church, but, if need be, at your own Houses also, to
examine and instruct the riper sort, that they may know what they are to do,
and what they undertake at their Confirmation; and to give me a Note of the
Names of such as are so qualified and prepared; and for the younger and more
ignorant, it is best to advise them to stay till another opportunity.

There are other ways and methods of Preaching, (as it may in a general Sense
be called) namely, private Exhortation and Admonition; Resolving Doubts and
Cases of Conscience; Comforting the afflicted; Furnishing the Poor with Bibles
and other good Books; directing the Richer sort what Books to provide for their
own use, and the use of their Familyes, of which (God be thanked) this Age has
produced many; Giving, or Lending to all sorts of Dissenters (there being no
other way of preaching to them) such Books as have been written on purpose to
prevail with them to return to the Communion of this Church; particularly the
Quakers, whose gross Errors and Blasphemys have been detected and confuted so
plainly by a late learned Author of the Snake in the Grass.
Writer, that if they be so sincere as they generally pretend, they will be
obliged to renounce them. Not that this can be expected from the Leaders of
that Party; they have Ends to serve in the Conduct of that deluded People that
will engage them to adhere; notwithstanding Confutation and Conviction too; But
I hope the Simple and well-meaning may be brought to see their Errors, and
forsake them, if the Satan disrobed.
Institution of Water Baptism.
Books of this Author were put into their hands, and that they could be
prevailed with to read them, or to hear them read.

Before I leave this Head of Preaching I must remind you of a particular
opportunity you have, and a very advantageous one, of performing some parts of
this Duty; which is, at the Visitation of the Sick; for which there is a
particular Office appointed; In this, the Exhortation is very proper and
serious, and the Collects very affecting; and if it be performed whilst the
Sick Person is capable of hearing, understanding, and joining in it, may be of
great use and Benefit; But either the Sick Person or the Relations are
generally too negligent in giving timely notice, so that it has not always that
good Effect which otherwise it might; But when it is known that People are
sick, they ought diligently to be visited, that when they have least ability of
their own, by reason of their Weakness or Pain, or fear of Death, or punishment
after Death, they may be succored and assisted by the help of others; This is
the time when the Devil, the malicious and watchful Enemy of our Salvation, has
great opportunity of tempting and deceiving Men, either by Presumption or
Despair; this therefore is an apt time for you to resist him, and to rescue the
Souls committed to your Care under so great a Danger; Besides, this Office duly
performed may be of good use not only to sick and dying Persons, but also to
Relations and Visitors, who may happen to be present, and to the Minister
himself; who, if he have a serious Sense of things cannot but improve himself
in discoursing with Persons in that condition; upon all which accounts this
Office ought not to be neglected.

And here I conclude what I thought fit to say concerning Preaching, which if
you would pursue thorough all the forementioned instances of it, with a sincere
and honest heart, and a fervent desire of doing all the good you can, you would
contribute to the upholding of the Kingdom of Christ in this Age of Atheism,
Infidelity, and Licentiousness.

I shall now consider one other Office with which you are entrusted as you are
Ministers of the Church of England, in which you are highly concerned to be
faithful, and that is the Office of Matrimony. I am sorry there are so many in
this Church, and some in this Diocese, who abuse their Trust in this Matter. It
is so presumptuous, and so perfidious a practice, that it cannot be censured
too severely. Such as can be tempted for a little Sum of Money, or a great
one, to marry any Persons that resort to them, without the Publication of
Banns, or License duly obtained, or with License at uncanonical Hours, and in a
Clandestine Manner, either in their own Houses, or in their Churches, are not
fit to be entrusted with such a Power; They do an illegal and uncanonical Act
knowingly and wilfully, which they that have any sense of their Character, and
Trust, and Duty to their Superiors, would not do: Especially, such as dare
presume to marry those whom they know, or have reason vehemently to suspect to
be either stolen, or not to have the consent of Parents, Guardians, or Friends;
These are the Pests and Shame of our Profession; Their Greediness of Profit has
debauched their Consciences, and they have no feeling of their own Wickedness,
nor any regard to the many evil Consequences that attend this practice; as, the
Ruin of the Branches of Noble Familys; Disquieting Parents and Relatives, and
alienating their Affections; Encouraging Disobedience in Children; and that
which is indeed the least to be lamented, exposing them selves to Ignominy,
Contempt and Punishment; not to mention, what has sometimes happened,
legitimating, as much as in them lies, Incestuous Mixtures. One would think
that no considering Man of Conscience and Probity, could be prevailed upon for
a present Benefit to drive on such a pernicious and dishonorable Trade, and
persist in it, with defyance of all Admonition, Censure, and Punishment. This I
could not forbear to say out of that inst Indignation I have to this most
treacherous and impudent Practice.

Thus having showed you how sincerity of Heart, which is that Qualification
which our Savior preferred in choosing his Apostles, would dispose you to the
due and regular performance of all the Offices of your Holy Function; I shall
now show you how necessary this Qualification is for the Conduct of your Lives
and Conversations.

Sincerity would engage us to live agreeably to our Doctrine; which if we do
not, our Preaching would be little regarded, so that our Ministry would be in a
great measure ineffectual, and unprofitable. Men that behold the evil
Conversation even of good Preachers, will be apt to say that either they do not
believe the Doctrine they preach, or that the Practice of it is not so
necessary to Salvation as they represent it; for they that press an holy
Conversation upon others, in order to the saving of their Souls, one would
think, if they meant sincerely, would not be negligent, by the same way, to
save their own; so that they must necessarily fall under the censure of being
either unfaithful Guides, or insincere Believers.

Those keen Expostulations of St. Paul directed to the Judaizing Christians at
Rome, as they could not fail to convince, or confound those Offenders, so they
and others of the like nature, may be made use of to the same purpose, to such
Preachers of the Gospel, as walk not according to the Gospel. Romans 2d. 21.
Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a
man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man should not
commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? So St. Paul. To which, if we add, Thou that preachest
the Laws of Purity, and Temperance, and Righteousness, and Peace, and Charity,
and Humility, and Patience, and Obedience, etc. Art thou guilty of Uncleanness,
or Excess, or Injustice, or Covetousness, or Contention, or Pride, or
Resistance of Authority? What Reply could the Offenders make? If they do not
preach these Doctrines, they neglect to instruct Men in their Duty; and if they
do preach them, and do not lead their Lives accordingly, they fail in their
Practice; So that they who minister in holy things, and lead unholy Lives, are
the most self-convicted and self-condemned Men in the World; They have nothing
to say for themselves, because they do not only know their Duty, but persuade
to the Practice of it, and yet do not practice it themselves. They Reprehend
those Vices in others, in which they indulge themselves. They tell Men they
shall be damned for committing those Sins which they themselves commit. How
inconsistent, how insincere, and disagreeable is this?

But this is not all; The Ministers of Christ are bound not only to live
according to the Laws of Christianity in general; But they have a Law of their
own, a Law peculiar to the Officers of Christ's Kingdom, by which they are
obliged to a strictness and decorum suitable to that Relation. St. Paul has
described the Particulars in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and
occasionally in other places, as St. Peter also has done. There you may see by
what measures you are to govern your selves, and your Familys, with respect to
your Office and Character: These indeed, were Men of the highest Station and
Authority in the Church, but the Inferior and Subordinate as well as the
Superior are mentioned and described, and the Rules are much the same for
both. I shall not need to transcribe them; it is a Mirroir you have in your own
hands, and you may look daily into it, and compose your Conversations by it.

If I would single any Particulars of those many Offenses, which the Ministers
of the Gospel of all Ranks are there directed to avoid, it should be those of
public Scandal; not that these are in their own Nature Sins of greater
Malignity than some others there mentioned, but that the Consequences may be
worse, and the Ignominy greater.

As for instance, Intemperance, which is one of the perticulars mentioned by
Tim. 1. 3 c. 3 and 8 ver. (...).
St. Paul, as it is a Sin that discovers it self more openly than many others,
so there is no other that renders a Clergyman more ridiculous and contemptible,
for which reason, if no other, it ought carefully to be avoided; But it infects
the Neighborhood too, and they that like it are the more encouraged to
practice it by the example and conversation of their Preacher, which increases
the Scandal. But though the Scandal be very great where the Guilt is
manifest, and that the Offenders cannot be too severely censured, yet if they
be but few, as I hope they are not many, in comparison of the great Body of the
Clergy, the whole ought not to be reproached for the misbehaviour of those few;
Let the Scandal lie in its own place, and there let the Offenders be punished
by all the Penaltys Ecclesiastical and Civil; But God forbid that the innocent
should suffer with the guilty, as they do too often, by the uncharitable and
malicious hints, Suggestions, and groundless Storys of those that are their
Enemies, because they demand their Dues, and tell them the Truth; An apparent
offense of this nature in one Man has been known to occasion the censure of
many, especially of those who do not abridge themselves the freedom of
Conversation with one another, being not conscious to themselves of any
unworthy design or practice by such Conversation; and yet even in this it must
be said, that there is regard to be had to time and place and other
Circumstances; so strict and nice are the measures, by which the Clergy are to
govern themselves.

If I should instance in another scandalous Sin mentioned by St. Paul, which
is Tim. 3.8. (...)
Covetousness, I know I should gratify some Men who are apt to accuse the
Clergy too commonly in this Matter; but very unjustly; for I think I may truly
say that there is no Profession of Men, or at least I know not any, that, in
the common Body of them, are freer from this Sin then the Clergy are; insomuch,
that the greater number of them, it may be, stand in need of Advice to be more
provident, considering their small Incomes, and the great Payments with which
they are constantly burdened, and at some times unjustly oppressed; But true
it is, that all cannot be excused, and it must needs be said, that such as are
really guilty in this matter, are highly scandalous. How unbecoming and
reproachful is it for those who ought, above all others, to have their
Conversation in Heaven, as being the Preachers of that Doctrine, which was
revealed from Heaven, and leads to Heaven, and that expect their Rewards for so
Preaching in Heaven, to mind earthly things immoderately, and study and
practice that Wisdom which is earthly? Such as they that are insatiably greedy
in acquiring and heaping up Preferments, or sordid and penurious in the use of
those they enjoy, or incumber themselves with the secular Affairs of other
Persons, employing a great part of their time and labor in worldly
Concernments which should be employed in the proper Business of their Function.

And here I cannot but take notice of one Instance of Covetousness which I take
to be very unworthy and scandalous, which is not allowing Curates a meet and
competent Maintenance agreeable to their Education, Character, and the occasion
of their Expenses. What a vile and sordid thing is it for Men of great
Preferments to cheapen Curates, and contract with them for 20, or 25, or 30 l.
per ann. (for they seldom exceed that proportion, calling it a Competency) when
according to the value of their Ecclesiastical Incomes they might make it
double to that? Then they might be provided of more sufficient Curates then
some of them are. This is a very scandalous Practice, and makes scandalous
Curates.

I shall not proceed to instance in any other particulars of Scandal, these 2
of Intemperance and Worldlymindedness being the most scandalous, as being the
most exposed and visible where they are practiced.

But though the Scandal in both be very great, the Scandalous are not so
numerous as some ill-principled and evilminded People, who are prone to censure
at random, would represent them to be. God be thanked that it may be affirmed
truly, that the Clergy of the Church of England in general, are not only good
Preachers, but sincere and good Men, and the freedom which some are apt to
accuse them of proceeds not from vicious Inclinations but from an abhorrence of
Hypocrisy.

I shall add no more to what I have said concerning your Behavior, and
Conversation, but only this, that though the Rules be more, and stricter
relating to the Clergy, than to Christians in general, yet those that are
sincere will make it their Endeavor to live up to them; Sincerity being a
Principle that will not permit a Man to shift off any Duty, whether active or
passive, though never so hard, which is laid upon him by God, or which he lays
upon himself; for which reason, as I told you at the beginning, our Savior
made choice of honest upright Men, as the most suitably qualified to be the
Officers of his Kingdom.

And here it may not be improper to suggest to you, That this Principle of
Sincerity would prevent a great many Failings and misbecoming Practices in some
of the Clergy, which though they seem not of so great Malignity as those I have
mentioned, yet ought to be taken notice of, and regulated,

One is concerning the subscribing Testimonials of such as apply themselves for
Orders or Institutions, in which, to my own Knowledge, some of the Clergy of
this Diocese have been too easy; and though they may call it Charity, it is a
great mistake; for by this means the Bishop, who can know nothing of the
Conversation of Men, but by the Testimony of those who do know, is often
deceived, and so unworthy Men creep into Orders, to the dishonor of their holy
Profession; which indeed is to be charged upon the unfaithfulness of those that
set their hands to Testimonials, either blindly, having no knowledge of the
Person; or falsely, knowing that he is not worthy of the Character they give of
him.

To which may be added that of granting insufficient, uncanonical, and false
Titles to Curates, when those that grant them never intend to employ them as
Curates, or to contribute to their Maintenance, but only to give them an
opportunity of entering into Orders, and then let them shift for themselves; and
indeed this has occasioned a great deal of shifting, some being forced to take
up with mean and poor conditions and ways of Livelihood, and others wandering
about for Employment, and even craveing Charity, to the great contempt and
dishonor of their Profession.

Another Failing I shall instance in, is the not Repairing timely, the Chancels
and Buildings belonging to Rectorys and Vicarages; by reason of which Neglect
such Buildings become so dilapidated that the yearly Profits of the Benefice
cannot suffice for the Charges of the Reparation; and that which renders this
neglect more mischievous, is, that such Dilapidators many times die insolvent,
and so leave the whole Burden of the Repair upon the Successor; which if he
undertake to do substantially, as he ought, he must live very inconveniently in
the mean time. Now what honesty is there in this for a Man to enjoy the whole
Profits of a Benefice, it may be, for many years, and by neglecting to repair
the Edifices belonging to it, leave an unsupportable Charge to a Successor who
must be forced to expend Moneys in repairing before he receive any Prosits?

The like Prejudice happens to Successors in another instance, in which many
Clergymen are culpable; which is the neglect of paying Tenths, Pensions,
Procurations, and other Duties chargeable upon their Preferments. I am sensible
that the Clergy cannot receive their own Dues in some places, though they
proceed fairly and legally to recover them. Many delays and evasions are used
in this case; however, they cannot answer the neglect of paying the
forementioned Dues, both as it is a Christian Duty to render to all their Dues,
and as they are liable by the neglect to very great Penalties.

I have been much troubled to observe so great an Arrear of Tenths in this
Diocese, where it is my Duty to collect them. It is my earnest Desire that for
your own Interest and Reputation you would hasten the payment of the present
Arrear, for which purpose I shall appoint one in my Visitation to receive them
and give Acquittances, which may be of some ease to you; and for the future, I
must advise you to make more timely and punctual payment. The neglect of this
has run some Benefices into so great an Arrear, that Clergymen are discouraged
from taking Institution to them, so that they continue several Years under
Sequestration, in which state, the Church and other Buildings become
dilapidated, the Tithe in a great measure unpaid and lost, the Gleab untilled
and purloyned, the Patrons Right of Presenting extinguished, and the Benefice
at last turned into a sine cure. So great a mischief has been occasioned, only
by the neglect of paying Tenths in due time. Care and Honesty would have
prevented this.

Another Neglect, with which I shall conclude, is that of not Residing upon
Benefices; which is an Omission of very ill Consequence, and occasions great
Complaint. Not only the Canons of General Counsels, but the Provincial Canons
allowed in this Kingdom are very strict in this Case, and where they are not
altered or limited by Statute Law remain in force, according to the Opinion of
many Learned Divines and Lawyers, though some are of another Opinion; and the
xli Canon of the Convocation in 1603, though it supposes Licenses of
Dispensation, for the keeping of more Benefices with cure than one, yet it
ordains many Restrictions and Limitations, which, if they were duly observed,
would prevent many of those ill Consequences and Complaints of non-residence;
But Men have found out Evasions for these Restrictions, with which, however
they may satisfy themselves, they do not satisfy the plain design and meaning
of the Canon, and Sincerity would Remedy the neglect if the Law cannot.

I have now no more to add, but only to desire you favorably to receive these
Advices which proceed from that honest and sincere Intention, which I have here
recommended; And I beseech Almighty God so to impress them upon your Hearts,
that I may see a good Effect of them. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's.
A Sermon Preached before the House of Lords at the Abbey-Church of St.
Peter's- Westminster, on Wednesday, the 11th of December, 1695. being the Day
appointed for a Solemn Fast and Humiliation. By the Right Reverend Father in
God, James, Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

A Sermon Preached before the House of Lords at the Abbey-Church of St.
Peter's- Westminster, on Saturday the 30th of January, 169^. being the
Anniversary of the Death of King Charles I. of Glorious Memory. By the Reverend
Father in God, William, Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, Lord Almoner to
His Majesty.

A Sermon Preached before the House of Lords at the Abbey-Church of St. Peter's
Westminster, on Thursday, 30 Jan. 1691. being the Martyrdom of King Charles I.
By the Right Reverend Father in God, Humphrey, Lord Bishop of Bangor.

The Guide of a Christian, directing him to such Things, as are by him to be
Believed, Practiced, Feared, and Hoped for. There are added at the End Prayers
to be used on several Occasions. The Second Edition, carefully Corrected.
Prince bound 6 d. This Book is designed to be given, as Charity, throughout all
Parishes in England.

A Declaration of the Sense of the Archbishops and Bishops, now in and about
London, upon the Occasion of their Attendance in Parliament; concerning the
Irregular and Scandalous Proceedings of certain Clergy Men, at the Execution of
Sir John Friend, and Sir William Parkins.

Animadversions on Two Pamphlets, lately Published by Mr. Collier. The one
called, A Defense of the Absolution given to Sir William Parkins at the Place
of Execution, Apr. 3. The other, A Vindication thereof; occasioned by a Paper,
entitled, A Declaration of the Sense of the Arch bishops and Bishops, etc.
Showing the Nature of the late Absolution, both as to Church and State. In a
Letter to a Friend.

The Spirit of Jacobitism; or Remarks upon a Dialogue between K.W. and Benting.
In a Dialogue between two Friends of the Present Government.

A Debate on the Justice and Piety of the present Constitution, under King
William. In two Parts; The first relating to the State, the second to the
Church, between Eucheres, a Conformist, and Dyscheres, a Recusant. By Samuel
Hill, Rector of Kilmington, Author of Solomon and Abiathar.

Eight Sermons, preached on several Occasions. By Nathaniel Whaley, Rector of
Broughton, in Northamptonshire.


