A True and Exact ACCOUNT OF Sadlers Well: OR The New Mineral-Waters Lately
found out at ISLINGTON; Treating of its Nature and Virtues.

Together with an Enumeration of the Chiefest Diseases which it is good for,
and against which it may be used, and the Manner and Order of Taking of it.

Published for public good by T. G. Doctor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry* 1684*

An exact Account of the new Well lately found out at Islington.
THe New Well at Islington is a certain Spring in the middle of a Garden,
belonging to the Music House, Built by Mr. -- Sadler, on the North-side of the
Great Cistern that receives the New River Water near Islington, the Water
whereof was before the Reformation, very much famed for several extraordinary
Cures performed thereby, and was thereupon accounted sacred, and called
Holy-Well. The Priests belonging to the Priory of Clarken-well using to attend
there, made the People believe that the virtues of the Waters proceeded from
the efficacy of their Prayers. But upon the Reformation the Well was stopped up,
upon a supposition that the frequenting it was altogether Superstitious, and so
by degrees it grew out of remembrance, and was wholly lost until found out, and
the Fame of it revived again by the following accident.

Mr. Sadler being made Surveyor of the High Ways, and having good Gravel in his
own Garden, employed two Men to Dig there, and when they had Dug, pretty deep,
one of them found his Pickax strike upon some thing that was very hard*
whereupon he endeavored to break it, but could not; whereupon thinking with
himself that it might peradventure be some Treasure hid there, he uncovered it
very carefully* and found it to be a Broad Flat Stone; which having loosened
and lifted up, he saw it was supported by four Oaken Posts, and had under it a
large Well of Stone Arched over, and curiously carved; and having viewed it, he
called his fellow Labourer to see it likewise, and asked him whether they
should fetch Mr. Sadler and show it him? Who having no kindness for Sadler
said, no; he should not know of it, but as they had found it, so they would
stop it up again, and take no notice of it; which he that found it consented to
at first, but after a little time he found himself (whether out of Curiosity or
for some other reason, I shall not determine) strongly inclined to tell Sadler
of the Well; which he did one Sabbath Day in the Evening.

Sadler upon this went down to see the Well and observing the Curiosity of the
Stone work, that was about it, and fancying within himself that it was a
Medicinal Water, formerly had in great esteem, but by some accident or other
lost, he took some of it in a Bottle, and carried it to an Eminent Physician,
telling him how the Well was found out, and desiring his Judgment of the Water;
who having tasted and tried it, told him it was very strong of a Mineral taste,
and advised him to Brew some Beer with it, and carry it to some Persons, to
whom he would recommend him; which he did accordingly. And some of those who
used to have it of him in Bottles, found so much good by it, that they defired
him to bring it in Roundlets. Which was done most part of the last Winter, and
continued to have so good an effect upon the Persons that drank it, that at the
beginning of this Summer Dr. Morton advised several of his Patients to drink
the Water. Which has so good an effect upon them, and operates so near Tunbridg
Water, that it has obtained a general approbation. And great numbers of those
who used to go thither, drink it, There are few Physicians in London, but have
advised some or other of their Patients to drink it; by which means it is so
frequented, that there are Five or six Hundred People there constantly every
Morning.

The Water has a kind of Ferruginous Taste, somewhat like Tunbridge, but not
altogether so strong of the Steel. It is no way offensive or unpleasant; so
that a Man may drink more of it than he can possibly drink of any other Liquor.
It is not yet certainly known what Minerals it runs through, but is supposed
to partake of several, and to have more of a Nitrous Sulphur than those of
Tunbridg, for which reason it moves the Person who drinks it to stool at the
first taking, and leaves the Body Open and Cool, which the other does not; and
where it meets with a very foul Stomach, provokes to vomit.

It appears to be good for the following Distempers*

First it effectually opens all Obstructions, both of the Liver, Spleen and
Gall, and that better than any other Physic whatsoever; for in regard
Obstructions are generally very stubborn, and require a long Course of Physic
to remove them, which is both loathsome, and chargeable to the Patient, it is
common for people to grow weary of it before the Physician have half run
through the course, which is necessary for the removing of them; which is the
chief reason that so many are troubled with Chronical, and Lingering Diseases*
which are not incurable in their own Nature, but made so, either by the
Patients not being able, or willing to undergo such a course of Physic, as is
requisite for his Recovery, or else some defect in the Physician. But these
Waters being less Chargeable, and after a little use no way troublesome, but
the longer they are used, the pleasanter, may be taken in a larger quantity
than other Physic, and by that means effectually cure the most obstinate
Obstructions, and all other Distempers proceeding therefrom; to wit, the
Dropsy, Black and Yellow Jaundice, Swelling of the Spleen, Scurvy, Green
Sickness, and other Distempers incident to the Female Sex.

Secondly* It excellently purges and sweetens the Blood, and scowrs and
cleanses all the Urinary Passages, which makes it exceeding good for those
troubled with Gravel and Stone, either in the Kidneys, Ureters, or Bladder,
which it sometimes brings away in great Quantities; and being somewhat of a
Restringent, and Healing Faculty, it is very good for inward Ulcers, and those
that make bloody Urine.

Thirdly, It Is good against all inveterate Dysenteries, or Bloody Fluxes, and
extinguishes all inward Inflammations, and hot Distempers.

Fourthly, It is extraordinary good for those who are troubled with
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and makes those who drink it brisk and cheerful.

Fifthly, It procures a good Appetite, and makes those who drink it, extreme
hungry, so that they can hardly forbear eating till Dinner. But that those
Persons who drink them, may not fail of the good they expect from them, they
must take heed that they be very careful and regular when they take them, and
especially to observe the following Directions.

Go to them early in the morning; for the sooner they are drank, the better
they operate. Beware of walking too fast, lest you overheat your self, and if
ye find your self hot when you come there, take a turn or two in the Garden,
till you are a little cooler, and then drink two Glasses, after which walk two
or three times round the Garden, then drink a Glass or two; walk again as
formerly, and so continue till you have drank your dose. You may adventure to
drink four or five Glasses the first morning, and increase two every day, till
you come to 9 or 10, or more, if you find your Body will bear it. Eat nothing
till about twelve or one a clock, and then eat freely of any Fresh Meat; but
Roast Mutton, or Lamb is best.

Those who please may eat Carraways while they drink the Water, and drink a
glass of Rhenish, or White Wind after them: And it is very convenient for those
who smoke Tobacco, to take a Pipe or two whilst their Waters work.

Which Directions being observed, you may assure your selves, by the blessing
of God, to reap great advantage by the use of these Waters, if ye continue to
drink them for any considerable time.

FINIS.

