(...).

A Just INVECTIVE against those of the ARMY, And their ABETTORS, who murdered
King Charles I. On the 30 of Jan. 1648. WITH Some other Poetic pieces in
Latin, referring to these Tragic times, never before published.

Written Feb. 10. 1648. By Dr. Gauden then Dean of Bocking in Essex, now Lord
Bishop of Exeter.

1 Samuel 24. 6. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and
be guiltless? 2 Chronicles. 35. 25. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the
Singers spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, and made them an Ordinance in
Israel. Prosperimae improbitati nunquam deest terror, nec spes afflictae
virtuti. LONDON, Printed by T. L. for James Davies, and are to be sold by Phil.
Stephens at the Kings Arms over against the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet,
1662.

The Author to the Reader.
I Wrote this Piece ( flagrante dolor) in the just paroxisms of extreme grief
and horror, immediately upon the Murder of the late Excellent King, 1648. as
soon as the astonishment of sorrow gave leave to regular thoughts and words to
vent themselves; I sent it ( incognito) in its sackcloath and ashes to London,
where I hoped it might find way to public view. My aim was, not only to
gratify my Own and the Nations vehement passion, by expressing a just
indignation against that prodigious Villainy, but to represent in true colors
that horrid sin and shame of killing the King, whereof some men then were so
impudent as to glory. And since I could not divert them from that flagitious
Fact by such Loyal and Religious Remonstrances as I sent them, I thought it
high justice to take this vengeance on them, either to bring the Authors and
Abettors (if possible) to repentance, or to preserve others from partaking of
their sins and plagues, by any after comprobation of their then prosperous
impiety, so as to make it the sin and shame of the Nation.

But my Papers found no hand so adventurous in those Tyrannous times as to
Print them; although conveyed to a person who had hazarded and suffered much in
that way of loyal-service and danger: So that having no Copy left of it, I did
not see it, or hear of it for many years, supposing it had perished in the
common shipwreck of those days, until this Feb. 1661. occasionally meeting
with Mr. Dugart (to whom I first sent it) and enquiring what became of such a
Piece, he told me it was Printed, and brought me the Book with a new Title
(Tragical enough) put to it (viz. Cromwels bloody Slaughterhouse discovered,
etc.) whereas I had inscribed it after the example of Gregory Nazianzen, when
he wrote his two sharp invectives against Julian the Apostate (...)) the
Steliteutick of that Army, justly araigning and condemning them that were
guilty of that bloody and barbarous Fact, which I hereby exposed, as upon a
public Pillar, to the view and execration of all men.

When I had thus recovered this Piece beyond all expectation, I well remembered
upon review, its pristine lineaments; and found it signally marked with the sad
drops of my passionate heart and pen; upon such an occasion in which no Ink
could be black enough, or have too much Salt, Vinegar, Gall, or Aquafortis in
it. Upon a calmer view of it (after thirteen years absence) finding it to have
something in it of a confused rapture, not misbecoming so intensive a grief,
and so pious impatience, with an unfegined abhorrence worthy of so abominable a
Fact, and monstrous a scandal to our Nation and Religion, I have been persuaded
by the Printer to own it as a legitimate Issue of mine, with some-other pieces
born in the same storm, though in another style and language, in order to make
him some compensation for his first (but not so beneficial) Loyal printing of
it, while yet it appeared an Orphane or fatherless, because nameless: I am now
content my name be called upon it, that the world may see in this unflattering
glass, with what thoughts they ought for ever to reflect upon so enormous a
wickedness, which no time can bury in oblivion, no color can palliate or
excuse, scarce any repentance can expiate; being then the Nations infinite
horror, and so must be an abhorrence to all posterity: Nor may the present
serenity of the times (which miraculous mercies have restored) ever make us
forget the blackness of darkness, which lies upon that day, beyond Jobs
birthday for that facinorous Fact committed in it.

For whosoever shall think of that crying Regicide, without just detestation,
will contract the posthumous guilt of the Murder, and as a dog lick up the
blood of the King which was so cruelly and unjustly shed. And whosoever shall
remember it with approbation perpetrates the paricide afresh, and is a mental
murderer of his Sovereign. O how great then was, and is their sin, who were
the first malicious contrivers and cruel actors in it? What repentance will be
sufficient for them? What contrition, detestation, confess on, satisfaction can
be proportionate to the enormity of the crimes committed with so high a hand,
followed with so many tragedies and confusions, yet ushered in with so many
pretensions of Religion, Reformation, sancity and devotion, yea special
Revelations and Miracles, the strong delusions and stratagems of Satan, that
grand Impostor, a liar, and murderer from the beginning, who affected the
fairest vizards of an Angel of light, when he was to act the foulest part of a
Devil: so expressly against the word of God, and diametrally contrary to the
examples of all true Saint, no less than the Savior and sanctifier of them?

A dreafull example indeed of pride and faction, betraying men to hypocrisy
and barbarity, by which the just God loudly warns the still discontented
spirits, the murmuring tongues, and malicious hearts of some men, not to
venture again on the confines of such sins, by any temptation, never so
specious and potent. Sin is seldom solitary or goes along, but is followed
with a train or succession, disposing, yea exposing from less to greater, and
from the greater to the most heinous and truculent sins, if for no other
reason, yet for this, to defend or cover the lesser: Nor can any man easily
forsee, what will be the impudent period of his sin, how modestly soever it
begins. David's idle humor, and an occasional look, betrayed him to wanton
thoughts, these to unlawful lusts, this to Drunkenness and Adultery, these to
Murder, and all to the highest both perfidy and ingratitude to God and all
valiant loyal subjects. Hazaels bashfulness was at first ashamed to find
himself under the Prophets suspicion of those cruel barbarities which afterward
he committed without remorse, and with greediness.

Tumultuating and traitorous thoughts (much more such words) must be stifled in
the cradle by every good Christian; who knows how great a fire a little spark
will kindle? Kings must not be cursed, no not in the Bedchamber; these lesser
thieves of schismatical and seditious mutinies let in at the window, will open
the door to greatest Rebellions and Regicides. Subjects cutting off the lap of
their Kings garment, or lesning the Robe of royal Majesty, that is their just
reputation, honor and authority, will imbolden them to venture at their heads
and throats, yea to take away their lives and Kingdoms: which David, a man
after Gods own heart, so much abhorred, that his heart presently smote him for
that cautious essay, as petty Treason, upon Saul's Vesture, which carried with
it something of injury and indignity to the King the Lords anointed; nor did
his justice spare those King-killers, who having slain Saul and Ishbosheth,
David's enemies, thought he had done a meritorious service.

A man's greatest flatterers, enemies and traitors are those in his own breast,
where proud discontents, inordinate lusts, and extravagant passions (as the
populacy, rabble, and vulgarity of people) are prone daily to conspire and
mutiny against that Reason and Religion, which ought to have a constant rule
and sovereignty in the soul.

I believe many men never intended in their first Schismatical motions so
sinful a conclusion; many no doubt are now ready to alter their opinion at the
scene and success of affairs, yea to think those counsels and actions very
wicked, which they find are become so unprosperous; but he sees sins too late,
who does it (as Adam, Cain and Judas,) by retrospection only in the glass of
punishment. It is best discerned by a forward and direct view in the first
access, by that prospect, which the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land give
us.

Had this been done by those blood thirsty and deceitful men, this Piece might
have been spared; now it will serve on the Anniversary of Englands Lamentation,
Jan. 30. to excite that just passion of a penitent grief, and utter
detestation, which are due to the memory of so foul a Fact, and of those sins
which brought us under the stroke of so sore a judgment.

The grief and horror of which, did so perfectly possess my soul, when I wrote
this Steliteutick, in an ecstasy of sighs, tears and indignation, that the
Reader may easily perceive the deluge of sorrow by the streams of it, which run
as a torrent with much trouble and unevenness, not with that order and
smoothness that becomes a quiet and calm temper, which had been a sin in me at
that time, when every soul, not stupid or seared, in England was filled with
extreme grief and horror, either for the sin they had done, or for the
punishment they had deserved, or for the duty they had omitted, or for the
desperate estate of the malicious doers of it, whose repentance was scarce to
be hoped or prayed for, having spoken and acted so many lies, perjuries, and
sacrileges in hypocrisy, seared their consciences, caused the enemies of God
to blaspheme, and profaned the spotless sanctity of Christian Religion, and
done despite to the Spirit of grace, which they dared to pretend to be the
patron of their bloody policy, a promoter and approver of their so execrable
and accursed practices. I shall be glad if any faithful corrasive here may
bring any of them yet living, to some sense of their most crying and
transcendent sins, that if possible they may repent and be pardoned by the
mercies of God, and merits of the Son of God, whose precious blood only can cry
louder than that of the Kings; if this end be not attained (of which God knows,
as yet there have been very few signs) yet I have great hope to reach the other
end, of keeping all good Christians and loyal Subjects for the future from the
like degeneration, as much as they would avoid Hell and eternal damnation.
Obedience to Superiors in all things lawful for the Lords sake, is a
Christians greatest honour^ and patience with pr^yers and tears under unjust
pressures is his surest defense; all other ways are but the wanton temptations
of the devil, and the petulant transports of men's wicked hearts, most unworthy
of good Christians (as all primitive examples teach us) whose actions flowing
from faith, and guided by love must never vary from the paths of piety and
loyalty, humility and charity, which are the way to true peace and eternal
happiness. And thus I have given thee (O Christian Reader) an account of my
first writing, and now publi^hing or rather owning this Steliteutick, or pious
Satyr, writ against so (...)nstrous a sin, as that was of Murdering the King.
Farewell.

JOH. EXON.

(...): A just INVECTIVE Against the MVRTHERERS OF King Charles the First.
HAve you killed our King, and also taken possession of his Goods, Lands, and
Kingdoms? O ye blood-thirsty and deceitful men! Is this your Sion, that must be
built with Royal blood, and your Jerusalem, that must be raised with such
detestable iniquiry? O ye painted Sepulchers, will no bones serve to fill you,
but those of your King?

You ravening Wolves, (whom God has suffered to uncase your selves of your
Sheeps Clothing) can nothing satiate your cruel Appetites and Hydropick
Thirst, but only the flesh and blood of our King? whom with merciless hands and
hearts, in an impudent Triumph, you have murdered before the Face of God and
his Subjects; whose Royal Posterities, and peoples Lives and Estates, you now
hope to devour, without any opposition or gainsaying. So cruelly heavy and
barbarous is that Iron Scepter, with which you think to rule this Nation; nor
allowing any fair and legal plea, for either Kings or Peoples Lives, Liberties,
Estates, or Religion: but beyond all Papal and Mahumetane Tyranny, you usurp
over our Souls, no less than our Bodies; and seek (now) by slavish fears, and
sinful Agreements, A Knack of State, called the Agreement of the People.
to make, to make us all as much the Children of the Devil as your selves,
whose Consciences (no doubt) like Cain's tell you, your desperate and damnable
Estate, having sinned against the light of God, and his holy Spirit, (some of
you) so impudently and maliciously, as justly excludes all hope of pity or
pardon from God and Man; having first treacherously betrayed, then barbarously
murdered, both your and our King.

Go on you Apollyons, you Abaddons, in the Spirit of Antichrist, to fill up the
measure of your Abominations, till you are drunk with blood, and stumble and
fall together: O you Locusts, the blackest smoke, and noisomest vapor that
ever the breath of the bottomless pit exhaled, or sent forth into the Christian
world; your Maiden faces, in your first seemingly modest and fair pretensions
to the King and Kingdom, have now brought on the poisonous Scorpions of you
Tails, after many cunning windings of flattery, perjury, and hypocrisy.

Behold the fruits of your Oaths, Prayers, Fastings, your Illuminations,
Raptures, and the Sacred madnesses of your Prophets; are they not as the Grapes
of Sodom, sour, and unsavory, seting on edge the teeth of all men that have
any taste or relish of true piety?

Are these the practices of Saints of spiritual and seraphick minds, of men
living in God and in Christ by the Spirit? We call Heaven and Earth, and your
selves (who are to us as Hell and Devils) to witness against you; What can the
most carnal, loose, and profane Atheists do more abominable, than you have
done? What have the falsest Jews, the fiercest Turks, the most brutish
Heathens, the Renegado Christians, the subtilest Jesuits, or the most
Phanatique Anabaptists, and Schismatics, or any other, that are wholly without
God in this world* ever done comparable to your immense Villainies? Yea, what
could Devils do more, if they had their wills, but by such Instruments as you
are, extend their malice to the utmost latitude of their power?

Have you not by Treachery and Tyranny usurped upon all just power, and exalted
your selves (such despicable worms) above all that is called God? Neither King
nor Parliament, nor Laws, nor your own Engagements to all, nor your many
Proposals, Promises, and Declaratioins have any reverence with you, or weight
upon you; but like riotous and enraged Beasts, you have overborn, and trampled
under your feet all that is either Sacred or Civil, in the Laws of God, Nature,
Nations, or this Kingdom, of which you are Members, though the most ulcerous
and pestilent that ever the Earth can bring forth, or bear.

Hapily your stupid pride, and brutish insolency, will not suffer you to
consider how odious, abominable, and accursed you now are to all men, but such
as are Cockatrices of the same Egg and Brood with your selves, that is, seared
Saints, hardened Hypocrites, and enraged Satan's.

We assure you, you are now looked upon by all sober and honest minds, as the
heaviest, and filthiest Incubuses that ever oppressed Church or State; as the
Legions of unclean Spirits, which by Diabolical Arts and Magic of Hypocrisy,
have got possession of this Church and Kingdom, till Christ by his power cast
you out of, and suffer you like the Demoniack Swine, through the just judgment
of God, to be hurried headlong by your own terrors, and despairs, into the
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

You are like cursed Cams, not mockers only, but murderers of the Father of
your Country; impudent Ravishers both of Church and State, to satisfy your
most abominable lusts of Tyranny; Cove^uosness, and all licentious Profaneness.

Monsters of men, putid Apostates, excreable Saints, shameless Sinners,
traytorous Tyrants, what have you to plead for, or palliate with your late
horrid outrages, and unparalled villainies, by which you have obstructed the
Fountain of Justice, altered the Chanel, broken the Cistern, turned the clear
and wholesome Waters of our Laws into Blood, Wormwood, and deadly Poison; while
you have with unheard of tyranny and treachery, set up your private wills, by
that public power (wherewith you were entrusted only for some limited uses)
above the Majesty and Lives of our King and his Children; above the Dignity of
our Parliaments, the Honor of our Laws, the Reverence of your Country, and the
Regard due to your fellow Subjects, and confederate Nations; And all this
without the least color of any Call or Authority from God or Man, Reason or
Religion; against all Obligations both Sacred and Civil, that might possibly
lie on men's Souls to God or Man against many your particular pretensions, and
former promises of such due observance as became you, both as Men, Subjects,
Soldiers, and Christians?

You, who are not the thousand part of His Majesty's Subjects, how durst you
knowingly act as in the name of all, and yet indeed against the Duty, Desires,
and Consciences of all, but such Children of Belial as your selves?

You that are for the most part such Sons of the Earth, of so base Extraction,
of meaner Education, Strangers to all good Literature, Honor, or Civility;
Heirs of beggary and contempt; whom most of the Subjects in England might for
your rudeness and barbarity justly have disdained to have set with the Dogs of
their Flocks: how are you become the Creators of a new Heaven, and a new Earth,
who are such Sons of Tohu, and Bohu, of Chaos, Obscurity and Confusion?

You that at best are but Gods Butchers, the unjust Executioners of his just
vengeance; as the evil and destroying Angels sent among us for a time; (though
your exorbitant malice and lusts disdain to be limited by your Military
Commission, yet God, we hope, will restrain your fury, who has manifested your
impious folly.) With what forehead could you thus lift up your hand against,
and set your selves above all those who are confessed your Betters, Masters,
and Superiors: As if in a Gyantly impudence, and Cyclopick cruelty, you could
never be famous enough, but by Infamy, nor fierce and wicked enough, unless you
fought against Heaven, against the express Word of God, and his Vice-garents on
Earth. Thus heaping up Mountains of Lies, Perjuries, Hypocrisies, and
Cruelties, upon those vast and enormous Lusts of Rapine, Sacrilege,
Covetousness, Revenge, and Tyranny in your hearts, which nothing nath ever
equalled, or can exceed.

You have indeed finished the Masterpiece of your Father the Devil, whom as
his firstborn, he has filled with a double portion of malice, subtilty, and
cruelty beyond any; whose hearts like Elymas the Sorcerer, or Simon Magus, he
has possessed. You have nothing left you but Impenitence and Hell, (which you
neither believe, nor fear) by which to make farther progress in your most
flagitious, and ever accursed Villainies.

What step have you more to advance to the blaspheming of the Majesty of the
most high God, both in himself, and his Deputies, lawful Kings, and Sovereign
Magistrates? What more can you do, or invent, to the scandal of the Gospel, to
the exposing the Name of Christ to open shame, to the trampling his Blood under
feet, through the hatred and detestation of all Nations, that are without the
Church? How could you devise more to adorn the Triumphs of Pope and Papists, to
whose tayls you are tied, though your faces seem contrary, and whose business
you have done, while you pretend to abhor their Names, as much as Devils do
potent Charms?

What Sea could ever wash away from the face of the Christian Reformed
Religion, the stain of that blood of our King, which you have (in a Pageant of
Justice) most unjustly, inhumanely, and barbarously shed, to color your
Malice, to satiate your Revenge, and to make way for your Tyranny, If we the
People of England should by our silence adopt, and by our assistance nourish,
those prodigies of Rebellion, Treason, and Confusion, which your libidinous
Mars, by the help of your prostitute and officious Venus, (your
Un-parliamentary Junto) has lately brought forth and astonished the world
withal? Was it ever so done, since the Name of Christ was planted on the
earth, save only by the spawn of those furies, from whom you are descended, who
made such havoc first in Africa, after in other Western Churches, and lately
in Germany? whose principles and practices you have as much surpassed, in
Hypocrisy, Anarchy, Cruelty and Blasphemy, as Beelzebub (your Prince) may be
thought to exceed the lesser fry of damned Spirits.

Those impure Catharists exercised (indeed) their Donatistical and
Anabaptistical frauds and fucies, chiefly upon the vulgar, to the ruin of many
thousands of the Country people and Citizens* But you like so many Ravilliacks,
are not content to have spoil^d so many Noble and flourishing Families, to have
exhausted so many plentiful Estates, to have made so many mourning Widows, and
Fatherless Children, to have destroyed the lives, and sucked the blood of so
many Christians, your Fellow Subjects, but you must in one day swallow up the
two Houses of Parliament, in another murder the King, in a third cut off the
right and inheritance of the Crown from the Undoubted Heir, and all the Kings
Children. At last you conspire to tempt us all by your simple and foolish Paper
falsely called, The Agreement of the People, to join with you in the utter
overthrowing of our Laws, Liberties, and the whole frame of this ancient and
renowned Kingdom, whose weight you will find too heavy for such weak Atlases as
you will shortly appear, both in Counsel and in Power, who are only wise to do
wickedly, and strong to shed or drink the blood of your King and Countrymen.
Your Cruelty has fulfilled the wish of Caligula, at one blow to cut off the
head of three Kingdoms, and with him all Monarchy, to make way for your
Polemocracy, a Military Tyranny, or Schismatical Anarchy.

Thus have you been profound to deceive, skillful to destroy; our Souls faint
within us, because of such treacherous dealers, such hideous Murderers, into
whose snares the breath of our nostrils is fallen, and in whose deep
dissembling pits the Anointed of the Lord, our meek, patient, and most
Christian King is swallowed up; under the shadow of whose just Authority*
Princely wisdom, and judicious piety we hoped to have been safe.

How does this sometime famous and flourishing Kingdom, now sit as a Widow,
oppressed, desolate, despised; full of unexpressible lamentations? The
bitterness and gall of your cruel Hypocrisy has entered into, filled and
overwhelmed our Souls.

How is she that was the Joy, Crown, and Queen of all Nations, the Envy or
Emulation of all Christian Churches, now become the horror and astonishment of
her Neighbors round about, the pity and calamity of all her friends, the
scorn, reproach, hissing and triumph of all her Enemies? Nor is there any
helper, comforter, or Deliverer left, till God take the matter into his own
hands, and plead the cause of the King and Kingdom against those proud Goliahs,
whose uncircumcised hearts and lips, out of a riot and superfluity of
wickedness, have blasphemed our God, destroyed our King, laid waste and
exhausted the Kingdom, and turned this Church into a Den of Thieves.

O Lord arise, O Lord consider, O Lord hear the voice of our sighs, tears and
prayers; let the cry of the blood of our King and our people come up to Heaven;
have mercy on us, for we are brought very low.

Our gracious King, the Husband of the Kingdom, the Father of his Subjects, the
Pr^^erver of our Laws, the Patron of Religion, the Protector of the Church, you
have treacherously and barbarously murdered; the two Houses of Parliament,
(whose weakness, perverseness, unevenness, inconstancy and cowardice God has
seen, disliked, judged, and punished) you have forcibly invaded, scattered, and
oppressed, notwithstanding all your special Engagements to them both of duty
and promise, commission and trust. The loyalty and love of the people, you
every where either with terror and cruelty seek to suppress and smother, so
that they shall not dare to petition for redress, or complain of those endless
calamities which they suffer under your tyranny; or else making lies your hope
and refuge, with forged semblances of complyant Petitions, and counterfeit
Gratulations, you falsely and impudently pretend the concurrent Votes of the
Countries, and the Communities approbation to your most abominated practices:
When God knows, and even your selves in your bloody dissimulation cannot be
ignorant, that the generality of all men in all places, of all degrees, do
from their Souls utterly abhor, deprecate and detest, your execrable Counsels,
and accursed Actions, which have thus brought upon us the abomination of
desolation, through the damnable deceivableness of your unrighteousness: Nor
do we believe that your pride, and tyrannous hypocrisy either finds any
comfort in them, or much considers those papers, which seem to own you, or
applaud your wicked deeds, further than they may carry on your strong delusions
with the vulgar, whom you know to be neither very wary of evil, nor very steady
in what is good.

If you had the general Consent of the Vulgar (which you know you have in no
sort) yet neither is their judgment any good rule to measure the Morality of
your actions; nor their inconstant pleasure any rest of honor, virtue or
piety: But indeed you (as well as we) are sadly conscious, that all those
clamorous Petitions for Justice, by which you would seem (as by Oracles of your
own inspiring) to be fatally directed and divinely encouraged in your Cruelties
and Treasons, were nothing else but the strokes of the Lions own tail, the more
to enrage himself; the very froth and scum, which arose only from the zealous
activity and boylings of your own bloody Faction; who restl(...) Devils,
continually go about, seeking whom they may de^^i^e and destroy; we are well
assured that your Schismatical crew of Regicides are no more to be compared to
the people of England, than the Gleanings may be to the Harvest; or Canters,
Thieves, Beggars and Juglers, to the sober and settled Dwellers in this Kingdom.

No, every honest man, who has any sense of piety, loyalty, modesty, pity, or
humanity left in his Soul, (as you have none) takes up Jacobs words against
you, Cursed beyour wrath, for it is fierce, and your anger, for it is cruel:
Into the secrets of these men let not our Souls enter; Lord lay not the guilt
of the sins of these men to the Charge of the People of this Kingdom.

No, let the blood of our pious, patient and most Christian King, be upon you,
and your Abettors for ever; who, as without any sense of Loyalty, Pity or
Charity, so without any shadow as well as* substance of Justice, having neither
Law, Rule, nor any due Authority, first by Fraud and unheard of Insolency
seized upon his Majesty's person, afterward by Flatteries, Lies, and Terrors
sought to deceive him; At last, by mere Force and beastlike Cruelty, have
massacred, and as so many horrid Assassinates, utterly destroyed him.

And all this after many fawnings, and shows of loyal and tender regard toward
his Majesty, and his Royal Family, as both your first Proposals, and your after
Agitations, (honestly and very providentially discovered by Major Huntington)
do declare: In which all men now plainly see, that you did but make way by the
Fox, to let in the Wolf, and by your Dalilah to bring the Philistims upon our
Sampson: Yea, after his Majesty was not only entered into and advanced in a
Treaty with the two Houses, agreeable to their Votes, and the general desires
of all his Subjects; under the most solemn National security and Public Faith,
which could be given, or pass between a King and his Subjects, or indeed any
honest men: But even when his Majesty's great wisdom and goodness had so far
brought all things to a fair closure and happy Agreement, that the two Houses
were satisfied, and resolved to proceed upon his Majesty's Concessions, as a
firm ground of Peace to the Kingdom.

Yet after all these public, Civil and Sacred Obligations, which lay upon the
two Houses and the Kingdom, on your selves as well as any, and all of us; for
you to seize again upon his Majesty's person, without any pretended Authority,
and with your Iron hands, and Adamantine hearts, to ravish and pull him out of
the arms and embraces of his Subjects, violently to hale and tear him from the
reviving love and loyalty of the two Houses and his People; thence to hurry and
toss him to and fro, to what inhospitable places, and desolate Prisons you
listed, there to deprive him, not only of all things proportionable to his
quality as a King, but even of those civil accommodations which ought to be
allowed to any Gentleman, though an Enemy and a Captive of War, which the King
never was, not being taken by force, but rendering himself to the professed love
and sworn loyalty of his Subjects. After this, with a sacrilegious mockery of
Justice, in the highest affronting of God, the King, the Parliament, and the
three Kingdoms, by an unheard of and most horrid Outrage, and riorous force to
oppress and utterly destroy the remaining honor,, freedom and power of the two
houses; and in despite of them to erect a new Court of Justice (as you most
unjustly term it (for which you have no color of Law from God or Man, no
precedent in this or any other Christian Kingdom, no ground or pretense of
Parliamentary consent or Authority of either Houses, (whose Members, three
parts of four at least, you forcibly detained and deterred from fitting in the
House of Commons, the Lords being unanimously against you; by all which methods
of cunning and violence you seek like Absalom (the contradiction between whose
name and actions, very well fits your affected but undeserved title of Saints)
to intrude your selves into a Judicative as well as a Military power, (as if
Hangmen and Executioners should usurp the sears of Judges, who are not fit to
be of a Jury; since their interest and advantage (like yours) lying in the
destruction of others, will easily tempt them to condemn any man.)

At length you make a shift to pack, not a high Court of Justice, as you
shamelessely style it, but the basest Conventicle of Injustice that ever was in
the World; In which all Cards of honor being shuffled out, you turn up such
Knaves only for Trumps as will best play your game: A very Medly and Rapsody of
the most ignorant, shallow, cowardly, cruel, weak, debauched and insolent
Fools, or Athiests, Hypocrites, Traitors, and Tyrants, that ever usurped power
over any honest and innocent man. Your President Bradshaw, and your Solicitor
Cook, are commonly known, and branded to be men of as corrupt Souls as any
lived in their profession; Their most traiterous, and covetous villainies, not
allowing the least pretense of ignorance ^n the Laws, which are in no Case more
clearly, expressly, and severely contrary, than in this, of taking away the
Kings life, wherein they, against all Law, Duty, and Conscience, were as
Judas's chiefly employed.

At last upon the wicked, most unjust, and cruel Sentence of these Mercenary,
Un-authorized, and Tyrannous Sycophants, and Hucksters of Justice, (who must
needs have their Commission from him that is the Father of Lies, the false
Accuser, the Old Murderer, the deceiving Serpent, the Roaring Lion, the Red
Dragon, the Dead Sea of Cruelty, and the sink of all Confusion, the Damned and
Damning Devil; and not from God (the Fountain of Justice, the Father of Mercy,
the Institutor of Order, the Author of Peace, and the Commander of subjection
to lawful Kings) in any notion imaginable; further than the Devil may have
Commission from God, permitting and limiting the activity, but not approving
the iniquity of his rage and malice) to compel such a King, so Great a Monarch
of three Kingdoms, their Undoubted Sovereign Lord, to submit to their
arraignment, Accusations, and Sentence (who were most of them his declared and
desperate Enemies) without allowing him the liberty of protesting against their
confessed Usurpation and Non-authority, or of pleading for his own both
Innocence, and well known Privilege, Sovereignty, and unquestionable Immunity,
according to the Laws of God and of this Kingdom; which are expressly against
their traiterous and tyrannous proceedings* as well as the nulli^y of their
Authority.

After this, without any remorse or pity to their and our King, to force a
person of so excellent worth, wisdom, virtue, honor, and Majesty to how down
at the feet of so vile persons, and then to Chop off his Head which was Sacred,
Crowned and Anointed, as rightful King over them and all his Subjects in his
Dominions. (A Butchery so barberous, that the common Headsmran abhorted to do
it; nor may we think those bloody Zealots were willing he should deprive them
of the pleasure of cutting the throat of such a Sacrifice, to inaugurate them
in their Royal Priesthood; by which their Schismatical fury pretends a title
against, or above all Lawful Kings and Governors.

What Words, what Tears, what Sighs, what oppressive Thoughts, what secret and
un-utterable Reflections of most stupefied and astonished Souls, are sufficient
to measure the Immensity, to weigh the burden, to express or conceive the
horror of this outragioussin, and most flagitious villainy.

Poor Prince, after so many delusions, so many lying Addresses, made by the
chief Engines and movers of the Army; after so much patience, so great
demonstrations of excellent wisdom, meekness, calmness and Christian gentleness
to his very Enemies and Jaylours; under infinite reproaches, injuries, and
indignities, even to the very spitting in his face: after all those gracious
condescendings, by which he had reduced himself almost to the very shadow and
bare name of a King (saving that he had gained the highest and most absolute
Empire in the renewed love and loyalty of the most and best of his Subjects)
that he might please all, secure and satisfy all, purchase Peace for all at
any rate but the price of his Conscience: Yet after all these infinite
demonstrations of goodness, capable to have softened even Devils themselves, to
be thus butchered by a Soldiery and Schismatical cruelty, to be brought to
public execution without any help or redemption from Parliament or people
(who generally abominated so horrid, inhumane, unseen, and unheard of a
Spectacle; whose Public Faith, besides their Personal Allegiance was engaged
for his Majesty's honor and safety,) what heart can be large enough to equal
the sorrow, what Eyes can be Fountains sufficient to deplore so unmerited a
Fate, befalling so excellent a Prince, by the malice, ambition, cruelty, and
treason of so base and execrable villainies.

And all this Tragedy of Tragedies carried on to such bloody conclusions, under
color of Safety and Reformation at first; afterward of Satisfaction and
Indemnity to the Army; in both which the good King denied nothing, that men of
any modesty, worth, or ingenuity, could expect, or would desire. Yet after
infinite delusions, and mutinous insolences committed against King,
Parliament, and People, some impotent and ambitious Tyrants, (who have the
marks of Blood and Cruelty in their Faces, and on their Foreheads, in the Army,
and Commons House, bethink themselves of a Scene of Justice, which must
speedily be acted by them; least the closure of a Peace with the King, and the
two Houses, should render their employment useless, as it has long been
burdensome; And forcing their Buff Grandees, and proud Officers, to return to
their Needles, their Hammers, their Lasts, their Slings, their Carts, and their
Flails, should quite defeat those designs of power, estate, and all licentious
profaneness both in Opinions and Practices; which their Chief Officers, and
Levelling Sticlers, have all this while designed for themselves, and their
false, giddy, cruel, covetous, and unreasonable Faction; through that power and
influence, which by their lies, sorceries, and hypocrisies, they, with the help
of that mungrel Minister, that Military Priest, that modern Simon Magus, that
disguised Executioner, that bloody Butcher of the King H -- P -- they have
gained upon the Common Soldiery. Upon whose simplicity and valor they have
presumed tyrannously, and traitorously to advance the mere will and pleasure of
some Officers in the Army, and those rotten and ever infamous Members of the
Commons, over all the Laws and Liberties, the Lives, Estates, and Inheritances
both of King, Prince, and People.

Yet after all these Scenes of various Villainies, they have the impudence to
glory, as if they had done God good service, and so extremely pleased God, and
the People, that they expect all should agree to their Plandite, as if might
and right were well met in the Army.

O you most seared Consciences, you most Rebellious Souls against God, the
King, and your own light; You most accursed Doers, you deaf Adders, whether you
will hear, or whether you will forbear, know this, That we the Christian
people, and loyal Subjects of England, do in the bitterness of our Souls
declare (as in the sight of God, to whose just Tribunal ^e appeal, and summon
your stupid and cruel hypocrisy) to all the world, our total detestation, and
utter abhorring of your Counsels, Actions and future Designs. You glory, as if
you were now Masters of our Estates, Liberties and Lives: But we shall by Gods
grace keep our Souls unspotted from those great Offenses and presumptuous
wickedness, wherewith you are infected beyond all cure or recovery.

No we would have your impenitent hardness, as well as the softer world to
know, That we look back with extreme sorrow, shame and repentance, upon our
former Delusions and forwardness to this Unhappy War; wherein though they were
most to blame who were the Deceivers and Instigators of us; yet we cannot
excuse our selves further than thus, That we did it out of credulous
inconsiderateness, and not out of malicious wickedness. The God of Heaven,
whose mercies exceed our sins and your cruelties, forgive the Errors and great
sins of this Nation in this Unnatural War; which have deservedly, as from the
Divine vengeance, though most perfidiously, as from your multiplied Treasons
and wilful Rebellions, brought upon these Kingdoms such a sore plague, and
intolerable oppression as you are.

Whose detected hypocrysie has now made it clearly appear, That both King,
Parliament and People were merely cheated and abused, by the Fraud first, after
by the Force of those Factions, Schismatical, bloody and implacable spirits,
your chief Genius's who despaired to carry on their wicked Designs of Ambition
and Tyranny, but by the means of Anarchy, Profaneness, Disloyalty, and public
ruin of Church and State.

All which Rottenness and Villainy, must be masked a while under the Names of
Reformation, Laws and Liberties, King and Parliament, which we see too
evidently (though too late) after infinite miseries, Oppressions, Bloodshed,
and Delusions, amount to no more but a slavish Submission to the will and
Arbitrary Tyranny of a few sanguinary Schismatics, cruel Hypocrites, and
desperate Usurpers over all; who, like deep Ditches; and open Sepulchers,
having swallowed up our King, our Parliament, our Estates, our Liberties, and
many of our Brethrens Lives, now like impudent Strumpets, in the wantonness and
security, to which success have hardened their hearts and foreheads, wipe their
mouths as if they had done no evil; and now lying in-wait for our precious
Souls, dress their whorish Faces with the Harlotry, and Temptation of a
New-fashioned Representative, and that both silly and ridiculous Babble, called
the Agrrement of the People.

Than which never any poison was presented in a sordeder, and less suspected
Cup; Nor foolish Devil never used less inviting baits for his snares; Their
gross and brutish unpolitickness offering nothing in that Beggars dish to the
miserably abused, and justly discontented Kingdom, but only such general dull
and confused notions, as might become the soberer sort of Picts or Highlanders,
or the less savage Indians, when from their Acorns, Nakedness, and Barbarity,
they began to form some concep^ions of casting themselves into more orderly and
civil Societies, for their better Government, and Common welfare; So vastly
short their motly. Agreement comes of those most tried, wise, noble, rational,
just, and indeed Divine Principles, and Foundations of True Government, Order,
and Polity, on which his famous Monarchy has for many hundred of years been
raised to so stately a Fabric; having flourished to so perfect a beauty, to so
ancient and venerable a glory, as became the Wisdom, Piety, and Gravity of our
former Kings, Parliaments and Ancestors, Men of Renown for true Wisdom, and
Heroic Greatness; to whom these late Overturners, and Innovators of all
Government, would scarce have served for their Dwarfs, Zanies, and Buffons.

But lest these Cursed Movers of the Ancient Boundaries, and Landmarks, should
lose both themselves, and us in the Wood and Wilderness of their poor, rude,
barbarous, and novel projections they bring forth their Ignes Fatui, lights of
private Inspirations, Fanatic Delusions, False and Falsified Interpretetions
of wrested and corrupted Scriptures, to make some show to their seduced
Proselytes (whom they would re-baptize in the blood of the King with
themselves) as if they were the little Stone cut without hands, which must
become a great Mountain, etc. They the Saints which must bind Kings in Chains,
and Nobles in Links of Iron, etc, They the people of the most High, to which
the Kingdoms of the Earth must be give, etc. Whereas true Saints, which had the
power, not show only of godliness, would not take all the Kingdoms of the World
upon such Devilish Concitions, and by such damnable practices, as yours are,
most apparent, and by your selves confessed to be unwarrantable. Such Scripture
paintings upon the face of your Jesabel, would have served the turn of John of
Leyden, Knipperdoling, Muncer, and those other Impostors, your infamous
Predecessors, as well as you, and indeed they were by them no less pretended;
But with how bless*d success you are loath to own to remember, as presaging
your like destinies in Gods due time.

It is a strange and unwonted way of any sound and true Christians, apparently
to violate, and wholly decline from the obedience of clear moral precepts of
Justice, and other both Religious and Civil Duties to God and Man, under a
pretense of Zeal, and a Call to fulfill prophetic Obscurities: which darkly
foretell what shall be done, but do not precisely command us to do this or
that; In which events even the wickedest men, and Antichrists (such as these
are) may, as the Vials of the wrath of God, pour our themselves, and have a
great part to act, and yet receive no comfort or reward, other than that of
Hypocrites, who may (as Joseph's Brethren, and Nebuchadnezzar did) then most
serve Gods Prophetic, and Providential disposings, when they act most contrary
to his Revealed Will, and only seek to serve their own Envy, Covetousness, and
unsatiable Tyranny, however they may as the Devil bait their Temptations with
Scripture Allegations.

But know O ye hard-hearted Belshazzars (whom no handwriting out of Gods Words,
clearly setting forth your sin, curse, woe, and damnation, can yet scan or
deterr from your frolic villainies) That, if you were Angels from Heaven, as
you are Luciferine Brats from Hell, (transforming your selves at first into
Angels of light, but now fully uncased, so that now your fiery eyes, your black
and wide mouths, your blasting and sulphurious breath, your proud horns, and
your cloven feet appear to all but your own besotted Imps and Familiars) if (we
say) you yet appeared as Angels, yet you should give us leave to believe the
express Will and Word of God, rather than your juggling fancies, to which that
is diametrically contrary, both in the Precept, and all practices of Christ,
and his true Saints. Hear how the voice of God disagrees with your apparent
folly and madness. He bids honor and obey the King, and our lawful Governors;
You cry crucify, destroy, and scatter them. Christ commands to give unto
Caesar that which is Caesar's, no less than to God what is Gods: But you take
away, as from God, and his Church what is his; so from our Caesar, his Empire,
Liberty, Life, Posterity and all.

The voice of God bids us seek peace and ensue it, branding with the reprobate
marks of Hypocrites, those that as Traitors, heady, high minded; and fierce
despisers of what is good, break all Truce, or Treaties, which you have done,
beyond what ever the fal^est Miscreants ever did.

The Word of God is a clear, constant, uniform light, as to the Rules of an
holy life in Piety, Equity and Charity; but your Opinions, Practices, and pious
Pretentions, Centaure-like, are various and deformed Changlings, many-shapen,
and misshapen* Monsters, shifting Proteusses, Slippery and virtiginous
Serpents, folded and hidden in the winding labarinths, and intricate
circulations of your many subtle, sly, and perplexed Designs.

The truth is, there is as wide a difference between your clamors, howlings,
and hideous yellings which sound nothing but War, Blood, Rebellion, Famine,
Death, Desolation, and Damnation) and that soft, sweet, gracious, and most
glorious voice of God in the holy Scriptures, which you use for a Net, not a
Garment) as there is between the most bright, beautiful, Soul-saving-Truths,
and most black, deformed, Soul-damning-Lyes. Your selves cannot think us
uncharitable, if we do believe, and tell you, That you have more blaspemed the
Spirit, Name, Grace, Word, Saints, and Servants of God, by intituling these as
Inspirers, Authors, and Approvers of your most graceless and devilish
practices; than ever those hard-hearted, and impudent Hypocrites the Pharisees
did, by imputing the saving miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ to your Beelzebub
the Prince of Devils: whose Servants you are, whose work you do, and whose
wages you must expect.

Nor do we doubt but all the Curses written in the Book of God (which like that
of Meroz, have been causelessly, factiously, and fasly, by some of your
double-faced Janus's, formerly imprecated upon the King, and his loyallest
Subjects) will certainly overtake, and fall upon both you, and your viperous
Generation.

We hope God will in his infinite goodness not suffer this dying Church, and
desolated Nation, to be further partakers of your Babylonish Sins, and open
Sorceries, lest we be partakers of your plagues and Torments, which are laid up
in the Treasures of the wrath, both of God, and all good men against you, and
your desperate faction.

We tell you* we are so far from counting you Saints and Saviors, that we look
upon you as the Tophet which God has indeed prepared for the King, and these
Kingdoms, to try and torment them a while; But we doubt not, but God will at
last cast you (who are our Sin, our Death, and our Hell) into the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever.

Unless you repent, so many of you Officers, Soldiers, and others, as are
capable of Repentance, not being so deeply engaged in the desperate sins of
those men, your chief Leaders and Seducers, who being past feeling, of a most
reprobate sense, greedy and unreasonable Sinners, make no conscience to damn
your Souls, for the perfecting their ambitious and covetous designs, for which
they have hitherto made use of the hands of so many valiant men, worthy of a
better work, and a nobler War, whereby to destroy your and our King, subvert
our Parliaments, Laws, Government, and Religion; And all this, against all your
and our Protestations, Vows, Oaths, and Promises to God and Man.

O you that have followed these Theudasses, as the seduced people sometime did
Absalom in the simplicity of your hearts, not aware of their devilish
stratagems, devises, and designs; You that have any touch of Gods Spirit, or
his Grace in your hearts, any fear of God, or dread of Sin left in you; You
that have any sense of your Souls eternal welfare (which those either question
or deny) any terror of the wrath of God, or hope of his love and mercy? You
that are afraid to degenerate into unreasonable Beasts, or incarnate Devils,
(that you may enjoy the benefit of the Kings last charitable Prayers for your
pardon and repentance) make have to depart from the Tents of these Achans,
these Korahs, these Sinners who know themselves accursed of God and Men. Come
out of their Babylon, which is become the habitation of Devils, and the Hold of
every foul Spirit, a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, by a penitent and
pious withdrawing from such filthy Harpies, such cunning, yet cruel Hyena's,
such weeping, yet devouring Crocodiles; such Banners as bear not the Kings
Arms, but his head cut from his body; such Ensigns as are dyed in the blood of
their King, murdered by them, while they pretended to fight for him, and
preserve him,

O drink no more of the Wine of the Wrath of their Fornications, which they
hold forth in that poisonous, and filthy Cup of their Agreement of the People;
with which they hope to make drunk this whole Nation; That as Lots incestuous
Daughters, their lusts may be fully impregnated by the conjunction of the
strength, riches, and counsel of these Kingdoms, Know you for certain (O you
Soldiers) that no place of Repentance can be found among those Esaus and
Judas's, who have been the chief and malicious Actors and Contrivers of these
wicked and cruel Confusions; whose Names as we well know, so we are sure the
hand of God will find them out, making them (who have been the terror and
torture of men of all degrees,) to become as Pashur Magornoissabis, terror
round about; As a Wheel, in past revolutions from prosperous wickedness, to
miserable punishments; as Chaff toffed to and fro by the breath of Gods
displeasure, and the execration, or abhorrence of all people in all Nations,
Christian and Heathen, where ever they are driven to be Vagabonds and
Runnagates, carrying with them in their fester'd Consciences the forked Arrow,
of their deceiving, and then cruelly destroying both their King, and their
Country.

And this, till they are cast into the chains of utter darkness, who have
quenched the light of Israel, and to everlasting flames, whose wrath kindled
with the fire of Hell, has burned to the very Foundations of so happy a Nation.

No person of Worth, Honor, or Piety* but will ever loath to eat, drink, or
converse with them, looking upon them as unluckie prodigies; Much more will
every ingenuous Man or Woman abhor ever to marry, or make any affinity with
them, or their Families, polluted with the blood of their King; but most of all
abominated will they be as to any Communion with them in Prayer, or other
religious duties, who having turned the Grace of God into wantonness; cannot
but already hear Judas's silent clamors, deep despairings, and
self-condemnings; Like Julian the Apostate, they cannot but feel the secret and
smart strokes of God in their Consciences, for betraying, persecuting, and
destroying the innocent blood of our King. O Earth cover it not, O Time forget
it not, O Heaven fail not to revenge their prodigal and cruel wast of so royal
and precious blood! Surely without any uncharitable rashness, they may be
suspected to be past all grace, and recovery by any Prayers. There remaining
for such sinners of the sin to death, such relapsing Swine, and resorbing Dogs,
who pretending to have escaped the pollutions of the World, are returned to
their mire and vomit; feigning to be illuminated Saints, yet have wrought such
works of thick darkness, nothing but a fearful expectation of vengeance, and
fiery indignation to consume them, without infinite mercys

They have impudently, and traitorously judged, condemned, and murdered the
King, upon the pretense of his raising War against the Parliament; of which
Fact themselves are doubly, and most unquestionably guilty before all the
World, twice menacing, invading, and forcibly assaulting their Masters in the
two Houses of Parliament. Nor if their charge had been true against the King
(which upon his death he both denied, and most evidently proved by the legal
right he had to the Militia, and the date of their Commissions for raising
War, before His Majesty's were out) yet were not these Usurpers any competent
Judges by God or Man appointed: Nor was indeed that calumny the real motive of
their sudden, bloody, and resumed cruelty; but only that extreme fear, hatred,
and terror, their hypocrisy, and villainy had conceived against the Kings
excellent wisdom, constant piety, and immovable goodness; which they had so
often, and so unmeasurably abused; and which they saw was the chiefest obstacle
in the way of their Sacrilegious Ambitions.

And now like desperate Empyricks, upon whose cruel tamperings we have spent
our Blood, our Estates, our Lives, the honor of our Nation, and the credit of
our Reformed Religion: You (now) pretend to stop that bloody issue (which by
tumult and treason you have made) by destroying the whole Royal Family, and
letting out all the Ancient blood of our Kings out of the veins of these
Kingdoms: To extirpate Kings, Peers, and Parliaments; and by addle fictions of
your weak and confused brains, to obtrude the frippery and gullery of your
Agreement of the People

As if all Rules of Justice, all true Policy, and Reason of State, and good
grounds of Government (no less than all wickedness, cruelty, hypocrisy, and
treason) only dwelt in your shallow brains, and narrow hearts; Who for the most
part are not guilty of any Learning, or Civil Improvements, are open and
declared Authors of Ignorance, Confusion and Tyranny, Enemies to all sober
Manners, and good Orders, both in Church and State.

Nor do those great things (as you call them) which you have hitherto with most
infamous treachery, and cruelty, peracted and attained, any way render you
considerable with sober, godly, and truly wise men: For what may not Frontless
Hypocrites do, who have forsaken God, and given themselves over to the Devils
Captivity, when empowered with Arms and Might, they resolve barbarously to
break through, and cast off all bonds of right, trust, duty, credit, and
conscience to God and Man, as you have done.

But you O hardened and infatuated Regicides, can you in good earnest flatter
your selves, that this foolish Toy, this shameless Imposture, your Bastard
Brat, your headless Chymera, your manyheaded Hydra, called The Agreement of the
People, (but by as full an Antiphrasis, as the Fiends and Furies of Hell were
called Eumenides) will be a salve sufficient to heal, or Plaster to cover the
wide deep and festered wounds, which your treacherous cruelty has made upon
this Kingdom in all Estates, both jointly as in Parliament, and severally, as
in the interests of the Crown the Nobility, the Clergy and the Commons.

No, your selves know, that very Title, which you shamelesly impose upon your
mad and deformed Model is nothing but a Lie and Falsity; being in no sense The
Agreement of the People, not we hope ever like to be. Neither in their
Representatives the Commons, whom you have disbanded and cashiered in the
Majority; leaving only some few Members left, whose Asinine patience and
stupidity suffers the Balaams of the Army, as mad and false Prophets to ride
upon them for the price of blood, and wages of Iniquity: To which Vassallage,
we hope no Gentlemen of any Honor or Conscience, will ever betray themselves
or their Country, by returning to the House again, or sitting and voting there,
while it is under such insolent Tyrants.

Nor will you find it more agreeable to the generality of the people throughout
the Kingdom, both Ministers and others, who ^n their souls disagree as much
from what you have done and by that further design, as light does from
darkness, Liberty from Oppression, and God from your Dictator the Devil.

No, the People of England, will one day (if God please to cast his Net upon
you, and put his hook into the all-devouring jaws of your Leviathan) make you
and your Dawbers with the untempered mortar of a mouldred and dissolved
Parliament, to understand, that they abominate you and your deeds, as much as
Hell it self; for your monstrous sins are their own Hell and Horror, more to be
detested than all the sinless sufferings of Hell.

The ancient and most honorable House of Peers, whom sometimes you flattered
into a Fools Paradise, (while the poor shreds and remnants of that Court might
serve your turn to face your affairs by any show of their Authority) as if you
had designed nothing to their diminution: Yet you have wholly laid them aside,
as useless and dangerous Idols of honor, fit to be cast out to the Bats and
Moles, to be levelled unto, or abased beneath, the meanest Animals, and vilest
beasts of the People; for though ^hey should, any of them, so dishonor
themselves as to descend unto the Hell of your infected walls; yet could they
never there ascend to any degree of public influence either for Counsel or
Action, being sure to be always overlaid, smothered and oppressed by your
over-voting crew of Mechanic Idols; who saving that they have mouths to speak
a Treasonable Yea or No, in other points, have Eyes and see not, Noses but
smell not, Hearts but consider not, the blood, cruor, carkases, skulls and dead
bones of their King and their Brethren of all degrees, with which they have
inhumanely filled that Charnel-house, that Golgotha of that quondam House of
Commons.

Sure the numerous, and once both famous and flourishing Nobility of England,
besides those of Ireland and Scotland, cannot but infinitely abhor and detest
your arrogant despising of them, and trampling upon them; if they have but any
drops of their Ancestors noble blood running in their veins, or any sparks of
true Honor left in their Breasts: It will at length kindle such a fire of just
indignation and revenge in those Cedars, as shall consume such base shrubs,
such offensive thistles, and such domineering Briars: But if their ignoble
despondency have so debased them to Luxury and Cowardice, that they dare not
vindicate the Honor of their Nation, Name and Order, together with the rights
of the Crown, the Fountain of their Honor, but are content to be either bowed,
or hewed down, or over-dripped, or exsuccated by such Aspiring Ivies as you
are; our Counsel is, that the ancient Barons of England, sometimes Peers and
chief Counselors in Parliament, would solemnly Degrade themselves, lay aside
their vain and ridiculous Titles, reverse their Escocheons, sell their Scarlet
Robes to the Brokers in Long-lane, rather than keep them, either to feed Moths,
or to be Monuments to all posterity, What Capons, Poultroons and dangerous
Buzzards they are, descend from such Eagles, as many of their Ancestors were.

But if the Nobility should so far betray and desert themselves, their
Posterity, their King and their Country (who though their number be not great,
yet their interest is; and so might their influence on the Public yet be,
both great and good, if their spirits and gallantry were such, yet, how can you
the greater buggs of the Army; or you the lesser Vermin and Maggots of the
Commons (who survive and crawl after the dissolution of your Parliament; bred
of, and feeding upon, the putrefaction of that House) How can you think, that
the People of England, who are generally and highly concerned in the Honor,
Credit and Religion of the Nation, can ever with a good Conscience, or any face
of common honesty, agree to your Juggling and Sophistry; as if you or your
Western Mahomet and new Antichrist ( Hugh Peter's) had any Papal power to
absolve their souls from those Protestations, Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, by all which they were and are both lawfully and religiously bound,
under the greatest curses of God both to the Kingdom in general, and specially
to the Parliaments Privileges, and the Rights of the King and his lawful
Successors: of which gross and manifold perjuries, they must make themselves
guilty, only to make way to the Dictatorship and Empire of some of your greater
Brambles; That (forsooth) the People of England might enjoy that Liberty, Peace
and Plenty under your unavoidable Tyranny, uusatiable Rapine, and cruel
Oppression; of such Beggars as most of you are, and were, which formerly they
could never have under the gracious Kings wise and Loyal Parliaments, the
ingenuous Laws, and excellent Government of this sometime flourishing Kingdom.

Sure you are not yet so much beasts, as to think, that the Community of this
great people can all govern themselves, or mutually one another: Government
must necessarily be settled and centred somewhere: Nor is it likely, that your
leaders and Bash^^es, whose hands are imbrued in the blood of their King, will
ever be so modest, as to lay themselves aside; and denying their own most
ambitious and covetous desires, to let any others but themselves and their
creatures reap the fruit of their projects and labors; for which they have
pawned their souls to the Devil, and sold themselves as Ahab to do wickedly.

But if you dare venture it upon so ingenuous a Trial let the people of England
without your terror, cunning, injurious restraints and exceptions be their own
Umpires, and Choosers, whether they will bear the light and easy yoke of the
Laws, and the gentle as well as just chastisements of their penalties under a
lawful King, or the iron-yoke of your Tyranny, and the Scorpions of your wills,
being so many Evening Wolves, bloody Traitors, and unlimitted Tyrams, (whose
little fingers in these last three years, have been infinitely heavier than the
loins of all the Kings, that ever were in this Kingdom) let the people have
free suffrages, you will soon find, That the true Agreement of the People (a
hundred voices to one) is this, to shake off your cruel Tyranny, to bring to
condign punishment such unheard of Traitors; and to invest in his Throne our
lawful King Charles the Second, the Eldest Son of that good King you lately
murdered. But how can the people of England ever hope to have any other Civil
Agreement of theirs, binding to you and your pragmatick faction; further than
your own fancies, lusts, and pleasures think fit; since they find you to have
so lately broken through all Laws of God and Man; all Ancient and Fundamental
Agreements in this Nation, on which the Honor and Safety of our Kings, the
Privileges of our Parliaments, the Liberties of the People, the Order and
Purity of our Church, and the happiness of our Nation were settled? What
Cautions can you give, that you will hereafter submit to any public Agreement;
who are such shifters, juglers and dissemblers, that no Laws, Leagues,
Protestations or Promises you freely make can bind you; No faith to King,
Parliament, People, Neighbor Nations, or God Almighty can hold you; but like
the man possessed with the unclean spirit, you break all ties and bonds,
casting Church and State into fire or water, as the rash motions of your
Frantic humors carry you. etc.

Conscience you can have none; since your lights are so Lunatic, and your
principles vary every month.

Credit you have none, who have made bankrupt of the Public Faith, and
forfeited so many solemn and Sacred Obligations to God and Man.

Sense of Honor or Duty you can have none, since you have neither fear of God,
nor reverence of Man.

Estates you have little or none, to hazard or lose upon any forfeiture of your
Faith or Agreement: And for your Heads and Lives they are now so vile and
cheap, that although you are not fit to live, yet they are scarce worth the
taking.

Sure you cannot but appear to your selves as well as to all men, the most
outlawed, notorious and stigmatized Rebels, the most perfidious Traitors that
ever any King, or Senate, State or People employed or trusted: Having utterly
blotted out all your former promeritings and good service so much boasted of;
Since the Event proclaims you served not King, Parliament, or Country, but
your own lusts, and villainous designs, which by the advantages of mutinous
power, you now seek to accomplish under the void, and forfeited Commission of
that stupid Saint, that dumb show of your silent, extatick, and seduced
General; who in so great a concern, forgot his pristine valor and honor.

So that the darkning of your most wicked designs by this ti^le of The
Agreement of the People, amounts to no more in the true and last sense of it,
but this, That you would have the People of England, and the other two united
Kingdoms, willingly to bow down to your Hoddy doddy, your all Breech-Idol, as a
Prophet of your own so variously, and falsely inspired, justly calls your
unlick'd, and monstrous projects, not of Government, but of Anarchy and
Tyranny, who may live indeed to see a day of judgment come upon you.

You would have us all to pledge you in that horrible draught of the Kings
blood, which you have greedily drank; to appove and abet your execrable
villainies, and to submit for ever to the intolerable Tyranny of such Goths,
Vandalls, and Saracens as you are.

Who are but the Devils Leieutenants; Factors for the God of this impure World;
signal Antichrists, accurate fullfillers of all the characters foretold, and
brands set upon you in the last and perilous time; in which true glass, you,
and all men may clearly see the ugly lineaments of your most deformed faces and
manners.

It is hoped, that God has yet so much mercy left in store for these sinful
(and by you most miserable) Kingdoms, as he gives us grace utterly to abhor
your desperate sins; So that we trust he will never suffer us by a Devilish
Apostasy to fall from all Vows, and Oaths, by which we and our posterity are
bound to God, the Crown, and our Countries; only to have yours, and the Devils
absolution, to make a Covenant and Agreement with Hell and Death, with your
most irreligious and damnable designs and practices.

No, the sin and horror of your waves, are now like Absaloms incestuous and
noonday Rapes, discovered in the sight of the Sun, and all the World; Nor will
the subtilty of your soft and feigned voices, like Sirens any more charm, and
enchant the honest people of England, into such Beasts and Monsters, as your
selves are; to whose hellish deformities you would have all others to conform:
They have seen, and felt too much already of your cruel Hypocrisies, your
devilish and strong Delusions.

Have not your words been always Soloecisms to your purposes, and your
practices contradictions to your pretenses?

Have you not as much as lies in your power and malice, cast us into the dead
Sea of disloyalty, perjury, cruelty, barbarity, irreligion, and confusion, that
is possible for any Nation suddenly to relapse, and fall into, after so many
Sacred, and Solemn Professions of Loyalty, and Reformation to God, and the
World, whom we called to witness upon our Souls?

Agreeable to all which, and to fill up the measure of our sins, as if our
Rebellion against God, and the King, were hitherto but a light and small
matter, by which we have most unhappily occasioned his death, by the hands of
cruel Edomites, and cursed Amalekites as you are; which most deplorable
calamity, to us, and this Nation, we penitently look upon as the severest
temporal stroke which the wrath of God, gone our against us, can inflict upon
us. Yet your impudent Hypocrisy now seeks to obtrude upon us your wretched and
abhorred Agreement; The Sum of which is to leave the Kingdom without a King,
Government without Authority, Magistrates without Power, a People without Laws,
a Body without an Head, Sheep without a Shephere, Christians without Christ,
Churches without Ministers, Ministers without Maintenance, a Nation without
Faith; In a word, you would have us live as men without Souls, without God,
wilfully degeneraring to Beasts, without sense of Virtue or Vice, shame or
honor, without fear of Hell, hopes of Heaven, or thoughts of Eternity; and all
this to maintain a few Tyrannous Hypocrites, and Sodomitick Saints, the cry of
whose sins, like Sodom, is gone up to Heaven, and are a burden too heavy for
the Earth to bear. Have you not already made the Name of these Protestant, and
Reformed Churches, to stink among all Nations, both Christian and Heathen,
through the dead flies, and rottenness of your principles, and manners.

Have you not surpassed the cunning and cruelty of the most Jesuitick heads and
hands, as much as you come short of their learning and pretensions, which are
to advance the Popes Authority above that of Kings: But you upon baser
Principles, seek to subject the Regal Sovereignty to that of the People, as you
call it, nor that you mean so in good earnest, further than to delude the
people, and to raise the heads of your desperate Faction above all, both King,
Prince, Peers, and People.

We appeal to all sober Christians, whether your Treasons have not far
surpassed the Powder Conspiracy; Inasmuch, as they plotted secretly, but you
have peracted openly, the murder of the King, the ruin of all the Royal
Issue, the overthrow of all our Laws, the blowing up of all Parliaments, the
subverting of the whole State and Government, the devastation of your Country,
the abolition of all true Religion, the extirpation of all Liberty, Peace,
Order, and Humanity.

Your Elder Brother Faux himself might seem a Saint compared to you; whose New
Light, and Dark Lanthorn you have so long made use of, to hide and disguise
your desperate intentions: Nor were the rest of those Powder Traitors so
criminal as you, if they had effected what they designed, since they neither
pretended to that Saintship, or that smooth preciseness which you have done;
nor had they upon them such signal ties of Public, and special Trust (besides
your many voluntary Obligations) The total violation of all which, renders your
Sins out of measure sinful, and your Treasons incomparably traiterous; beyond
what any Catelines, but your selves, ever had the desperate boldness to have
conceived, or committed.

Had you been our Open Enemies, or self-raising Rebels, in a declared rivalry,
and enmity against King, Parliament, and Country, we could either have
prevented, and opposed you, or have born with less shame and disdain your
insolent and prevailing Cruelties against them all.

But when we consider what ostentation, and show you made of exact obedience,
and plenary aquiescence in their Votes, Results, and Orders, from whom you had
your unhappy Commission; also of loyal regard to His Majesty's Safety, Rights,
Honor, and Posterity, (to whom some of your chief Commanders (as they well
know) engaged their Souls, as much as was possible for any mortal men to do^,
devoting themselves to all the Curses of God, temporal and eternal, upon the
breach and failer of their words to His Majesty.

Add to these the fair gloseings you made at your first meeting, of speedy and
impartial endeavors to se^tle all things in Peace, Justice, due Liberty, and
Piety; which how faithfully you have effected, the present Deplored state of
this Church and state may witness; whose face is now miserably squalled, and
hideously besmeared with the blood of the King, and those most indelible
Reproaches wherewith you have blasphemed our God, our King, and our Religion.

We the People of England, of all sorts, Lords, Gentry, Clergy, and Commons, do
again and again declare to God, and all the World, the present Age, and
Posterity, so long as the World shall endure, our infinite adhorrence, utter
detestation, and total disagreement, from what you the Officers of the Army,
and your most slavish, ever infamous, and Unparliamentary Juncto have already
done, or shall further do, (through Gods vengeance upon this Nation) in
prosecution of your never sufficiently abominated Villainies.

Nor do we desire any thing more of the just and Almighty God, (not in order to
the satisfaction of our private malice, or desire of revenge on any of you
(though our particular injuries have been many from you) but only in order to
the public Vindication of Gods Glory, the Honor of the Reformed Religion,
the Loyalty, Faith, and Credit of this Nation, the wiping away those foul sins
of Treason, Perjury, Truce-breaking, and Regal Parricide, (in all which
Villainies your execrable Faction, wallowing in the blood of your King, and
Fellow Subjects, now seek impenitently and irreparably to implunge this whole
Nation;) That we might (as some solace under our immense sorrows, and
tyrannizing miseries inflicted by you) but live to see Gods temporal judgments
so far upon you, as may pull down your Luciferian pride, and make your
obstinate minds to see the horror of your Villainies; That like Cain, you may
be afraid of all men; like Judas, accursed to all Posterity, given over to
Satan, and excommunicated by all good Christians, as Murderers of your Father,
Killers of your King; That you may ever be haunted with the rueful Ghost, and
hideous Phantasme of the King, whom you have traitorously butchered: That the
exemplary vengeance of God may be upon you, and your Adherents so remarkably,
and in such a Proportion to your Villainies, that if there be any place left for
Repentance, you may find it; and yet all the World may see, your destruction is
the Lords doing, and say, Doubtless there a God that judges the Earth.

Nor do we despair, but God will upon our true Repentance for our great sins
and supine folly (which gave you advantages to fulfill your most odious
Villainies) so far remember his mercies to his most deplorable Kingdom, and by
you (as so many wild Bores) desolated Churches, as to stir up some powerful
Avenger of the Kings blood; and all that other innocent blood, which the depths
and deceits at first, the force and violence afterward, of your bloody Faction
has occasioned and caused to be shed; by your tumultuating the people; your
instigating the spirits of the two Houses with false and pannick fears; Your
calumniating the King, and perverting his gracious purposes; Your enflaming the
enmities, and heightning the Animosities on both sides; Your fraudulently
voting, No Addresses; and publishing that lying and most infamous Libel for
your pretended grounds; Your widening the differences, and hindering all fair
equable closings, both formerly, and in that (...) memorable Treaty at Newport;
of which you were the most rude, savage and perfidious Violators, that ever
History recorded.

We know, that you can now only trust in your Arm of Flesh, in the Devils aid
and Counsel, having in your works denied the Living God; instead of whom; your
Belly and the present World, are become your God and your glory: for the
satisfaction of which, and the attaining places of profit and power (agreeable
to your lusts, which are enlarged like Hell) you have dared to advance thus far
to the destroying of King, Parliament, and Laws; which were the only boundaries
and conservers of our Peace, Properties, Lives and Liberties; yet after all
this, you inscribe on your Bloody Banners, and impudent foreheads, The
Agreement of the People; and the Restorers of our Liberties.

Which Plots, although you think them your Masterpieces for artifice, juggling
and policy (that so you might by fair words and flattering lies, allure the
many and meaner People to maintain those Monsters which you have brought forth)
yet you must know, That the People of Englands eyes are not so blood-shotten,
not their Consciences so ^eared, nor their Hearts so disloyal, nor their senses
so bewitched by your Magic and Charms, as not to see through, and fully both
discover and detest your devilish designs of Tyranny, Anarchie and
Profaneness, whereto you drive, through all these cloudings of immethodical
Nonsense, and indigested scriblings; which like your late damnable Remonstrance
and your other illiterate and irrational Papers discover; that where there is
so much want of grace and common honesty as in you, it is impossible not to
want even those shows of common sense and vulgar Reason, which are necessary
(not to justify (which no tongue, pen or wit of Devils can do) but so far as
to palliate your filth, and cover your nakedness; or to render your wicked
projects but tolerably plausible to those, that have the grossest perception of
things.

The better to temper this your Cup of deadly poison, to please the vulgar
relish (which you think is gross and undecerning) you tempt them with the name
of Liberty, first in Civil things; which all men see is but a mere Cheat, while
they are like to be held under your Iron hands, and squeezed under your
tyrannous wills, and intolerable Exactions; instead of enjoying the benefit of
our ancient and famous Laws (the best that any Subjects in the world enjoyed,
the just and only bounds of our Liberties, and Conservers of our both Peace and
Prosperities; to which all honest men (who have no joint stock with you in
Knavery, Poverty, and Baseness) desire most humbly and earnestly to return;
Despairing (and with good cause) that ever their Liberties and Properties can
be either advanced or defended by you, who have been so insolent usurpers over
King, Parliament, and all our Laws and Liberties; which our forefathers indeed
enjoyed many years, through Gods blessing and the Fatherly care of their
Princes, to a greater measure of Peace, Plenty, and Piety, than ever can be
hoped for under such bloody Leeches, such numerous and unsatiable Caterpillars,
as we have felt you to be: Nay, we tell you, we so far disdain your Hypocrisy,
Treachery, and Tyranny, that we had rather be under the Tyranny of our
rightful King (of whose justice and clemency we nothing doubt) than owe our
Liberty, as you call it, to such vile Mushrooms and detested Traitors as you
are; who boast of Liberty, yet are indeed slaves to your damned and desperate
lusts; studying nothing but how to delude the people with the name and fancy of
Liberty; as if you would persuade us rather to be the Devils Freemen, as you
are, (led Captive by his will) than to be Loyal Subjects to our lawful and most
hopeful King; or humble servants to God, whose sacred ties are many ways upon
our souls, binding us to fear God, and to honor the King; and no less to
abhor you; and have no fellowship with such as are given to seditious or
perjurious changes: forbidding us to use our Liberty, as men and Christians,
for a cloak of maliciousness, perjury, tyranny hypocrisy, and all licentious
villainies, as you have done.

The next pretense wherewith you bait the Mousetrap, and temper the Ratsbane of
your Agreement, is that of Liberty in Religion; Your meaning is, That men may
be free to profess no Religion; or any which they call such, so it be not the
true one, which you know is most opposite to your seditious, traitorous,
merciless, uncharitable, and bloody Superstitions: The very truth is, you aim
at such an Intolerable tolleration in Religion, as you think is most agreeable
to the profane hearts, and licentious manners of the most debauched lives, and
Atheistical Spirits, with which you have already pestered this English world.

In order to this Truth-darkening, and Soul-damning design, we know you follow
your Leader the Devil, and his Lieutenant General, to the utter dissolving of
all Government, Order, and Discipline in the Church, to discourage all learned,
godly and painful Ministers; to rob and spoil them of all settled Maintenance;
to reduce them and the work of the Ministry to that contempt, which in the
pride and luxury of these times, follows poverty and beggary; That they
depending on the peoples good will and charity, (which in many you have made
bad and cold enough toward the best and ablest Preachers) or upon your insolent
and niggardly stipends, they and their families may either eat their own dung,
and drink their own piss, or be forced by necessities of life to desert their
Function and places; so as to leave their Congregations destitute of all holy
public duties; or expose them to those Military Wolves and Mechanic Foxes,
which you have in great store provided for the supply of all places, in Church
as well as State.

Thus does your rage reach as high as Heaven, and as low as Hell: But we hope
the God of Heaven will look down upon us, and our children in mercy, and by
some speedy rebuke of such Satan's, not suffer your folly and fury to proceed
any further, it being manifest to all moral and sober men, that you are Factors
not only for your selves, to devour our Estates, Houses, Lands* Liberties,
Peace, and Lives; but like the great Dragon, yo^ pour for^h a Sea of blood and
poison, ignorance and profaneness* such as may for ever drown both our and our
childrens souls it. Heathenish Barbarism, Superstition, Atheism, and Eternal
destruction.

But know O you neither Milstones, you poisonous Asps, you King-killing
Basilisks, you desperate Deceivers, and damnably deceived: That although you
have against all Faith of Turks, Jews, or any Heathens, by fraud and force
usurped upon our secular and civil Liberties; so that at present we have not
any formed power to oppose you, and call your Ringleaders to a severe account
for your unheard of crimes and injuries against our King and our Country. Yet
shall our constancy in, and our suffering for our Religion, and our
encouragement of godly learned and faithful Ministers, to our best abilities,
make the world to see, that there is no Agreement between Christ in us, and
Belial in you; our God and your Mammon.

We hope the Triumphing of such Hypocrites as you are, is but short; nor shall
you long insult over the dead and divided Corpse of our late Lord and Sovereign
King; whose Wisdom, Piety, Faith, and Patience, God (we doubt not) has crowned
with Glory and Immortality; having perfected those many Princely gifts and
Divine graces in him (as God often does in his dearest Saints and Martyrs,
after the example of his crucified Son Jesus Christ) by his sufferings and your
cruelties, whose Memory and Posterity will be ever dear, precious, and
honored, to us and our succeeding generations as a King, who now appears
beyond the Errors and Jealousies of former surmises (chiefly raised and
fomented by your false and envious Faction) to have been the most constant
Pillar, the Noblest Patron, the resolutest Protector, and the most patient
Martyr for our Laws, Liberties, Lives, and Religion; Yea and of our Parliaments
true Privileges; which his Majesty best saw, and fullest declared at first to
have been shamefully invaded and out-raged by your Tumults, afterby your
Armies; next by your new modellings, at last by actual mutinings, impudent
menaces, violent and warlike expressions upon their safety, liberty, faith,
loyalty and honor, with which purposes you sometime falsely aspersed, and
afterward accused the King: and for which calumnies you most unjustly
condemned, and traitorously muthered him; your selves being most truly and
notoriously guilty of that, for which you wickedly, cruelly, and unjustly
destroyed your and our King. Shall you escape the righteous judgment of God?
Will not God visit you for these things? Shall he not be avenged of such cruel
Hypocrites?

Nor is it without a special Providence, that you should be left wholly naked,
and destitute of all pretended due Authority, in the fulfilling your execrable
villainies, to which you would now fain invite the people of England; not having
any show or color of any Parliamentary Votes, Authority, or Commands to
countenance your mischiefs, murders, and tyrannies, not any concurrence of
either Lords or Commons; whom now under force, and without all freedom
(becoming either Gentlemen or Christians) we must tell you, we look upon as no
House, and their enforced, or enslaved Votes as null; Their after sittings, and
complyings with you, being nothing but infamous, and base prostitutings of the
Honor of that House, and Vassallatings of the Dignity and Liberty, both of the
Parliament, and People of England, to the tyranny of a few Mutinous
Cutthroats, Traiterous Rebels, and bloody Schismatics; who are in no sense to
be counted the People of England, any more than Scabs, or Plague-sores, or
Leprosy, or putid Ulcers, and noisome Excrements, are to be repured any part
of the Body, whose grief, burden, and annoyance they are.

So that unless you can flatter your selves to have done well, and worthily, in
all you have cruelly, insolently, and traitorously acted against King, Lords,
Commons, Gentry, Clergy, and all honest men.

Unless you can propound something to recompense the inestimable Injuries you
have done to all Estates in these three Kingdoms, as in other acts of your
Tyranny and Treason, so chiefly in that unparalled Villainy of Murdering such
a King, and depriving us of so Incomparable a Prince, for Wisdom, Piety,
Gravity, Patience, Magnanimity, Courage, Constancy, Charity, and all other
Virtues, most adorning a Man, a King, and a Christian; (the loss of whom, all
the lives of you, and your Approvers cannot countervail, or expiate, being but
as so many Dogs heads to such a Boon.)

Unless you can stop the Mouths of all men, or cut their Throats, or sear their
Consences, or persuade them to damn their Souls, for your sakes, to gratify a
few Cauterised Consciences, bloody and ambitious Spirits among you.

You cannot but hear the sound of much Vengeance coming upon you, to which your
own black Souls summon you, and which your own Consciences will in the first
place silently, but yet severely execute upon you.

Nor will your Seeming Smiles, and forced confidences, nor yet the Applauses of
your sordid Flatterers, and desperate Confederates, nor yet the assistance of
your numerous and deluded Soldiers, be able to exempt you from that storm of
Fire and Brimstone, that Pit, Snare, Curse, and Hell, which pursues you, and is
ready to overtake you.

How can such Zimri's, who have so traitorously slain such a King, their Lord
and Master, ever hope to have peace, or impunity in this, or the other World?
Since the Justice of Divine Providence (in a Case where his Name was not
blasphemed, and so his Glory not so concerned, as in this, (of your murdering
so lawful, and so Christian a King) suffered not any of the Murderers of
Julius Caesar, who was but an Usurper, to dye other than a violent, and
immature death. Nor will (we hope) our Solomon by Gods blessing, and his
Subjects assistance, suffer the hairy Scalps of those who were the chief
Counselors, and Actors, in destroying his dear Father, and our Dread
Sovereign, to go down to the Grave in peace, or to dye a dry death, who have
shed the blood of War, in a time when all Differences were by a Treaty drawn to
a Peace and Union.

We can never think, that a Babel of so confused a fashion, of such a headlong
height, as yours is; such a Toads-stool suddenly grown out of the Earth of
Beggary and Ignorance, by Fraud and Cruelty, lately watered with the blood of
the King, and his Subjects, can long thrive or stand; having no foundation in
the World, or any show of reason, equity, honor, peace, liberty, or piety to
support it. Not any seeming Authority (for due and legal you could have none
upon Earth.) Not any general desire, delight, consent, or Agreement, in what
you have done, or propound further to do; but rather a general detestation, an
utter abhorrence, and a perfect hatred of you, and your deeds; which honest men
will then agree to, and subscribe, when they can be content to love Death, and
Hell, or to hate God, and their Souls.

Nor doubt we, but many of those Soldiers, whose valor and simplicity you
have thus far grossly abused, by engaging them in such desperate assistances
(whose profit will redound to but few, or none of them) when their Christian,
penitent, and smiteing hearts shall come to see (as no doubt many of them
already do, who are not thoroughly poisoned with your desperate Principles) to
what horrid Villainies they they* are made Gossips, and accessory by your Fraud,
and Hypocrisy, they will speedily re^^rn from you, dead Dogs, desperate
Sheba's, and cursing Shimei's, those mouths and hearts are full of the gall of
bitterness, whose hands and feet are swift to shed blood, who know not the way
of Peace, nor have any fear of God before your eyes? whose Curse is to bo^st
your selves in your iniquity; to fall from one wickedness to another, till
eterual vengeance upon you.

Penitently smiting their breasts, as those that came from crucififying Christ
Jesus, (a work proportionate to the malice and cruelty of you our Kings
Murderers, our barabasses) whose barbarity has at once deprived the King of
what is wont to be dearest to men, his Life, and his Kingdoms; robbing his
Subjects, the Christian World, and all Mankind of the greatest glory, and most
Illustrious Example of Virtue and Piety that ever sat upon a Christian Throne
The most unspotted Person, the wisest Prince, the most Charitable Christian,
the most imitable Pattern for Moderation in Prosperity, for Patience in
Adversity, for devout humility toward God, for judicious zeal to true Religion,
for constant love to the Church, for winning Majesty upon all men, that ever
swayed the Scepter of this, or any other Kingdom; Accessible in his brightest
splendour, Magnanimous in his Diminutions; Of a th^iving and victorious Virtue
under the heaviest Pressures and Crosses; Whose excellent Skill was never so
much discovered as in the late Storms; Whose Darknings rende^ed him not less
formidable to his Enemies, or less venerable to his Friends; Nor was he ever
more terrible to those that are perfect haters of God, of Him, and of all
Goodness, than when they saw that the Eminency of his Virtues was not to be
smothered by their Calumnious Expressions; but the beams and luster of Divine
Majesty in him daily conquered all Ecclipsings that either his own
misfortunes, or your malice cast upon him,

This was the Man, this the Christian, this the King, this the Saint, this the
Martyr, whom ^hese Judas's have betrayed, these Jews destroyed, these Caniballs
devoured.

A Sin questionless exceeding in many respects that of Christ's Crucifiers, (not
as to the dignity of the person, wherein Christ infinitely surpassed the
Majesty, as well as Merit, of all Earthly Kings) but as to that Eminency of
Civil Dignity, and Sovereignty, wherewith the King from God was invested; which
Christ Jesus never assumed, contenting himself with the form of a servant, and
subjecting himself to Civil Magistracy. Also in regard of that malice,
hypocrsie and pretenceless Cruelty, which these Monsters showed against the
King, destitute of any show of Due Authority; which the Crucifiers of our
Savior wanted not, urging also a Law they had, by which they said, (though
falsely) he ought to die: What Law the Kings Murderers either produced or
pretended to justify their Authority, their Accusations, or their Sentence
against, and Execution upon the King, we and they are yet to learn; nor is it
possible they ever should; since all our Laws do most fully and clearly declare
the person of the King as Supreme, Sacred, Unaccountable, Inviolable by any
Person, Process, Judgment or Punishment on Earth.

When the Souldierie by Sea and Land shall once seriously reflect upon and
consider the infinite odious aggravations, wherewith this horrid Murder of
such a Man, such a Prince, and their lawful King, is laden (to which Villainy,
their Valor was abused, to be only as Bloodhounds, Butchers, and Hang-men) no
doubt they will be conceive so just and generous a disdain, that no men's hands
will be more ready to avenge their own dishonor, the shame of their
Profession, the wound and stain of their Consciences, the Blood of their King,
the Dignity of Parliaments, and the Loyalty of their Nation, (never so branded
in any former age) than those Soldiers, whose Valor you the Achitophels,
Jeroboams, Hamans, and Machiavels of our times have basely abused, only to
serve you in accomplishing you Execrable Villainies, and to preserve you from
just and speedy Vengeance, which (as Severus said to those Villains and
Traitors, who had murdered their Emperor Pertinax) can neither be invented
for you, nor executed upon you, proportionable to the many and Out ragious
Villainies committed by you.

We the People of England, cannot but appeal to God, your own Consciences,
(such as they are, cauterised and polluted with the Blood of our King) also to
the judgment of all men, that have but common sober sense, Whether any Age,
any Monuments of former times, any History of humane Aff^i^s, have ever
recorded any excess of Riot, any superfluity of Wickedness to have ever flowed
from the hearts of any men, o^ have been fulfilled parallel to yours? Whether
any Combination of desperate men, filled with the Quintessence of all
wickedness, fraught with flattery, cruelty, hypocrisy, tyranny, and all
degrees of malicious Villainy, incident to humane nature, have since the world
began, and Mankind has been planted upon the Earth, ever committed the like
Villainies (which exceed all names of Vice and Infamies) or ever more deserved
to be made a public Curse, and universal Execration to all Mankind, to have
their persons cut off from the face of the Earth, and buried with the burial of
an Ass; to have their Posterity, as a Pestilent Progeny spewed out of the
Land, (unless they fully declare their unfeigned and utter abhorrence of their
Fathers Villainies, who have defiled the Land with the blood of the King;) That
their Houses (which are neither great nor many) may be raised; that their
memories may be blotted out from under Heaven, or only remembered with perpetual
scorn, cursing and infamy.

Since they have besides many other preparatorie mischiefs, by murdering the
King, dis-inheriting his Posterity, and dissolving this ancient and
flourishing Monarchy, (as far as lies in their power and malice) put us upon
this miserable choice; Either cowardly, basely, and shamefully to submit to
their detestable and unsatiable Tyranny; or to be ever oppressed with a War in
our own bowels; in which we must either expose our Lives and Fortunes to these
men's covetous Cruelty, or help to enslave and destroy our selves by assisting
these Usurpers; or compel the Rightful Heir of these Kingdoms, our hopeful King
CHARLES the Second, to plead and assert his Right by a Foraign Sword; being
denied that just assistance, which as his Subjects we ought to afford him
against the Murderers of his and our Countries Father; his own Enemies, and
indeed of all Kingly Majesty, and Mankind; the Dissolvers of our Parliaments,
the Oppressors of our Liberties, the Exhausters of our Estates, the Suckers of
our Blood, the Blasphemers of our Religion, the Damners of our Souls (unless
God preserve us,) the Crucifiers afresh of the Lord of Glory, and putting him
to open shame.

The Cry of the blood of our King, the Voice of the Genius of this Nation, and
the Alarm of Gods Justice, call aloud to all honest men of Foraign Nations
round about, to all loyal Subjects in these three Kingdoms, to all men of any
common honesty or sober profession of Religion in all the world; summoning them
to sanctify themselves, and lustrate and expiate not only this English Nation
and these three Kingdoms, but all Mankind, and Civil Societies, by taking
speedy Vengeance, and executing Gods and Man's severest Justice on these
perfidious Truce Breakers, proud Usurpers, cruel Hypocrites, traitorous
Apostates, and barbarous King-killers.

We cannot but send the divided parts of our dead but endeared King, now a
glorious Saint, (whom these men have with subtilty and cruelty lately
murdered) to all the Tribes of this our Israel, to desire the advice of all
good men, to see and consider, whether this hideous Villainy were committed with
their consent, or deserve to be patronized with their Agreement; whether it was
ever thus done in any Christian Nation or Kingdom, by any Army of pretending
Saints, or any men, we say not of Common Honesty, but of the most exquisite and
studied Villainy: Whether any thing can be produced out of Common Principles of
sound Reason, out of the Laws of God, out of Christ's Holy Precepts, out of the
Actions and Examples of any holy and good men; or lastly, out of any letter,
sense or meaning of our Laws, whereby in the least degree to countenance, cover
or excuse the Actions of these men; or to satisfy any man's Conscience, that
does not utterly abhor, and seriously endeavor to expiate the sin and guilt
of such Detestable Villainies.

According to the heaped and overrunning measure of their open sins, and
abominable Villainies, so let every good man, that fears God, knows the Memory
and Virtues of so good a King, loves his Country, will keep a good Conscience,
and desires to save his own soul, not only withdraw all voluntary assistance
from them, lest they seem approvers of their wicked Deeds, and be partakers of
their Guilt and Judgments; but heartily pray, and constantly endeavor the
Restoring of the Crowns and Kingdoms to the only Lawful Heir, the late Kings
Eldest Son, upon whom are many happy Presages, and great Expectations of
Glorious Achievements; whom God has in Mercy, we hope, to these Churches and
Kingdoms, preserved out of the hands of these bloody Villains, who Declared in
their Devilish Remonstrance, their purpose to destroy him, with his Brother the
Duke of York, and mingle their tender bloods with that of their Father; whom
special Providence has prepared for great and excellent Designs, by the
maturity of his years, by the procerity of his person, by the gallantry of his
Spirit, by the excellency of his Understanding, by the gravity of his Manners,
and severity of his Example, far beyond what is wonted or expected in young
Men, or young Princes in point of Piety and Virtue.

This is that Person, this that Prince, worthy of his high Descent, worthy of
such a Father, whose worth already promises to exceed all you can desire or
hope for from a Good and Gracious King; upon him God, and our Laws, and our
Oaths, commands all Loyal and Religious Subjects to fix their Eyes, to unite
their Hearts and Hands to the Love and Assistance of him, to expiate the sin
and shame of their former Errors and Defaults, which have produced such sad
and abhorred Effects; to break the Strength, to extirpate the Persons, to
oppose the Designs, and to revenge the Villainies, which have been with an high
hand committed against God, the King, the Parliament, the Laws, and the
Kingdoms, by these Miscreants, men always of desperate Fortunes, but now of so
desperate Minds and Manners, that all their paths lead to the Chambers of
Death, and their steps are descending to the pit of Hell.

From which the Lord in Mercy deliver the people of this Nation, by prospering
our Rightful King, and by his Valor and Virtues, redeeming us speediy from the
sins, sufferings and tyrannies of these blood-thirsty and deceitful men; with
whom no Agreement can be made by any man, who does not desperately resolve to
sin against the Holy Ghost, and eternally damn his own Soul.

Lam. 5. 16. 16. The Crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have
sinned.

For this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim.

Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

Consilia callida and inhonesta prima front laeta. Tractatu dura; eventu
tristia Lecit.

FINIS.
In Martyrium CAROLI PRIMI Magnae Britaniae Regis invicti, Jan. 30. 1648.
IN fandis refer as damno, scelerique dolorem
Musa parem; qualis luctu sub morte Josiae
Ingenti vallem compleverat Hadarimmon.
Qualis ab irriguis oculis, seu font perenni,
Uberibus manet lachrymis noctuque diuque:
Qualem continuo rorans pia lumina fletu
Optabat V^tes deplorantissimus olim.
Sit modus hic nescire modum; quo postera discat
Impia gens quantum sceleretur sanguine Regis.
Regis ab antiquis oriundi Regibus; at Qui
Tantum alios superans, virtute antiquior omnes*
Quantum lenta solent celsae viburna cupressus.
Ut scopulus mediis Neptuni in fluctibus ingens,
In coelum tollens sublimia culmina, nullis
Exuperanda undis, immotus pectore forti
Perstat, and immensis haerens radicibus, omnc(...)
Oceani frangit rabiem; n^^ territus unquam
Conjuratorum ventorum praelia temnit.
Talem Te sensere Tui; Te (Maxim Regum)
Vidimus invicta conatus mente ferentem
Hostiles; varia tentato mole malorum
Inconcussa manet victrix patientia; sacro
Horrore insuetum complesti Carolus orbem.
Aurea, quae pulchro pinxti dictamina libro,
(Tam pravi caecique malis Lux and super aevi)
Unicus implesti vitae, moderaemine; passus
Quas alii fingunt aerumnas; ultima mortis
Humanam superant sortem miracula sancta.
Rex idem, and Martyr; Trino Diademata clarus,
Altior exurgens sum a men's ambition^
Martyrium imperio junxit: Quartamque Coronam
Stellis non gemmis fulgentem, sum^re pergit
Impavidus Christi, and Sponsae mirandus Alumnus;
Coetibus Angelicis proprior, mortalia long
Despicit. Ante pedes (facinus deforme) Rebellum
Dum prostrata jacet Majestas Regia, surgit
Celsior, e ten^bris splendens Augustior istis:
Comminuit quantum Satanae, vel militis ira,
Omni-potens tantum Numen virtutibns auxit;
Gratia grandescit, collo minor, atque corona
Carolus evafit Magnus; Ludibria Trunci
Ridet; Rex humilis sequitur vestigia Christi.
Formosum in lata vidistis valle Leonem;
Quem trepidi cingunt Pastores; Rusticus horror
Magnanimum sequitur telo, and clamore lacessens;
Non hominum, non illa canum, petulantia terret
Gradivum, generos a fugam quia bestia nescit
Degenerem, motu nullo blanditur; at ille
Constans incedit gressu; vultuque minaci
Arduus insidias strepitusque aspernit inanes;
Inveniet, facietve viam sibi conscia virtus.
Per fastiditos sic Te tulit impetus Hosts
Ingentem Regni Genium; dumque agmine circum
Sacrilegum spectant crudelia schismaticorum,
Immortalis abis Regna ad meliora Monarcha;
Lusit fatalim men's impenetrabilis ictum;
Plectitur illaesus; poena est victoria; fanguis
Non minus innocuum decorat, quam purpura Regem.
Tutatur, quem non potuerunt Scepira, securis.
Non dolor Hunc, non irae movet, non Carceris horror,
Non tristis comitem squallor, non Monstra profani
Judicii, non scommata, sputa, culumnia, pulsus
Erectum laedunt animum, purissima lympha
Mill modis agitata ni^et: Patientia totum
Possidet; ac pleno sic fatur Numine Turbam.
"Tetrius in vosmet, quam in me p^ccabitis; illa
"Vulnera me cruciant potius, quae saeva paratis
"In proprias animas, quam quae in mea corpora cives;
"Non Deus hoc vobis, non sancta oracula mandant
"Infandum facinus; Quamvis justissima summi
"Dextra patet, (suplex hanc prono exosculor ore;)
"Vos tamen injustos graevior vindicta manebit;
"Qui genus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma,
"At sperate Deum memorem fandi, atque nefandi,
"Castigatvehemens faelicia crimina poena;
"Deprecor ultorem, mea vota novissima Christo
"Pro vobis, patriaque mea cum sanguine fundam.
Dixerat; and dicto citius prostratus atrocem
Imperturbato Rex invictissimus ictum
Sustinuit vnltu. --
Diriguere omnes; imo suspiria ducunt,
Pectore que is hominum, que is non adamantinae corda:
Non dolor, aut lachrimae, vastus stupor occupat orbem
Ingenuum, irato suffusum triste pudore
Erubuit coelum, pallentia lumina condens.
Antiquae periit sic illustrissima Gentis
Gloria; vix oculis unquam reparabile nostris
Occubuit lumen; Domini quem dextra sacraret
In Regem, extinxit diro manus improba ferro:
Publica libertas; Decora omnia; Religionis
Sanctus honos, una pereunt collapsa ruina,
Singula quae tanta fuerant suffulta columna.
In Chaos horrendum lapsos nox opprimit atra;
Cum tenebris pondus; Terras Astraea reliquit,
Sanguine pollutus Divi; Lex sancta recessit;
Militis incubuit trucis insatiata libido,
Omnia diripiens paupertate ambitiosa,
Cui stravere viam Regni perjuria dira.
Sic Lupus, and Vulpes, tecti ambo pellibus Agni
Insidiis fallunt, non vincunt Mart leonem,
Tam claro ut possint satiari sanguine fauces.
Quoque magis possint factis obtendere velum
Justitiae, miles procerum, plebisque senatum
(Relliquias vulgi rudis, informisque Tumultus,)
Dissipat; in sulsis toga cedere cogitur Armis.
Carnifices dant jura prius; suffragia deinde
Liberiora petunt, sequitur sententia tristis;
Corripit, incusat, condemnat, destruit, idem
Judex and Testis, Miles, Subjectus, and Hostis.
Tantum Relligio, tantum nova lumina possunt
Persuadere mali; lucis tum Lucifer almae
Nomen, and Effigiem simulat; quum perditus error
Ingruit, and tenebras cupiens effundere vero,
Immanes animos ad atrocia crimina ducit:
Principis hinc sanguis libandus: subditus iras
Non putat averti superum, nisi tanta litetur
Victima: non alio ritu placabile numen
Sanguinei celebrant sancti: maculata cruore
Dextra Fraterno, Patris, Regisque pianda:
Tantae molis erat sanctorum condere Regnum.
Nihil habet ulterius vestris quod moribus addat
Horrens posteritas; I nunc perjure supremum
Ecoeli pergas sede exturbare Monarcham:
Inde locum teneas late dominantis Abyssi
Regis; ut ad solium poteris conscendere dignum,
Arbitrio Cromwelle tuo, dum cuncta reguntur
Numine quis credet mundum rectore moveri?
Flevit J. G.

CAROLUS REDUX; Sive Nemesis ad CAROLUM SECUNDUM.
CArole, vindictam celera; ne per fidus orbis
Esse Deum tam cord neget, quam pernegat actis:
Imp^a, quae laeti, and ridentes facta tuentur
Prosperiora mali, falso dum lumine cernunt
Crimina, mox viderint quum tristia, turpia credent.
Carole, vindictam celera; Te mill ruinis
Pressa vocant tria Regna; uno Te vindice sperans
Sustentat miseris reliquam patientia vitam:
Te leges vocitant; sancto Te murmr poscunt
Pectora, quae tacitis miscent susprcia votis.
Carole, vindictam celera; Te justior ira
Flagitat, and Coeli, and Terrae; Te Gentis, and Orbis
Vox properare jubet; multo Te mersa cruore
Et Patria, and Patris clamat Te sanguis inultus;
Perfida quem fudit truculentum Dextra Rebellum.
Carole, vindictam celera; victricibus Armis
Ora petas exosa Deo; seu, fulmina ab alto
Omnipotens quando Numen librabat Olympo,
Usta Gygantae is cecidere cadavera flammis:
Et subitam, and certam fundat tua dextra ruinam.
Carolus adventum celeres; non Phosphorus almae
Nuncius Aurorae post noctem gratior atram;
Non requies fessis; calidis non umbra; minaci
Gurgite jactatis non portus; non sitienti
Rivus; certa salus non aegris; non morienti
Vita magis laeta est, aut grata mente recepta,
Quam Tua solicitis aderit praesentia nobis.
Publica vita, Salus, Requies, Lux (Unicus) adsis,
Numinis auxiliis fultus; Qui monstra domares
Et foedam lustres Gentem virtutibus Haeros.
Fatidicum vox est Te Majestate secundum,
Et caedem ulcisci and Regnum superare Parentis.
Vovit J. G.
1649
Manibus Montisrosanis sacrum.
Votivam hanc quam vides, invidesque viator tabulam
Nudam; non auro, miniove pictam,
Uno Montisrosani Nomine
(Vilis plebeculae Nobile ludibrium)
Ornatam, sanctam, satisque celebratam,
Male foederatae Gent is infamia,
(Heu justae meritaque nimis!)
Foedam, deformatamque senties.
Caut is, and Oceani proles barbara,
Mente, manuque truculenta,
Solis detescens vitiis, and dedecore;
Caetera vilis, and pauperrima;
Ingens Christiani Nominis
Dehonestamentum, and propudium;
Busiridas, Cyclopesque omnes
Immanitate superat nefanda.
Tragicum obscurae Gentis facinus,
Ne nescias (Lector) audi.
Regii vindices sanginis dum videri volunt,
Nobilissimum Regii sanguinis vindicem,
Majestatisque sacrae assertorem aeerrimum,
Montisrosanum (Gentis decus, dedecusque) vita,
Seipsos honor humanitateque privant Scythae.
Quo enim nuper sancti, ligatique perduelles,
Vafri, perjuri, truces, inexorabiles,
Insatiabilem restringuentes Ambition is sit(...),
Regium propinarunt poculo cruorem;
Idem diverso nequiores isti
Excipiunt, ex sorbentque animo
Egregium impotenti vindictae
Mactantes Heroem,
Pristina facinora,
Novissimo hoc piaverunt monstro.
Quum enim venditum prius amissumque Carolum
(Virtutum and Regum exemplar unicum
Mirandum, inimitabile, aeternum)
Propria neglexerant trucidare dextra,
Montisrosani pergunt jacturam reparare caede.
Imbelle^, fraudum, irarumque vernae;
Uti nescientes, quam parti sunt victoria.
Immites (proh pudor!) mitissimi Numines cultores,
Amantissimum satagunt immanitate placare Deum,
Humanum quasi cruorem sitiret, esuriretve sanguinem
Propriis qui non pepercit, nostrae consuluit saluti
Christus, mitis, misericors, clemens, placabilis,
^nimicorum indultor, ligantium solutor
Damnantium salus, crucifigentium Redemptor,
Occidentium vita.
Hunc, Hunc Christianae tantus Reformator sectae
Audire, imitarive si velis Scote,
Non carnificis Christiano praetulisses munus,
Infame, detestabile, diris execrandum;
Aut una saltem simplicique lainena
Contentus, non dimidata, aut lenta
Torquere debuisses (miser!) Hero(...),
Tota. Quem non terruisti morte:
^ereri fas est, non irridere miserum;
Nec ludibrio suplicioque simul excipere
Praeclarum hoc virtutis aenigma,
Humanaeque prodigium inconstantiae;
Qui
Sapientiam temeritate, Fortitudinem fuga,
Splendorem Tenebris, Foelicitatem infortunio,
Victorias laqueo, Triumphos patibulo
Clausit.
Adeo demiranda, deplorandaque rerum vicissit(...)line,
In valles celsos videas desidere montes,
In spinas su^ves degenerare Rosas.
Suspensum satis, lusumque cadaver
Rabiosi dum lacerant Canes,
Invicta interim ridet Anima
Trunci dispendia Montisrosani.
Quem enim unus non capit Tumulus, bust^mve*
Totus Hunc orbis excipit, conditque sinu,
Docto, ingeuo, molli* ver^c^ndo:
Adeo non mendicata Pompa,
Aut ementito Honor,
Funeris, fruitur, caretve,
^el jam superstes Heroes;
Quem immortale(...)esse jubent
Gratiae, Musae, virtutesque omnes.
Haec (viator) dum legeris,
Luge si poteris;
Si nescis, Actor esse
Detestandus incipis,
Qui lector and indolen^
Ista deseris.
1649. L. M. Q. J. G.

FINIS.

