THE CERTAINTY OF THE Christian Revelation, AND THE NECESSITY OF Believing it,
Established.

In Opposition to all the Cavils and Insinuations of such as pretend to allow
Natural Religion, and reject the Gospel.

By FRANCIS GASTRELL B. D. and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon.

Ye believe in God, believe also in me, John 14. v. 1. LONDON, Printed for
Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, 1699.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of England, and one
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THE Design of the following Discourse being to prove the Christian Religion in
the most unexceptionable manner I could, I was resolved to give the Enemies of
our Faith as little Advantage against me in my Dedication as in my Proof: And
it is for that Reason I have presumed to offer these Papers to your Lordship, as
being well assured that your Lordship's Name and Character will not only
Justify this Address, but Recommend the Cause I am defending.

For to whom could an Advocate for Christianity better direct his Defense, than
to a serious Believer, and a great Example, placed in a high Station; whose
Profound Knowledge of Law and Government has fully convinced him of the
absolute Necessity of Religion in general, and the Reasonableness and Wisdom of
the Christian Institution; and who in a long, diligent, and impartial
Administration of Justice, must be very well acquainted with all the Ways and
Methods of proving Matters of Fact, and nicely understand the Force and
Proportion of every Proof.

I shall not take upon me, in this place, to set forth all the Extraordinary
Qualifications your Lordship is Master of; because, most of them being employed
in the Service of your Country, they have already procured you the just returns
of Gratitude and Esteem from the Public, which has received the benefit of
them: But this I think my self more particularly obliged to mention, for the
Honor of the Christian Religion, that it is to the Influence of that Holy
Doctrine your Lordship owes the most advantageous Distinctions in your
Character.

What other Account can be given of that Firmness and Steadiness of Mind which
your Lordship has preserved in all the difficult and trying Circumstances that
different Turns of State, and different Measures of Policy have engaged you in?
When new Interests and new Dangers arose, and every thing changed about you, it
must be wholly owing to Christian Principles that your Lordship always kept
your Ground and your Posture.

To the same Cause it must be ascribed that your Lordship has never stained
your Public Character with private Immoralities. Notions of Honor and
Reputation may preserve a Man's Dignity upon the Bench; but it is only a Just
and Awful Sense of Religion that can make him Reverence himself at home.

And in a Corrupt Age, where Impiety is grown Fashionable, and has Quality and
Title to Countenance it, it is no small Sign of your Lordships regard for
Religion, that you judge it for your Honor to have it known, that you make the
Scriptures the Rule of your own Life, and think it the highest Concern of all
Humane Laws and Constitutions to support their Authority and Obligation.

For all these Reasons, my Lord, it must be very proper for any Person that
appears in the Christian Cause to Address his Endeavors to your Lordship;
especially if it be considered that, besides your great Capacity to make a
right Judgment of the Proofs alleged for it, you have no other Considerations
to engage you in the Interests of Christianity, but those of Truth, and the
Happiness of Mankind. It cannot be said of your Lordship, that the Credit or
Advantages of your Profession are concerned in the Defense of the Gospel; you
derive none of the Honor and Greatness you possess from the Church; and
therefore your Lordship's Example is a very good Argument to Unbelievers, that
those who are peculiarly set apart for the Service of God are not carrying on a
separate Interest from the rest of the World; but are promoting all they can
the Universal Good of Mankind.

I might, among other Inducements to the present Dedication, reckon personal
Favors: But I must own, that though I have all the Gratitude imaginable for
the Honor of your Lordship's good Opinion and kind Intentions; and though I
have no greater Obligations to any Man Living than to your Lordship; yet
nothing of that Nature would have produced such an Address as this, if I had
not been determined by more public Considerations to interest your Lordship in
the Cause I have undertaken. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obliged, and most Humble Servant, FRANCIS
GASTRELL.

THE PREFACE.
WHen Christianity first appeared in the World, the Light and Influence of it
were so strong, that it bore down all the Powers of Vice and Falsehood, and made
one of the worst Generations of Men, that perhaps ever lived since the Flood, a
most astonishing Example of the greatest Virtue and Piety that Humane Nature
has yet reached; but now the Spirit of Wickedness seems to have recovered it
self, and to threaten Revenge to that Religion which has so often triumphed
over it: And Deism is employed by the great Enemy of Mankind, to do what
Atheism, Superstition, and Idolatry, never could effect.

And indeed it has pleased God to suffer Irreligion, to spread so far under
this new Title, that one would be apt to imagine it had, like the Lying Spirit
we read of in the Time of Ahab, a solemn Permission from the Lord to go forth,
persuade, and prevail: For what other Account can be given of the Original and
Growth of such a Delusion, which has no manner of Foundation either in Reason
or Fact to support it?

It Is true Deism is looked upon as a more defensible Post than Atheism; and
when we observe with what seeming Calmness, and Serenity, some deny the
Christian Religion, with what Contempt they treat the Holy Scriptures, and with
what Boldness they ridicule the History and Doctrine of the Gospel, we are
tempted to suppose that these Men must certainly have a great deal to say for
themselves, or otherwise they durst not thus despise what they could not prove
to be false, nor bear up against if it should be true.

But whoever has that regard for Truth and Happiness, as to consider the
Pretenses of Christianity, and to examine carefully the Proofs it stands upon,
will be thoroughly and effectually convinced, that those who deny Revelation,
have as little ground for their Infidelity, as those that disclaim all
Religion; and that the Confidence of the one, as well as the other, is only the
Effect of a desperate, not a well-defended, Cause.

For if Matters of Fact are capable of any Proof, if we can have any Evidence
of Things not seen or heard by us, the Christian Religion has as sure an
Establishment as any other part of our Knowledge, which does not confist in
pure abstract Ideas, or immediate Sensations.

This, upon the strictest Enquiry I have been able to make, is become so fixed
an Opinion with me, that I dare venture to affirm, not only that there never
was any Imposture in the World, which had so many plain Marks and Characters of
Truth upon it, as the Christian Religion is attended with, but that there never
was any true History of Things whatsoever so well attested; That it is
impossible for the united Wisdom of Men to contrive any Scheme of Events that
shall be delivered down to Posterity, with so many certain Signs and Monuments
of its Truth; and that there cannot be any Supposition invented, that will be
fuller fraught with Absurdities, than that of the Christian Religion's being an
Imposture.

These are Assertions I have endeavored to make good in the following
Discourse; and I hope I have in some measure performed what I undertook; but if
I have not said enough to communicate the same Conviction to others, which I
feel my self, the Fault must lie wholly in the Management, not the Proof. For,
in the Pursuit of this Argument, I found my self on every side surrounded with
so much Light, that I am sure there is Proof enough to be made of what I have
here advanced, though the Evidence I have brought for this Purpose should
appear to have been chosen ill, or applied wrong.

But, after all, there is no need of proving so much as this to Unbelievers:
It Is a sufficient Answer to them if it can be shown, that the Christian
Religion has as just a Pretense to be believed as any other Matters of Fact not
questioned by them; and that nothing they have to urge in behalf of Infidelity,
can lessen the Credit of this Revelation; which is so easy a Task, that
whoever engages in the defense of the Gospel, will find it much more difficult
to meet with Objections than to answer them.

For my part I must profess, that in all the search I have had occasion to make
into Natural and Revealed Religion, I never could meet with any one Objection
to either of them that would bear the Form of an Argument. Several new Plans
and Models of Philosophy have been framed, and a great many new Hypotheses
raised in all Parts of Learning; and every one of them has been ransacked to
furnish Matter for Infidelity; but all to no purpose: There are no such grounds
of Knowledge laid by any Man, but Religion may be proved from them; And I don't
know of any Propositions whatsoever, advanced by any Philosopher, Ancient or
Modern, which, if they are not such as plainly imply a Denial of Religion, can
prove any thing against it.

Some have openly declared for Irreligion, and have made a Philosophy on
purpose to maintain their Cause; others have covertly, under false Pretenses,
thrown out several Opinions and Doctrines, with a Design to weaken some or
other of the main Principles of our Faith; but in vain are all these Fiery
Darts of the Wicked, and the Arrows of those that shoot in secret; no
Philosophy or Humane Wisdom can prevail against the Almighty. In the open
Attempts of impious Authors, the Force they make use of is unsupported, and
often recoils upon themselves: And as to those dishonorable Writers, who
endeavor to wound Religion by Hints and Insinuations, nothing expressed in
their Books is sufficient to make good what they mean. Epicurus and Lucretius
may affirm that there is no Providence, and no Future State; but no other
Propositions in their Philosophy will prove there are none: Hobbs and Spinoza
may intend to undermine the Common Faith of Christians; but there is nothing
directly advanced by either of them, that, if it were allowed to be true, could
infer any thing to the prejudice of the first general Principles and Proofs
either of Natural or Revealed Religion.

For a through Confirmation of which Truth, I have in treating of both these
Subjects, endeavored to form my Proof upon such common unquestionable
Principles, as every body, of what Sect (...) Philosophy, must needs grant.
It Is true indeed most of the Notions employed in the Cause of Infidelity, are
false, as well as unconcluding; and upon both these Accounts deserve a
particular Answer, in order to prevent the Mischief they might probably do
among the Unwary and Unstable. But I looked upon that as the surest and most
effectual Way of defending Religion, which would cut off all Objections at
once, and put the Cause upon a general Issue; this is the way I have taken in
both Discourses, and I am sure the Method cannot fail if the Performance be but
Answerable.

If we are such Beings as I have described, and every body by consulting
himself may find; and if there are such Appearances in the World, as every Man
that will look abroad may perceive, then are all the Principles of Natural and
Christian Religion certainly true: And if we are not such Creatures, that have
such Powers and Capacities, and act for such Ends and Motives as we feel in our
selves; and if we are not sure that the Frame of the World, and the Public
State of Humane Affairs do appear to us in such a manner as we imagine they do,
then do we know nothing at all; and if the Inferences truly drawn from these
Appearances don't hold, none do. And if we have no Knowledge, we are like the
Beasts that Perish, and have no Pretensions to Happiness neither. Religion,
Knowledge, and Happiness are all upon the same Foot, and are so closely united
together, that there is no separating one from the other, without destroying
them all.

But if Religion be built so strong, what support can Irreligion have? What
Principles can the Atheist, Deist, and Libertine Reason or Act upon? What new
ways of Knowledge have they found out? Can he that denies a God, or Providence,
show us how the World was Made, or has been Governed without? Or can he that
disowns a Future State inform Mankind what and why they were, or resolve them
that Question, Whether it were not better they had never been? How can he that
denies the Christian Religion prove, that we were not of Yesterday, and know
nothing but what we have seen our selves, or our immediate Forefathers have
told us? And how can he that thinks both Natural and Revealed Religion to be
Imposture, persuade himself to believe any thing else?

The most reasonable thing that such Men as reject all Notions of Religion can
do, is to believe nothing: But Skepticism and Suspense are so very difficult
and disagreeable to the Mind of Man, that every body must have something
continually to believe; and we do all of us give up our assent in abundance of
Instances, without staying for the utmost conviction we are capable of: But
none have been more remarkably distinguished from the rest of the World for
their Credulity, than the Irreligious; it being commonly and truly observed of
them, that they believe as unreasonably and absurdly as they deny, and that is
what no body else does. What can be more extravagantly ridiculous, than to see
an Atheist telling Fortunes, a Deist in quest of the Philosophers Stone, and a
Libertine venturing all his present Pleasures and Enjoyments in a Rebellion for
the good of his Posterity? And yet such is generally the Conduct of the
Irreligious; and it is a just Judgment from God upon them, that they should be
given up to believe Lies, and to act against their own Interest, to throw off
the Principles of Truth, and not make the best of their Errors.

Upon which account I think, if the Enemies of God and his Christ, are so far
resolved upon the ways of Unrighteousness, that they will not consider the
Proofs of their Duty in order to be reformed, they would do well to betake
themselves for Refuge to Ignorance and Amusement, rather than Learning and
Reasoning: For all the Improvements of Knowledge do only furnish new Light and
Strength to Religion, and administer fresh occasions of Shame and Confusion to
Unbelievers; and therefore 'twould be more advisable for them to keep up their
Infidelity to themselves, than to let it loose to the disturbance of others:
They had much better Entrench than Attack. For, besides that, all attempts upon
Virtue and Piety annoy the rest of the World without any Advantage to their
Cause that make them, 'twould be more for their Ease to lie quiet. For arguing
and objecting against Religion, and making Proselytes to Infidelity, are not
only certain Signs of present uneasiness, but will very probably create them a
great deal more. If they will be continually disputing and pressing their
Objections they will be sure to meet with something or other to puzzle and
startle them; and this may awaken their Fears, and raise new Disquiets in their
Mind, which may at last end in a just Despair, when they will be able to repent
of nothing but this, that they were not content to enjoy the Fruits of
Irreligion without offering to defend it.

I heartily wish such Advice as this to Vnbelivers were needless, and that they
were seriously disposed to embrace a more reasonable and lasting Satisfaction,
by entering upon an humble and impartial Examination of the Proofs of the
Christian Religion. But this being to be looked upon as an Effect of
Extraordinary Grace, all that can be expected from the Endeavors of those,
that undertake to set these Proofs in the best light they can, is to stop the
Mouths of Gainsayers, and to prevent the mischief of Infidelity from spreading
further than it has done: And it is my sincere Prayer to God, that the following
Discourse may have a share, with many other upon the same Subject, in
contributing to so good an Effect.

All that I have to warn my Readers of is, that if any of them should be
inclined to judge, that the Abstract I have given of the New Testament, and the
Proof of the Common Matters of Fact there Related, either unnecessary, or too
long, they would pass over these parts and leave them to be read by those for
whom this Discourse was principally designed: Most of which I believe will know
more of the Christian Religion, from that Abstract of it I have drawn up, than
they did before. And I durst not presume so far upon them as to take the Common
Matters of Fact for granted, because, if they are true, I look upon all the
other as demonstrable from them; and therefore I was willing to lay the
Foundation as firm and as broad as I could, that it might bear the weight of
what I was to build upon it; and I persuade my self I have all along taken
sufficient care not to overload it.

I have not been precise as to Time, and some other Circumstances relating to
the History of Christianity, because what I was to prove is as fully made good
within the Latitude allowed as if it had been more punctually determined.

ERRATA.
In the Book.
PAge 31. line 10. know read knows. p. 39. l. 14 measure r. measures. p 41. l.
27. him, r. him; p. 44. l. 5. Discourses r. Discoveries. p. 53. l. 19. as r. a.
p. 59. l. 10. too true r. to be true. p. 62. l. 24. happened: d.: p. 67. l. 26.
of r. as. p. 76. l. 12. Year r. Years. p. 79. l. 9. r. country; p. 99. l. 13.
r. must be. p. 106. instanced, in. d., p. 107. l. 6. Words r. Records. p. 109.
l. 14. r. Diocletian. p. 110. l. 24. sense r. force. p. 112. l. last. then r.
there. p. 115. l. 23. designs r. design. p. 140. l. 22. r. according to. p.
160. l. 22. Relation r. Relators. p. 163. l. 26. r. Perceptions. p. 174. l. 12.
r. truth of. p. 192. l. 2. execute r. excite. p. 211. l. 14. r. some such. p.
228. l. 3. ever r. never. p. 240. l. 6. then. r. than. p. 287. l. 10.; r., p.
293 l. last.? r.; p. 298, l. 19. at r. of. p. 304. l. 23. to be d. be. p. 316.
l. 10. Scheme r. Scene. p. 337. l. 11. Motives r. Monuments, p. 339. l. 5. were
r. are. p. 353. l. 2. r. frame of.

The Certainty of the Christian Revelation, AND THE NECESSITY Of BELIEVING It.
HAving in a former Discourse proved that there is a God; That this God has
appointed us a certain Rule and Order of Life; That he has obliged us to
Conform to his Will and Appointments, by annexing Happiness to our Obedience,
and Misery to our Disobedience; That the Rule he has given us to go by, is
whatever we can, upon our own Enquiry, or the Information of others, discover
to be agreeable to our purest and most unprejudiced Reason; all which is
comprehended under the Name of Religion: Having likewise shown that a general
and exact Observance of all the Duties of such Religion, would advance the
Happiness of Mankind to the highest degree, they are in this their Mortal
Condition capable of; and from these Principles, together with the present
Irregularity of things in the World, having made it appear that there must be a
Future State, of Rewards and Punishments proportioned to the different
behavior of Men in this: I have now farther undertaken to prove that, besides
those Tokens and Indications God has given of himself, his Will and Designs in
the Nature and Constitution of things, which are discoverable by right
well-exercised Reason; he has in a more extraordinary manner, viz. by Immediate
Revelation from himself made known his Mind to us; by which means he has given
us a clear and entire view of the forementioned rational Truths, rendered our
knowledge of them more certain, plain, and particular, discovered a great many
new Truths which the unassisted force of Human Faculties could not have found
out, and established new Rules and Measures of Duty, over and above those our
Reason was before, by its utmost efforts, able to inform us of.

All which extraordinary Discoveries I affirm to be contained in the Books
which go under the Name of the Old and New Testament: from whence I infer that
all the Doctrines, Precepts and Directions delivered in the Old and New
Testament, are obligatory to us so far as they are there declared to be so;
that is, they are to be believed and observed in the Way and Manner, and upon
the Reasons and Motives there proposed; and consequently, that at present, the
true and adequate Rule of Human Life, is what we call the Christian Religion.

But because, as it is plain from the nature of all Revelation, the truth of
what is pretended to be revealed must depend upon the proof of Matters of Fact;
I shall take this Method of establishing the Certainty of the Christian
Revelation.

1. Having premised some things concerning those particular Facts I design to
insist upon; I shall give a short Abstract or Summary of the Christian Scheme,
as we find it delivered in the New Testament.

2. I shall prove by such direct Arguments as Matters of Fact are proveable by,
that all the principal Matters of Fact related in the New Testament, are true.

3. I shall endeavor to make good the same Proposition indirectly, by showing
the Absurdity of a contrary Supposition, and the weakness of all the
Difficulties and Objections raised against the truth of those Facts, or of
Revelation in general.

4. I shall show the sufficiency of such a proof as shall be given under the
former Heads to induce us to believe the Christian Religion, and to render us
inexcusable if we do not.

As to what concerns those particular Facts I design to insist upon for the
proof of the Christian Religion, there are these three things necessary to be
observed.

First, I take all this for granted, viz. That there are such Books as those I
call the Old and New Testament, that they are in the hands of a great number of
People of different Countries in the World, and are with a very little
variation the same every where: That the greatest part of those in whose hands
they are, who are called Christians, profess to believe that the Matters of
Fact there Recorded are true, and that the Doctrines came from God, and are
appointed by him as the Rule and Measure of their Actions; but more especially
those delivered in the New Testament, which they look upon to contain a full
Scheme of their Duty: That a large Sect of Men, called Jews, profess to believe
the same of the Old Testament as the Christians do, but reject the New, and
make the former only the Rule and Measure of their Duty; and that a great many
of these, both Jews and Christians, do really and sincerely believe what they
profess, and endeavor to order their Lives accordingly. All which Matters of
Fact are such as I have no manner of reason to suspect any body will deny me.

Secondly, I insist wholly upon the proof of those Matters of Fact which are
recorded in the New Testament; not only because the Christian Religion, the
Certainty of which I have undertaken to establish, is fully confirmed by the
truth of those Facts: But because the Old Testament is supposed, and every
where appealed to in the New as true and authentic, upon which account, a
thorough effectual proof of the latter, will be of it self a sufficient
establishment of the former. Besides, many of the same Arguments that I shall
make use of to support the Christian Revelation, are in like manner applicable
to the Jewish: And therefore I shall only consider the Old Testament as a Book
that was extant long before the Christian Religion appeared in the World; and
which was then, and had been long before esteemed by the whole People of the
Jews, as a Book that contained the Revelations of God; and I shall concern my
self no farther in the proof of these ancient Writings, than to defend them
from the little Cavils and Objections raised against them by Modern
Unbelievers, with a design to weaken the Certainty of Divine Revelation in
general, and consequently to invalidate the proofs of the Christian Religion.

Thirdly, I distinguish all the Matters of Fact observable by us in the New
Testament, into Common and Extraordinary; such as are conformable to those
Facts we have often taken notice of before, or to those Notions we have of the
Natures and Powers of the Agents, which appear to be the immediate Authors of
them; and such as exceed all our Knowledge and Observation of what we call
Nature and natural Powers: which Extraordinary Facts mentioned in the New
Testament, I distinguish further into two kinds; such as were immediately
perceivable by some of the Senses, of those before whom they were done, and
such as were knowable only by reasoning from the Natures of Things, and other
concurrent or consequent Facts. Of the first kind, are Prophesies and Miracles;
of the second, are Divine Assistance and Revelation. And thus I shall endeavor
to establish the Certainty of the Christian Religion, by proving the truth of
all the principal Matters of Fact contained in the New Testament, according to
the Order and Distinction of them before mentioned, viz. Common Historical
Facts; Prophecies and Miracles; Divine Assistance and Revelation.

I. But, for a better and clearer prosecution of my Design, I shall in the
first place, before I enter upon this proof, give a short Abstract or Summary
of the Christian Scheme, as we find it delivered in the Books of the New
Testament: Wherein I shall consider the Matter and Subject of these Books, and
the Manner in which they are writ; with all the important Circumstances
belonging to them, that offer themselves upon a careful and impartial reading.
Which general view of of all the Christian Facts, the truth of which I have
undertaken to maintain, will not only prevent a great many inconvenient
Repetitions, and show the force of the subsequent Proofs in a stronger light,
but give us such an Idea of the Christian Religion, as if carefully weighed and
attended to, would render any further attempts to prove it unnecessary.

It is plain to any one that reads over the New Testament, that it contains in
short, a History of the Publication and Propagation of certain Doctrines and
Rules of living proposed to the Belief and Practice of Mankind; together with
an Account of the several Discourses, Actions, Writings, Sufferings, and other
remarkable Circumstances in the Lives of the first Publishers, and some of the
principal Propagators of those Doctrines and Principles which make up the New
Scheme of Religion here delivered.

But to take a more particular Survey of the New Testament, according to the
several Parts or Volumes into which it is divided: In the first Four Books of
it, called the Gospels, we find a very large and particular Account of the
Birth of Jesus Christ, the first Author, as is there affirmed, of that Religion
which is now termed Christian; and his Birth is related to have been after an
extraordinary manner in all the Circumstances of it; viz. That he was conceived
by the Spirit of God, and the over-shadowing of his Power; That he was born of
a Virgin; That his Conception was foretold, and his Birth proclaimed by Angels;
That his Coming into the World was signified by a Star, which brought Wise Men
from the East to worship him; That mighty Things were immediately before and
after his Birth said of him by Angels, and Just Persons, moved by the Spirit of
God. From the Birth of Christ, 'till he was thirty years of Age, very little is
mentioned of him besides some Discourse he held with the Doctors in the Temple
at Twelve; but when he began to be about thirty, he was baptized by John, who
is styled his Forerunner that prepared the way for him; and at his Baptism the
Heavens were opened, and the Spirit of God descended upon him like a Dove; and
a Voice was heard from Heaven, saying, This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. The principal Things that are afterward recorded of him, are his
calling of Disciples and Apostles, his Sermons and Instructions to the People,
his Miracles and Prophecies, and his Sufferings, Death and Burial, with some
other remarkable Passages that happened after his Death.

His Disciples and Apostles, but more especially Twelve of them, were favored
with a nearer and more intimate Conversation than any of the rest he directed
his Instructions to. These were the constant Companions of his Labors, and
Witnesses of his most private Behavior; These he instructed in a more plain
and open manner than he did others, and communicated several things to Them,
which he kept secret from his common Auditors and Followers: To these he gave a
Commission to teach and instruct the Jews, and to do mighty things among them
while he lived, and to preach to all Nations after his Death, and propagate his
Doctrine with Signs and Wonders.

He himself is represented as preaching and teaching throughout all Judea, and
several of his Public Sermons and Discourses, as also many things which he
said in private to his Disciples, are every where throughout the several
Gospels repeated; sometimes in short, and only the Substance of them, sometimes
more at large, in the same Form and Manner in which they were delivered.

The Miracles, or wonderful Things, mentioned to be done by Christ, exceeding
all the Observation and Power of Mankind, are these: Fasting Forty Days and
Forty Nights together; turning Water into Wine; Stilling Tempests, walking upon
the Sea; telling the secret Thoughts of Men's hearts; curing the Blind, Lame,
and Maimed; healing all manner of Diseases with a word, or touch of his
Garment; casting out Devils and unclean Spirits, and restoring Men possessed
with 'em to their former state of health and sense; feeding vast multitudes of
People with a few small Loaves and Fishes; by his bare Word causing a Fig Tree
immediately to wither, great numbers of Fish to be taken in a Net, and a single
Fish to come to the Hook with Money in its mouth to pay his Tribute with;
transfiguring himself before some of his Disciples, so that they saw the
fashion of his Face altered, and his Raiment changed; raising the Dead, and
rising himself after his Burial; appearing to his Disciples after he was risen,
and conversing with them Forty Days, sometimes being known by them, and
sometimes not, according as he pleased; and at last in their Presence ascending
up into Heaven.

The Matters we find in the Gospels foretold by Jesus Christ, were his own
Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mission of the Holy Spirit or
Comforter, with several particular Circumstances of them; the Persecutions and
Sufferings of his Disciples; the Death of some of them, and the manner in which
they were to dye; as also their future Glory and Office at the end of the
World; the Rejection of the Jews; Vocation of the Gentiles; Success and
Continuance of the Gospel, or Christian Religion; the Appearance of False
Prophets and Teachers, and False Christ's; the springing up of Heresies, and
falling away of Professors; the Destruction of the Jewish Temple, and
Constitution, and Dispersion of that whole People, with many strange and
terrible Signs foregoing; and lastly, the second Appearance of himself in Glory
to judge the World, which is set forth in a very large and pompous Description
of the whole Scene.

As to his Sufferings, Death, and Burial, and what followed afterward, which
are the next things that challenge our Consideration, we read that he was
betrayed by one of his Disciples, denied by another, and deserted by all the
rest; that he was taken, and carried first before the High Priest of the Jews,
and afterward before Pilate and Herod; that he was scourged, mocked, spit
upon, reviled, and, at last, upon false and frivolous Accusations, condemned by
Pilate, contrary to his Conscience, only to please the Jews; and then crucified
between Two common Malefactors, one of which reproached him, the other believed
in him; while he was upon the Cross, the Sun was dark'ned, the Veil of the
Temple was rent in twain, and the Earth quaked, and the Rocks rent, and the
Graves were opened, and many Bodies that slept arose, and came out of their
Graves after his Resurrection, and appeared unto many; his Body being taken
down from the Cross unbroken, was laid in a Sepulcher hewn out of a Rock, with
a Stone rolled to the door of it; and the Sepulcher was made sure, by sealing
the Stone, and setting a Watch; notwithstanding which he rose again the Third
day after he was buried, and appeared to his Disciples, and many others: But
the Soldiers that were appointed to watch the Sepulcher, being affrighted by
the appearance of an Angel, who descended from Heaven, and rolled back the
Stone from the door, came into the City, and showed the Chief Priests all the
things that were done, and had Money given them to say his Disciples came by
Night and stole him away; after this, the Disciple that betrayed him repented
of the Fact, brought back the Money he had received for betraying him, and
hanged himself.

This is the sum of what is contained in the Four Gospels. In the next Book,
called The Acts of the Apostles, we find the Eleven, who are peculiarly styled
Apostles, after their return from beholding the Ascension of their Master,
assembled together at Jerusalem with the rest of those who were more
particularly distinguished by the Name of Disciples; where they make choice of
another Apostle to supply the room of Judas that had hanged himself. After
which choice, the twelve being all with one accord in one place, they were
filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke with other Tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance; which wonderful Gift of diverse Languages was conferred upon
them with very strange amazing Signs and Appearances, viz. a sound from Heaven
as of a rushing mighty Wind, cloven Tongues like as of Fire, etc.

Having received this extraordinary Assistance, we find them wholly employed in
preaching the things concerning Jesus; interpreting the Scriptures of the Old
Testament with relation to him; baptizing in his Name; converting People to the
Belief of those Facts recorded in the Gospels, and the Doctrines built upon
them; exhorting Men to the Practice of the several Duties enjoined them by God,
and delivered to them by the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, and bidding
them expect Salvation by Christ only; ordaining several Persons under different
Characters to assist in the Ministry; healing all manner of Diseases; raising
the Dead; and doing many other Signs and Wonders wherever they come; and
conveying the same Powers and Gifts to others they had received themselves: By
which means we read that the Gospel was spread, and the number of Believers
increased, many Churches or Congregations were every where established, and the
Members of them kept so united by those that were set over them; first in
Judea, and Samaria, then in remoter Parts abroad where the Jews were scattered,
afterward in several Cities, Islands and Nations of Asia and Europe.

With the Progress of the Gospel or Christian Religion, we have an Account
likewise of several Attempts made in many Places to hinder and oppose the
Establishment of it, together with the Sufferings and Persecutions of the first
Apostles, and others chosen afterward to be Assistants to them in carrying on
the same Work; many of which were beaten, imprisoned, and many other ways
afflicted and distressed, and some were put to death.

But a more particular relation is given of the Conversion, Travels, and
Sufferings of Paul; all which appear to be very extraordinary. Several
Discourses of Paul, and other Apostles and Disciples of Christ are set down at
large. Some Prophecies also are mentioned of Holy Men, who are represented as
being filled with the Holy Ghost, and speaking by the Spirit of God; and some
remarkable Judgments of God upon wicked Persons are there recorded.

These are the principal Matters which compose the History of the Acts of the
Apostles.

All the following Tracts or Volumes of the New Testament, are written in the
form of Letters or Epistles, sent from such of the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, as we find mentioned in the Gospels and Acts, and directed, some of
them to particular Persons, some to large Societies of Men, of several
different Countries, who had embraced the Christian Faith.

In which Epistles are contained most of the same Rules and Precepts that are
laid down in the Gospels and Acts, many large and particular Explications of
several Doctrines there delivered; and several new Doctrines which we do not
meet with in those Books, the Truth and Obligation of all which are frequently
enforced by Arguments.

Most of the principal Matters of Fact recorded in the Gospels and Acts, are
reserr'd to in the Epistles, and alleged as Proofs of the Truth of the
Doctrines there taught, and of the Authority of the Teachers. Here are likewise
several new Matters of Fact incidentally mentioned which we do not find in
those former Books; and some of the Facts there related are repeated here with
new Circumstances.

All the Epistles do abound throughout with Exhortations to a steady Belief of
those wonderful things said and done by Christ and his Apostles, and to a
constant Practice of the Duties enjoined by them. In several of them there are
some Prophecies too intermixed with these other Matters before taken notice of:
And the last Epistle directed to the seven Churches in Asia, which is by a
peculiar Title styled The Revelation, is almost wholly prophetical. Some of
them also conclude with Salutations to, and from several particular Persons
therein named.

These are the most remarkable things that occurr to a Man upon reading the
Epistles.

Thus have I run through all the Variety of Particulars treated of in the New
Testament. But in order to form a juster and fuller Idea of the Subject of this
Book, it is necessary to add some farther Considerations not formally expressed
in any one particular Volume or Chapter, but fairly and evidently collected
from the whole Composure, or from several plain Passages here and there
dispersed through the several parts of it: Such as are the Characters of Jesus
Christ and his Doctrine; of those that believed in him, and that assisted him
in the publishing and propagating his Gospel; and of those that persecuted him,
and all that bore Testimony to him, and opposed the Establishment of his
Religion.

As to the Character of Jesus Christ, so far as it can be collected from the
several Writings of the New Testament, it is in short this: His Birth, Life,
and Death, were attended with extraordinary Circumstances of different kinds:
Those who are called in Scripture his Parents, are said to be descended from
the Family of David, the greatest King that ever reigned over Judah and Israel;
but their present Condition when this Child was born, is set forth as very low,
and the Employment that maintained them then, and afterward, very mean; but
they were Persons that feared God, and lived very conformably to the Law of
Moses.

The first Appearance of Christ in the World, was prepared, accompanied, and
followed by Prophecies, Visions, Signs, and Wonders, Ministry of Angels,
Adoration of Wise Men, Jealousies and Fears of a Great King; together with the
Doubts, Ignorance, Amazement, Necessities, and Flight of his Father and Mother.

His Education was fuitable to the meanness of his Birth. Thirty years were
spent at home in Obscurity and Retirement, where he was subject and obedient to
his Parents; but at the same time he waxed strong in Spirit, and increased in
Wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him, to the Astonishment of all his
Kindred and Countrymen, who could not imagine whence he had that Wisdom.

His whole Life afterward was taken up in preaching, and instructing, and
confirming his Doctrine and Authority by Signs and mighty Works, and by
Arguments drawn chiefly from the Prophecies and other Passages of the Old
Testament. He went about every where teaching and doing Good: He taught in the
Temple, and other public Places of Jerusalem; he passed through all the Cities
and Villages of Judah and Samaria, and the Neighboring Coasts, preaching and
expounding the Scriptures to the People in their Synagogues: In the Fields, the
Deserts, and upon the Seashore, we find him attended with great multitudes who
heard him gladly.

Thus was he constantly employed, from the first discovery of himself and his
Gospel to the World, 'till by Treachery and Malice he was apprehended and put
to Death: In all which time that he publicly conversed with Men, we have a
great many surprising things related of him, which do very much distinguish his
Character from that of any other Person.

He is represented as sensible of Human Passions, Appetites, and Infirmities;
and yet free from all Sin, and endued with a Power of not feeling and relieving
those very wants he suffered.

He loved, grieved, and was angry; but these Affections were occasioned in him
by a just Concern for the Glory of God, and the Success of that great Work he
came about, the Salvation of Mankind; and they never exceeded their due bounds.

He felt Hunger and Weariness, yet fasted Forty days and Forty nights together,
fed vast multitudes, and healed all manner of Infirmities by his miraculous
Power; and, when his Disciples brought him Meat, he refused it, saying, he had
Meat to eat which they knew not of, and that his Meat was to do the Will of him
that sent him.

He lived in extreme Poverty and Want: He had not where to lay his Head; and
was destitute not only of the good things of this World, but of all the lesser
Conveniences of this Life: And yet we see when he sent for an Ass and Fool to
ride into Jerusalem with, the Owners let them go; and when he ordered to have
such a room prepared for him to eat his last Supper in, 'twas presently got
ready for him; and both upon the bare Saying of his Disciples that the Master
had need of them.

His Meekness, Lowliness, and Humility, are very conspicuous throughout his
whole Conduct and Behavior; and in several particular Instances; as his
conversing freely with Persons of the meanest Rank, choosing such to be his
constant Companions, and most intimate Friends, declaring that he came to
minister to others, and not to be ministered to, ordering those he cured not to
publish what he had done for them, refusing to be King when the People would
have made him so, washing his Apostles Feet, etc. Notwithstanding which, in
many other Instances, he discovers himself in very signal Characters of
Greatness, Majesty, and Power: For, not to mention what we have before ranked
under the Style of Miracles and Prophecies, he taught as one having Authority;
so that not only the People, but their Rulers and Teachers were astonished at
his Doctrine; he reproved the Scribes and Pharisees with Boldness; he entered
into Jerusalem with all the highest Solemnities of Triumph, and drove out of
the Temple all those that profaned that Holy House, by applying it to common
Uses; he spoke the Word, and whoever he called immediately left all they had,
and followed him; he took upon him to forgive Sins; and he gave his Disciples
the same Power, as likewise a Power against unclean Spirits to cast them out,
and to heal all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Diseases, to tread on
Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy, so that nothing
should by any means hurt them.

Besides all which, and many other Marks of Greatness, Power, and Authority,
that appeared in the Actions of Christ, the things which he declares of
himself, and which are attributed to him by his Disciples, give us a much
higher Idea of him.

He says of himself, that he is greater than the Prophet Jonah and Solomon; he
proves that David called him his Lord; he affirms that before Abraham was he
is; that Abraham rejoiced to see his day, that he is the Christ, the Messiah
expected and prophesied of, the Son of God, the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
that all things are delivered to him of the Father, who was Lord of Heaven and
Earth, and that all things which the Father has are his; that he and the
Father are one, that he is in the Father, and the Father in him; that he came
forth from his Father when he came into the World; that he is the Bread of Life
that came down from Heaven; that this Bread is his Flesh, which he will give
for the Life of the World; that he has overcome the World; that no Man took his
Life from him, but that he laid it down of himself, and had Power to take it
again; and that when he leaves the World, he goes to his Father: He owns that
he is a King, but that his Kingdom was not of this World; He tells us that all
Power is given to him both in Heaven and in Earth; that hereafter he should be
seen sitting at the Right Hand of the Power of God, and that he will come in
his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him to judge the World; that then he
shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be gathered all
Nations, and receive their Sentence from him according to their Works. He
assures his Twelve Apostles that he will send the Comforter to them, who shall
teach them all things, and guide them into all truth, and show them things to
come; that he himself will be with them always unto the end of the World; that
whatsoever they shall ask the Father in his Name, that he will do; that he will
prepare a place for them in his Fathers House; and that, when he comes to judge
the World, they shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. To all those that labor and are heavy laden he promises that they
shall find rest; to those that sell what they have and follow him, that they
shall have Treasure in Heaven; to those that love him, that they shall be loved
of his Father, and that his Father and he will come and make their abode with
them. Whosoever drinks of the water that he shall give him, he says, shall
never thirst, but that water shall be in him a well of water springing up into
everlasting life; and whosoever eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has
eternal life, and he will raise him up at the last day. He tells one of the
Thieves upon the Cross, That he should be with him that day in Paradise; and in
general to all those that believe in him, and obey his Word and Commandments,
he gives assurance of Salvation and Eternal Happiness in another World, besides
many other occasional Blessings and Assistances in this; and those that will
not believe in him, and obey his Gospel, he threatens with Eternal Punishment
in another life, and with many Troubles and Calamities while they continue here.

Agreeable to which Declarations made by himself, are the Language and Practice
of his Disciples to him, and of him in his Life time and after his Death. They
call him Lord, and God; Preach, Baptize, and Bless in his Name; and attribute a
great many glorious things to him, which are in other places, in the same
Manner and Expression attributed to the One Only Supreme God. They Worship him
when alive, with all the external signs of Divine Adoration, and Pray to him
after his Death, and expect all manner of Grace, Assistance, and Spiritual
strength from him here, and an Eternal Reward of their Labors, Sufferings and
Obedience from him hereafter.

And as these are all Evident Marks and Tokens of an amazing Greatness and
Power in Jesus Christ, so are all his Sermons and Discourses, his manner of
Preaching and Conversing, and the whole Scheme both of his Life and Doctrine;
manifest proofs of an extraordinary kind of Wisdom.

It does not appear from the History of the Gospel, or any other parts of the
New Testament, that Christ had read any other Book but the Old Testament, or
that he had had the advantage of being instructed in the meaning and sense of
that by any Master or Teacher whatsoever: yet we find him Teaching, Reasoning,
Answering Questions that were put to him, and Expounding the Scriptures of the
Old Testament in such a manner, that all that heard him were astonished at his
Understanding, his Doctrine and Answers.

His usual way of Teaching the People that believed on him, and reproving the
Scribes and Pharisees, and others that were unbelievers, and sought occasion to
find fault with what he said, was by Parables, which were such familiar
Resemblances of, or Allusions to the common and most observed accidents of
Life, as were more easily apprehended by ordinary Capacities, better attended
to and remembered, and not so liable to Censure and Misinterpretation as plain
and proper expressions of the same Truths that were delivered this way, would
have been: But sometimes he both taught and reproved openly without any
disguise or reserve, and some of his Parables were such as were not understood
even by his Disciples, till he was pleased in private to show them the meaning
of them, and acquaint them with the reason of this part of his Conduct.

His Answers to those that accused him of any crime, as of eating with Sinners,
breaking of the Sabbath, Blasphemy, and the like; or that sought to entrap him
in his Discourse, and to find matter of Accusation against him, were very
surprising and unexpected; and such as always silenced and disappointed his
Enemies.

His Exposition of some parts of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and the
Inferences he draws from them, seemed wholly new to all the Jewish Teachers and
Expositors that heard him, and yet we do not read that they confuted, or so
much as opposed either his Comments or his Arguments.

And in fine, his whole Behavior and Conversation were so carefully and wisely
ordered, that, though he was constantly watched and observed by cunning and
malicious Men, of different Opinions, Designs, and Interests, yet no Man was
ever able to convince him either of Sin or Ignorance, as is manifest from the
Answers he gave to those who Censured, or Despised him, or thought to puzzle
him by difficult Questions, and from the whole Process against him when he was
condemned to die.

Thus lived Jesus Christ a perfect Pattern and Example of the Religion he
established, in all Holiness, and unblameableness of Conversation, showing in
all the Actions of his Life recorded of him an entire Submission and
Resignation to the Will of God, and exceeding great Charity and Compassion
toward Men.

And the same reason for which he came into the World, and was obedient to the
Law of Moses; for which he published his Gospel, and upon that account endured
the Contradiction and Persecution of Sinners, was that also which made him lay
down his Life, and submit to all the Indignities and Torments that accompanied
it; the only Cause, Motive, and End of all these Actions and Sufferings of
Christ was the love of Mankind. As he came into the World to save Sinners, so
he gave his Life a ransom for many. To free Men from Eternal Misery, render
them capable of Eternal Happiness, and to direct and assist them in the way of
Salvation, was his sole Work and Design.

These are the largest and most remarkable lines in the Character of Jesus
Christ, the first Author of that Religion we profess and defend.

In the next place I shall endeavor to give a short draught or representation
of his Doctrine or Gospel; or, as we now call it, The Christian Religion, so
far as it is plainly delivered in the Writings of the New Testament: But all
Religion, as every one know, consisting of Faith and Practice, things to be
believed, and things to be done in consequence of such Belief, I shall first
consider the Christian Faith, and afterward what concerns the Practice of a
Christian.

The sum of the Christian Faith is to believe in One God, such as he is in the
New Testament set forth to us, and in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our
Lord, according to the History and Character before given, or whatever else the
Scriptures say of him: and by Faith in him, accompanied with a Sincere,
Universal, and Persevering endeavor of Obedience to the Rules and Laws
prescribed by him; and a hearty Repentance for the Sins and Frailties we do at
any time fall into, to expect eternal, inexpressible Happiness; or, in case of
Infidelity or Disobedience attended with Impenitency, to be assured of
suffering Eternal, inexpressible Misery in another Life.

The particular Doctrines which give us an account of these things more at
large, may be considered under these three Heads, God, Christ, and Man.

The God proposed in the New Testament to be believed in, is represented as a
Spirit, Invisible, Incorruptible, Eternal, that is, that was, and is to come,
Almighty, that knows all things, and yet whose Judgments are unsearchable,
and his ways past finding out; Creator of the World and all things therein, who
upholdeth all things by his Power; in whom we live and move, and have our
being; of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things: Most Holy, Just,
Righteous and Perfect; who is to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, and with
purity of Heart; no respecter of Persons, of great goodness and forbearance,
and yet who will render to every Man according to his deeds, to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory and Immortality, Eternal
Life; but to them that do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath: of whom it is further said, That he is the Father, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our Father; a Title he is frequently and
peculiarly distinguished by, all over the New Testament: That he sent his Son
into the World to die for us, and by him reconciled us to himself; That the
Sins of Ignorance he winked at; but that now at the appointed time, when Christ
came into the World, he calls all Men every where to repent: That at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, he spoke in times past by the Prophets, but in
these last days has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir, of
all things, by whom also he has made the World; that he foreknew,
predestined and Elected some in Christ, and adopted them for Sons, to be
Heirs of Salvation, and to obtain a Heavenly Inheritance: all which are said to
be Sanctified by the Spirit of God, who is often called the Holy Ghost, or
Spirit, and the Spirit of Christ and of the Son, in several places of Scripture
is joined together with the Father and the Son; and frequently talked of as a
Person acting after such and such a manner, as God is in other places
represented to do; and many of the same Titles, Characters, and Attributes, are
ascribed to him as are ascribed to the One Only Supreme God.

The principal things that are taught us in the writings of the New Testament,
concerning Christ, besides what we have already mentioned in his History and
Character, are, That he came into the World, took upon him the nature of Man,
was obedient to the Law, offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, was made a
Curse, died, was buried, rose again, and is sat down at the right hand of God,
that thereby he might redeem us from our Iniquities, and from the Curse of the
Law, be a propitiation for our Sins, and reconcile us to his Father through his
Blood, that our Trespasses might not be imputed to us, but that by his
Obedience we should be made righteous: That he might become the Mediator of a
new and better Covenant between God and Man, than that which God made with the
People of Israel when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and that he
might abolish the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, and break down
the middle Wall of Partition between Jew and Gentile, that so both might be
united in one Building, of which Christ was the chief Corner Stone, and all of
us be Members of one Body or Church, of which Christ is the Head: That he might
be an Advocate with the Father when we sin, and make continual Intercession for
us, that so upon our Confession and Repentance, God might forgive us our sins,
and cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And lastly, That he might obtain a
Kingdom, and by that means spoil Principalities and Powers, triumphing over
them; destroy the works of the Devil, and put all Enemies under his feet; and,
that when Death, the last Enemy, is destroyed, he might raise the Dead, and
judge the World: Part of which he has already performed, and the rest he does,
and will hereafter fulfill.

The most remarkable matters that occur in the New Testament concerning the
Nature, Condition, and Circumstances of Mankind, are these; Adam was the first
Man, Adam was first formed, then Eve; the first Man Adam was made a living
Soul, the last Adam, by which is meant Christ, was made a quickening Spirit,
which two different Expressions are distinguished as Natural and Spiritual,
Earthly and Heavenly; by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin;
and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned: Adam was not
deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was in the Trangression;
notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing if they continue in Faith,
and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety: Death reigned from Adam unto Moses,
even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam 's
Transgression, who is the Figure of him that was to come: A Man is the Image
and Glory of God, but the Woman is the Glory of the Man; notwithstanding which,
all that are of the race of Mankind, are styled and accounted in the Scriptures
sinners, ungodly, enemies of God, dead in trespasses and sins, servants of sin
and corruption, Children of the Devil, by nature Children of Wrath; of whom it
is said further, That Sin dwells in us, and reigns in our Mortal Bodies,
that when we would do good, evil is present with us, and we find the Flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and a Law in our Members warring against the Law of
our Mind, and bringing it into Captivity to the Law of Sin: The Jews are
represented as subject to Ordinances, and a Law which had only a shadow of good
things to come; and as in bondage to weak and beggarly Elements; and all other
Nations are reckoned as Aliens and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise,
having no hope, and without God in the World.

This is the state of Mankind considered without relation to Christ; but by
Christ we are cleansed from our sins, we are made free, we are justified by
Faith in him, and by his righteousness we are saved.

But the advantages which accrue to Mankind by the means of Christ, and the
change that is made in our Condition by him, will be more fully understood from
these following passages. As by one Man's disobedience, many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, as sin has reigned
unto death, so shall Grace reign through righteousness unto Eternal Life by
Jesus Christ.

Cursed is every Man that continues not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law to do them; the Man that does them shall live in them; but this
being impossible, it is evident that no Man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God; if there had been a Law given which could have given life,
righteousness should have been by the Law, but the Scripture has concluded all
under sin, that the promise of Faith by Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe; In many things we offend all, but if we repent, and are baptized
and believe, and show our Faith by our Works, and persevere unto the end we
shall be saved; but if we believe not the Truth, and have pleasure in
unrighteousness, and repent not of the evils we have committed, we shall be
damned. Those that have embraced and obeyed the Gospel of Christ, are said to
have put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and put on the New Man, which is
renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him; Thus through
Christ only we are to expect Salvation, there being no other Name given under
Heaven whereby we might be saved; which Salvation if we neglect, we shall be
condemned by God at the last day, when he comes to judge the World in
Righteousness by his Son, whom he has appointed Judge of the quick and dead.
Then shall we be raised from the dead by Christ, and receive every Man
according to his Works. As in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; and since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
dead. The dead shall be raised incorruptible, their mortal corruptible Bodies
shall put on immortality and incorruption, and those which are alive at the
coming of Christ, shall be changed in a moment, at the last Trump. As we have
born the Image of the earthly Man Adam, so we shall also bear the Image of the
heavenly Man Christ. Then shall they which have done evil be condemned to
everlasting torment and misery, and they which have done good, shall be
rewarded with everlasting joy and happiness in the presence of God, and his
holy Angels.

This is the substance of what is taught, and proposed to the Faith of Mankind
in the New Testament; which I have expressed, as near as ever I could, in the
very language of Scripture, as my design plainly obliged me to do.

The other Branch of the Gospel, or Doctrine of Christ which concerns the
Practice of a Christian, and may properly be styled Christian Morality,
consists of such rules and measure of Action, as every one that believes in
Christ, is obliged to conform his life to, and without which his Faith is dead
and vain, he is still in his sins, and he must expect the Wages of them,
Eternal Death.

The principal Heads of Christian Duty are these.

To love God, and the Lord Jesus, Christ with all our heart, and with all our
power; to honor, praise, and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, with purity
of heart and intention, to submit our Wills to his, and to aquiesce in all the
dispensations of his Providence, with the utmost resignation of Mind and
Judgment possible.

To love our Neighbors as our selves; to do unto all Men as we would they
should do unto us; to forgive, and love our Enemies; to bless, and pray for
those that despightfully use us and persecute us; to do good against evil; and
to endeavor as much as in us lies to live peaceably with, to do good unto, and
to promote the Salvation of all Men.

To deny our selves, and to mortify all our Lusts and Affections, to take off
our Affections from things on the Earth, and set them upon things above, and to
have our conversation in Heaven; to live chastely and soberly in this present
World, avoiding all manner of excess and intemperance; to bridle our Tongues,
to take care that we offend not in word; and to bring every thought into
Captivity to the Law of Christ; to think lowly of our selves, with all humility
preferring each other; to humble our selves in the presence of God, and when we
have done all that we can, to say we are unprofitable Servants; to take up the
Cross of Christ, and not only to bear Afflictions patiently, but to glory in
them, and rejoice that we are thought worthy to suffer.

These, and all other the particular Duties derived from them, we are required
constantly and sincerely to endeavor to perform, without a willful allowance
of our selves, to offend in one point, or to do evil that good may come of it;
and, whenever we have transgressed any of these Rules of Life prescribed us to
act by, we are immediately to break off our sins by repentance.

All which we are obliged to do for the Glory of God, in pure obedience to his
Word and Command, in love and gratitude for all the Mercies we receive from
him, and in hope and expectation of enjoying Eternal Happiness, and escaping
Eternal Misery in another life, and upon no other account or prospect
whatsoever; these being the only true Ends and Motives of Human Action, and the
only Grounds of Duty and Obligation.

We have considered the Character of Jesus Christ, and taken a short view of
the Gospel or Religion he taught and recommended to Mankind: In the next place,
let us see who, and what sort of Men they were that first believed in him, who
assisted in the publishing and propagating his Gospel; and who they were that
opposed the Establishment of it, and persecuted Christ and all that bore
Testimony to him.

Those that were any ways concerned in the receiving, publishing, and
propagating the Gospel of Christ, were John his Forerunner, his Twelve
Apostles, other Apostles and Disciples, and such as were particularly set apart
for the Ministry, and Common Believers.

John, who is styled The Forerunner of Christ, and one that was to prepare the
way before him, was born of Parents who were righteous before God, and walked
in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless; his Conception and Birth were
attended with many extraordinary Signs and Wonders; then it is said of him,
That he grew and waxed strong in Spirit, and was in the Deserts till the day of
his showing unto Israel, and his Raiment was of Camels hair, and his Meat was
Locusts and wild Honey; afterward he came Preaching in the Wilderness of
Judea, saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and many were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins: all he Preached to and
baptized, he acquainted with the Character and near approach of Jesus Christ,
whom in a particular manner he preferred to himself, and and by that means
satisfied them that he was not the Christ, which before they doubted of: Little
more is recorded of his Preaching or Discourses, but only some particular
advice to some Persons that enquired of him what they should do, and his
reproof of the Multitude that came to him, and of Herod; for which last he was
put in Prison by him, and afterward beheaded. He did no Miracles, but the
Austerity of his Life, the Authority of his Preaching and Baptizing, and the
Holiness of his Conversation, made him looked upon by all People as a Prophet.
Jesus Christ says of him, that he was more than a Prophet, and even Herod
himself that beheaded him feared him while alive, and observed him, and when he
heard him he did many things, and heard him gladly, knowing him to be a just
Man and a holy.

The Twelve Apostles were all of them Persons of a low Rank and mean
Occupations; all the time they followed Christ, they seemed not to be fully
acquainted who he was, or what he designed; several of his Discourses they
understood not, but wondered what the meaning of them should be; they were
several times by their Master reproached for want of apprehension, and
knowledge in the Scriptures, after the plain Discourses he had made of himself
to them, and for want of Faith and Courage, notwithstanding the many Miracles
and mighty Works he had done before them, and they themselves had done by his
Commission; they looked upon him as a Temporal Messiah or Deliverer, who was to
restore the Kingdom again to Israel, and they had several little Contests among
themselves who should be greatest in the Kingdom they fancied their Master came
to establish; they acknowledged him to be the Christ the Son of God, but they
seemed not to have rightly understood what they said; when he was apprehended
to be put to death, one of them betrayed him, all the rest were offended
because of him, and fled; but one of them that returned after him, solemnly
denied him, and immediately repented; and he that betrayed him repented, and
hanged himself: After his death we find some of them bewailing themselves as
disappointed in all the hopes and expectations they had conceived of him; and,
when it was reported that he was risen again, none of them would believe it
till they saw him themselves, and one of them was more remarkably incredulous
in this point than the rest, till he had received the satisfaction he desired.

But after the Ascension of Christ, and the choice of another Apostle in the
room of him that had hanged himself, we find the Twelve Apostles maintaining a
different Character from what they had in their Master's lifetime: Now they
appear perfectly instructed in all things concerning Christ; whatsoever before
seemed strange to them either in his Actions or Discourse is all unriddled, and
the Scriptures which before were difficult to be understood, are now made plain
and manifest: And, as their Knowledge is enlarged, their Faith is strengthened;
no doubts or distrusts are now entertained, but they Preach the Gospel of
Christ with Authority and full Assurance, insomuch that we find many more
converted at their Preaching, than at Christ's; they are endued with new
Powers, which they had not whilst their Master lived, and which did not show
forth themselves in Christ; their whole lives are taken up in Traveling and
Preaching, and laboring with their hands to maintain themselves; their whole
Business and Design is to persuade People to embrace the Gospel of Christ; many
are their Troubles and Sufferings upon this account, all which they undergo
very cheerfully, and never show the least sign of fear or regret for any thing
that happens to them; they never decline an opportunity of Preaching the
Gospel, or converting People to the Belief of it upon any prospect of danger
whatsoever, and no Power or Authority of Rulers and Governors, no severity of
Persecutors can discourage them in their Work.

The other Persons concerned in the Ministry and Propagation of the Gospel of
Christ, by whatever Names and Offices distinguished, whether Apostles,
Disciples, Deacons, Pastors, Teachers, Prophets, Evangelists and Presbyters,
Bishops, or Rulers, so far as we know any thing of them by the Scriptures,
were, all of them, very near of the same Character with the Twelve, for
meanness of Birth and Education, simplicity of Manners, Steadiness of Faith,
and adherence to the Doctrines they taught, Piety and Devotion, Self-denial and
Disinterestedness, Constancy and Resolution under continual Sufferings, and a
cheerful preference of a future expectation in another Life, to all
considerations whatsoever which this World could afford.

But one of them, named Paul, is represented to us under some particular
Circumstances, which make his Character very different from that of the rest.
He was Educated in all the Learning of the Jews at the feet of one of their
greatest Doctors; and by some passages we find in the Epistles ascribed to him,
we collect that he was acquainted with the Heathen Greek Authors; he was at
first a zealous Enemy of the Christian Doctrine, and a fierce Persecutor of all
that called upon the Name of Christ; but being in an extraordinary manner
called by God, and by several wonderful Signs and Appearances converted to the
Faith of Christ, he became a zealous Preacher of the Gospel, had a larger and
fuller Commission of Apostleship granted to him than any of the Twelve, was
exercised with a greater variety of Afflictions for the sake of the Gospel,
labored more abundantly in the establishment of the Christian Religion in the
World, and writ more for the Confirmation of those in the Faith, whom he had
converted.

The generality of the first Common Believers, who were not called to the
Ministry, were of the lowest sort of the People, and several of them scandalous
and notorious Sinners before their Conversion; but some there were of the
better and richer sort, and some Rulers and Priests that believed in Christ,
though but a very few that we read of. The Character of which Believers after
the Ascension of Christ, and first Sermons of the Apostles, was this; That the
Multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul, neither said
any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, but they
had all things common; neither was there any among them that lacked, for as
many as were Possessors of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the prices
of the things that were sold, and laid them at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made to every Man, according as he had need. In other places
it is said of them that believed, That before they were Servants of Sin, but
after they had obeyed from the heart that Form of Doctrine that was delivered
them, they were made free from sin, and became the Servants of Righteousness;
that in times past, they walked according to the course of this World,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and mind, but now being created in Christ
Jesus unto good Works, did walk in them; that some of them, who were before
Fornicators, Idolators, Adulterers, Abusers of themselves with Mankind,
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, and Extortioners, were washed and
sanctified by the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God; many of
them that believed, came and confessed, and showed their Deeds; many also of
them which used curious Arts, brought their Books together, and burnt them
before all Men. But, in process of time, when the number of Believers
increased, though the greatest part of them manifested their Faith by their
Works, turned from the Vanity of Idols to the Living God, renounced all the
hidden Works of Sin and Darkness, and were ashamed of those things in which
before they took pleasure; yet Offenses and Heresies did spring up among
Christians, notwithstanding all the care of those that first planted the
Churches, and those that afterward presided over them; and some there were
that walked disorderly, that Preached Christ out of Envy, that taught other
Doctrines than what they had received, that turned after Satan, that loved this
present World, that put away Faith, and made Shipwreck of a good Conscience;
but these bore no proportion to the numbers of the Faithful, whose Faith and
good Works were spoken of throughout the World.

Such were the first Publishers and Believers of the Gospel of Christ. And the
Persons who endeavored to discourage the Belief, and oppose the Establishment
of it, by all the means they could, but especially by Contemning, Disgracing,
Reviling, and Persecuting those who were any ways concerned in maintaining or
propagating this new Religion, were among the Jews, their Kings, Governors,
Chief Priests, Elders, and Chief of the Jews; as also the Scribes, Pharisees,
and Saducees, who were the Men of greatest Learning and Authority in the Jewish
Nation, some of which are represented as very wicked Men, and notorious
Hypocrites, and others as disbelievers of a Future State: And among the
Gentiles, the Magistrates, Rulers, and Chief of the Cities, Philosophers,
Sorcerers, Craftsmen for Idolatrous Shrines, and certain lewd Fellows of the
baser sort; most of which were stirred up, and moved to what they did by the
Jews that lived among them.

This is the shortest and plainest account I could give of the Subject of the
New Testament, or the Matters contained in that Book; which are such as every
Body that reads it will find there, and consequently must subscribe to the
truth of the Representation, however he may doubt of the reality of the
Original.

The next thing to be considered in the New Testament, is the Way and Manner in
which the several Matters before mentioned, are there related, with such other
circumstances as referr to the Form or Composition of the whole Book, and the
several parts of which it consists.

Now it is plain to any Man that reads over the New Testament with the same
care, attention, and impartiality, as he does another Book, that it was not all
writ by the same Person at one continued time, but by several Persons at
different times, and upon different occasions; and that in general, it is writ
with great plainness and simplicity of Style, without Art or Affection, and
with many extraordinary Marks of Sincerity and Truth.

But to be more particular; the four first Books, called Gospels, seem to have
been Penned by so many different Authors, as appears, not only from several Ways
and Manners of Expression observable in each of them, but also from the
Subject; which being the same in all, and most of the same Matters of Fact
being repeated in each Gospel, some of which are told with such a diversity of
circumstances as occasions some difficulty to reconcile together, it cannot be
imagined that any one Man would write so many accounts of the same Story, so
little different from one another in the main Branches, and so much, in some
lesser particulars.

The Narration in all the Historical parts of the New Testament is very short,
naked, and simple, nothing but bare Matters of Fact being related just as they
happened, without any interposition of the Author: There is no Preparation of
Events; no artful Transitions or Connexions; no set Characters of Persons to be
introduced, or Reflections upon past Actions, and the Authors of them; no
Excuses or Apologies for such things as a Writer might probably foresee would
shock or disturb his Readers; no Colors, Artifices, or Arguments, to set off a
doubtful Action, and reconcile it to some other, or to the Character of the
Person that did it: The Faults and Infirmities of those Persons, the Authors
would seem to recommend, are fairly recorded without any mitigation or
abatement, and the Crimes of their Enemies barely told without any aggravation.

The Epistles appear to be written with a great Air of Piety and Devotion; and
the Authors of them seem to be acted by as warm and steady Zeal for the Glory
of God, and the Good of Mankind; and to speak with mighty Assurance from a full
Conviction of the truth of those things they so earnestly press and recommend.
Whether any of them were written by the Authors of the Historical Books, and
which of them were, and which not, we have nothing in the Writings themselves
to judge by, but the difference of Style, which seems very distinguishable in
some of them; but I shall not lay much stress upon that, because it may be
disputed by Pretenders to Criticism.

The last Epistle which goes under the Name of the Revelation, is plainly of a
different Character from all the other Books of the New Testament, though said
to be written by one who was Author of a Gospel and some other Epistles; which
difference arising wholly from the Matters contained in it, and the manner of
their Conveyance into the Mind of the Writer, upon this supposion, it may
easily be allowed to belong to the same Author that writ some other parts of
the New Testament in a different Style from that of the Revelation, which is
altogether Figurative and Mysterious.

All the several Books in the New Testament, excepting the Epistle to the
Hebrews, have Names of Persons prefixed to them as the reputed Authors of them;
who are all the same that are mentioned in the Gospels and Acts, either as
immediate Apostles of Christ, or such as were chosen and directed by those that
were so: But neither by the Titles, nor by any thing said in the Books
themselves, does it appear, that any part of the New Testament was written by
Christ himself, or that he writ any thing at all.

I have these things further to observe of the Books of the New Testament in
general; that there are in diverse places of them, a great many particular
remarkable Notes of Time, to distinguish when the several Actions therein
related happened; all which are within the space contained betwixt the Death of
Julius Caesar, and the Destruction of Jerusalem: That there are a great many
Names of Persons and Places concerned in these Actions, the greatest part of
which are Jewish, Greek, and Roman: And that most of the chief Matters of Fact
and Doctrines mentioned in any of the Books of the New Testament, are supposed
by the several Writers of them, to be known and believed before those Books
were writ.

The two former of these Observations are very evident upon the first, and most
transient reading of the New Testament; and a very small degree of attention
will serve to satisfy us of the latter.

All the Epistles are very absurd and unintelligible without this Supposition;
for first, the Arguments and Exhortations there made use of, with which they
abound, are for the most part inferences from Matters of Fact taken for
granted, and not newly told, as appears from the Way and Manner in which they
are mentioned, the Facts being alluded to only, and imperfectly hinted at, not
related with all the Circumstances necessary to inform those that had never
heard of them before: Then the Forms of Blessing and Salutation we find there,
and the Titles the Writers give themselves, and those they write to, all
necessarily imply the same thing: Besides there are several direct Expressions
in many places of them, which do formally, and in plain terms, assert that the
Persons these Epistles were writ to, had been before instructed in all the
principal Truths of the Gospel.

It Is plain also from the Acts of the Apostles, as well as the Epistles, that
Churches and Congregations of Believers, are supposed to be established in
several parts of the World, before any of these Books were writ; the manner and
way of their establishment being the chief Subject of that Book called the
Acts, as the fixing and confirming them in the Faith, is the chief Design of
the Epistles.

Nor is it less manifest from the Gospels, that they all suppose the principal
Matters of Fact related of Christ, and most of the Doctrines delivered by him,
to have been known and believed by a great many, at the the time when these
Gospels were writ, and in the places where they were published. The manner of
beginning each Gospel, is a very good proof of this Truth: St. Luke plainly, in
express Words, affirms, That the Person for whom he more particularly writ his
Gospel, had been before instructed in those things he was about to give him an
account of in order, and that those things which others had before him set
forth a Declaration of, were such as were most surely believed among them, even
as they delivered them unto them which from the beginning were Eyewitnesses,
and Ministers of the Word: And the Writers of the other Gospels begin so
abruptly, and fall so immediately into the Story of Christ, without any
Introduction or Preface concerning the Character of the Person whose History
they writ, or the time or design of their writing, that it cannot be imagined
they would address themselves in such a manner to Persons who were perfect
Strangers to the Name and History of Christ. But, besides this way of
beginning, we have several accounts in the Body of each Gospel, of multitudes
of People that followed Christ, that heard his Sermons, and were Witnesses of
his Miracles; of great numbers of Believers who were converted by his
Discourses; and of a great many that opposed and prosecuted Christ, and
objected several things to his Doctrine and Miracles; all which being told as
happening in the lifetime of Christ, most of the things concerning him must be
supposed by those who pretend to have written presently after his Death (as
it is plain all the Evangelists do) to be generally known and freshly remembered
at the time of their Writing; which Supposition further appears from the short
and disorderly Relation of several Matters of Fact in each Gospel; which, in
such cases where we are not assisted with a fuller Account from the other
Gospels or following Books of the New Testament, seem very obscure to us now,
who are not acquainted with the rest of the Circumstances omitted.

This is what I thought fit to remark concerning the Subject and Form of that
Book which we call the New Testament. And now that this Book does really
contain such things as are before mentioned, and is writ in such a way and
manner as I have here represented, I think, may be taken for granted, since
whatever has been observed under this head, must necessarily appear too true to
any one that will read over the New Testament, and is capable of making any
Judgment of a Book.

II. Supposing then that I have given a just Account and Character of the New
Testament, and the several Books or Volumes it consists of, I shall from hence
advance to the main Design proposed; which was to prove, That all the principal
Matters of Fact related in the New Testament, are really true; that is, did
really happen out at the Times and Places, and in the Manner they are there
recorded to have happened. This I shall endeavor, in the second place, to make
good by a direct Proof, according to the distinction of the several Facts to be
enquired into before laid down, viz. common Historical Facts, Prophesies and
Miracles, Divine Assistance and Revelation.

I. The first Step then I am to make in the proof of what I have before
asserted, is, to show that the common Historical Facts mentioned in the New
Testament are true. The principal of which are these following, viz. That there
was such a Person as Jesus Christ, of such a Character, who taught such
Doctrines, pretended to such mighty Works, and was executed in such a manner as
is represented in the New Testament; That there were likewise certain Persons
who were Followers and Adherents of Christ, who after his Death, professed to
believe the Miracles we find now recorded of him, and to do as great
themselves, who taught the same Doctrines he did in his lifetime, and many
other things which they pretended to have received from him while he was alive,
and from the Spirit of God afterward, and who made is their business to
propagate the Belief and Practice of what they taught throughout the World,
whose Characters and Sufferings were such as are before described: That the
Doctrine or Religion of Christ was accordingly propagated through all Judea,
and most Parts of the Roman Empire; so that great Numbers of People every where
owned and professed it: And that all this happened within that compass of Time
included between the Death of Julius Caesar, and the Destruction of Jerusalem.

Now these are such remarkable, notorious Facts, have been so well proved by
multiplicity of Evidence, and so little contested by the several Enemies of
Christianity, That I shall content my self by giving a summary Proof of them,
without entering upon that great Variety of particular Arguments every general
Branch of Evidence contains in it: Which Proof I shall cast into this Method.

First, I shall take an Account of the Original of Christianity; and show, That
this Religion must have came first into the World at the time assigned for this
Event in the New Testament.

Afterward, I shall consider the state of Christianity at another Period of
Time, when it will certainly be allowed, that all the principal Matters of Fact
that stand now recorded in the New Testament were generally believed.

And then I shall prove, That the same Matters of Fact were likewise believed
at, and immediately after, the Times in which they are said to happen, and so
continually down to that particular Period fixed upon.

Which last Proposition I shall endeavor to make out.

From the constant Tradition of such a Belief, together with many sensible,
infallible Effects of it.

And from many other extrinsick Signs and Monuments remaining at that Time.

From which constant and universal Belief among Christians, of all the
principal Facts in the New Testament, both common and extraordinary, continued
down to such a Period, from the very first Times in which they severally
happened: I conconclude, That at least the common Matters of Fact, such as I
have just before instanced in, must be true.

First then, as to the Original of Christianity; it is to be observed, That
there is no Age of the World, no Portion of Time, since the beginning of Things
at any great Distance from us, that we have a clearer, fuller, and more
particular Account of, than we have of that which past under the Twelve first
Cesars, or Emperors of Rome; both Learning and Empire being then at the highest
Pitch, and furnishing abundance of Matter for the Pens of that and the
succeeding Ages.

And as the History of that time is the truest and best known of any, so no
Matter of Fact could happen within that Time which was more remarkable, or
could more easily and certainly be conveyed down to Posterity, than the first
Rise and Propagation of the Christian Religion. There Is nothing so easy to be
known of any Country, where we have the least Remains of History left us, as
what Religion was professed there, and what considerable Alterations were made
in it: All the Laws, Customs, and Policy of a Nation, are intermixed with their
Religion; most of the Actions, Opinions, and Characters of particular Men, bear
the Marks of it; and if we examine Things more narrowly, and trace them up to
their Original, we shall find that Religion puts a greater Distinction betwixt
one Nation and another, than any difference of Climate can do.

But, not to pursue that Speculation any further, it is very plain from all
History what the Religion of the Jews was, and what Religion they had at Rome,
and in other Parts of the Roman Empire, under the Reign of Augustus. There were
no such Persons then to he heard of as bore the Name of Christians; no such
Religion any where professed as that which is now called Christian, the Plan
and Model of which we find in the Books of the New Testament.

But in the Time of Nero we find a great many Persons at Rome, Tacitus
called Christians, put to Death, and several other ways persecuted and
tormented, for being so, by that Emperor; which Denomination, and whatever they
thought themselves obliged to believe or do, upon that Account, was then
generally acknowledged by themselves, and others, to be derived to them from
one Christ, who was sometime before crucified at Jerusalem.

Now the Time when this Christ, the first Author of this Sect of Men called
Christians, began to publish his Doctrine to the World, is very particularly
and circumstantially set down by St. Luke, in the Third Chapter of his Gospel,
to be the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being
Governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his Brother Philip
Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch
of Abilene, Annas and Caiaphas being the High Priests of the Jews.

And in the Book called the Acts of the Apostles, said to be writ by the same
St. Luke, it is affirmed, That the Disciples, by which Word is there meant all
those that believed in Christ, and embraced the Doctrines taught by him, were
called Christians first at Antioch: Which Matter of Fact is, by the Consent of
all Christian Historians, recorded to have happened at the latter end of the
Reign of Caligula, who was the next that succeeded Tiberius in the Empire of
Rome.

And that this is the lowest Point of Time it can be fixed at, appears from the
same Place of St. Luke, where immediately after the Words before cited, it
follows, And in these Days came Prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch, and there
stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit, that there
should be great Dearth throughout all the World; which came to pass in the Days
of Claudius Caesar. From whence I infer, That this Relation of Agabus,
concurring in Time with that other Account of the Disciples being first called
Christians; and it being plain, from what is said concerning the Completion of
Agabus's Prophecy in the Days of Claudius Caesar, That he first uttered his
Prophecy some time before the Days of Claudius Caesar, the Time when the
Disciples were first called Christians must likewise be, sooner or later,
before the Reign of Claudius; which Claudius being the immediate Successor of
Caligula in the Empire, the Matter of Fact in question must happen in the
latter end of the Reign of Caligula, or at some time before.

Now from the Fifteenth Year of Tiberius, when Christ first published his
Doctrine at Jerusalem, to the last of Caligula, when his Disciples were first
called Christians at Antioch, is about Twelve Years; from whence to the Tenth
Year of Nero, when the Christians were first persecuted at Rome, is a little
above Twenty Years; within Five Years after which Jerusalem was destroyed, and
an End was put to the Jewish Government and Policy. So that from the Fifteenth
of Tiberius, when it is pretended that Christ first published his Gospel at
Jerusalem, to the first of Vespatian when Jerusalem was destroyed, is about
Forty Years, and no more.

If therefore these Matters of Fact concerning the Neronian Persecution, and
the Destruction of Jerusalem, are true, as is constantly attested, by Heathen
and Jewish, as well as Christian, Writers; it is more than probable, that those
mentioned by St. Luke are so too. For before the Fifteenth of Tiberius, no
Signs or Footsteps of Christianity are to be found in the World, neither is it
pretended by any of the Adversaries of this Religion that it was earlier; and
the Destruction of Jerusalem falling in the First Year of Vespatian, the
Propagation of the Christian Religion from thence to other Parts of the World,
must needs have had as early a Date of that. And therefore, if we find great
Numbers of Christians at Rome in Nero's Time, both the Propagation, as well as
Original, of the Christian Religion, must have happened not only before the
Destruction of Jerusalem, but some time between the Fifteenth Year of Tiberius
and the Tenth of Nero, and consequently the Account before given by St. Luke,
of these great Events, cannot well be imagined to be false; but it is certain
the Mistake in Time, if there should be any supposed, cannot be considerable.
From all which, I think I have reason to conclude, That the Christian Religion
was professed at Rome in the Time of Nero, and was derived from one Christ, who
was the first Author of it, and suffered Death at Jerusalem upon that Account,
toward the latter end of Tiberius's Reign, as I find it recorded by St. Luke,
and the other Writers of the New Testament.

The next view I shall take of the Christian Religion shall be under
Constantine, another Emperor of Rome, who upon some occasion or other was
disposed to embrace this Religion about 300 Years after the first Publication
of it by Christ, at which time it is very notorious that Christianity was the
prevailing Religion in all the parts of the Roman Empire, the extent of which
was then very great,

This manifestly appears from all the accounts we have of the History of this
famous Emperor, and the State of the World under his Reign; in the Twentieth
Year of which, was held a General Council, which was a Meeting or Assembly of a
great number of Bishops, who came from all the different Provinces and Cities
both of the Eastern and Western Empire, and were Persons that in their several
Districts, governed and directed in Religions Affairs; the chief design of that
Meeting was by Constantine, who called them together, declared to be for the
decision of a Controversy, that had happened between certain Christian
Professors concerning a particular Article or Doctrine of their Religion, which
some affirmed ought to be believed in one Sense, and some in another: These
Bishops did meet accordingly to the number of about 300, decided the Matter
they were called about, by appointing a Form of Words for all Christians to
express their Belief of that, and several other particulars in, which was
unanimously approved and subscribed by all but two: Besides which Form of Faith
they made several Canons or Rules, with Relation to Discipline, which concerned
the Qualifications of such Persons as were to perform Religious Offices, or to
partake of the Effects of them; their manner of Acting upon such occasions, and
their Behavior to one another upon the account of any Religious distinction.

But, in order to take a more particular survey of the State of the Christian
Religion under Constantine, from the account that is given us of this Council
by Eusebius and Athanasius, who were present at it, and other credible Writers
who lived at, or near the same time, I shall draw these following Observations
and Reflections.

I. Constantine was the first Roman Emperor that professed the Christian
Religion. There was no King, Consul, Dictator, Emperor, or any other, the chief
Governor of the Roman State before him, that ever departed from the ancient
Institution made upon the first Settlement of that Commonwealth, or publicly
embraced a new Religion, of a different Character from that established by the
Laws of Numa.

2. There never was before this Council, any such General Meeting of Eminent
and Learned Persons, who were Assembled together from so many different
quarters of the World, purely to settle some Controversies in Religion.

Which two surprising Circumstances must make this Council of Nice, one of the
most remarkable Events that ever happened in the World.

3. The calling of this Council does plainly infer, that Constantine looked
upon the whole Roman Empire to have been at that time generally Christian: The
Persons summoned, the Places from whence they came, the occasion of their
Meeting, do all prove this; For the Persons of which the Council was composed,
were most of them Governors and Teachers of large Churches and Congregations,
they came out of all the greater and lesser Provinces, and from the most
Populous and Considerable Towns under the Roman Government; and the reason of
their coming, was to give their Opinion concerning a particular Doctrine which
did suppose an antecedent Belief of the whole Christian Scheme.

4. The whole behavior of this Council of Bishops while they sat together, and
the business they did there, is a certain proof, not only that they were
Christians, and that the Christian Religion was publicly and generally professed
in the Places from whence they came; but that they all agreed in some common
Faith, and that the Christian Religion professed in the several Places from
whence they came, was every where the same, without any other variation than
what was grounded upon the different Conception of some Articles by particular
Persons which were allowed by all alike in some general Terms, or different
application of some general Rules about such Matters as Christians were, by the
whole tenor of their Religion left at liberty so to apply.

5. The reason of this general Agreement of all Christians, separated so far
from one another in place, and never before this time united under one common
Head or Governor, was, as we find by what passed in this Council, a firm and
constant Belief that such and such Books, which they all had amongst them, were
written by the immediate Followers and Disciples of Christ, and contained a
true Account of his Life and Doctrine, and a full Scheme of their Religion.
What ever was in any of these Books they looked upon as Obligatory, and such
they esteemed the Authority of these Writings, That they were not, upon any
Account, in the least Passage of them, to receive any Addition, Diminution, or
Alteration whatsoever. In the Decision of the present Controversy before them,
these were appealed to on both Sides, and the Authority of them allowed by all;
and the particular Canons they made, were founded upon the general Rules and
Orders of Discipline laid down in these Scriptures.

6. As we find by what was done in this Council, concerning the Matter of Faith
they came to settle, That all the Bishops there assembled were acquainted with
several of the same Books of Scripture, which we now have under the Name of the
New Testament; and that they were persuaded they were delivered down to them
from the Apostles, as a Rule of their Faith: So, by several of the Canons they
made, we are assured, That, in all the several Places from whence they were
assembled, the Customs of Baptism and the Communion were universally and
constantly used; That the First Day of the Week was observed as a Day set
apart for Religious Services, which were chiefly Prayers, and Reading the
Scriptures; That there were a great many Men, in a particular Way and Manner
appointed for the Performance of Religious Offices, in the Name and Presence of
the People; And that some of these did, in a more eminent Degree, preside over
all other, both Religious Officers and common Christians, in such a District,
under the Title and Style of Bishops.

Now the Truth of this Relation concerning the Council of Nice, and the State
of the Christian Religion at that Time being supposed; in the next Place I
shall undertake to prove, That the Christians we find in Nero's Time, were of
the same Faith and Religion with those that lived under the Reign of
Constantine; and, consequently, That all the principal Matters of Fact now
recorded in the New Testament, were generally believed at, and immediately
after, the Times in which they are said to happen, and so continually down to
the Council of Nice.

This I shall endeavor to make out; First, From the constant Tradition of such
a Belief, together with many sensible and infallible Effects of it.

From the Neronian Persecution to the Council of Nice is about 260 Years; which
is so short a Period, That it is hardly possible to imagine the Tradition of so
important a Fact, as the general Profession of the Christian Religion, in any
considerable Country or Nation, should, in the main Branches and Substance of
it, be defective or corrupted within that Time; though there were no other
remaining Monuments of it, but what were obvious to every Man's own Observation
at the Meeting of this Famous Council. And therefore since the Christians of
this latter Period did look upon it as a certain Truth delivered down to them,
That the Christians who lived in Nero's Time professed the same Faith they did,
as it is plain from the Account before given of their Religion they must, we may
very well conclude, That the Matter of Fact was really so without further Proof.

But to remove all Doubts and Objections so general a Conclusion as this may be
apt to create, the Truth and Credibility of the Tradition shall be more clearly
made out in the following Manner.

Several of those who were present at the Council of Nice might, of their own
certain knowledge, be fully satisfied, That, for Fifty Year backward, the
Christian Religion had been the same it was then, in the Countries from whence
they came; That all this Time they had had the same Scriptures among them; That
these Scriptures had constantly been read, both in public and private; and (as
far as fell within humane Cognizance) as constantly, and in the same manner
believed and esteemed, as they appeared then to be; That the Ceremonies of
Baptizing and Communicating had been always universally used, at such Times,
and upon such and such Occasions; That these, and several other Religious
Performances, as Reading the Scriptures, Prayers, Exhortations, etc. had been
constantly practiced in public, when Christians were assembled together; That
Meetings, or Assemblies, for these Purposes were very frequent; That, besides
other occasional Times, they always observed the First Day of the Week, as a
Portion of Time which they thought themselves obliged to set apart for the
Performance of Religious Duties, and especially in Public; That there were a
constant Succession of Men, by certain Ceremonies peculiarly appropriated to
the Discharge of some Religious Offices, which they did not think it Lawful for
others, not so distinguished, to be concerned in; That it was the particular
Business of these Men to teach and instruct the rest in the Knowledge of the
Christian Religion, and exhort them to a steady and exact Submission to the
Rules of it; That there were some of these styled Bishops, who were by some
different Marks of Distinction known from the rest of their Brethren, and
presided over all Christians, both Clergy and Laity, in such a District,
governing and directing them all in Religious Affairs, and exercising certain
Spiritual Powers of an extraordinary future Influence, in order to the
preserving and enforcing the Belief and Practice of the Christian Religion.
Such Customs and Actions as these, in all which every Bishop must himself have
bore a Share, must needs be infallibly known to those Bishops assembled at
Nice, who were of Age enough to remember for so long together as Fifty Years,
which may easily be supposed of several of them: And it may, with as much
reason, be allowed, That these very Bishops might have, Fifty Years before
their Meeting at Nice, conversed with those who could have as distinctly
remembered what was done for Fifty Years further backward, as they could
remember what had happened since the Time we supposed they conversed with them;
from whom they might have been certainly informed, That all the forementioned
Matters of Fact had continued the same, for Fifty Years before they could have
an immediate Knowledge of them themselves. And moreover, those who gave them
this Information could have assured them, That they never saw, or heard of any
Body, that lived since their Time, who knew it otherwise; and this, with the
same Allowance as in the former Case, will carry the Thing Fifty Years higher
still.

And so far, I think, however uncertain Tradition is justly accounted in the
Conveyance of Doctrines and Opinions, the Tradition of such notorious Matters
of Fact as these, so easily observed, so constantly present, so general, and so
concerning, may be fully relied upon.

To make this plainer, by a like Instance in our Country, just about 150 Years
ago, Edward the Sixth is reported to have been King of England; and the same
History which tells us so, (which I will suppose to be but just now written)
acquaints us, That, in his Time, the Christian Religion was generally professed
through all this Nation, and much after the same manner it is now: But,
particularly, that the same Scriptures were acknowledged, and the same
Religious Customs and Vsages obtained, which are before mentioned in the other
Case, viz. Baptism and Communion, Observation of the Lord's Day, Ministration
of Priests, Government of Bishops, etc. just as they are at this present. The
Truth of all which we might be very well assured of, if there were no History,
or other Monuments, of what was done in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth
extant, down from his Time to this; because, by the former Supposition, there
have been a great many Persons, who, during the Course of their Lives, computed
at no uncommon length, might have conversed with those who lived in King Edward
the Sixth's Time, and also with those who are now Living; and at such Ages of
their several Lives, in which they may well be supposed capable of remembering
and judging of what they saw and heard: From which intermediate Persons, so
many as are now Living, and conversed with them, (which, I believe, are a great
many) may have had sueh certain Information of the state of Religion in this
Nation, during the Reign of that King, that they cannot possibly call in
question. And if all these agree in their several Reports, without concerting
with one another, the Evidence of the same Matters of Fact they thus agree in
will be as strong, with respect to us who enquire these Things of them, and
much stronger than to any of them themselves in particular, who have not made
the same Observations concerning the Agreement of others before them.

'Twould be no unreasonable Supposition to imagine, That there are some now
Living, who have immediately conversed with those who lived in Edward the
Sixth's Time; but these are so few, and of so unusual an Age, that I shall not
insist upon a Proof that might be made that way: But the other Case I have
mentioned is easy and common, and lies open to every Body without a particular
Computation of Time.

Upon which I shall further observe, That those, whose Testimony is allowed
sufficient for the Form and Kind of Religion professed in England, under Edward
the Sixth, are, so far as that Period reaches, as good and capable Witnesses of
the Condition of its Being, with respect either to its Original then, or any
considerable Alterations or Intermissions in it at any time since. Whether the
Christian Religion was first introduced into this Country by Edward the Sixth,
or any Body else in his Time, all the Inhabitants of it having immediately
before been Jews, Heathens, or Mahometans; or whether it had been received and
professed here, before he came to the Throne, must have been equally known, and
in like manner conveyed down, by those from whom we derive the other Matters of
Fact with which this is supposed cotemporary? And if any considerable Changes
in the main Branches, or general and public Vsages of it, such as are before
instanced in; or any Intermissions, either of the whole Profession, or of some
of those public Customs and Manners of Worship or Discipline, should have
happened at any Time since, these being more remarkable Facts than the
uninterrupted Continuance of the same state and form of Religion, and falling
later than the first Date of what we allow to be distinctly known and
remembered, must be granted to be as easily and surely delivered down to us, as
those Things which are acknowledged to fall earlier, and yet came safe to our
Hands.

Now to apply all this to the former Case: These Bishops in the Council of
Nice, who came from such or such a particular Province of the Roman Empire,
might be as fully assured, That the Christian Religion was professed 150 Years
before in that Province, in the same Manner, founded upon the same Scriptures,
and attended with the same Customs, as it was at the Time of their assembling
at Nice; as we of this Country can be assured, That our Religion, Scriptures,
and Religious Customs are the same now, that they were in the Reign of Edward
the Sixth, King of England.

What particular Christian Customs, I mean, in both Instances has been
sufficiently expressed already; but what those Scriptures were, which I suppose
the Nicene Bishops unanimously acknowledged for the Word of God, and Rule of
their Faith, and believed to have been written by the First Apostles and
Disciples of Christ, and consequently to have been the same 150 Years before
they met in Council as they were then, has not yet been declared, and, by what
was done in the Council, does not certainly appear: But, I think, there is no
manner of Reason to doubt, but they were the very same which now go under the
Name of the New Testament. For whether the Council of Laodicea, which was the
first that made any Canon concerning the Books of Scripture, was before this
Council of Nice, as some imagine, or about Forty Years after, as others more
probably conclude, we have Arguments and Authorities enough to convince us,
That all the Books of the New Testament were acknowledged by the greatest part
of the Nicene Fathers, and most of them by all.

It Is plain, from all the public Decisions and Orders of the Council, That
they are grounded upon some or other of the Books of Scripture now in our
Hands, if they may be supposed to have been written before that Time: And that
they were Eusebius, one of the Bishops of this Council, is a sufficient
Witness; who, in a History he has left us, gives us an Account of the Time when
they were all writ, and the Authors they were writ by; which is another very
good Argument, That most of the Nicene Bishops had the same Bible: For Eusebius
being not only present amongst, and conversing with several of them, but having
a great Share in the Management of the Controversy they came to decide, and
being of a doubtful Faith in the main Point determined by them; or, as some
suspect, a Favourer of the Side condemned, must have had occasion either in
public Debate, or private Conversation, to have cited most of the Books he
acknowledged for Scripture; and had any doubt arisen concerning the Authority
of them, such a considerable and important Controversy as would have sprung
from thence, would have produced a Determination of the Council upon it; or, to
be sure, have been as much taken Notice of, and as faithfully Recorded, as any
Thing else that was done there.

Besides, it is plain from the History we have of this Council, by
Cotemporaries, and others of the Age immediately following, That some
Scriptures were appealed to, their Authority acknowledged, Forms of Expression
drawn from thence, a Difficulty made of departing from Scripture-Terms till
other equivalent Expressions were found necessary, to distinguish those who
believed Scripture in a right Sense, from those who interpreted it wrong. And
therefore, if Eusebius, or Athanasius, who were present at the Council, or any
other Writer cotemporary, or near in Time to it, says any Thing of this Nature,
he must be judged to mean, That the same Scriptures were acknowledged by the
Nicene Council, which he himself owns: So that if Eusebius, or Athanasius,
owned all the Books of the New Testament which we do, it is manifest, That when
he talks of the Scriptures, in the Account he gives of the Nicene Council, he
must mean the same that he does when he mentions them upon any other Occasion.
And the like will hold of other Writers.

But further, to put this Matter past all doubt, it is certain, That the Canon
of Scripture was some time or other afterward fixed, as we find it now, with
all the same Books in the New Testament that we have at present. The Occasion
of making such a Canon was, because it was doubted of some of the Books,
Whether they were the genuine Works of those whose Names they bore; and, if
they were not, Whether they were of equal Authority with the rest. Now the way
that was taken to remove all Objections, and fix the Authority of those
Scriptures which were to be the unalterable Standard of the Christian Religion,
was, by examining the general Tradition of all the different Churches where
Christianity was professed; upon which Examination, when it was certainly
known, That such and such Books, which were doubted of by some, because they
had been but lately received among the Christians of those Provinces and
Churches to which they belonged, had been constantly acknowledged under the
same Style and Character with the rest, by the Generality of the other Churches
of Christians; these were likewise as universally received as the other, and
their Authority in the same manner allowed. The Consent of so many different
Churches in the same Opinion concerning certain Books, and, agreeably to their
Opinion, in the same careful Preservation of them unaltered, most of which
Churches had continued separate, and independent one of another, ever since the
Date they ascribed to those Writings, and several of them at such a Distance as
to have had no communication with one another since that Time; such a Consent,
I say, as this, whenever the Canon of Scripture was first determined in a
general Meeting, was thought sufficient to establish the Authority of any Book
that was doubted of, and accordingly the whole Canon we now have, was
afterward universally acknowledged.

Since therefore we find, That all the Scriptures of the New Testament were
universally received some time after the Nicene Council; and, since the
Establishment of the Canon, and universal Submission to it, were founded upon a
general Tradition, so faithfully preserved in the far greatest part of
Christian Churches, that all other Christians were fully satisfied of it: From
hence it follows, That the greatest part of the Nicene Bishops must own the
same Scriptures we do now, because the greatest part of the Churches from
whence they came did.

But, not to insist upon this, we will consider only those Scriptures which
were never doubted of by any Christians, and consequently must have been
received by the whole Council of Nice. These were, according to Eusebius, who
in his History gives us a Catalogue of them, the Four Gospels, Acts of the
Apostles, the Thirteen Epistles of St. Paul, which have his Name to them, the
First Epistle of Peter, and the First Epistle of John. And Eusebius could not
say this, had he known of any of his Fellow-Bishops of the Council, who denied
either the Authority or general Reception of any of these Books.

Supposing therefore, That these were the only Scriptures acknowledged by all
the Nicene Bishops; then what was said before, concerning several Religious
Customs and Practices there mentioned, will hold in like manner of those Books
of Scripture; and such or such a particular Bishop, that was present at this
Council, might himself, by a short, easy, and unquestionable way of conveyance,
be assured, That for 150 Years last past, the same Scriptures had been
acknowledged, as well as the same Religious Customs practiced in that Church
and Province from whence he came, and consequently, That the main Scheme of
Christian Doctrine, and the public Profession of it, had been all that Time
the same.

Now if we apply the foregoing Observations to all the several Bishops of this
Council, and suppose them all satisfied of the constant Tradition of the same
Scriptures and Customs as are before specified, in the several Churches and
Provinces from whence they came, as the History of these Times relates the
Matter of Fact to have been; then is the unanimous consent of all these Bishops
an infallible Argument of the truth of what they testify.

And, if there had not been such a constant Tradition in any of these Churches
or Provinces as we suppose, then the Original Introduction, or Intermission of
any of those Scriptures or Customs within the same compass of Time, would have
been in the same Way and Manner, and with the same Certainty known to the
Bishops of those Churches and Provinces, where such Introduction, or
Intermission happened; and, what was first introduced among them, might as
easily and surely have been traced to the Country or Province from whence it
was derived to them, and the Manner and Occasion of the Conveyance as certainly
remembered, as the continued Tradition of the same State of things could have
been; and, then the enquiry may be made in those Churches and Provinces which
did not derive their Religion from any other, within the time before set of 150
Years; and so far the Argument from Tradition will most undoubtedly hold
according to the former Supposition laid down.

But, however this be, whether we suppose that all the Countries and Provinces
from whence the Nicene Bishops came, had professed the Christian Religion for
150 Years before this Council met, or that some of them had received it later;
the Tradition concerning the continued Uniformity of the Scriptures and
Religious Customs which I have before given an account of is equally to be
relied on for that whole space of Time; for, the Tradition of any thing being
preserved by a Succession of Men, and not a constancy of Place, There was no
Person at this Council, but was capable of informing himself with great
certainty, that the Christian Religion had been in the World, and the same
Scriptures and Religious Customs they then had in the Church he belonged to had
been in like manner, constantly owned and received by those that professed the
Christian Religion for 150 Years before that time, either in the Country he
himself was then of, or in some other from whence that Religion, and those
Scriptures and Customs were derived to them. The Succession of the Persons
conveying such a Tradition is so very short, that no change of Place is
sufficient to disturb or interrupt the Conveyance, and therefore, no Person
that gave himself the trouble of a faithful Enquiry, could be mistaken in it;
and it must be allowed to have been the concern of all to enquire; and, since
it is plain that all the Bishops did acknowledge these things to be of greater
Antiquity, and of uninterrupted continuance, as all pretenses to the Christian
Religion do necessarily infer; it must also be supposed that several of them
had taken particular care to satisfy themselves of the truth of these Matters,
and that none of them had met with any contrary accounts that shocked their
Faith.

Thus does it manifestly appear from the certainty of bare Tradition only,
without the assistance of any concurrent Monuments of a more fixed and lasting
signification to strengthen it, that for 150 Years before the Council of Nice,
the Christian Religion was in the main Foundation and Substance, and in the
principal Institutions of it, the same it was then, wheresoever it was
professed at either of these times: And, by accounts written about this latter
Period, by Persons that were present at the Council then Assembled, who could
be sure of the Tradition themselves in some Countries, and could receive the
like Information from the other Bishops Assembled with them, as to the Places
they came from, it is likewise certain that in most, if not all the Provinces
and Cities, any of the Nicene Bishops belonged to, the Christian Religion had
been established 150 Years before the Meeting of that Council, and in the same
manner professed during that whole Term.

Taking it therefore for granted, that the Christian Religion was by large
numbers of Men professed in the greatest part of the Roman Empire 150 Years
before the Council of Nice, in the same manner it was at the Meeting of that
Council; this Agreement of so many several distinct Countries in the same
Religion, necessarily proves that that Religion must have been derived to them
all from some common Original; and, since, as has before been observed, the
Chief Governor of all these Provinces and Countries, was always, till the
Person that then Reigned, of a Religion opposite to that which was then
professed by so many of his Subjects, and consequently cannot be supposed by
any Decree or Law of his, to have introduced this into all his Dominions at
once; it evidently follows from hence, that this Religion must have been
published and entertained in some one Country or Province first, before it was
heard of in any of the other; and in some particular Town or City of that
Province, except we suppose a great many first Inventors concerting a Scheme
and agreeing to publish it all at the same time, in several Countries, or
several parts of the same Country, which is a very unlikely Supposition, will
hardly be objected here, and, if it was, would do the Objectors little service,
as might easily be proved if there was occasion.

Whatever Country then we suppose the Christian Religion first published in, we
must allow some time for its spreading through that Country, and being
afterward propagated and fixed in so many other Nations of different Manners,
Tempers and Languages as the several Provinces of the Roman Empire were, in
which the Christian Religion was 150 Years before the Council of Nice
established, and flourished, notwithstanding all the opposition a New Religion
unsupported by Civil Power must meet with.

Now if we allow about Threescore Years for all this, and according to the
natural progress of Things, it is incredible the Christian Religion should from
any one City or Province of the Roman Empire, in so short a time, be diffused
so far, be embraced by so many, and be established so sare, under all the
disavantages that such a Religion must be attended with; yet, allowing but
Threescore Years or thereabouts for so wonderful an Event, this added to the
150 before accounted for, brings us to the time of Trajan. We are sure
therefore, that the Christian Religion could not have a later Original than
under the Reign of Trajan: Pliny.
But it is plain from an Eminent Minister of his Court, that there were then
vast numbers of Christians in the Roman Empire, and in Provinces very remote
from Rome, as well as within the district of Rome it self, and the account he
gives of that Religion, manifestly shows that it was so far the same with what
was found in the Scriptures, and professed by all Christians at the time of the
Council of Nice.

Since therefore, as has before been proved, the Christian Religion was the
same 150 Years before the Council of Nice as it was then; since in some of
those very Provinces and Cities of the Roman Empire, where the same Christian
Religion was professed 150 Years before the Council of Nice, we find that the
Christian Religion was likewise professed; and there were great numbers of
Christians about Threescore Years before that time, under the Reign of Trajan;
and the account we have of these Christians and their Religion by Heathen
Authors, agrees exactly with the Character of the Christian Religion which not
long afterward, we find, generally maintained, then it follows from hence,
that in those particular Places, the Religion was the same in the time of
Trajan, it was Threescore Years afterward; and consequently, that being but
150 Years before the Council of Nice, the same it was then: And, if the
Christian Religion was as far spread in the time of Trajan, as it was Sixty
Years afterward, the same will hold as to all the Roman Empire; and, if it was
not, it must be derived to those Provinces that wanted it, from those where it
was professed, which amounts to the same thing; for, if the Christian Religion
in the time of Trajan was not the same it was Sixty Years afterward; no
account can be given of so general and wide an Agreement then in so many
different Provinces, as has already been proved the same Christian Religion was
professed in at that time, in all which, the Religion then professed, must be
supposed different from the Original it was derived from Sixty Years before,
even in those very Provinces, where it had been so long ago established, as
well as in those where it was later entertained, which is absurd to imagine.

And further, since by the account we have of these Times, it plainly appears,
that the Christian Religion was very far spread under the Reign of Trajan, and
consequently published long before; and since as far as it was then spread, it
was the same it was Sixty Years afterward, when, as we have already proved,
the greatest part of the Roman Empire agreed in the same general Form or Scheme
of Religion which was professed at the Council of Nice, and in the same
Religious Institutions and Practices as were then in use; it follows from
hence, and from what has been before advanced, that the Christians we find in
Nero's Time, were of the same Religion and Faith with those that lived at the
time of the Council of Nice; and consequently, that all the common Historical
Matters of Fact mentioned in the New Testament, respecting the Original of the
Christian Religion, the Place where it first appeared, the Time and Manner of
Publishing and Propagating it, the Characters of those concerned in the Work,
and the Fortune that attended both them and their Doctrine, must necessarily be
true, as I shall endeavor to show more particularly by summing up the whole
Argument in this manner.

It has been proved before, That the generality of Christians at the time of
the Council of Nice, acknowledged all the same Scriptures that we do now, and
that most of the Books of the New Testament were universally received then, and
believed by all Christians of that Time, to have been so from their first
appearance in the World. The Books which were thus universally received, were
as universally thought to have been written by those Authors to whom they are
ascribed, and to have been all written by their several Authors, at several
times, between the end of Caligula 's Reign and the beginning of Trajan's. And
indeed, if they believed the Scripture-History, as it is plain the Christians,
who received these Books, did, they must have believed likewise, that all the
Books of the New Testament, being written by such Authors whose Names they
bear, were writ within the compass of Time assigned for them; for from the Time
and Manner of the Publication of the Christian Religion, it appears that they
could not have been any of them written sooner; and from the Age of the
Authors, it is plain that they could not have been Works of a later Date.

This being the general Faith of all Christians at the Time of the Council of
Nice, must likewise, according to what has been already proved, the universal
Belief of Christians 150 Years before this Council sat; and if the same
Scriptures were in the same Manner received and acknowledged, in the greatest
part of the Roman Empire, 150 Years before this Council of Nice, they must have
been generally known and received in the Time of Trajan, as far as the
Christian Name then reached, they could not otherwise have been propagated so
far and wide in less than Threescore Years time; And if the Christians in
Trajan's Time knew and believed these Scriptures, then was the Christian
Religion under Trajan the same it was under Nero: For in every Book of the New
Testament the Author plainly supposes the Christian Religion established, and
all the principal Matters of Fact, and Doctrines there recorded, believed
before he wrote; and therefore, if all or any of these Books were received at
Rome in the Time of Trajan (as the Epistle to the Romans must have been when
Sixty Years afterward it was believed by the greatest part of the Roman Empire
to have been sent to them) then does it follow that all the Christians that
received them must have certainly known that they believed the same Facts and
Doctrines which they found in those Books ever since they professed the
Christian Religion; and that all others who were of the same Name, must have
professed to believe the same things too, (the Nature of that Religion so
requiring) and consequently, that the Christian Religion at Rome was the same
in the Time of Nero it was then, the Neronian Persecution being not above
Thirty five Years before the Reign of Trajan; which is so short a Period, that
several Christians of Trajan's Time, might have been Christians under Nero too,
and must have known whether Christianity then Preached to them, was the same
with what they found written, supposing they were converted before they had
seen any of the Books of the New Testament; and if they were not, they might as
easily have informed themselves, whether that part of the Christian History
they found in these Books respecting Rome, and particularly Nero's Time were
true or not: And their Conversion to Christianity by the means of these Books
necessarily proves them satisfied of the truth of the Relations there given.

Now if most of the Books of the New Testament were received in Trajan's Time,
and if Christianity was the same under Nero as under Trajan, and the same
Preached as Written, then does it necessarily follow, not only that these Books
were written by those Authors whose Names they bear, some time between the
Death of Tiberius, and beginning of Trajan's Reign; but that all the common
Historical Facts mentioned in the New Testament, and which I have undertaken to
prove under this Head, are certainly true; otherwise they could not have been
so generally and firmly believed, so near the Time they are there reported to
have happened in. For the Christians that lived in Trajan's Time, and received
these Books as written by such Authors, must consequently believe that the
first Promulgation of the Gospel or Christian Religion by Jesus Christ,
happened but Seventy Years before, and that during that space it was Preached
throughout the Roman Empire, by such Persons, and in such a Manner, as is there
related; that it was embraced by great numbers of People in all the
considerable Provinces, and Cities of it, established by the Union of large
Societies and Congregations under the same common Form of Discipline, and
Witnessed and Confirmed by the various Sufferings of the first Teachers, and
multitudes of their Disciples; and the Christians that lived in Nero's Time,
must have believed most of this to have happened in half that space.

Thus by the help of mere Tradition only, does it plainly appear, that the
Christian Religion was the same at the Time of the Council of Nice, as it was
when it was first Published and Preached to the World; and consequently, that
all the principal Matters of Fact in the New Testament, such as I have before
given an account of, were all along believed by those who Styled themselves
Christians; and therefore all those common Historical Facts, the certainty of
which 'twas my present business to show, must be true.

All the Authority I have made use of to strengthen this Tradition, is the
Testimony of some Heathen Authors of unquestionable Credit for the proof of
this one point only, that there were a great many Persons Styled Christians,
who were persecuted for what they believed and did as such, at Rome, by Nero,
and in other remote Provinces of the Roman Empire by Trajan: Which two Matters
of Fact happening at such particular distances from the supposed Original of
the Christian Religion, I chose to mention rather for the better Illustration
of the Matter I was to prove, than for any distinct proof of it. For, taking it
for granted that the Matters of Fact concerning the Council of Nice, and the
State of the Christian Religion at that time, were such as I have represented;
and, allowing further, what, I think, I have proved, that the Christian
Religion was professed in most, if not all the same Places from whence the
Nicene Bishops came, and in the same manner, as to the Belief of the
Scriptures, and use of those Religious Customs and Institutions I have before
instanced in, 150 Years before as it was then, it follows from hence, that,
without the help of any particular Testimony of Heathen or other Writers, or
any other Ancient Monuments of History, that all those common Matters of Fact
which I have mentioned at the beginning of this Head, must needs be true. For,
according to this Supposition, the greatest part of the Roman Empire, believing
the Books of the New Testament 150 Years before the Council of Nice, must
consequently believe that in less than 150 Years before that Time, the
Christian Religion was first published to the World at Jerusalem, there being
no such Thing as a Christian before; and that, within that space of Time down
from the first Publication of the Gospel to their present Belief of it, it must
have been Preached and Propagated through the greatest part of the known World,
in the Way and Manner recorded in the Books of the New Testament, and that the
same Persons who Preached it were the Authors of those Books; Copies of which
had been dispersed so far, and multiplied to so great great a variety, that
most of the People that professed the Christian Religion in every Country, had
them in their Hands; which Matters of Fact, and other Particulars depending
upon them, if they had not been true, could never have been so generally
believed at a Time so near that in which they were supposed to happen, that the
first and remotest of all, was not 150 Years past, and the others must fall out
much later.

But further, besides this proof that I have brought from Tradition, there are
a great many other concurrent Authorities which do not only confirm the
Certainty of the Tradition, but are of themselves a distinct and sufficient
Evidence of the same Truths which we have already proved that way. For, at the
same Period of Time wherein we have chosen to consider the State of the
Christian Religion, and from whence we have traced it up to its first Original,
and showed the Constancy and Integrity of the Conveyance, viz. At the Meeting
of the first General Council of Nice, we find a great many fixed and standing
Monuments of several Ages and different Places, that every body might have
recourse to, and examine when they pleased; all which did very exactly and fully
prove the Antiquity and uninterrupted continuance of the Christian Faith, as to
all the principal Matters of Fact related in the New Testament.

Eusebius, one of the Bishops of the Nicene Council, before mentioned, has writ
a History of the Christian Religion from its first appearance in the World down
to his own Time, and the Book is now extant, warranted to be his by the
Testimony of abundance of succeeding Writers, and questioned by none. Now in
this History he gives us a very large and particular account of the State and
Condition of Christianity in all the several Places of the World, wherever he
could learn it had been entertained: which Account consists of a vast variety
of Matters of Fact, beside those already instanced, in as preserved by
Tradition, the Memory of most of which, was not only preserved the same way,
but was further secured by lasting Monuments and Records.

The most remarkable Matters in him, which I think sufficient to my present
purpose to mention for the further Confirmation of those Truths I have already
proved, may be referred to these three Heads, Customs and Vsages; Relics,
Buildings, and other such like Monuments; Books and written Words.

And first it is to be observed that, at the time of the Council of Nice,
besides those Religious Customs and Institutions before instanced in, which
were general and constant in all Ages and Countries since the first Original of
Christianity, there were several other Customs and Vsages then Practiced; some
of which obtained as generally as the former did, and others were confined to
some particular Places: such were the Annual Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and
Pentecost; stated times of the Year and Week for Fasting; Anniversary
Commemoration of the Sufferings of Martyrs, and often Meeting at the Places
where they Suffered; using the Sign of the Cross upon several occasions;
calling Children by the Names of the first Apostles and Saints, etc. These, and
many other such like Customs as these, are plainly founded upon, and suppose an
antecedent Belief of Christianity, and particularly those principal Facts
Recorded in the New Testament, upon which the whole Christian Religion turns.
These therefore are both fresh proofs of the Truth of those Facts we have
undertaken to prove, and do also strengthen and confirm the Tradition of those
other Customs and Institutions we have before instanced in; especially if we
consider what the same History, that gives us this account, informs us of, viz.
that the Christian Customs now mentioned, were not looked upon as such
necessary parts of that Religion, nor of so early an Original as the other; and
that both these and the former were in several Places and Ages practiced after
several Manners, with different additional Rites and Ceremonies; which general
Reception of some Customs and general distinctions betwixt Necessary and
Unnecessary, Substance and Manner in all that were received, are certain
Arguments of a sincere and well-examin'd Tradition.

Another Set of Testimonies which Eusebius furnishes us with, in behalf of the
Christian Tradition, are Relics, Buildings, and other such like Monuments;
several of which were remaining in his Time, and seen by him himself; such were
Christian Burying-Places and Sepulchers with the Names of Christians upon them;
particularly those of Peter and Paul; Statues and Pictures, particularly the
Statue of the Woman cured by Christ of the Bloody Flux; Pictures of Christ,
Peter, and Paul, in colors: These were all seen by Eusebius himself, as was
likewise the Episcopal Chair of James at Jerusalem, several Christian
Libraries, and several Christian Temples, before they were pulled down and
destroyed by the Order of Dieclesian. These, and many other such like Monuments
remaining in Eusebius's Time, whether all the Particular Traditional Reports
concerning them were true or false, might easily be perceived upon view, or
diverse other ways be known to be Ancient; and, whatever Age they were of, they
must be good proofs of the Belief of the Men of those Times, and consequently
of the truth of Christianity, so far as we are now concerned to prove it.

But the Tradition of Christianity from its first Original, down to the Council
of Nice, with all the principal Matters of Fact upon which it is built, is
further and more especially secured to us, and the truth of all the foregoing
Testimonies confirmed by Books and written Records: vast Numbers of which of
different Kinds and different Ages, written by several Men of different
Countries, Characters, Designs, and Religious Persuasions were extant in
Eusebius's Time; a great many of which were generally known, multitudes of
Copies of them being dispersed throughout the World; and several of these
Writings were carefully preserved in particular places, and either never
communicated further by any Transcripts or Copies, to remaining there to be
seen in their Primitive State after Transcription.

Now all these Writings, of what kind soever they are, whose Authority is made
use of for the establishing the Christian Faith, I shall rank under certain
distinct Heads, in order to show what sense and weight they have in the proof
of what they are brought to maintain.

The several Books and Writings then to be considered, are: Copies of the Holy
Scriptures, viz. of the Books of the Old and New Testament; Public Acts and
Records belonging properly to Societies, and not to particular Authors; Genuine
Writings of professed Christians, who by reason of their common Agreement in
some certain Doctrines of Christianity are Styled Orthodox; Books writ by
Heretics, who were Men of particular Opinions different from those commonly
received by other Christians; Jewish and Pagan Books, containing such Things as
have Relation to Christianity; Forged and Supposititious Writings of uncertain
Authors, which do some way or other concern the Christian Religion.

As to Copies of the Scriptures found in the hands of Christians in Eusebius's
Time, I have these Things to observe; that they were then multiplied to so
great a Variety, that hardly a Christian Family was without some of the Books;
That they were Translated into several different Languages; That in those
Countries, where the Translations were of common use, a great many Copies in
the Original Language were preserved; That in most of the great Cities and
Episcopal Churches, there was a Copy in the Original Language more ancient than
the rest, from whence the other Copies were taken, and Translations made; That
such Copies as these might not only by Tradition, but by several intrinsic
Marks be known to be ancient, and their Age pretty nearly determined; That,
upon comparison, there was a very great Agreement betwixt these ancient Copies
preserved in several very distant and remote Churches; That such care had been
taken in Transcribing and Translating from them, that the differences found
between any Copies either of the Originals or Translations were very
inconsiderable; That all Christians thought themselves concerned to preserve
the Jewish Canon of Scripture, as well as the New Testament; and therefore
Copies of the Old Testament in the Original Tongue, and Translations of it into
several Vulgar Languages were multiplied, carefully Transcribed, and kept
together with those of the New; That upon a diligent search into the Matter it
was found, that, besides those Copies of the greatest part of the Books of the
New Testament which were alike to be met with in all Christian Churches, there
were others received in some Churches, and by a constant Tradition then vouched
to be as early, and of as great Authority as the rest.

From all which I think I may safely infer, That the Writings of the New
Testament were as early as they are pretended to be, and that the Christian
Religion had its Original in Judea, at the time assigned it; which being less
than 300 Years before Eusebius; and the Books of the New Testament, which give
an account of the Christian Religion, and plainly suppose an antecedent
Propagation and Establishment of it in a great part of the World, being writ
some time after the first Publication, Eusebius, or any other Person of his
Age, who thoroughly examined the Matter concerning the Copies of the Scriptures
then received, must needs be satisfied from this Consideration only, that the
Books of the New Testament had as early a Publication in the World as is now
ascribed to them, and consequently that the Christian Faith was somewhat
earlier and the same then as it is in these Books represented to have been.

This will further be made out from the next sort of Writings to be considered,
viz. Public Acts and Records, belonging properly to Societies, and not to
particular Authors: such were Catalogues of Bishops, Decrees of Synods, Letters
from Churches and Societies of Men, general Records of remarkable Matters,
particular Acts and Monuments of Martyrs, Psalms, Hymns, Creeds, and Forms of
Prayer.

The most famous Churches, especially those constituted by Apostles, kept the
Succession of their Bishops with great care laid up in their Archives,
recording their Names and days of their Death in a pair of writing Tables: This
Eusebius tells us was the Custom of the Primitive Christians; and these Tables
he assures us he diligently examined, and he was very exact in the Account he
took of them, as particularly appears from what he says concerning the Church
of Jerusalem, viz. That he found from Old Records fifteen Bishops, with their
Names, who had succeeded in that Church, from the Apostles to the Siege of the
Jews in Adrian 's Time; but could not find preserved in Writing the space of
Time each Bishop spent in his Presidency over that See. The like diligence and
exactness are observable in the Account he gives of the Succession of Bishops
in several other Churches, most of their Names being set down, and the times of
their several Succession, Presidency, and Death punctually determined, and
Reasons given why he could not speak with the same certainty of the rest
omitted.

There were likewise extant in his Time a great many Canons and Decrees, made
by several Councils and Synods, convened at several times, in different
Countries, and upon different occasions; as also several Letters writ from
Churches and Societies of Men such as were the Epistles of the Churches of
Vienna and Lions to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, concerning their Martyrs;
Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning the Martyrdom of Polycarp; Epistle
of the Martyrs of Lions to Eleutherus Bishop of Rome; Epistles of the Bishops,
and other Members of Synods, enforcing the Observation of the Canons they made,
etc. All which were, according to the Nature and Designs of them, either
dispersed far abroad, and to be found in several Countries, or else carefully
preserved in some particular places whither they were directed, and so remained
there to be seen by such as were pleased to consult them.

Besides such occasional Writings as these which, according to some particular
Exigencies of the Church, were sent abroad and communicated from one Society of
Christians to others, there were in several Places Public Histories of all
remarkable Affairs that happened in each Place, continued down for a
considerable space of Time: several of which Public Histories or Records
Eusebius consulted, as he himself assures us, particularly when he gives us
that wonderful Relation of Agbarus King of Edessa, he says he took it out of
the Public Records kept at Edessa, wherein the Antiquities of the City and the
Acts of Agbarus are contained: And a great many other Memorable Facts he came
by the same way.

In this manner were more especially preserved the Acts and Monuments of such
as had suffered Martyrdom upon the account of the Christian Religion. The Names
of abundance of Martyrs, the Times when they Suffered, the various sorts and
kinds of Sufferings they endured, with all the other Circumstances relating to
their Persecution, were largely set forth in Writing, and the Records of them
carefully kept in many Countries, where the Cruelty and Violence of the several
long Persecutions, which had raged at several distant Periods of Time, were
most remarkable.

Other Public Writings extant in Eusebius's Time, were Hymns and Psalms,
Creeds and Forms of Prayer: Several of which, that were constantly used in the
Public Assemblies of Christians, were known to be of great Antiquity: And some
of these ancient Forms of Worship were the same in many Churches, and several
of them more or less different from one another.

Now it is plain to any one that examines any of these Public Writings
belonging to Societies of Christians, that, whenever they were writ, and
whether in all respects true or false, they are certain proofs of an antecedent
Establishment and Belief of the Christian Religion, such as it was in
Eusebius's Time, and such as it was, and is now found in the New Testament; and
all the Accounts we have of the Age and other Circumstances of them, do concur
to strengthen the Evidence already given of the Christian Tradition.

But the Truth of all those Matters of Fact related in the New Testament, which
I have at present engaged my self to prove, will be more abundantly made out by
a continued Succession of a vast number of Writings belonging to particular
Persons, distinguished by the Titles of Orthodox Christians, Heretics, Jews,
and Heathens.

A great many of these Writings are mentioned by Eusebius, and had been with
incredible industry read and examined by him. Several he gives the Titles of
only, others he gives some Character and Account of, and Transcribes large
Passages out of them; a great many Orthodox Books he omits the mention of, for
want of their Authors Names being prefixed to them; others for want of being
able to distinguish when their Authors lived; and a great many he rejects the
Authority of, though they made for the Cause of the Christian Religion which he
maintained, because they had not sufficient Marks upon them, to prove they
belonged to the Persons and Times they pretended to. Some of the Writings he
quotes were lost in his Time, and only Fragments of them to be found in others
that were entirely extant; several that were then extant and mentioned by him,
were seen by a great many later Authors, and all his Quotations out of them are
confirmed to us by their Writings, but the Originals of them are now lost; and
a great many remain entire still, and are plainly the same he represented them
to be, and so are the Fragments of more ancient Authors contained in them: All
which are certain Arguments of the Diligence and Sincerity of this Historian,
and the Antiquity of those Books, whose Authority we are now to make use of.

In the next place then let us take a more particular view of these Writings,
and consider the Age, Character, and other Circumstances of the Authors, the
Subjects they treat about, and the Form and Manner in which they are writ.

As to the Age of those Christian Authors we call Orthodox, some small
Treatises and Fragments we have of such as lived together with the Apostles,
and were immediate Witnesses of the Doctrines delivered, and the mighty Works
done by them; and several of these ancient Pieces are allowed to be Genuine by
those whose Skill and Enquiry into the Matter, have rendered them capable
Judges. The Authors of the next Age who declare they lived with those who
conversed with the Apostles, are more, their Writings much larger, and of more
unquestionable Authority than the other, being confirmed by more numerous
Testimonies of following Writers, who in very near Periods of Time continually
succeeded them.

The Character of all these Writers was in some respects very like, and in
others very different. Some of them were Jews and Heathens converted to
Christianity; others were born of Christian Parents; many of them were Greeks
and writ in that Language, and many were of Roman Colonies, and writ in Latin;
but, though all the Authors we have, writ in one of these Languages, they were
most of them of very different, and very remote Countries from one another:
Several of the first Writers were Plain Simple Men, without the advantage of a
Learned, Honorable, or Public Education, others of them were Philosophers,
and Men very well versed in all the Heathen Learning; some were of Honorable
Families, and Public Employments; many of them were Bishops of the Christian
Church, and lived in the most considerable Cities of the Roman Empire, and by
that means had great opportunities of being acquainted with the true State of
Things in the World. In this they all agree that they were hearty Believers and
zealous Assertors of the Christian Religion, that they bottomed their Faith
upon the Books of the New Testament, that they made it the chief Business of
their Lives and Writings to promote the Christian Faith, and that they were
ready to bear Testimony to the Truth of what they professed by resigning their
Lives; the sincerity of which disposition of theirs is confirmed to us by the
actual Martyrdom of several of them, who lived in such Times and Places, as
gave them opportunities of manifesting their Faith and Christian Resolution
this way.

But the general Character of these Writers, as well as the Authority of what
they say, will be further made out from the consideration of the Subjects they
writ about, the several kinds and sorts of their Writings, and the Manner in
which they are writ. All which I shall endeavor to bring under one view, and
raise such Observations from them as will plainly confirm the main Conclusion I
am to establish.

The common Subject of all the Books and Writings of the first Orthodox Authors
was the Christian Religion, though in several Ways and Methods discoursed of.
Most of these concern the History of Christian Affairs, either expressly or
occasionally: For, besides those Authors, who purposely designed an Historical
Relation either of the Church in general, or of some particular Ecclesiastical
Matter, there is hardly a Christian Writer within the Time of our present
Enquiry, but has some occasion or other to mention several Historical Passages
in almost every Book that he wrote, in order to some further end he proposed to
himself in writing.

Now concerning the Writings of Christian Authors, considered under this
Character of Historians, I have these Things to observe.

First, That they do manifestly confirm the truth of all those Traditions and
standing Monuments before mentioned. For we have frequent Proofs of the
Antiquity of the Scriptures, and all those Religious Customs and Institutions
in use amongst Christians in Eusebius's time, and the General Tradition
strengthened by abundance of New Circumstances; such were the great
Controversies and Quarrels about some Christian Usages, (particularly Baptism,
and the Feast of Easter) together with the Canons and Decrees that were made,
and the Letters that were writ with relation to these Affairs. Here is likewise
mention made of the same Christian Relics and Momonuments, and the same
public Acts and Records which Eusebius saw, and the Accounts and Extracts of
them in several Authors agree with what Eusebius himself was witness of.

In the next place it is very plain, that they give us an account of several
other Customs, Monuments and public Acts, and abuudance of other particular
Historical Passages, besides those mentioned in Eusebius; the Truth of which,
or the Antiquity of their Fiction being proved, they are so many new Arguments
in behalf of the Christian Tradition, or the truth of those Facts we are now to
prove.

Thirdly, I observe that most of these Authors, considered as Historians, were
very Competent Judges and Credible Reporters of the truth of the Facts they
relate. For either they were actual and immediate Witnesses of what they tell
us themselves, or they took a great deal of care to inform themselves right, or
the Facts were of that nature that they could not be deceived though they did
not examine them very strictly; and which way soever they came by them, they
were Faithsul and Sincere in their Relation. Several things they tell us of
their own Knowledge, others they quote their Authors for, and others they
deliver only as Traditional Reports, which they distinguish also into Probable
and Fabulous according to the Evidence that then appeared to them upon a
diligent Examination. And several of them have given great Marks of their
Diligence and Care in enquiring as well as Sincerity in reporting: as
particularly Hegesippus, who gave an account of the Unity of Faith in several
Cities, after having traveled through them, and conversed with the Bishops of
them; Clemens who used all the care he could to inform himself of the Truth and
Sincerity of the Christian Tradition from several Eminent Persons of different
Countries; Irenoeus who carefully remembered the Conversation he had with
Eminent Christians in his Youth, and was very much concerned to have his own
Writings delivered down faithfully to Posterity: a proof of which first Remark
concerning Irenaeus, we have in an Epistle of his to Florinus, quoted by
Eusebus, part of which I think worth the Transcribing, when reproving Florinus
for some ill Opinions he held, he speaks to him in this manner: Eus. Ec. H. l.
5. c. 26.
These Opinions the Presbyters who lived before our times, who also were the
Disciples of the Apostles, did in no wise deliver unto thee: For I saw thee
(when being yet a Child, I was in the Lower Asia with Polycarp) behaving thy
self very well in the Palace, and endeavoring to get thy self well esteemed of
by him; for I remember the things then done better then what has happened of
late; for what we learnt being Children increases together with the Mind it
self, and is closely united to it, insomuch that I am able to tell where the
Blessed Polycarp sat and Discoursed; also his goings out and comings in, his
manner of Life, the shape of his Body, the Discourses he made to the Populace,
the familiar Converse which he said he had with John, and with those who had
seen the Lord; and how he rehearsed their Sayings, and what they were which he
had heard from them concerning the Lord; concerning his Miracles, and his
Doctrine, according as Polycarp received them from those who with their own
Eyes beheld the Word of Life, so he related them, agreeing in all things with
the Scriptures. These things by the Mercy of God bestowed upon me, I then heard
diligently, and copied them out, not in Paper, but in my Heart; and by the
Grace of God I do continually and sincerely ruminate upon them. And the same
Irenaeus, at the end of one of his Pieces says thus. I adjure thee who shall
Transcribe this Book, by our Lord Jesus, and by his Glorious coming to Judge
the Quick and the Dead, that you compare what you shall Transcribe, and correct
it diligently according to that Copy whence you shall Transcribe, and that in
like manner you ascribe this Adjuration, and annex it to your Copy. Which
concern of Irenaeus for the faithful conveyance of Truths contained in his own
Writings to Posterity, is a very good argument of his care in examining the
Traditions and Writings that came down to him from elder times, respecting the
same Important Truths.

A great many other such like Instances as these may be given, where the
Primitive Christian Writers positively and expressly declare, that they had seen
and conversed with the immediate Successors of the Apostles, and with those
upon whom several great Miracles had been wrought by them, and had themselves
been Witnesses of a great many wonderful Gifts remaining in the Church in their
time; as likewise where they demonstrate by many sensible Marks and Signs, the
great Care and Diligence they had taken in examining the Informations they
received from remoter Hands, and all other concurring Presumptions arising from
Circumstances of Fact, and Rational Inferences.

And as they were competent Witnesses and careful Relators in General, so are
they more especially to be relied upon, as to those two great and concerning
Matters of Fact the Scriptures of the New Testament, and Persecutions of
Christians.

The Truth and Authority of the Scriptures was with much enquiry and
examination Established: This every one made it his business to be well assured
of; and a free disquisition concerning the truth of some or other of the Books
of Scripture is every where to be found among the Ancient Writers.

Then as to the Persecutions they were so many, they continued so long
together, were so widely spread, were attended with so vast a number of very
new and remarkalbe Facts, and so many of the Writers lived in the heat of them,
and had so large a share and concern in them themselves, that it is impossible
that the accounts they give of them, should not be, most of them at least, very
true.

The Fourth Observation I have to make upon the Historical part of the first
Christian Writers, is that there are so many Notes of time to be found in them,
such a particular Designation of Places and Persons, and such a mixture of
Jewish and Heathen Affairs with the Christian History, as rendered any Errors
or Mistakes so liable to a discovery at those times, when the several Books
that treat of these Matters were first Published to the World, that by not
being confuted, they are, as to the main substance of what they declare,
irrefragably confirmed.

The other Writings of OrthodoxChristians of the first Ages, which do not
concern the History of Christianity, are either Vindications and Defenses of
the Christian Religion against all the Objections and Calumnies raised by any
of the Enemies of it, or Explications of the Christian Doctrine, Government and
Discipline, or Exhortations and Directions to Practice, or Animadversions and
Reproofs for Errors and Offenses: All which are written under the form of
Orations or Apologies, Letters, Disputations, Comments, etc.

Now it is plain from all these Writings, that the several Authors of them were
thoroughly convinced of the Truth of the Christian Religion: This appears from
the Zeal and Warmth with which many of them writ upon several occasions to one
another, and to Heretics; the readiness they testify to quit all they have,
and to lay down their Lives rather than do any thing contrary to their
Profession; the concern they express for the continuance of their
Fellow Christians in the same Faith, and the Conversion of others to
Christianity; the Boldness and Courage they show to Persons of Power and
Authority, when the truth of their Religion, or their own Innocence is called
in question, and from many other unquestionable marks of Honesty, Sincerity,
and a through Persuasion, visible almost in every Page.

It Is manifest likewise that all these Authors believed the Scriptures of the
New Testament, and Founded their Religion upon them. Several of them have writ
Comments upon them, all quote them and confirm the Doctrines they deliver, and
the Rules and Directions they give from them; and all their Writings plainly
declare they were very well versed in them and influenced by the same Spirit
that governs there, and distinguishes those Writings from any other; and, when
ever any Controversy happened in matters of Christian Faith or Practiced, the
Appeal is constantly made to these Scriptures.

Several other Remarks and Observations might be drawn from the Writings of
those Christians called Orthodox; but these are sufficient for what I design to
prove by them, and so I pass on to consider what we have written by Heretieks,
Jews and Heathens, with relation to Christianity.

A great many things were written by Persons of these several Denominations in
the Three first Ages of the Christian Era, but very little of them that
expressly concerns Christianity remains now, and a great many of these Writings
were lost in Eusebius's Time; so that almost all we know of them is contained
in the Orthodox Writers: In many of which there are several considerable
Fragments yet to be found, and accounts of what is lost. From all which we may
collect that none of the Enemies of the Christian Religion, neither Heretics,
Jews nor Heathens, did at any time offer to disprove or contradict those
Christian Facts I have been now Establishing, but did in several respects
strengthen and confirm the truth of them,

We find by the Orthodox Writers, that there were in the most Primitive Times,
and continually, in all the after-Periods of Christianity, a great many
Heretics of very different Characters and Opinions, who troubled the Peace of
the Church, and endeavored to corrupt the Christian Doctrine and Tradition.
Their Writings are full of the strange Opinions of Heretics; they are
oftentimes very large in giving a History of the Men, their vicious Lives, and
wicked Designs; and in confuting their Absurd, and, for the most part,
Blasphemous Doctrines. From hence we find that several of these Heretics, in
order to justify their Errors, made use of all the Arts and Shifts they could;
and some denied one Book of Scripture, and some another; some took upon them to
reform the Scriptures, and added what they thought served their turn, or took
away what they did not like; Others made new Scriptures, and put them out in
the Names of the Apostles; but none of them denied the principal matters of
Fact contained in the New Testament, neither Miraculous nor Common, though
their Character oftentimes allowed, and their Cause required such a denial, if
the Evidence of those Facts had not appeared to them so strong as to render all
contradiction Vain and Ineffectual.

The Jews who writ against the Christian Religion, allowed most of the
principal matters of Fact Recorded of Christ in the New Testament, even his
Miracles as well as the Common History of his Life; and when they deny the
Reality they grant the Pretense, and are wholly concerned to show that Christ
was not the Messiah promised them, notwithstanding his extraordinary Character;
because, as they thought, several of the Prophecies in the Old Testament, which
were agreed on all hands to relate to the Messiah could not be applied to
Christ. In this consisted wholly the Controversy betwixt them and the
Christians; and therefore are the Jews of these times censured by the Christian
Writers, as corrupting the Old Testament in such Passages of it as seemed to
them to make most for the Christian Religion: Particularly Justin, in his
Dialogue with a Jew, endeavors to evince, That several Testimonies of the
Prophets which he quoted was cut out of the Bible by the Jews, which charge
whether true or false, proves thus much, that the Jews had no other way of
resisting the Evidence of the Christian Religion, but by denying, or in some
manner evading the Arguments drawn from the Prophecies of the Old Testament.
Here they placed the chief strength of their Cause, and not in the Confutation
of the Christian History; the greatest part of which is plainly granted in the
Arguments they make use of to overthrow the Faith built upon it, and the
Inferences drawn from it. Particularly Josephus does comfirm the truth of
several of the Facts related in the New Testament, and such as necessarily
determine the Oririginal of Christianity.

The like account, in a great measure, may be given of the Heathens whose
Writings do any ways concern Christianity: For neither those of them that were
Instrumental in the Persecution of Christians, nor those who endeavor to
overthrow the truth of their Religion by Arguments, do deny any of those
matters of Fact related in the New Testament, which we have distinguished by
the Title of Common Historical Facts; and a great many of them are confirmed by
other Heathen Writers, who treat of their own affairs only, or mention
Christian Matters occasionally, as they happened to be intermixed with those
Things they designedly writ about. Nay, some of those that writ expressly
against the Christian Religion, do not only allow that Christ pretended to
Miracles, and that he did those Things Recorded of him in appearance, (as was
the Opinion of several of them) but that he did really work those very Miracles
he pretended to: But then they endeavor to lessen the Credit of them, and
destroy the Doctrines built upon them, either by ascribing them (as many of the
Jews likewise did) to Magic and Evil Spirits; or showing that several of their
own Religion had done as extraordinary Things as any that were attributed to
Christ and his Apostles.

A great many of these Heathen Writings are quoted, some of them particularly
Answered and Confuted, and several large Pieces of them inserted in the Books
of Christian Authors. There we find, besides a great many Passages out of
Private Authors, and Common Traditions, several Rescripts, Edicts and Letters
of Roman Emperors, either mentioned or transcribed; and several Public Acts
and Records compiled by the Authority of Heathens, and in their keeping,
appealed to with the greatest Confidence and Assurance imaginable, as extant in
the Writers Time that Cites them, and generally known: Particularly we meet
with diverse of these Heathen Monuments in the Christian Apologies, which were
at several times, by different Writers, Dedicated to Roman Emperors, the Senate
of Rome, and Governors of Provinces.

Many such Proofs and Evidences as these of the Christian Faith and History,
are still to be found in the Christian Books which were writ before Eusebius,
and are now extant: But there were also extant in his Time several of the same
Heathen Books out of which those Testimonies were taken, and others which gave
the same Account of Christian Affairs; which was looked upon by Eusebius to be
so notorious a Truth, that when he talks of the State of Christianity under
Domitian, he confirms what he says by the Authority of Heathen Writers, without
thinking it necessary to name any particular Author: Eus. E. H. l. 3. c. 18.
So mightily (says he) did the Doctrine of our Faith flourish in those
forementioned Times, that even those Writers who are wholly estranged from our
Religion, (by which he plainly means Heathens) have not thought it troublesome
to set forth in their Histories both this Persecution, and also the Martyrdoms
suffered therein; and they have also accurately shown the very Time; relating
that in the Fifteenth Year of Domitian, Flavia Domitilla, Daughter of the
Sister of Fabius Clemens, at that time one of the Consuls of Rome, was,
together with many others, banished into the Island of Pontia, for the
Testimony of Christ.

There are likewise several Heathen Authors still separately extant, out of
which may be Collected a great many Passages, which give a concurrent Evidence
of the Truth of the Christian History as Tacitus and Pliny before quoted, and
diverse others; and there is nothing to be found in any of them that does, in
the least, contradict any of the principal Matters Fact now to be proved.

But, besides these Writings which are acknowledged to be Genuine, and the true
and proper Works of those Persons whose Names they bear, whether Orthodox
Christians, Heretics, Jews or Heathens, there were a great many other in the
Primitive Times of Christianity, written by uncertain Authors; and either
purposely Published under false Names and Titles, with a design to promote the
Belief of the Christian Religion in general, or to advance and defend some
particular Notions and Practices which the Authors of them approved, and had a
mind to recommend to the World; or else by some mistake ascribed to those
Persons to whom they did not really belong. Such were a great many false
Gospels, Acts, Epistles and Revelations, and several other Historical and
Doctrinal Discourses, Published under the Names of Christ, the Virgin Mary, the
Apostles, and Eminent Christians of the succeeding Ages; such were also several
Letters said to be Writ by Pilate, Seneca, and Lentulus, the Oracles of the
Sybils, and several other Writings attributed to some considerable Heathens, a
Passage in Josephus relating to Christ, etc. All which, supposing them all
Forged, or only some of them so, some accidentally mistaken, and others
doubtful; whoever were the Authors of them, so long as it plainly appears they
were of such and such Antiquity, they are certain proofs of the general Faith
of Christians, at the respective Times when any of them were Published, and
consequently of the Truth of those Facts in question; forasmuch as they all
evidently suppose an antecedent Belief of the Christian Religion, founded upon
those Facts, as is visible by all the Remains we have left of them; and
therefore are as good Arguments of the Truth of what I am proving, as the most
Genuine unquestionable Writings of any other Author whatsoever, viz. That the
common Historical Facts related in the New Testament are true.

Which Point, I think, is proved by such a multitude and variety of Evidence,
that I may take it for granted, That Jesus Christ who lived and was Crucified
at Jerusalem, in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, was the first Author of the
Christian Religion; That the Characters, Sufferings and Pretenses of Christ and
his Apostles, and the Doctrines taught by them, were the same we find
represented in the Books of the New Testament, and that the Christian Religion
there delivered, was propagated through the World, and those Books writ,
according to the Time, Manner, and Circumstances there mentioned, between the
middle of Tiberius, and the beginning of Trajan's Reign; and consequently that
the Christian Faith, as to the principal Facts and Doctrines contained in the
New Testament, was always the same, from the Time of Tiberius to the Council of
Nice, and from thence to the present Age; the greatest part of the Scriptures
having been always acknowledged to be the Genuine Works of those whose Names
they bore, and to contain the unalterable grounds of the Christian Religion;
and the Sum of what Christians were obliged to believe.

2. In the next place then, I am to prove that those extraordinary Facts
Recorded in the New Testament, which we call Miracles and Prophecies, were
really true, according the Relation there given of them.

That they were constantly believed to be true by all Christians ever since the
Time in which they are first said to happen, has already been proved; but
whether their Faith was well grounded, or not, is now the Enquiry: That it was,
I shall prove by showing that the Miracles and Prophecies Recorded in the New
Testament, are related and attested in such a manner, that the Truth of them
cannot possibly be called in question.

But that the strength and validity of what I have to say upon this Head, may
be better, and more clearly perceived, I think fit, by way of Introduction, to
show,

First, What I mean by Miracles and Prophecies; and,

Secondly, What kind of Evidence these Facts are capable of, and which way they
are to be proved.

By Miracles, then, I would now be understood to mean only strange unusual
Events, out of the common Road and Course of Things, which by all the Knowledge
we have of Nature, we cannot tell how to bring to pass, nor account for, when
they have happened: And these are to be distinguished into such as are
absolutely, at all Times strange, and not to be accounted for by what we know
of the Power and Force of Nature, as the Resurrection of the Dead, etc. And
such as are so only in consideration of some particular Circumstances; as
healing the Sick, which is in it self no strange Thing, but only when it is done
in a shorter Time than Medicines were ever known to operate, or without the
assistance of any visible means, or the like.

By Prophecies, I here understand Relations of such future Events, as have no
perceivable connection with the State of Things at the Time when they are
uttered.

This is all I mean at present by Miracles and Prophecies; and every Body I am
sure will allow me that there are a great many such Matters of Fact as these
mentioned in the New Testament: How, and by what means they were done, whether
they were Natural or Supernatural Effects; whether they were the Works of Art
or Magic; whether God or Man, or some Good or Evil Spirit was the Autohr of
them, is not my present business to enquire; that belongs to another place: All
that I have now undertaken to show, is that they were some way or other really
done, according to the Relation we have of them in the New Testament.

Now I know of no other way of proving this, but by the Number and Character of
the Witnesses who attest the Truth of these Facts, and by the Nature and
Circumstances of the Facts themselves, according as they appear from the
Account the Witnesses give of them. If the Witnesses are such, as we have no
reason to think, could be deceived themselves in what they relate, or would
offer to impose upon others; and if the Facts are such as could not be
represented by the Witnesses otherwise than they were, without a certain
discovery of the Falsehood of their Relation, nothing more can be required to
justify our Belief of the Miracles and Prophecies Recorded in the New
Testament.

This being premised, I shall endeavor to show that the Christian Miracles and
Prophecies Recorded in the New Testament, have all the forementioned Characters
of Truth belonging to them, and are therefore very reasonably and justly
believed to be true; which is the Thing I have obliged my self to make good,
and shall prosecute my Design in the following Method.

First, I shall consider the Miracles by themselves, and this according to the
different Periods in which they were done, and the different Persons they were
done by.

Secondly, I shall consider the Prophecies apart according to the same
distinction of Times and Persons, as I observe in treating of Miracles.

Thirdly, I shall make some general Reflections with Relation to the proof of
the Christian Miracles and Prophecies taken altogether.

First, Then as to Miracles; it is very plain that a great many such Facts as
these, that I call Miracles, are said to be done by Jesus Christ: This is every
where asserted or supposed in the New Testament; and the Gospels give a very
particular and circumstantial Account of several of them. It Is certain also,
from the general Proofs before given of the History of the New Testament, that
these Miracles were believed by the first Christians, both by those that lived
in Judea, and those that dwelt in other Countries; and the real Truth of them
will as evidently appear, if we consider the Grounds and Reasons upon which
they were at first believed.

The greatest part of the Miracles Recorded of Christ, were done in the
presence of great Multitudes, at the most Public Places in Judea, and at the
most solemn Times of Meeting: Nay, he was so constantly employed in Traveling
and going about, and performing so many Signs and Wonders wherever he came,
and gave so many repeated instances of his Power in the same Places, that there
were very few in that whole Country, who had not seen some of his mighty Works
themselves; and therefore the sole Ground and Reason upon which the generality
of the first Christians of Palestine believed these Miracles, was the Testimony
of their own Senses.

The Facts themselves were so level to their Capacities, and the manner of
doing them was so open, and so easily and fully perceived, that they found no
reason to distrust their Senses, and therefore they readily concluded them to
be true.

A great many of the first Believers of Christ's Miracles, had a further and
more intimate perception of the Truth of them than the rest, viz. those upon
whom some of the Miracles were wrought, or who were made to have a share in the
Actions themselves: Such were all those that were healed or fed by Christ, that
had Devils cast out of them, that had their secret Thoughts or private Actions
revealed to them, etc.

Those who saw none of these mighty Works themselves, but believed upon the
Testimony of others, were confirmed in their Faith by an universal concurrence
of all Persons their Curiosity or Concern disposed them to enquire of: For, as
we read in the New Testament, all kinds of People believed the Miracles of
Christ; not only those who reverenced his Person and Character, and embraced
his Doctrine, but even those who despised him and set him at naught, and
rejected his Gospel.

The Scribes and Pharisees who were the most Powerful and most Zealous Enemies
of Christ and his Gospel, acknowledged his Miracles, but attributed them to
Evil Spirits. Some of the Pharisees could not deny his wonderful Cure of a
Blind Man, but would not allow that he was of God, because he kept not the
Sabbath Day; though others of them said, how can a Man that is a Sinner do such
Miracles? None of the Jews, upon the strictest Examination, were able to
disprove this or any other of his Miracles; but notwithstanding, they would not
believe in Christ or embrace his Doctrine, because they were Moses's Disciples,
and they knew that God spoke unto Moses; but as for that Fellow who cured the
Blind Man, they knew not from whence he was.

The Chief Priests and Elders never doubted of the mighty Works done by him,
but only questioned his Authority in doing them. Among the Chief Rulers many
believed on him, but did not confess him, lest they should have been put out of
the Synagogue. His Countrymen acknowledged that mighty Works were wrought by
his hands, but were offended because so mean a Person did them, whose Birth,
Relations and Education they knew. The Gergesenes were astonished at the
wonderful Things he did, though they besought him to depart out of their
Coasts: And the Devils confessed his Power before they were cast out, though he
came to torment them before the time. A great many were convinced of the Truth
of his Miracles, but did not hearken to what he taught, because none of the
Rulers or Pharisees believed on him; and because they took him for a Galilean,
and thought that no Prophet arose out of Galilee. Several would not believe on
him, because they knew whence he was; and when Christ came, no Man they
supposed knew from whence he was; though they were thus answered by others who
believed, when Christ comes will he do more Miracles than these which this Man
has done? Some were entirely satisfied of his Miraculous Power, by being healed
by him, as Nine of the Ten Lepers, and nevertheless regarded him not. Abundance
of People accompanied him wherever he went, and were continual Witnesses of
the Signs and Miracles done by him, and yet followed him not for the sake of
them, but because they were fed by him. And many there were that believed in
his Name when they saw the Miracles that he did; but Jesus did not commit
himself to them, because he knew all Men. So that all these bore Testimony to
the Truth of the greatest part of Christ's Miracles, as well as those who
became his Disciples, and embraced his Doctrine.

But other Miracles there are Recorded of Christ, which were done in the
presence of his Apostles and Disciples only, who already believed on him; some
of which continually attended him, and others of them were very frequently with
him. Several of these Miracles were done in his Lifetime; sometimes before the
whole Twelve, who are peculiarly Styled Apostles; sometimes before a Select
Number of the Twelve; sometimes before a promiscuous Company of his Apostles
and Disciples together: After his Death, he appeared at several times to
different Persons and different Companies; but his Resurrection, and whatever
he did or said during Forty Days Conversing upon Earth after he was risen, his
Ascension into Heaven, and Mission of the Holy Ghost, with many extraordinary
Signs and Wonders, none were Witnesses of, but his own Disciples and Followers:
and therefore the Truth of all these Miracles must principally depend upon the
Credit of the Disciples of Christ that relate them.

Besides all these wonderful things immediately attributed to Christ himself,
we meet with several others in the New Testament, which are represented as done
by some other Power, but are such as have a manifest relation to Christ, and
are designed to confirm the truth of his Pretenses: Such were the Appearance of
Angels to Mary the Mother of Christ, Zachariah the Father of John, and to the
Shepherds; the appearance of a Star in the East to the Wisemen; the Dumbness
of Zachariah, and other Signs that attended the Birth of John and Christ; the
Dove and Voice from Heaven at the Baptism of Christ; the Darkness, Earthquake,
Renting of the Vail of the Temple, and Resurrection of dead Bodies at his
Crucifixion. Several of these things could not be known immediately to the
Evangelists that relate them, or to any other Disciples of Christ, but to those
only whom they are told of, and upon their credit we must in a great measure
rely for the truth of them; but several of them were very public; and
consequently the truth of these rests upon the Testimony of a great number of
Witnesses besides those that relate them.

In this manner are the Miracles of Christ, and all the Wonders and Signs that
accompanied him, from his Conception to his Mission of the Holy Spirit upon his
Apostles, Related and Attested in the New Testament.

But of the same Jesus Christ, who has so many wonderful things there reported
of him, it is farther testified, that he conferred a power of working Miracles
upon a great many of his Followers, who believed in him; and that a great many
Miracles were accordingly performed by their Hands. In his Lifetime it is said,
that he gave this Power to Twelve Apostles and Seventy Disciples, whom he sent
out into all the Towns and Villages of Judea, with a Commission to Preach his
Gospel, to cast out Devils, and to cure Diseases and they went about Preaching
the Gospel, and Healing every where, and the Devils were subject to them
through his Name. This we have their own Testimony for; and whoever were Cured
or Dispossessed by them, and all that saw what they did are so many more
Witnesses of the Miracles they wrought, but none of the Particular Facts or
Circumstances of them are mentioned.

After the Ascension of Christ we read that the Twelve Apostles, being all with
one accord in one place, received a larger power of working all kind of
Miracles by the Mission of the Holy Ghost; who, according to the promise of
Christ, was to be constantly with them, to guide and assist them in the whole
course of their Ministry. This Power immediately showed it self by their
speaking in several different Languages before unknown to them; the Witnesses
of which Fact are not only these Apostles themselves, but a great many others
that heard them; Parthians, and Elamites, and the Dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt,
and in the parts of Libya, about Cyrene, and Strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, who were amazed to hear Galileans speak in
their Tougues the wonderful things of God. Those also confirm the truth of the
Fact who foolishly imputed it to New Wine.

After this we read of a great many other Miracles of different kinds performed
by several Apostles and Disciples, who received their Power immediately from
Jesus Christ; and, by the account that is given us of them, we find that the
particular Facts were more numerous, more frequent, and more public then those
of their Master Christ himself. The time of Christ's Ministry was but Three
Years or thereabouts, the Exercise and Manifestation of his Power was confined
to the Country of Palestine, and whatever mighty things he did, he did them in
his own single Person: Whereas the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were a
great many; all which were constantly employed in Preaching the Gospel, and
confirming it every where with Signs and Wonders, during the whole course of
their several Lives; and they performed this Work with Diligence, not only in
Judea and Samaria, but in diverse other Cities and Countries throughout the
whole Roman Empire.

By which Account it plainly appears, that most of the same Persons, who were
Witnesses of those Miracles of Jesus Christ, were also Witnesses of those that
were done by the Hands of his Apostles and Disciples; the truth of which was
likewise owned and acknowledged by avast Multitude more, both of such as
believed the Gospel, and of such as rejected and opposed it, and violently
Persecuted the Teachers of it.

To omit the Testimony of true Believers, thus it is Recorded concerning those
upon whom the Gospel of Christ had no Power nor Influence: The Rulers, Elders,
Scribes and High Priests among the Jews, when they summoned Peter and John
before them for curing a Lame Man, could not deny but that a notable Miracle
had been done by them, which was manifest to all them that dwelt at Jerusalem.
They were afterward filled with Indignation, and took Counsel to slay them,
because they could not restrain them from doing more Miracles in the Name of
Christ; but they never questioned the Truth of the Facts. Stephen full of Faith
and Power, did great Wonders and Miracles among the people; but he was accused
and condemned by the Council of the Jews, not for deceiving the People with
false Miracles, but for speaking things against the Holy Place and the Law, for
saying that Jesus should destroy that Place, and change the Customs which Moses
delivered them; when at the same time it is said, that all that sat in the
Council looking steadfastly on him, saw his Face as it had been the Face of an
Angel: Neither had they any Thing to object against his Life or his Works.
Simon, the Sorcerer, to whom all the people in Samaria gave heed from the least
to the greatest, looking upon him to be the great Power of God, was himself as
well as those that were bewitched by him, Baptized by Philip, and believed when
he beheld the Miracles and Signs that were done: But afterward we find, by the
wickedness of his heart, which he discovered to Peter, that he was an Enemy to
the true Doctrine of the Gospel. Elymas the Sorcerer, who was struck Blind by
Paul, and yet not converted to the Faith, is another unwilling Witness of the
Power of the Apostles. The People of Lystra confirm the same Truth who took
Paul and Barnabas for Gods in the likeness of Men, by reason of the Miracles
they saw performed by them, and afterward, by the Instigation of the Jews,
stoned Paul. The Damsel possessed with a Spirit of Divination, and her Masters
who saw the hope of their gains gone, by Paul's commanding the Spirit to come
out of her, several Vagabond Jews Exorcists, who took upon them to cast out
Evil Spirits in the Name of Jesus, but suffered very much for the Impudence of
their Pretenses; and a great many other such like, were Witnesses of the
Miracles of the Apostles, who by reason of some wicked or dishonorable Motives
rejected the Doctrine they taught; or professed to embrace it upon ill Designs;
or, after they had received it made Shipwreck of the Faith: Great Complaints of
all which sort of Men we find in the Epistles.

Thus are the Miracles of the first Apostles and Disciples of Christ declared
and attested.

But moreover it is Recorded of them, that they had not only a Power of working
Miracles themselves, but that they were Authorized and Enabled by Christ and
his Spirit to convey the like Power to others: And accordingly we find a great
many Instances in the New Testament, where Miracles were wrought by private
Christians, by Virtue of a Power they had received from the Apostles, which was
conferred upon them by Prayer and Imposition of Hands: After which Actions of
the Apostles they are immediately said to be filled with the Holy Ghost, and to
have received the Gifts of the Spirit; which, according to the different
exigencies of the Church, and the different qualifications of the Persons
endued with them, were diverse: And among these are reckoned the Gifts of
Tongues and of Interpretation; the Gifts of Healing and of Miracles; which
Gifts are said to be very common among the first Converts to Christianity, in
all places where the Gospel was Preached; and the same is plainly implied by
the frequent Rules and Cautions that are given by the Apostles concerning the
due Exercise of them, and the fear and apprehension they often express, lest
the Christians thus empowered, should, by coveting one another Gifts, or being
puffed up with those they were severally possessed of, neglect to apply
themselves, as they ought to do, to the Edification of the Church of Christ.

This is the Scripture-Account of Miracles, and these were those wonderful
Facts believed by the first Christians; their full assurance of the Truth of
which was the chief Ground and Motive of their embracing the Gospel or Doctrine
of Christ.

There were likewise other strange Matters of Fact called Prophecies, which
were most surely believed among them, and which contributed very much to their
receiving the Gospel, and continuing in the Profession of Christianity without
wavering; and these I shall consider in the same Way and Method I did Miracles.
For there are several Prophecies Recorded in the New Testament as uttered by
our Savior himself, together with several other spoken with relation to him
and fulfilled by him; others there are mentioned as spoken by the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ who had received the Power of Prophecy immediately from
him: It Is plain also from several Instances and Passages in the Sacred
Writings, that the Spirit of Prophecy was conveyed by the first Apostles and
Disciples to private Christians, and was very common among them.

The Prophecies spoken by our Savior, were most of them delivered in private
to his Disciples; some of which were not written till after the things
happened, and the truth of these the Disciples are wholly answerable for; and
some of them were Published in Writing before the things happened, and these
might then, and may still be examined by the Circumstances of them; others of
them were spoken publicly and frequently before great Multitudes of People, as
those about his Suffering and Resurrection, etc. and several, besides their
being spoken openly, in the presence of many, were also spread abroad in
Writing long before the Events actually happened, as particularly that
remarkable one concerning the Destruction of Jerusalem.

Prophecies spoken of Christ in former times, with relation to his Person,
Actions, Sufferings and Doctrine, with the several Circumstances belonging to
the whole Dispensation of his Gospel, are to be found written in the Books of
the Old Testament, which were manifestly wrote long before his coming into the
World, and are now Extant, and might then, and may still be compared with those
Events related in the New, which are pretended to be completions of them: And
some Prophecies there are concerning our Savior, spoken by Holy Persons a
little before and after his Birth, and at his Presentation in the Temple, as
also others concerning John his Forerunner; and all the Preaching of John was
Prophetical of Christ.

The truth of all which Matters of Fact does not depend wholly upon the Credit
of the Prophets themselves, but upon the Testimony of those also that heard
them; and some of them were spoken before much Company; particularly what John
said of Christ was very public, and frequently repeated, and consequently
there were great numbers of Witnesses of it.

The particular Prophecies of the first Apostles and Disciples, and other
Christians, preserved in the New Testament, are but few, and most of the Events
foretold, were so near the time of their Prediction, that we cannot certainly
tell whether they were written before they were fulfilled; but some of them
there were many Witnesses of, and consequently the truth of them does not
depend wholly upon the credit of their Relation.

But what is frequently mentioned in the Scriptures of the New Testament
concerning the Gift of Prophecy in the Church, (by which Expression is often
signified an extraordinary Power of foretelling future Events as well as
interpreting Scripture) is a plain Appeal to the Testimony of all Christans in
general: For, according to the account there given, so many were endued with
it, that 'twas an easy matter in any place where the Gospel was spread, to be
satisfied of the truth of the matter whether there were any Christian Prophets
or not.

Thus have I taken a short view of the Miracles and Prophecies Recorded in the
New Testament, and shown how they were all attested, and upon what grounds they
were at first believed.

In the next place, I shall make some general Reflections upon the account here
given, in order to evince the truth of these extraordinary Facts, and the
reasonableness of those Grounds upon which the first Christians believed them.

It has been observed before, that when any Matters of Fact are attested by
such Witnesses as cannot be imagined capable of being deceived themselves, or
willing to deceive others, and the Facts related by them are such as could not
possibly be represented falsely without a certain discovery, no greater evidence
can be required for the proof of them: And that the Miracles and Prophecies
mentioned in the New Testament are such kind of Facts, and so attested, will
plainly appear from the following Considerations.

First of all it is certain, from the account before given, that Christ
pretended to do a great many Miracles, and that vast Multitudes of People
pretended to have seen a great many Miracles done by him, and to believe that
what they saw was truly and really performed by his means; and some pretended
further to have experienced the effects of this strange power in themselves:
From whence it evidently follows, that all these Miracles so attested were
true; because it was very easy for Christ to know whether he had such a Power
as this or not, by an immediate Consciousness, and therefore he could not be
deceived in pretending to what he had not; and the Sincerity, Innocence, and
Integrity of his Life, the Disinterestedness, of all his Actions, the Humility
and Uprightness of his Carriage, and the many Troubles, Sufferings and
Afflictions he was actually exposed to upon account of these Pretenses, and
which by his great Wisdom and Knowledge of Men he easily soresaw would happen
to him; all these, I say, do sufficiently assure us that he would not offer to
deceive others, by pretending to such Works which he knew he had not done, or
could not do.

Then as to the Persons pretending to have seen, and, for that reason, to
believe his Miracles, they could not be deceived; because the matters of Fact
they are Witnesses of, are such as were the proper Objects of Sense, and were
as easily, distinctly and fully perceivable, as any other the most common
obvious Events daily taken notice of; so that every one who had Ears to hear,
and Eyes to see, was a capable Judge of what Christ said and did, and there
wanted no great skill or capacity of understanding to compare his Pretenses
with his Performances.

But those who felt the effects of this wonderful Power in themselves, had a
more intimate and more infallible preception of the truth of his Miracles,
which gave them greater assurance of their not being deceived.

And when we consider the number of those who had all, at the same time, the
same Preceptions, it is a further confirmation of the truth and reality of the
Appearances; especially when we observed that a great many of these were
possessed with violent Prejudices against the Person and Doctrine of Christ,
and were unwilling to believe any thing that seemed any way to justify his
Pretenses.

And as all these Witnesses of the Miracles of Christ, cannot possibly be
imagined to have been mistaken themselves, in thinking they perceived what they
did not really perceive; so neither was it possible for them to deceive others,
by telling them such things were done in their presence which they knew were
not done: For, besides that it is utterly inconceivable how so great a Multitude
of Persons of different Places, Degrees, and Opinions, as the first Witnesses
of these Miracles were, should agree together to assert that they saw such
Facts as were never done; and this constantly without any ones ever discovering
the Cheat; besides this, I say the Characters of the Witnesses will not suffer
us to think they could entertain a design of imposing upon the World; and the
Manner and Circumstances of their first Declaration of their Belief of the
Miracles, makes a Confederacy to deceive utterly impossible.

As to the Characters of the Witnesses, they were either such Persons as after
they had seen, believed and embraced the Gospel of Christ, or such as continued
in the Religion they were before educated in, notwithstanding all the Miracles
they saw: Most of the former sort were Persons of remarkable Probity and
Integrity, and of great Simplicity of Life and Manners, who renounced all the
Interests and Advantages of this present World, and exposed themselves to great
variety of Troubles and Afflictions, for their constant profession of their
Faith in Christ, and his Miracles; and it cannot be supposed of Persons of this
Character, that they would invent, and industriously propagate what they knew
to be false, if the agreement of so many in the same design had been possible:
But, if so many People could be supposed capable of forming such a design, and
of putting on such a false Character for the better promoting of it, it is not
imaginable that they should be able to continue their Plot, and preserve their
Character so long as they did, without betraying themselves, when they lost and
suffered so much for carrying on the Cheat, had no prospect of future success
answerable to their present Sufferings, and might have been very well rewarded
by the Enemies of Christianity for a seasonable Discovery.

But all the Witnesses of Christ's Miracles, who afterward entertained his
Gospel were not of the same Character with the former; some of them confessed
him with their Mouth, but in their Works denied him; they acknowledged his
Authority, and admired his Doctrine; but being led away by their Lusts, or
distracted by the Cares of the World, they continued still in their Sins, and
never lived up to those holy Rules he prescribed: These who never felt the
power of the Christian Religion, could never be so concerned for the Interests
of it, as constantly to vouch and maintain an unprofitable Lie in its defense;
when it is very probable they might have had easier Consciences and better
Fortunes for disproving the Pretenses it was built upon: Others of them made
Shipwreck of their Faith, and turned again unto those beggarly Elements or
Idols they were freed from, neither can these be suspected of justifying what
they knew to be false in behalf of a Religion they had forsaken: It Is more
reasonable to suppose, had they been privy to any deceit, that they would have
been very zealous in the discovery of it.

Then as to those who rejected the Authority and Doctrine of Christ, and
continued in the Religion they were at first Educated in, notwithstanding all
the Miracles they saw; who, as we find by the History of the Gospel, were
frequently reproached by Christ and his Apostles for their Infidelity, and
obstinate adherence to the Religion and Traditions of their Fathers; the
greatest part of whom, and those Persons of the greatest Dignity, Authority and
Learning among them, made it their business to Persecute Christ and his
Apostles, and all that professed the Christian Religion: It Is plainly as
impossible to imagine that Persons of this Character should agree to own the
truth of Christ's Miracles, which they knew to be false, as that honest sincere
Christians who abhorred a Lie, and were thoroughly persuaded Eternal Misery was
the certain Punishment of Lying, should conspire to deceive the World, by
contriving, spreading, and continually supporting, what they were sure was the
grossest Cheat imaginable.

But, without considering the Characters of the Witnesses, the Manner and
Circumstances in which they first gave Testimony to the truth of Christ's
Miracles, makes a confederacy to deceive utterly impossible: For in many
Instances of Public Miracles in the New Testament, we find that, upon the
sight of something done by Jesus Christ, the whole Multitude of Spectators
immediately declared their Belief and Admiration by openly glorifying God, or
expressing their Wonder to one another: So that it plainly appeats from hence,
that they were all severally convinced of the truth and wonderfulness of what
they saw before they could know one another Minds concerning it, and therefore
the agreement of their Testimony could not be the effect of any antecedent
concert among themselves.

Thus have I evidently proved the truth of the Public Miracles of Jesus
Christ; and whatever has been said upon this Subject will hold with the same,
or rather greater degrees of certainty, concerning the Public Miracles of the
first Apostles and Disciples of Christ, who received that Power immediately
from their Master; and of all other Christian Believers to whom the same Gifts
were conveyed by their Hands: For the Signs and Wonders Recorded to have been
done by any of them were as easily known and distinguished by vulgar Senses and
Capacities as those of Christ; the Characters and Circumstances of the
Witnesses, so far as concerns the credibility of their Testimony, was very near
the same: But the number of those, who by an intimate consciousness of their
own Power knew they performed such Works, of those who felt the Effects of this
Miraculous Power in themselves, and of those who saw the External Signs and
Appearances of it in the Facts that were done, was very far greater than in the
former Case; and the impossibility of a general agreement to deceive, more
manifest here than there; and consequently the truth of all these Facts is as
evident as that of the other before proved.

As to the more Private Miracles done by Jesus Christ himself in the presence
of his Disciples only, and the Signs and Wonders employed by some other Power
for the manifestation of Christ to a few chosen Persons, we have these reasons
to believe them true.

The Facts were of the same nature, and as easy to be known and discerned as
the other before mentioned; the several Witnesses of these things which
happened at several times, taken altogether, were a great many, which makes an
agreement of them all to deceive, and a constant invincible Perseverance in a
Cheat very difficult to imagine; the Characters of them, as far as appears from
the History of the New Testament, were such as leave no room to suspect the
Fidelity of their Relation; for they are all of them, the Apostles and first
Disciples especially who are principally concerned in the present Cause,
represented as honest, sincere, undesigning Persons, that feared God and loved
Mankind; that were free from Pride and Vanity; and were so far from seeking
their own Interest or Advancement in this World, that they were despised, and
set at naught, and evilly entreated wherever they came, and were, as to this
Life, of all Men most miserable, for constantly asserting the truth of the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and such other Facts now in question; all
which they were as firmly persuaded of, as of any of the Public Miracles of
Jesus Crrist; and several of them they Preached up as more necessary and
impottant to be believed.

Besides all this, many of these Miraculous Facts, which were fully discovered
only to a few, were accompanied with several Circumstances more publicly
known, with which they have so near, and almost necessary a connection, that
it is very difficult to imagine these Circumstances should be true, and not the
principal Facts also; as will easily appear from the Instance of the
Resurrection of Christ.

In the account of which wonderful Fact we find, that it was known to the Chief
Priests and Pharisees among the Jews that Christ had said, while he was yet
alive, after three Days I will rise again; for which reason they make
Application to Pilate to secure his Sepulcher, that his Disciples might not
come and steal him away by Night, and take occasion from thence to give out he
was risen from the Dead. The Sepulcher was accordingly made sure by rolling a
great Stone to the Door of it, by Sealing the Stone and setting a Watch: But
it is further said that, at the time appointed and foretold for the rising of
Christ, there was a great Earthquake, and that then the Angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and rolled back the Stone from the Door of the
Sepulcher, and sat upon it; that his Countenance was like Lightning and his
Raiment White as Snow; that the Keepers saw all these things, and, for fear of
the Angel, did shake and became as dead Men: Afterward we read that some of
the Watch came into the City and showed unto the Chief Priests all the things
that were done; that the Chief Priests when they were Assembled with the
Elders, and had taken Counsel, gave large Money to the Soldiers, to say, his
Disciples came by Night and stole him away while they Slept; which the
Soldiers accordingly did, upon their Promise to persuade the Governor if it
should come to his Ears, and secure them.

Now if all these Circumstances were true, for the truth of all which the Chief
Priests, Pharisees and Elders, Pilate, and the Soldiers that watched the
Sepulcher of Christ, are cited as Witnesses, then is it certain that the Body
of Christ was removed out of the Sepulcher by an extraordinary Power, agreeable
to his own Prediction: The belief of which will render all the after-Accounts
of Christ very easy and probable, and the sincerity of the Witnesses that
relate them will take away all manner of doubt concerning the truth of them.

Which Sincerity of the Witnesses is manifest, not only from the constant
settled Character of the Men, but from a great many peculiar Circumstances in
the Relation it self that is given of this great and wonderful Event: Such as
were the Ignorance of the Disciples of Christ, who knew not the Scripture that
he must rise again from the Dead; their Fear and Flight when he was taken;
their Sorrow and Disconsolate Despair of seeing Israel Redeemed by him after he
was Dead, as they trusted before it should; their Amazement and Astonishment,
Terror and Trembling when he appeared to any of them; the Trouble and Distrust
some of them showed upon his discovering himself to them; the suspense of
others from believing by reason of their Joy and Wonder; the difficulty of
believing and hardness of Heart in all of them, and particularly in Thomas,
(who believed not them that had seen him after he was risen) till they were
convinced by the Testimony of their own Senses: All which Passions are
expressed in such a manner, as none but honest sincere Persons, who were
thoroughly persuaded of the truth of things, were capable of expressing.

Several other Circumstances might be alleged, and all of them further
enlarged upon, to confirm the truth of what I have advanced; and the like might
be done in many other Facts besides that of the Resurrection, as may be plainly
seen in the Gospel-account of them; but this single Instance is sufficient to
show that the truth uf the Private Miracles of Christ, is supported by the
Public Circumstances with which they were attended, as well as by the
Characters of the Witnesses that related them.

But the greatest Confirmation of the Truth of all these Private Miracles of
Christ, and the chief Ground upon which the first Christians believed them, was
the Power of working New Miracles, which was so manifestly and remarkably upon
all occasions exercised by the Relatours and Publishers of them. The Public
Miracles of Christ were such, and so well known and attested as made it very
easy to believe he might do the like, or as great, or greater privately, in
the presence of a few: And the public Miracles of the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ, took away all Suspicion of their forging privates ones done by their
Master; that extraordinary Power they were endued with, being reckoned a
certain Argument of the Divine Favor to them, and consequently of their
extraordinary Piety and Holiness, which are Characters utterly inconsistent
with all Falsehood and Lying Pretenses.

But, if notwithstanding this wonderful Power and Appearance of Divine Aid,
they were Persons of a contrary Character, and otherwise assisted; then is it
utterly inconceivable they should be so much concerned to invent and propagate,
and so earnest to persuade all People to believe what only made for the Honor
of another, at the same time they knew it to be false; when they might better
have served their own ends, whatever they were, in concealing it from the
World, if it had been true. For, whatever farther Designs they had, it is
certain they intended to have their own Miracles believed in order to compass
them; and they could not possibly hope to make People believe they worked
M^racles openly and publicly in their presence, by vouching some done by
another, which they themselves only were Witnesses of: The difficulty of
believing these was likelier to lessen than increase the Credibility of their
own, the uncontested certainty of which, was the chief Thing that made the
other believed.

This is sufficient to establish the private Miracles of Christ.

Whatever Miracles are Recorded as done by the first Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, or any other Christian Believers afterward privately in the presence
of a few; the Characters and public Miracles of the Persons that did them,
are, to those who were not Witnesses of them, a sufficient Warrant for the
Truth of their Relation, or of any other Account not contradicted by them: And
those few, who were Witnesses, had a more Sensible Conviction themselves, and
were a further security for the Truth of the Relation of them to others.

What has been said of the Miracles, will hold in like manner of the
Prophecies Recorded in the New Testament; only there is one Thing to be
observed, which is peculiar to Prophecies, and which makes the proof of them
somewhat different from that of Miracles; though, I think, in no respect less,
but in some instances rather greater.

This peculiar Character of Prophecies is, that every Prophecy consists of two
Parts; a Prediction and an Accomplishment, which are commonly at some distance
from one another; from whence it happens, that the same Persons who are
Witnesses of the one, may not be so of the other, which seems to take off
something from the Credibility of the whole Fact, that often depending upon the
Agreement of several Persons, who were at different times Witnesses to several
parts of it: But then, on the other hand, if we consider the Prediction only,
as well Attested and Recorded in Writing before the appointed time of its
Accomplishment, a Prophecy will have this advantage of a Miracle, that more
People may have read the Prediction in Writing than can possibly be Witnesses
of a Miracle at the time when it is done, and consequently, there may be
oftentimes more Witnesses of the Accomplishment of a Prophecy than of the
Performance of a Miracle; forasmuch as things Prophesied of are commonly Events
of such a nature as have a more fixed and continued Existence, and a much wider
compass of Appearance than Miracles have: And besides this, for a Person
acquainted with the Prediction, to be satisfied of the Accomplishment, it is
sufficient to know such an Event is any ways come to pass, without knowing any
thing of the Power by which it was done, or perceiving any thing extraordinary
or unusual in the manner of its happening.

Thus for Example, the Destruction of Jerusalem, and Extirpation of the Jewish
Nation, were Events of a wider and more lasting Congizance than Healing a Sick,
or Raising a Dead Man; and a Person who knew the former were foretold by
reading the Prediction in Writing, might be more easily and certainly satisfied
of the truth of their Accomplishment, than one who was not an actual Spectator
of the other Facts, could be of the truth of them: For to be assured that that
Prediction was fulfilled, and that therefore it was a true Prophecy 'twas
enough to know that Jerusalem was Destroyed, and the Jewish People driven out
of their Country, whatever way this came about; but to know that such a Man was
Well, or such another Alive, or that the one had been Sick, and the other to
all appearance Dead, is not sufficient to convince a Man of the truth of the
Miracle in either case; and a Person who did not see the Manner and
Circumstances in which each of these Facts was done, can receive no assurance
of them afterward, but from the Testimony of others; because there are no
visible Remains and Footsteps of the Miracle left after the Action is over;
whereas, in the other Instance of Prophecy, the Event is constantly the same it
was at first, and equally convincing at all times to every one that will take
the pains to satisfy himself.

And further, if a considerable time intervene between the Prediction and the
Accomplishment, and the Record of the Prediction was very public before the
thing happened, the Persons who live after the Accomplishment, and so were
immediate Witnesses of neither part of the Prophecy, may be more easily and
fully satisfied of the truth of a particular Prophecy, than of a particular
Miracle, they were not Witnesses of themselves; because both the Prediction and
the Accomplishment being Common Facts, considered in themselves, without any
relation to one another, are less liable to suspicion than unusual Events of a
more surprising Nature, and the truth of the latter Fact being often certainly
cognizable at any time of inquiry, there is so much time supposed between this
Accomplishment and the former Prediction, that it is easy to find out whether
that really happened out before this, which is all that is required for the
truth of the whole Prophecy; the extraordinary nature of which arises from the
comparison of both together in order to know the reason of their Connection, and
not from any thing in the Facts themselves severally considered, as it does in
Miracles, where the Facts themselves are wonderful, without any consideration
of the Causes or Occasions of them.

Thus are the first Christian Miracles and Prophecies related and attested:
These are the Grounds and Reasons upon which they were believed; and this is
the sum of all the Evidence that is brought for them; which is capable of
being illustrated and confirmed by a vast variety of particular Observations;
but my intended Method not allowing me to make such Inlargments, I shall
conclude the Proof I was upon with this General Reflection.

From the account that is given in the New Testament of the Miracles and
Prophecies there Recorded, and of the manner of Preaching the Gospel, and
Converting People to the Christian Religion, it plainly appears that the first
and principal Motive upon which any Persons believed in Christ, and embraced
the Doctrine taught by him and his Apostles, was some Miracle they themselves
were actual Witnesses of; for Miracles were then so common every where, that
there was hardly any Christian, even among the Gentile Converts, for above
Threescore Years after the Promulgation of the Gospel by Christ, but was
himself a Witness of some Miracle wrought by others: So that, though they might
be further confirmed in the belief of what was taught them by the Characters of
Christ and his Apostles; the Testimony of Jewish Christians, who, upon the
several Persecutions in Jerusalem and all Judea, were scattered and dispersed
among the Gentiles of all Nations; and the Accomplishment of Prophecies written
in the Books of the Old and New Testament, which they knew to have been written
before the Events happened; yet the first and chief ground of their assent to
the Miracles and Doctrines of the Gospel was some Miraculous Power they had
themselves been Witnesses of.

When therefore we consider the vast number of Converts that were made to
Christianity in the first Age of the Gospel, and consequently the vast
Multitude of seeming Miracles that must have been continually wrought for their
Conversion in all Places, together with the steady and invincible Perseverance
of Christians in the Faith, notwithstanding all the variety of Sufferings they
endured for believing, it is impossible to imagine there should be a whole Age
of Delusion and Deceit; that there should be such a long continued train and
series of mere empty Appearances, without any reality under them; which
produced such real Effects, as remain till this Day; and Effects of such an
extraordinory nature, as in a very short time gave a new turn to the whole
Scheme of Affairs in the most considerable part of the World.

Since therefore all the common Matters of Fact mentioned in the History of the
Gospel, as we find it delivered in the New Testament, are true, as I have
showed before; and consequently, that among the rest, that the Miracles
Recorded in the New Testament were believed, according to the relation there
given of them; it necessarily follows from hence, that there were such Facts as
those, in appearance at least, otherwise there could have been no ground for
believing them in that manner as it is said they were believed; and if there
were all those appearances of something done, I shall take it for granted, for
the reason just before given, that there were so many true real Facts.

And if the Miracles are allowed to be real, the Prophecies must be so too, as
being freer from all suspicion of wrong appearance.

3. The next step I am to make in the proof of the Christian History, is to
show, that what is said in the New Testament concerning Divine Assistance and
Revelation, is true.

Now it is frequently and positively asserted there, not only that such and such
Signs and Wonders were wrought; such Prophecies uttered and fulfilled; and such
Doctrines preached; but that all these things were performed by the immediate
Power and Authority of God: This is every where acknowledged and insisted upon
by Christ and his Apostles, and all that were concerned in the Work and
Ministry of the Gospel. What they constantly affirm of themselves is, that they
were sent from God; that they were authorized and ordained by God to Preach the
Gospel; that they were doing the Work of the Lord; that the Doctrine they
taught and preached came from God; that they had it by Revelation; that God
showed them things to come; that they spoke by the Spirit of God; that the
Power they had was from God; and that God was with them, continually assisting
them and revealing himself to them.

Whether the Matters of Fact were really so as they affirmed, we have no other
ways of knowing but these two, their own Testimony, and the nature of the
things said and done by them.

As to the Testimony of those who declare all these wonderful things of
themselves; their Condition, Character and Sufferings have been considered
already, and found to be such as are a sufficient warrant to secure us from any
fear or suspicion of their designing to impose upon us: But because they do not
require us to believe their own Witness, but bid us examine their Works, and
inquire of their Doctrine, in order to know whether they were of God or not, we
will take the Method they have prescribed us; though I cannot but observe by
the way, that the Appeal they make, and the Directions they give, for a careful
examination of their Pretenses, is a very good Argument of their Sincerity, and
full assurance of the truth of what they pretended to.

But, waving all Observations of this kind, I will confine my self to the
consideration of the nature of the things said and done by Christ and his
Disciples; and show that they were such as neither they themselves who said and
did them, nor those that saw and heard them, nor any body else that is any
other way convinced of the truth of the Appearances, could be deceived in
thinking they proceeded wholly from God.

The Matters to be inquired into, fall under one of these Three Heads, viz.
Miracles, Prophecies, and Doctrines; concerning which we will inquire first
whether the Persons themselves, who appeared to be the immediate Authors of
them, might not be infallibly satisfied, that, whatever of this kind they did
or said was from God alone, and not at all from their own Power or Skill.

This is certainly and undeniably possible, that God may, if he so please,
reveal and discover something to a Man, which he did not know before, and
something, which, without such discovery he could not have known at all, or not
at that time when he first perceived himself to know it. He that made us and
gave us the capacity of Perception and Understanding, may as easily, when and
howsoever he thinks fit, put into our Minds such thoughts as our own Labor and
Industry had not yet, or could not have supplied us with. There needs no
further proof of this to him that believes a God.

And, if God can reveal any thing to Man, it is likewise as certain that that
Man to whom such discovery is made, may be undeceivably convinced that the
Revelation came from God. The same God, who gave him the faculty of difcerning
betwixt Truth and Falsehood in his acquired knowledge, can enable him to
distinguish as certainly betwixt his own Seize and Divine Communications:
He may judge that such a thing was revealed to him by God, with the same
Satisfaction and Acquiescence of Mind, and with the same impossibility of
entertaining a doubt, notwithstanding all his efforts and endeavors to
distrust himself, as he judges any other Proposition is true in which the
connection of the simplest and most known Ideas is irresistibly perceived.

Evidence of Perception is the only Standard of Truth in all Cases: And though
several Men may have been deceived in thinking some things were revealed to
them by God which were not so revealed; this is no more an Argument that a Man
cannot be certain of any Revelation, than it is an Argument for Universal
Skepticism that some Men have been mistaken in what they thought self-evident
Propositions and Demonstrations.

But not to enter further into that dispute, which I shall have occasion to
consider in another place; besides the certainty that a Man may have that God
has revealed himself to him, from immediate consciousness, his Faith may be
confirmed, if any degrees of Evidence can be supposed wanting, by External
Signs and Characters. God may, if he please, give a Man such a strong
conviction of his Power to do such and such wonderful things, that he may be
entirely satisfied, without so much as a desire to make any trial of his
Talent; and he may likewise manifest himself to him in such a manner as leaves
some room for Doubts, but such as must needs yield to further Proofs ordained
by God for the removal of them.

Thus, for Instance, a Man that is strongly persuaded God has given him a Power
of performing such and such extraordinary things, but has some little distrust
of himself lest he should mistake the Delusions of his own Fancy for the
Revelations of God, when, upon trial, he finds that such things are really
performed by his Hands, all his doubts vanish, and he is thoroughly confirmed
that both his Power and former Persuasion were from God.

This in general must be granted, that a Man may take such a certain estimate
of his own Capacities, Powers and Seize, that he may be infallibly sure
that he could not do or know such a thing of himself without some other
Assistance; that he did not know such a thing before such a time; that he did
not know it then by the help of his Antecedent Knowledge; and that he did not
do such a thing by any Power or Force of his own, or by any Skill or Knowledge
of the manner how it was done.

That I cannot now Cure the Sick, nor Raise the Dead, nor Speak the Syriack and
Arabic Tongues, nor tell when the Jews shall be settled in their own Country
again, I am as sure, as it is possible for me to be, that I can think, or speak,
or move: And if I should hereafter Cure the Sick, or Raise the Dead by the word
of my Mouth, if I should speak the Syriack and Arabic Languages, without
reading any Books writ in those Tongues, or hearing them spoke, or should
foretell the exact time of the Restoration of the Jews, I should then be also
fully satisfied and assured that I did not perform such Works, as curing the
Sick, and raising the Dead by any Power or Skill of my own; that I did not
understand such Languages, or know any thing of such an Event before I spoke
the one and foretold the other; and that all the knowledge I had acquired
before that time, was not sufficient to make me understand those Languages, and
that Event, without some further and more extraordinary Assistance, exceeding
all my Power and Knowledge. If I am capable of knowing any thing at all of my
self, I cannot be mistaken in these things; and the same Experience every other
Man is alike capable of.

But supposing Christ (whom I consider now only as a Man) and his Apostles and
Disciples, were all severally satisfied, by a certain consciousness of their
own Power and Knowledge, that the Miracles they performed exceeded their Humane
Power, and the Prophecies and Doctrines they delivered could not be the Results
and Products of their antecedent Knowledge, how could they be assured that God
was the sole Author of them all, and not some other Being of Superior Order to
Men? Why the very same way they were convinced that they themselves were not.

God who made them after such a manner that they could by immediate
consciousness perceive that such a thing did not proceed from themselves, could
enable them in like manner to judge that such a thing did proceed from God
only, and not from any other Being.

It Is true indeed there may be, and we have several reasons to believe there
are other Beings, besides God, of a Superior Nature to Man; who it is probable
may, and do, by some invisible unperceivable way act upon the Mind of Man, as
we are sure Men act upon one another by the means of External sensible Signs;
but, if God so please, we may distinguish as truly and certainly betwixt the
Revelations of God and the Suggestions of other Spirits, as we can betwixt the
thoughts arising within us from our selves, and those raised in us by other Men
upon occasion of External Signs. And though some may have mistaken the
Suggestions of other Spirits for the Voice of God, there is no more reason from
hence for those who have had true Revelations to doubt of the certainty of
them, than there is for me to distrust the evidence of my own Perceptions, when
I judge such Ideas were occasioned in me by the real Voice and Presence of
other Men, because some have imagined they heard such and such Words spoke by
such Persons, when these Ideas came from their own Minds only, without any
External Occasions to execute them.

From all which it necessarily follows, that Christ and his Apostles might be
infallibly convinced that the Signs and Wonders they wrought were done by the
Power of God; that the knowledge of future Events was communicated to them by
God; and that the Doctrines they preached were delivered to them by God: All
this, I say, they might be infallibly convinced of by an immediate
Consciousness, not only of their own Disability to do and say such things of
themselves, without the assistance of some higher Power; but of God's express
Revelation of himself to them in all these Instances.

Which sort of Evidence and Satisfaction, though it reaches no further than the
Persons themselves who pretend to have received any Revelation from God, yet is
it of great use for the Conviction of others, by making way for such Proofs as
are proper to that end, and which will not have any Force at all without it.

For, except it be supposed that Divine Revelation is possible, and that the
Person to whom the Revelation is made may be certain of it, it is in vain to
persuade any Man that he is obliged to believe and do such and such things,
because they were revealed by God: For, if Revelation be impossible, it is
plainly absurd to make that a foundation either of Faith or Obedience; and, if
Revelation be possible; but no Man can be certain when any thing is revealed to
him, and when not; there can be no Arguments found to convince another of the
truth of a Revelation, which the Person that pretends to it cannot be satisfied
of himself.

But, both these things being proved, we are in the next place to examine how
other People can be satisfied that God revealed himself to Christ and his
Apostles.

Now it is plain by the Account before given, that they themselves might be
entirely satisfied by the immediate assurance of their own Minds, that God had
given them a Power of saying and doing such things, and had made such things
actually present to their Minds as could proceed from him only, and from no
other Being: But, except they communicated what was given and revealed to them
by External Signs, it is very plain that the Revelation could not be known to,
or concern any other but themselves; and therefore the only way that others
have of knowing the truth of the Christian Revelation, is from the External
Signs and Appearances by which it was communicated to them from those who first
received it; which, as has been before observed, may be considered under the
style of Miracles, Prophecies, and Doctrines: So that, if it can be proved that
the Miracles, Prophecies, and Doctrines, Recorded in the New Testament, did
proceed from God, this is sufficient to convince us that God has spoken to us
by Christ and his Apostles; and that we are obliged to believe and obey the
Christian Religion, as delivered to us by Divine Revelation and Authority.

The proof I shall give of this great and concerning Point, shall consist of
these three parts.

First, I will endeavor to show, that Christ and his Apostles, considered as
mere Men, unassisted by any higher Power, could not be the Authors of the
Miracles, Prophecies, and Doctrines Recorded in the New Testament.

Secondly, I will make it appear, not only that God might be the Author of
them, but that they have such certain Marks and Characters of Divinity upon
them, that we cannot be mistaken in attributing them to God.

Thirdly, I will prove that it is very improper and absurd to ascribe these
things to Evil Spirits.

First, Then I am to show, that Christ and his Apostles, could not by any
Humane Skill or Power be the Authors of those wonderful things said and done by
their Ministry.

It Is said of Christ, that he spoke as never Man spoke; and he says of himself,
that he did those things among the Jews that Man never did; which he uses as an
Argument to prove their unbelief in him inexcusable: The plain meaning of both
which Phrases here is, not only that no Man could of himself speak like Christ,
or perform such things as he did, but that no Man had ever spoke like him, or
done what he did, however assisted by any other Power. This appears from
several other Passages in the New Testament, and particularly from Christ's own
Argument against the Jews: For he knew that they believed in Moses and the
Prophets, and were persuaded of the truth of all the Miracles Recorded in the
Old Testament; and therefore he did not think it sufficient for them to believe
in him for the sake of his Works, though he had done what no Man, without
Divine Assistance, was able to do, if he had not also done greater things than
Moses, or any other Person Divinely assisted, had done before. So much was
necessary to convince the Jews, and supersede a former Revelation; but for the
truth of Revelation in general, both Christ and his Apostles seem to make this
the only Test, that what they said and did exceeded the Power and Wisdom of
Men; from whence they immediately concluded that therefore it was from God. If
this then be the Standard we are to judge of Revelation by, 'twill be easily
made out that neither the Miracles, Prophecies, nor Doctrines of the New
Testament, could be from Men, and therefore that they came from God who
assisted and revealed himself to those Men that appeared to be the Authors of
them.

It has been observed already that a Man may take such a certain estimate of
his own Capacities and Powers, and of his Present stock of Knowledge, as to be
infallibly sure that he cannot do or know such and such things, either at all,
or not after such a manner. And, if we know any thing certain of the nature of
Man in general, we may confidently affirm that we are made and fashioned with
such resemblance to one another, that, notwithstanding the great variety and
disproportion of Faculties and Seize observable among us, a Man may be
able, by what he knows of himself, so far to determine the Limits of Humane
Force and Skill, as to be firmly assured such and such things cannot possibly
lie within the reach and comprehension of mere Man, unassisted by any other
Being.

Thus for Example, to use the former Instances, we are fully and entirely
assured that no Man whatsoever, barely by his own Power, without the Assistance
or Application of any other Being, can Cure the Sick, or Raise the Dead, or
Speak a Language he knew nothing of just before he spoke it, or foretell such
Events as that of the Restoration of the Jews.

We may likewise be as fully sure that Persons of such an Education and Course
of (...) could not possibly, of themselves, by the force of their own
Capacities and Acquisitions, conceive, speak, write or do such and such things,
in such a particular way and manner as we can suppose, or may actually find.

Whoever therefore believes the Miracles, Prophe^^s and Doctrines of Christ,
and his Apostles, according to the History given of them in the New Testament,
must have this assurance, that if these Matters of Fact were so as they are
there delivered, it is impossible that those Men should be the Authors of them,
as I shall show more particularly by considering them apart.

To begin with Prophecies, which have been always reckoned the most
unexceptionable Testimonies of an Intelligence exceeding Humane Knowledge: If
the Books of the Old Testament were writ long before Christ came into the
World; and all those Passages out of them, which we find applied to Christ, and
the Dispensation of the Gospel in the New Testament, (...) a designed relation
to those Events they are there applied to; it is impossible to imagine that
either the Prediction or Accomplishment of them was the effect of mere Humane
Knowledge and Power.

Such a multitude and variety of surprising Events, never before heard of in
the World, that had no manner of perceivable connection with the state of things
when they were foretold, nor indeed at any other time before they happened,
could not, by any force of Humane Wisdom, be so particularly and
circumstantially foreknown.

Neither can it be supposed that Christ made all those Relations in the Old
Testament pass for Prophecies by an Arbitrary Application of them to such
Events, as were in his own Power to bring about in such a manner, as he thought
would bear the nearest resemblance to those accounts of things he found already
written; for 'twas manifestly impossible for Christ to order and contrive the
time, place and manner of his Birth, and all the other Circumstances which
attended his coming into the World; and yet these things are as particularly
and remarkably expressed in the Writings of the Old Testament, as any other
matters whatsoever applied by Christ to himself; and as certainly believed by
the Jews to belong to the Messiah, before the Pretensions of Jesus Christ were
heard of, as any other Prophecies that were ever thought by them to concern him.

If the Prophecies cited out of the Scriptures of the Jews relating to the
Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, the Mission of the Holy Spirit,
Propagation of the Gospel, Rejection of the Jews, and Destruction of Jerusalem,
and the success and continuance of the Christian Religion among the Gentiles
were allowed by the Jews of that time to belong to the Messiah, when Christ
applied them to himself, then are they certain Arguments of a knowledge in the
Prophets who uttered them exceeding all Humane Sagacity and Foresight: But if
none of the Jews understood them in that sense, or would grant the Passages
referred to, to be Prophetical of any thing, then must the Application of them
to such and such future Events by Christ be reckoned as new distinct
Prophecies, uttered first by himself, and so they will be equal proofs of an
extraordinary and more than Humane Knowledge in Christ; because the Events
foretold were such as 'twas plainly impossible for Man to foresee or accomplish
by his own Power.

For, not to mention the vast unlikelihood there was, according to all Humane
Measures of Judging, that Jerusalem should be utterly destroyed, and the whole
Nation of the Jews rooted out, so soon after the time it was foretold this
should happen, and in that very manner in which the whole Fact stood described;
not to insist upon all the amazing Difficulties that might be urged against the
success of the Gospel, which rendered it, in all Humane Appearance, a thing
impracticable that Christian Religion should so mightily and suddenly prevail
and spread by such means and instruments as is foretold it should be propagated
by: Waving, I say, all Reflections of this nature that might be made, which are
a great many, this must certainly be granted, that 'twas utterly impossible for
Christ by any Humane Skill or Wisdom to know that he should rise again, and
ascend into Heaven, and that afterward his Apostles should receive such
Knowledge, Courage and Power, as to Preach his Gospel boldly, endure
Afflictions patiently, confirm their Doctrine by many Signs and Wonders, and
Convert great Multitudes to the Christian Faith. And if it was impossible for
him of himself to know all these things, it must be accounted much more
impossible for him to effect and accomplish them by his own Power.

But, if it be said that all these great and wonderful Events were really
foretold in the Old Testament, though so darkly and obscurely expressed, that no
Man, before Christ, understood the method and way of applying them right,
whence had he the Art and Skill of Interpretation? This is as great a Mark and
Character of an extraordinary and more than Humane Wisdom, as Prophesying it
self would be: But then, besides this wonderful Skill of Interpreting, he must
be allowed the Talent of Prophesying too, by reason of several new
Circumstances and Particulars relating to those great Events, which are plainly
and expressly mentioned by Christ, and cannot be deduced from any Passages of
the Old Testament; as will easily appear upon a Comparison of the several
Predictions of Christ, and the ancient Prophecies of the same Events referred
to by him: Which Particulars foretold by Christ himself, and others afterward
by some of his Disciples and Believers are most of them such as could not be
foreseen by any Labor, Art, or Force of Humane Understanding; because they are
such Matters of Fact as before they did actually happen, no Man, without an
overruling Conviction could possibly persuade himself to believe would ever
happen at all, much less to expect that others should believe they would upon
his Testimony.

From hence it evidently appears that most of the Prophecies Recorded in the
Old and New Testament relating to Christ, and his Gospel must be the results of
some Higher Knowledge than that of Man, because they are such as cannot
possibly be accounted mere lucky Conjectures, nor skilful Prognostics grounded
upon the necessary connection and dependence of Natural Causes and Effects;
which are all the ways of foretelling things that Men are capable of.

It Is true indeed some general common Events, may sometimes by a luckly turn of
imagination be foretold; such as Life or Death, Peace or War, Prosperity or
Adversity, and the like; and therefore had Christ spoke no other Prophecies but
such as these that Peter should be Crucified, and John should out live the rest
of the Apostles; there might have been some ground to think them casual
conjectural Predictions; though a great many true Predictions even of this
nature, without one mistaken guess, could not with any color of reason or
probability have been attributed to chance.

Several other Events likewise there are, which by a skill in this or that part
of Knowledge, and by an immediate information concerning several antecedent
Circumstances may be foretold: Thus does an Astronomer foretell an Eclipse, a
Physician the Death of some particular Person, a Politician a National Calamity
or Advantage; and thus does a Wise Man understand how such a Person, whose
Temper and Principles he is well acquainted with, will behave himself upon such
an occasion; and many other the like Instances might be given. But the
Prophecies of Christ and other Ancient Prophets before him concerning the whole
Dispensation of the Gospel could not possibly be mere Guesses and Conjectures;
because the things foretold were, most of them, such as the Persons who
foretold them had never seen or heard of any Instances of before, and so could
have nothing to lead or determine their thoughts that way: And if the Ideas of
such Facts could be supposed to have entered their Minds, they could not have
positively and confidently affirmed that those Facts would really happen,
without thinking it probable that they might so happen; and it is impossible
that any Men in their senses should look upon such Events as probable, which
they had had no manner of experience of before, without a deep insight into the
nature and reasons of things, by which they were enabled to see such a train
and connection of Causes as would very likely produce such Effects.

But this cannot be pretended in the case before us, for several reasons.

For first of all our Knowledge of Nature and the Causes of things, is so very
scanty and imperfect, that hardly any thing was ever foreknown by Man without
an antecedent experience of something of the same kind or nature that had
already happened: Some Eclipses were observed before any were foretold, such a
complexion of Symptoms had actually proved fatal before it was known to be a
certain cause or sign of approaching Death, and the like will hold in all other
Instances of Humane Prediction, by virtue of any natural or acquired Knowledge.

Besides, in none of these cases can any particular Event be foreseen by the
most certain comprehension of all the Causes producing it, without a true and
particular information concerning the punctual and determinate Existence of
those Causes, and all the Circumstances requisite to make their Influence
effectual. If a Man be never so well acquainted with the Motions and
Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, he cannot tell that an Eclipse will happen
at such a time without knowing the particular position of the Bodies
contributing to an Eclipse at that time; nor can a Physician, by all his skill
in the frame and structure of Humane Bodies foretell that such a particular Man,
whose Constitution and Circumstances of Health he knows nothing of, shall at
such a determinate time dye or recover of such a Disease.

But, supposing a Man knew the whole Economy of the Corporeal World, was
acquainted with all the Laws of Motion, and saw the necessary dependence of all
the Parts of Matter upon one another, he could not be enabled from hence to
foretell such things which depended upon the free Resolutions and Determinations
of Intellectual Beings; nor is it possible for us, by what we know of the
Temper and Dispositions of all the Persons we converse with, to foretell what
Men will Live, and what particular Actions will be done by them at a great
distance from us. The connection of all Humane Actions is nor discoverable from
the clearest view we can have of Humane Nature, and all the Principles and
Motives Men act upon.

Now for all these reasons, it is impossible that those great and wonderful
Events foretold by Christ and the Ancient Prophets, which we find mentioned in
the New Testament, could be foretold by any Humane Skill or Learning, the same
way that we have seen other natural Truths Predicted.

For several of them, it is plain, were such as the Prophets had never seen or
heard of any Instances of before: As for Example, that a Person should come
down from Heaven to save Mankind from their Sins; that a Virgin should conceive
and bear a Son, etc. And indeed all those Facts we call ^^raculous, may be
referred to this Head; (...) though some of the same, or alike kind were known to
have happened before, yet the Prophets, who knew and believed them, looked upon
them as exceeding all Humane Power and Cognizance, and therefore could not
foresee the like by any ordinary Natural way of Knowledge, because they had
never had any Experience of such things happening according to the ordinary
course of Things.

Several of the Matters prophesied of, if they had depended upon certain
necessary Causes, and that dependence had been very well known to the Prophets,
yet they could not have been foretold by them, for want of knowing some
particular Circumstances, which must concur to their Existence: Thus, for
instance, supposing a Man was able, by his extraordinary Skill in Nature, to
explain how a Virgin might conceive, or the Dead rise, the Lame be made to
walk, and the Sick be cured; he could not by the means of this Knowlede,
foretell that, at such a certain time hereafter, such Facts as these should
happen, because he could not understand when there the State and Disposition of
Things, at that time, would certainly be such that those Facts must ensue.

But these Reasons chiefly concern corporeal Agents: Whereas, besides the
difficulties arising from hence, all the Prophecies we are concerned to defend
could not be fulfilled, without the concurrence of an infinite variety of
Humane Actions, which were not the Results of irresistible Motives when they
were done; nor was the Application of any Motives for the doing of them, nor
even the Existence of the Persons that did them, necessary.

That such a Person as Christ should at such a Time and Place be Born, depended
upon Ten Thousand Millions of the most contingent Determinations Humane Nature
was ever sensible of; which must all happen in sucha manner, betwixt the time
of the Prophesy and the Completion, or else the Event had never been: And the
like might be shown in all the other Christian Facts, and Events, prophesied of.

All which is abundantly sufficient to prove, that the Prophecies mentioned in
the New Testament, were not conceived and uttered by mere Men, without the
assistance of some other Being, of greater Knowledge and Wisdom.

And the same likewise may easily be made out of the Miracles there Recorded;
that they were such Works as Man alone, by his own Power could not perform.

For some of them were such, that the Persons who did them had never seen or
heard of before; as casting out of Devils, speaking unknown Tongues, etc. How
came it then into their Minds to think of them? And when they did think of
them, how had they the Confidence to believe they could do them, and venture
upon a trial?

Most of those they had heard of before, were by them themselves believed to
surpass Humane Skill, and to have been done by a Higher Power; and therefore
they could have no Inducement, or Encouragement from thence, to try their own
Abilities upon them; nay, further, any endeavors of this kind were utterly
inconsistent with such a Belief as is here supposed.

The Skill or Art of doing any of them, in a natural way, was never pretended
to before, and was never known to any other Persons; Whence therefore had these
Men their great unheard of Skill? Raising the Dead, Curing all manner of
Diseases, and several other things Recorded to have been done by Christ and his
Apostles, have always been looked upon as impossible to be effected by any
Humane Art, or Application of the Powers and Virtues of Bodies to one another:
And, not to mention those other Miracles of Christ, and his Apostles, which
seem more above Humane Power, it cannot be supposed, but among those vast
promiscuous Multitudes of Blind, Lame, Sick and Maimed, that were cured by
them, there must have been some, such as were then, and always before, and
would be now, accounted Incurable by the help of any known Remedies.

But, allowing that the secret force of Nature is very great; that the Powers
of Natural Bodies, and their Operations upon one another, are very strange and
wonderful; and that we cannot conclude such or such Effects are impossible,
because we have never seen the like before; that there may be Medicines
proportioned to every Disease; and that there may be an Universal Remedy for
all found out, as several Learned Men have imagined: Allowing, I say, all this;
and supposing further, that Christ and his Disciples were acquainted with all
these mighty Secrets; yet, if the History of the Gospel be true, as we have
proved before it is; the wonderful Cures they did, could not be brought about
in a natural way, such as is here intimated; because it is plain, by the account
we have of these Matters, that they never made use of any manner of
Applications of other Bodies to the Persons Cured by them; (excepting one in
the case of a Blind Man) and, if they had, whatever the Medicines were which
they used, no body could have been Cured by them, in the manner Persons are
said to be Cured in the New Testament.

The first is plain from all the several Relations there given of the Cures
that were done; it being every where almost positively affirmed that Persons
were Cured by Christ and his Disciples immediately; most of them upon their
speaking the Word, without any kind of operation or process, some of them by a
Touch of their Garment, and some by their Shadow passing over them. And however
ignorant we may be in the Nature of Bodies, we comprehend the whole Force and
Power, and all the possible Virtues of a Word, a Tonch of a Garment, and a
Humane Shadow.

But, if the most powerful Medicines the World affords had been applied, it is
demonstrable from the Nature and Laws of Motion, and the constant Manner of
Operation, observed in all other Natural Works, that the Cures performed by
Christ and his Disciples, could not have been wrought in an instant, nor in any
short time without such violent Agitations in the Bodies Cured as would have
appeared in strange External Marks; which must have been taken notice of by all
the Beholders, and consequently some of them would have been mentioned in the
Accounts that were written of the Facts; whereas we find no such things in all
the History of the New Testament; unless perhaps one Case of a Blind Man be
thought an Objection to what is here advanced: But this Instance, which is made
use of by some to prove that this, and all other Miracles were brought about
the same way, by the Application of proper means, is a very good Argument to
the contrary; for besides, that the means here used had no particular fitness
in them for the End designed above any other whatsoever, this was the slowest
Cure we read of, and took up the longest time in doing.

And, if these Observations hold true, as to the Cures wrought by Christ and
his Disciples, they are of much greater weight, with respect to several other
of the Miracles done by them. If the Sick could not be Cured by a Word's
speaking without the use of Remedies, How could the Dead be Raised without any
other Application? If no Application could Cure the Sick in an instant, what
Force or Power of Natural Bodies could Raise the Dead immediately? And to what
secret Workings of Nature can we ascribe the power of speaking several
Languages, which the Speakers were utterly ignorant o^, immediately before they
spoke them.

Neither is it to any purpose to urge, that the Relation of all these Miracles
in the New Testament is impersect, and several Circumstances omitted; which, if
they had been Recorded, would have enabled us to explain how the Facts might
have been brought to pass in a Natural, ordenary Way: For, if that Account we
have of them, or those Circumstances that are mentioned are true, it is
impossible, by the addition of any other Circumstances whatsoever, to make the
Events appear such as might be compassed by Human Power.

If several Persons, who were unknown to Christ, and whose Constitution and
Case he had no antecedent knowledge of, were Cured by him, immediately upon his
first view of them, as soon as he had spoke the Word, as it is plain they were
from abundance of Instances in the Gospel's; if Lazarus came out of the Grave
immediately upon Christ's calling of him; if the Centurion's Servant was healed
the self same hour Christ spoke that it should be done, without his going to
the House where he lay; and if the Apostles were enabled to speak several
Languages, which, the Day before they spoke them they knew nothing of; which
things are all positively asserted in the New Testament, let us imagine what
other Circumstances we please, and suppose Christ and his Apostles, endued with
all the Knowledge and Power that any Man ever was, or could be Master of, it is
impossible to give such an account of these Matters, consistent with that
Relation we have of them in the New Testament, as can satisfy any Man they
were Effected by Humane Skill and Power; as does evidently appear from the
Reflections before laid down.

But, if it be further Objected, notwithstanding the Evidence before given,
which plainly proves the contrary, that all these things we call Miracles would
have happened according to the Established Course of Nature, at the time, and
in the manner they did happen, whether Christ and his Apostles had used such
previous Signs as made them appear to be the Authors of them or not; and so all
the Facts are to be ascribed to other natural Causes, though they could not be
Effected by Man; if this, I say, should be urged, and the supposition allowed,
then must all the Miracles, with respect to the pretended Authors of them, be
resolved into Prophecies, and that will amount to the same thing: For the
foretelling all those wonderful Events Recorded in the New Testament, as done
by Christ and his Disciples, will plainly appear, by what has been already said
upon the Subject of Prophecies, to be as much above the Power and Skill of Man
as the doing of them would be.

The vast number of Miracles done, the multitude of Persons concerned in them,
the public Manner of doing them, and the Times and Places in which they were
done, take off all imaginable suspicion of Confederacy, if the Natures of the
Facts would have admitted it, as it is certain they would not; and therefore I
shall not suppose that Objection, and nothing more can possibly be urged.

And as the Miracles and Prophecies, which concern the Christian Dispensation,
did certainly proceed from some Higher Power and Knowledge than that of Men; so
likewise did the Gospel it self; by which I mean that whole Scheme of Doctrine
delivered by Christ and his Apostles, as we find it contained in the Books of
the New Testament.

It Is allowed on all Hands, that there never was so Just and Noble a Draught of
Morality as the Christian; so full and consistent a Scheme of Humane Duty; laid
down in so plain and simple a Manner, without any Art or Ostentation; and
pressed upon Mankind with so much Earnestness and Authority; without any
visible Interest or Advantage of the Preachers and Writers; and without any
Worldly Dignity or Title that made them Superior to the lowest of those they
Preached and Writ to.

It must be likewise confessed that the Grounds and Reasons upon which the
Practice of this Morality is enforced, by the Preachers of it, are very New and
Surprising; that the things they require Men to believe, in order to render
their Practice of the Duties enjoined them effectual, are very shocking and
repugnant to the common Opinions and Prejudices of Mankind, but especially
those of that time in which they were first Published; and that the very
Language and Forms of Expression, in which the great Articles of the Christian
Faith are delivered in the Scriptures, are very different from whatever we find
used upon any other Occasion.

Now, these Things being granted, I cannot possibly conceive how any Man should
at once invent such a System of Morality as the Christian, so very different
from all others known before, and so contrary to all the Passions and reputed
Interests of Men; nor how he should take upon him to enjoin several Duties as
necessary, whichnone of the Learned in these Matters had judged so before; as
bearing and forgiving Injuries, doing Good for Evil, and the like; should
possitively affirm some Things as certain, which were doubted of till then, as
the Resurrection of the Body, and a future state of Happiness and Misery, etc.
should command every thing he said to be believed, or done, under the severest
Penalties imaginable; and all this barely upon his own Word and Authority,
without consulting any other Principles, or Rules of Action, which had before
obtained, or giving any Reasons to prove his own, were better, and therefore
ought to be submitted to.

But, if any Man can be supposed to have invented all the Christian Morality
himself; what force of Imagination, what turn or agitation of Thoughts, could
have helped him to conceive that Set of Notions which make up the whole
Christian Faith, in the way and manner they are joined together in the New
Testament? If they had entered into his Mind, what Reason or Motives could he
have to believe them? And, had he believed them himself, how could he expect to
make others assent to the truth of them? How could he imagine that these
Opinions would recommend his Morality to the World? Why should he think himself
obliged to propagate them; to insist upon them as necessary; to make the danger
of disbelieving them as great, as neglecting the Duties of his Morality; and
yet give no other Reason to the World for what he said, but his bare Saying it?

Besides, were all these Christian Doctrines, relating both to Faith and
Practice, found out by mere Humane Sagacity; it is extremely difficult to
imagine, that neither the Contrivers, nor Publishers of them, should any where
in their Preaching or Writing, arrogate any Thing to themselves upon this
account; but should constantly renounce the Honor of the Discovery, and never
betray any design of procuring to themselves Esteem, or any other Advantage of
Life whatsoever, for obliging Mankind with so beneficial a Scheme of Things as
the Gospel proposes.

And, to carry this Point yet farther; If it be so very hard to imagine how any
Person whatsoever should frame such Notions and Opinions to themselves, and
afterward act upon such Motives, and observe such a Conduct in the Publication
of them; it is much more inconceivable how ignorant and unlearned Men, of very
low Education, and constantly employed in mean Affairs, should do all this: And
it is particularly unaccountable how Jews should give such a Character and
Representation of their Messiah, and his Office and Business in the World, so
directly contrary to all the Opinions and Expectations of that whole People;
and upon that account so very unlikely to be entertained or credited.

It Is moreover impossible to conceive how so many Men, as were concerned in the
Preaching and Propagating Christianity in several parts of the World, at the
same time, should, before any thing was committed to Writing, all agree upon
the same Set of Doctrines, use the same open, sincere, unartful Method of
delivering them, and the same bold, authoritative way of enforcing them; and
should all show the same Courage and Resolution in maintaining the Truth of
what they Preached, and in bearing all manner of Losses and Afflictions for the
sake of that Testimony: This, I say, is not to be conceived or accounted for,
if they were not assisted by continual Revelations, and constant supplies of
Spiritual Strength and Force, which proceeded from some more powerful and
knowing Being than Man.

That they were all firmly persuaded they were thus assisted, is the least that
can possibly be supposed; and how the invention of the whole Christian Scheme,
and the conduct of those that Published and Preached it to the World, and
Suffered for it, can be ascribed to Resvery and Enthusiasm (which must be the
Case, if that Persuasion was ill grounded) is much more unintelligible; since,
as has been proved before, these Effects are such as exceed the most improved
Force, and most accomplished Wisdom of Man.

It Is certain then, from all that has been said, that the Miracles, Prophecies
and Doctrines, contained in the New Testament could not be the Work and
Contrivance of mere Man.

In the next place therefore, I am to prove that God was the Author of them all.

That God might, if he pleased, Reveal such Things to Men, by secret Impression
upon their Minds, as they did not know before, and could not have found out of
themselves, has been proved already; and therefore all the Prophecies mentioned
in the New Testament; all the Doctrines which peculiarly concern Christianity;
the consciousness that Christ and his Apostles had, that they could do such
Miracles as are Recorded of them; or a firm Persuasion that they would be done,
upon their use of such external Signs; and several of the Miracles themselves,
such as telling the private Thoughts and Actions of Men, speaking strange
Languages, and the like, may all be accounted for this way.

And whoever believes a God, must likewise grant, that 'twas possible for him
to effect all the other Miracles, either by an original Designation of such a
chain and connection of Events, or by an immediate interposition of his Power.

That it was not only possible, but very likely and probable, that God should
reveal himself to Mankind in this manner, appears from the common Opinion of
Men in all Ages, that he had revealed something to the World, and their common
Expectation that he would manifest his Will to them in further Discoveries.

In all the Accounts of past Things we have left us, we find that every where
what was Great or Good, was always ascribed to some Divine Power. Not to
mention the Jews, whose Opinions in this respect, are sufficiently known and
allowed; if any thing useful or beneficial to Mankind, was invented among the
Heathens, the Gods had the Praise and Honor of the Discovery; if by Dreams or
waking Suggestions, Men were put in mind of procuring themselves some
Advantage, or avoiding some Evil, the Gods were thanked for it; many also were
the absurd and the superstitious Opinions of the People, concerning the way and
manner of the Gods discovering Things to them, by the means of external Signs;
but this they were all most constantly and unanimously satisfied of, That their
Religion came immediately from Heaven; and what we call Prophecies and Miracles
were always esteemed proper Marks and Characters of Divine Power; especially if
they any ways contributed to the happiness and welfare of Mankind.

This has been the constant Faith of the World at all Times; and so far as it
concerns Divine Revelation in general, and the ways of conveying and confirming
it by inward impressions upon the Mind, and by Prophecies and Miracles, I
think, is very well grounded. For, first, That there has been such a Thing as
Revelation in the World; and that there have been true Prophecies uttered, and
true Miracles wrought to confirm it, seems to me very plain. For, not to insist
upon that common, but very true Observation, that all Pretenses of this nature
must be founded upon Realities, and that therefore it cannot be conceived how
Revelations, Prophecies or Miracles should ever have been pretended to or
believed, if there never had been any true ones of each kind; omitting, I say,
this Reflection, it appears very unaccountable to me, upon a supposition that
there never was any Revelation, how there could be any such Thing as Religion,
Civil Government, or Learning in the World.

Learning certainly depends upon Government: When Men are not united together
in Society, and live securely under good Laws and Defenses, no Improvements of
Knowledge are to be expected; and I do not see how such a Union should be made
without a good share of Religious Notions; nor how a loose divided Herd of Men,
such as we must now suppose, living in a State of Want and Ignorance, who are
wholly employed in providing themselves Necessaries, and securing what they
have from others, and consequently who have but few Ideas, and no leisure or
curiosity to get more; how, I say, such Men as these should be furnished with
any Notions of Religion, or how they should be able to form a Regular
Government and Constitution without, I cannot possibly imagine.

The present State of the Americans is an instance which confirms me in the
Opinion I have laid down; for, I cannot help believing, that if this People
should always continue divided from the rest of the World, and have no Commerce
with other Men, nor any Revelation from God, they would constantly, as long as
the World should endure, remain in the same stupid ignorant Condition we now
find them in; or, if possible, worse, without any further improvement in
Religion, Policy or Learning.

This seems to me much more probable than that any Polite, Learned, and
well-governed Nation, which once lived under the Advantages of Wise Laws and a
Rational Religion, should in some few Ages become as Rude, Barbarous, and
Ignorant as the present Americans; and yet this has been almost the Fate of
many a Country, and would have been quite, if they had been deprived of the
Assistance of better, and more enlightened Neighbors, as the poor Americans
were.

And in general, from many Observations it is evident, That Men are naturally so
apt to degenerate, and fall into a State of Ignorance, Confusion, and Wildness,
even till they become like the Beasts that perish, that all remains of natural
Religion, seem purely owing to Tradition, and not to Study and Search; and if
so, that Tradition must have had its Original from Revelation, the former set
of Men being as unlikely to find out and cultivate Religion of themselves, as
the present.

So much is visibly owing to Revelation, That, had it not been for the Jewish
and Christian Pretenses, there had hardly been now any such Thing as Religion
in the World, if we may judge what would have been in other Places, by what we
find actually is in those Countries where the Jewish and Christian Revelation
were ever heard of, or are now forgot. Nay, those obscure Notices of Religion
we find among the Ancient and Modern Pagans, are, most of them, plainly derived
from something contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

And, as from these Observations concerning the general Opinion of Mankind
about Revelation, and the different State and Condition of Humane Affairs where
Revelation is supposed, and where none is pretended to, it appears very
probable, that there has been such a thing in the World; so likewise does it
seem very agreeable to the best and purest Notions our most improved Reason is
now able to form concerning God, and our selves, and the Obligations we owe to
him that God should reveal himself to us.

We cannot but think, however we came first by these Opinions, that it is highly
suitable to the Nature of God, to give Men true Notions concerning himself; to
acquaint them how and in what manner they ought to Obey and Worship him; and to
direct them in the Knowledge, and assist them in the Attainment of their
Happiness.

We are very sensible of our own Ignorance, Misery, and Impotence: We cannot by
any Arguments of Reason find out how, or when we were made; what should be the
occasion of that contrariety of Principles and Inclinations we experience
within us; why we should act contrary to what we our selves think our selves
obliged to act, and be more disposed so to act, than otherwise; why we should
be determined to pursue Hapness, and yet be Miserable; why the enjoyment of
several Pleasures we are inclined to, should be often attended with greater
degrees of Pain; and acting as our Reason approves and prescribes, should be
oftentimes as prejudicial to our present Happiness; why we should look upon it
as our Duty to serve God, and yet in several Instances, endure more Trouble and
Misery upon that account, than those who live in defiance of Religion; these
are Things our Reason is puzzled to explain to us: And, if there should be a
future State after this Life, as we have very good grounds to believe there is,
how can we be sure our Religion or Piety was acceptable to God? And, supposing
our service was proper so far as it went, what assurance can we have, that the
many constant violations of our Duty which our own Consciences accuse us of,
may not render our small Service ineffectual? Besides, the Bounds and Limits of
our Conduct and Behavior, with regard to our selves, and one another, must be
very uncertain and precarious, when we have no other Guide but our unassisted
Reason; and no Man is obliged to submit to any other Judgment but his own; for
in this Case, every Man, according to the difference of his Passions,
Prejudices and Interests, must have a different Standard to regulate his
Actions by.

These are Things we are all sensible of now, and which, without allowing
Revelation, we are not able to account for, or satisfy our selves about,
notwithstanding all the improvements of Rational Knowledge we at present enjoy:
And the expediency of being rightly informed in all these Matters, is esteemed
so great, that it is urged by some, as an Argument against the Truth of the
Jewish and Christian Revelation, that they have not been Universal enough; it
being looked upon by the Objectors, as a Thing inconsistent with the Goodness
of God, to suffer so great a part of the World, in all Ages, to live in a State
of gross Ignorance, Barbarity and Disorder, as Ancient History and Modern
Experience inform us of.

Since therefore we cannot but be satisfied from Reflections upon our own
Nature improved, and from Observations upon the wretched State of a large part
of Mankind who live in Ignorance, that the Difficulties which concern the
Knowledge of Religion, are very great, that the Effects and Consequences of the
want of Religion, are very Dismal and Calamitous; and that Men in such a State
of Ignorance, as we find some whole Countries are, would very probably, never,
by any force of their own Faculties, without foreign Helps and Assistances,
reach to that Knowledge of Natural Religion, that some Nations of the present
Age are arrived to, which is manifestly owing to those Books they have among
them, and which they look upon as communicated to them from God: Since we are
further convinced, that Persons in such a State of Ignorance, as we now
suppose, if they should be allowed to make some advances in the Knowledge of
Natural Religion, could not, by mere Reason, without Revelation, proceed so
far, as upon good grounds, to be fully assured of the Truth and Obligation of
what they knew, and the Advantages or Dangers that attended their Performance,
or Transgression of the Rules they laid down; that they would never be able to
explain any of the Difficulties before mentioned; and that, in a short Time, by
the overruling prevalence of present Pleasures and Passions, working
differently in different Men, they would relapse into their former State again:
Upon all these Accounts, it seems very expedient, that God should give Men a
true and perfect Scheme of Religion, agreeable to the Reason, and fitted to all
the Wants and Exigencies of Mankind.

However, I dare not venture to argue that, because it appears so very
expedient for us, and so suitable to the Nature of God, that there should be
some Revelation made to the World; therefore God has actually done it, because
I cannot comprehend all the particular Reasons and Ends of God's acting with
regard to Men here; nor what allowance he will be pleased to make in his Future
Judgment upon them, in order to an other State: But, if there be a Revelation
pretended to, and I find, upon a strict Examination of it, that it has all the
Marks and Characters of such a Revelation, as our Reason tells us Men wanted,
and was very proper and becoming God to give, and such a one, as has been
proved before, Man himself could not be the Author of, I must be convinced from
hence that it came from God. And such a Revelation as this is the Christian.

There we find a very just and rational Account of the Nature and Attributes of
God, of the Original Formation of the World, and particularly the Creation of
Man, the change and alteration of his first Condition, and the unhappy
Consequences of it; from thence we are enabled to explain these contrary
Tendencies and Principles of Action we experience in our selves, that unequal
Composition of Perfections and Weaknesses, Capacities and Wants we are sensible
of, the Ignorance of which makes Man the most unaccountable part of the whole
Universe; There we are acquainted with the most proper suitable way of
Worshipping and Serving God; There we have the truest draught of Morality, the
best and most exalted Scheme of all the Duties which concern the Government of
our selves, and our Behavior to one another; By this Revelation we are
assured, that the observance of Religious Duties in such a manner will be
acceptable to God; all our Doubts about the Imperfections of our Obedience are
removed, and our Consciences entirely satisfied, a way being there showed us
how our Piety and Virtue may be rendered well pleasing to God, notwithstanding
the many failings they are accompanied with, the Wisdom and Kindness of which
Expedient we cannot but acknowledge and admire; The same Revelation does
likewise fix and ascertain our Belief of a Future State, and proposes such
Rewards and Punishments in another World as are proper and sufficient Motives
to determine us to the Practice of Religion in this, and gives us a
satisfactory Explication of all the present Inequalities of Providence in the
conduct of Humane Affairs.

This is certainly a very rational Scheme of things, and very agreeable to all
the Notions our Souls are able to frame of God; and therefore since it could
not proceed from Man, as has already been shown, we must ascribe it to God.

But moreover, besides the nature of the Things revealed, the Ways and Methods
made use of to Communicate them to the World, and to Establish and Propagate
the Belief of them among Men, are Infallible Marks that the Revelation came
from God. His Power and Wisdom are as Legible in this whole Dispensation, as in
the Frame and Structure of the Universe, as will easily appear from a short
view of the Progress and Conduct of this great Work of the Salvation of Man.

For, except the Hand of the Lord was in it, how came the Jews to have better
and juster Notions of God, the Original of the World, and the Nature of Man
than any other Nation under Heaven, when they had no manner of Learning among
them, no gradual Improvements in Knowledge as we find other Countries had? How
came the whole People to have these Notions as well as the chief and most
knowing among them? In all the Periods of Learning among the Egyptians,
Chaldeans, Greeks and Romans, the People were generally Idolaters, and the
Priests and Philosophers durst not propagate better Notions of God when they
had found them out, though even their best had a ridiculous mixture of Fable and
Superstition in them, How then came the People of the Jews to remain entirely
free from Idolatry for so many Years, ever since they became a Nation? Or, if
we believe their own Story, and they were as inclinable to Worship Idols, and
embrace absurd Opinions of God and Religion as any other Nation, How came they
to recover themselves again, and preserve the true Worship of God among them?
And how at last, when they were so wedded to the external form and manner of
Worshipping the true God as to place all their Religion in it, to the neglect
of Moral Duties, at a time when there was no other sort of Learning among them,
how I say, came a perfecter Scheme of Morality and Religion to proceed from
thence than from any other Quarter of the World; and such a Scheme as no body
that professed it durst think of altering, adding to, or diminishing, when no
such respect was paid to any Philosophers Scheme by his own Sect or Party? To
whom can we ascribe such a wonderful Preservation of true Religion but to God,
who was able to bring Strength out of Weakness, and even of Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham.

If afterward we consider by what particular Hands this perfecter Scheme of
Religion was delivered to Mankind, and in what manner it was first Published
and Preached to the World, here the Finger of God will plainly appear also. For
all the Instruments and Ministers of this great Work were Persons of a low Rank
and mean Occupations, Ignorant and Unlearned, and of no Reputation in the
World, and their Preaching was plain and simple, without the enticing Words of
Man's Eloquence; and yet, wherever they came the Gospel prevailed, many were
daily added to the Church, and, in a little time, they drew the whole World
after them; this they did notwithstanding all the Opposition that was made to
them, by the Reasonings and Disputings of the Learned, and by the Force and
Authority of Magistrates and Men in Power; notwithstanding the Doctrine they
Preached was everywhere spoken against, and the Preachers and Believers of it
were everywhere Persecuted and Afflicted with all the variety of Sufferings
their Enemies could invent: And when we perceive it so ordered that the Foolish
things of the World should Confound the Wise, that the Weak and Base things of
the World, and things which are despised, should Confound the things which are
Mighty and in great Esteem, we cannot but acknowledge that God has chosen
them, and what is thus wonderful in our Eyes is the Lord's doing. Thus it
became God Almighty to humble Men, and show his Power in a way directly
contrary to all the measures they would have imagined proper.

Was it not likewise every way worthy of God, and agreeable both to the Wisdom
and Goodness of his Designs in giving Mankind a more perfect Model of Religion
than they were hitherto acquainted with, that he should convince them of the
Beauty and Reasonableness, and encourage them to the Practice of it, by
exemplifying the whole Scheme in the Lives of the first Publishers and
Preachers of this Religion? And where were such perfect Characters of Men ever
heard of before, as those of Christ and his Apostles, and most of the first
Christian Believers? What could more demonstrate the Force and Influence of the
Christian Religion, and recommend it more Effectually to the World than this?
As therefore the Knowledge of a true and reasonable Service of God must be
referred to him, so must likewise the power to will and to do, according to all
those Rules and Measures he has been pleased to prescribe us.

But further, when such Doctrines as those of the Gospel which were Preached,
Believed, and Propagated in such a manner, and recommended by Persons of such
Characters, as is before specified, are confirmed by so many Prophecies and
Miracles, and those of such kinds as we find mentioned in the New Testament; it
must be likewise allowed that God was the Author of all these Signs and
Wonders. For, if it be possible, and sometimes expedient, for God to reveal
something to Mankind, as has been already shown, more infallible Tokens and
Indications of himself he cannot give us, than such Prophecies, and such
Miracles as those Recorded in the New Testament; no greater Instances of
Knowledge and Power, besides what appear in the Making and Governing the World,
are conceivable by us; and what better deserved such an extraordinary and
immediate Manifestation of these Attributes of God then the Gospel? To what
nobler Ends could God employ his Power than for the confirming and promoting
the belief of such a just, reasonable, and beneficial Scheme of things as the
Christian Religion?

But besides, these Prophecies and Miracles were not only certain Indications
of Divine Revelation and Assistance in themselves, and more undoubtedly so to
us, for being made use of to confirm a Doctrine which deserved such
Attestation; but they were also the properest and most suitable means that
could be chosen for Establishing the belief of the Gospel, to which they were
designed, and consequently must be employed by God to that End: For, what was
more becoming the Divine Wisdom, and what could be more effectual to convince
Men of the truth of such future things as are Promised and Threatened in the
Christian Religion, than by the Completion of Prophecies, spoken of at several
distant Periods of time before the Events happened, to give them a sensible
proof, that all things were manifest and open to the Eyes of God, and that a
Thousand Years was to him but as One Day? And that the strangeness of the
Christian Events relating to a Future State, upon the prospect of which the
whole Religion is founded, might not shock the Faith of Mankind, what wiser and
more convincing Method could be taken, than by various Instances of things
actually done in their Presence, of as strange and surprising a Nature as those
foretold, and some of them of the very same kind, as the Resurrection of the
Dead, Ascension into Heaven, etc. How, I say, could Men be better satisfied,
than by such present Experience of the Divine Power that nothing was impossible
to God; and that there might be such things in a Future State, which Eye had
not yet seen, nor Ear heard, nor had entered into the Heart of Man to conceive?

Thus have I proved in short, that the Prophecies, Miracles and Doctrines
contained in the New Testament, and consequently the whole Christian Religion,
which were before shown to exceed all Humane Reach and Capacity, did certainly
proceed from God.

After which proof the third thing proposed will be very easily made out, viz.
that it is very improper and absurd to ascribe these things to Evil Spirits.

All that we know of Good or Evil Spirits, without Revelation, is that there
have been some Men unaccountably assisted by some invisible Power, to say and
do certain things which they knew they could not have said or done without such
Assistance; that, if what was said or done this way was serious and concerning,
and seemed to contribute any thing to the Good of Men, it was reckoned to
proceed from a Good Spirit appointed by the Supreme God for that End; if the
things said or done were Trifling or Hurtful they were thought to come from
Evil Spirits permitted by the Supreme God to Amuse or Punish Men; and that
Sacrifices and other Religious Rites were performed by the Persons particularly
concerned to express their Thanks to the One, or to appease the Other, these
Good and Evil Spirits being esteemed as Gods of a Lower Order, who had
different Offices assigned them by the Supreme.

In the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, we have a more particular
account of Good and Evil Spirits, the first occasion of their Distinction, and
their different Offices and Employments as such; and there we find that what
was said or done by Angels, or Good Spirits, was by the express Order and
Command of God, and is Attributed to him in the same manner, as if it had
proceeded immediately from himself; and what was said or done by Devils or Evil
Spirits, was by the Permission of God for the Trial or Punishment of Men.

The Power God suffered Evil Spirits to Exercise, and the Signs and Wonders he
permitted them to do, in order to tempt Men from the Belief or Practice of
those things he had injoined and commanded them, were so easily distinguishable
from the positive express Manifestations of Divine Power, that any Man was
justly to be Condemned for being deceived by them: For besides that Miracles
done by the help of Evil Spirits, were, Pascal.
as a Judicious Author well observes, always foretold, or outdone, or both, and
consequently could never be of force enough to invalidate a Divine Revelation:
Besides this, I say, the Works of the Devil, and the Doctrines of Devils, are
so contrary to the Reason and truest Interests of Mankind, and so easily known
to be so, especially when compared with the Doctrine of God and the Fruits of
it, that no Miracles or Signs whatsoever can be sufficient to establish their
Credit.

And therefore it is very absurd, and contrary to all that the Scriptures inform
us of concerning Devils or Evil Spirits, to suppose that they should employ all
their Power and Cunning to promote a pure and holy Service of One God, and to
destroy all the Pretenses of Superstition and Idolatry: It Is contrary to all
the Policy of the Kingdom of Darkness, as our Savior argues, that it should be
divided against it self, and that some Evil Spirits should disturb and oppose
the rest, when they are all carrying on the same Work.

But neither Jews, Christians, or Heathens, ever entertained any such Notions
of Devils or Evil Spirits, as to make them the Authors of any thing that
recommended and established what they called Virtue in the World, or
contributed to the Peace, Welfare, or Happiness of Mankind.

It Is manifest then that such a Scheme, as we have seen the Christian Religion
is, could not be Contrived, and Propagated through the World in such a manner
by Evil Spirits; neither was it possible that the first Preachers and
Professors of this Religion should derive their extraordinary Characters from
the Possession and Influence of Devils. These are such Notorious Truths, that
there is no need of further Inlargments upon this Head.

Thus have I finished what I undertook under my Second General, and by a full
and direct Proof made it very Evident that all the principal Matters of Fact
related in the New Testament are true.

III. I shall strengthen and confirm the same Truth by showing the
improbability and absurdity of a contrary Supposition, and the weakness of all
the Difficulties and Objections raised against the Scriptures, and the Matters
contained in them; which is the third thing I proposed to make good, in order
to my main Design, which is to establish a firm Belief of the Christian
Religion, and all the Obligations of it.

It has been sufficiently proved already, that if all the common Matters of
Fact related in the New Testament, or only the principal of them, such as have
been before mentioned are true, in the Manner and Circumstances there set down,
it necessarily follows from hence that the Miracles and Prophecies there
Recorded must be true also; and if the Miracles and Prophecies are true, they
must certainly be the Effects of Divine Assistance and Revelation; and
consequently, the Doctrines delivered by Persons so assisted must come from
God: This, I say, has been fully made out beyond all possibility of a a
reasonable Contradiction, and every thing that could be supposed, all the
different Accounts that could be given of these Matters, in order to invalidate
the strength of the Inferences drawn from them, have been shown to be false and
groundless.

The next Pretense which the Enemies of Revealed Religion make use of in the
behalf of Infidelity, is that the whole Body of the Scriptures of the New
Testament are Forged and Suppositious, that all the principal Matters of Fact
there Recorded, with all the Strange and New Doctrines built upon them, were
purely the Inventions of Men; and that the Books were given out by the
Contrivers of them, as containing the Revelations of God, in order to Establish
their Credit and Authority in the World. This is the worst that the utmost
Malice of Scoffers and Unbelievers can suggest, but the Folly and unpresidented
Absurdity of this Plea will easily appear upon a slight Examination of it.

For first, It Is very manifest from what has been said already, that it has
been a constant and universal Tradition, in this part of the World, that most
of the Books of the New Testament were written by those very Persons, whom we
that are now called Christians pretend they were Written by, and that all of
them were writ about the same time we now believe and affirm they were, and
therefore there is the same reason to believe these Books to be true and
genuine as any other of the same Standing and Antiquity, and, if we consider
the importance of the Books, much greater.

In the next place it is certain, that in all the Accounts we have left us of
the History of Christianity, it no where appears that any of the Ancient
Adversaries of this Religion, either Jews or Heathens, Profane or Revolting
Christians, ever Objected to the true Christian Believers, that the Books in
which they pretended their Religion was contained were Forged and
Supposititious, and consequently that their Faith was Vain and Ill-grounded:
And if those who lived at and near the first rise of Christianity never made
use of this Objection against it then, what strength can it have now, when
urged by those who cannot well be more industrious Enemies of the Christian
Religion, than their Unbelieving Predecessors were, and cannot possibly at this
distance make out such a discovery as they pretend to, could we suppose the
thing true and never detected before, by such as sought all occasions to lessen
the Credit, and stop the growth of Christianity in every Age; which to me seems
utterly inconceivable.

I am likewise persuaded that no mere Man, by the strength of his own
unassisted Capacities, could have framed and contrived such a Book as the New
Testament is. I cannot possibly prevail upon my self to believe that such Facts
as are there Recorded, such a Contexture of History, such a Scheme of
Doctrines, such Characters of Men, and such a manner of Writing as we find
throughout that Book, could be altogether the Issue and Result of Humane
Sagacity alone.

But supposing it to be possible, that all these things might have entered into
a Man's Mind; supposing likewise that notwithstanding the present appearance of
Universal uncontradicted Tradition to the contrary, a Book now believed to be
true, might some time or other have been invented without any ground for such a
Work in the reality of things; allowing, I say, the possibility of these
things, it is still upon many other Accounts manifestly absurd to imagine that
the Writings of the New Testament, were the Work and Contrivance of Men,
without a sufficient Foundation of true real Facts to support them.

This will more paticularly appear from these two Considerations.

1. That there is no End or Design imaginable sufficient to have determined the
supposed Author of the New Testament to undertake such a Work.

2. That if the Principal Matters of Fact contained in the New Testament, both
Common and Extraordinary, had not been true, 'twould have been utterly
impossible that the Christian Religion should ever have been believed and
propagated in the World, in the manner we find it is at present.

First then I am to prove that there is no End or Design imaginable sufficient
to have determined the supposed Author of the New Testament to undertake such a
Work.

All the Ends we can imagine the Author of this Extraordinary Performance acted
upon, must be either the Good of Mankind, his own particular Interest, or
Reputation in the World, or purely the pleasure of deceiving, but none of these
could have Influence enough to produce such a Work, and therefore we must
account for its Original some other way.

For first, it cannot be supposed that some Virtuous Good Man, who endeavored,
as far as he was able, to live up to those Rules we find delivered in the New
Testament, should, out of pure Zeal for the Welfare and Interest of Mankind,
Publish such a Scheme of Living, as is there laid down, under the grossest form
of Imposture imaginable; it could never enter into the thoughts of such a Man
as this, to recommend Simplicity, Truth and Integrity by the most solemn
variety of Lies and Falsehoods that ever were invented: He that was concerned to
establish a Form of sound Words, who represents all manner of Lying, Deceit and
Dissimulation as utterly inconsistent with that Model of Religion he was
setting up, and who strictly forbids all Men to do Evil that Good might come of
it; a Person, I say, of this Character, who was in earnest, and thoroughly
persuaded of the truth of the Principles he recommended, cannot be imagined to
have acted directly contrary to them himself, in order to have them Believed
and Observed by others.

It Is true indeed Fables and Parables have been often made use of as very
proper and easy means of conveying good Instructions to Mankind; but the
History of the New Testament is too Particular and Circumstantial to be
reckoned an Allegory, and therefore there is no occasion to prove it none; so
that if the Principal Matters of Fact Recorded in the New Testament are not
true, according to the first obvious literal meaning of them, the whole
Relation must be a downright Forgery, and consequently could not be the Work of
an Honest Man invented by him merely for the good of Mankind.

The possibility of which Supposition can no ways be accounted for by the many
Forged and Supposititious Writings, Published by some of the first Christians,
in favor of that Religion; for, considering only those which made for the
Christian Religion in General, and may seem to have been contrived purely for
the Propagation of it among such whose Condition was looked upon as very
Miserable, by reason of their Ignorance or Disbelief of Christianity; whatever
of this Nature was Forged by any Christians was not really done upon any good
Motive, but proceeded from too passionate a Concern for the Party they were of,
and the Opinions they had undertook to defend: When the Enemies of their
Religion stood out against all the true rational Proofs urged for it, an eager
desire of convincing those they Disputed with, and doing Honor to their own
Cause and Management of it, put them upon inventing such things as by the
Temper or Concessions of their Adversaries were likelier to prevail with them.
This I take to be the true Spring and Cause of most of those False and Spurious
Writings which were designed for the advantage of the Christian Cause in
General, the Forgeries that were contrived for the defense of some Particular
Doctrine proceeding most commonly from a worse Original. But it is very evident,
that the first Invention and Publication of the whole Christian Scheme could
not be owing to the Influence of any such Principle or Motive as is before
mentioned; and if it had, the Inventer and Publisher could not have been a Good
Man, that was so Influenced, nor such a good Man as we suppose acted upon a
pure disinterested Principle of Love to Mankind.

And if it should be further Objected, that it is very probable some honest
well-meaning Christians were guilty of the like indirect Practices, as well as
others, and that Purely out of Love and Compassion to Mankind for no other End
and Design, but to bring over as many as they could to the belief of that
Religion which they were persuaded would make them happy; the Answer to this is
very ready and obvious, viz. That these were very plain simple Men, as
manifestly appears by those Circumstances whereby their Forgeries were
discovered; their great Zeal for the Salvation of their Brethren was without
Knowledge, and they were ignorant of the Nature and Power of that Religion they
sought to Propagate, as imagining such well-intended Frauds allowable. But the
Author of the New Testament, if the Work was wholly Humane, was certainly a
wise knowing Man, his Forgery; if it was one, was so well laid and contrived,
that no body has been yet able to find it out; and he cannot be thought to have
been so ignorant of the Religion he made himself, as to believe that to be
lawful which he had expressly forbid; and therefore we may certainly conclude,
that if the Scriptures of the New Testament were Forged, the Author of them was
an Ill Man who acted upon some Private Motive, and not out of a true generous
Concern for the good of Mankind.

But what Principle or Motive can we imagine strong enough to have disposed an
ill Man to frame such a Work? Not any Profit, Interest or Advantage that could
accrue to him from it. He could not but foresee, that to impose a New Religion
upon the World, to change the Ancient Laws and Customs of Nations, to Condemn
and Expose to Contempt, what the Wisest and most Powerful part of Mankind had
in Veneration, to disturb Men in the Possession of Advantageous Errors and
Prejudices, and to put a Restraint upon their most agreeable Passions and
Inclinations: This, I say, he must needs foresee, would be an attempt too
difficult to be managed without the most violent Opposition imaginable, and too
great to be effected in his Days. 'Twas hardly possible, I think, for a Man of
Common Sense, to persuade himself such a design as this should succeed at all;
but much more inconceivable, that he should imagine Things should be carried on
so smoothly and easily, that he should live to enjoy the Fruits of his Labor;
and a future Reward in another Life, could have no antecedent Influence upon
him, who is supposed to Invent the Notion, or at least, to enforce it upon
others, without having any good Reason to believe it himself.

And as it must be acknowledged, 'twas very easy to foresee the many Troubles
and Difficulties that would attend the Establishment of Christianity; so it is
plain, that the Author of the New Testament, whoever he was, understood very
well, what the Natural Consequences of such an Attempt were, as appears by the
large Representation he makes of the manifold Sufferings and Afflictions which
befell all the first Publishers and Preachers of the Christian Religion, and
those who embraced the Doctrines they taught.

It must be likewise confessed, That if any of those mentioned in the New
Testament, as concerned in Publishing or Preaching what is there called the
Gospel, did really Suffer such things as are there Written of them, for
endeavoring to persuade people to believe such Wonderful Facts and Doctrines
as we now find Recorded in that Book, which some of them had before invented,
and afterward caused to be written, together with the Account of their own
Sufferings: If this, I say, be supposed, then it must be granted, That the
Event was every way answerable to the Prospect which we have seen the Author of
the Christian Scheme must have had before him when he was upon that Design; and
which soever of these Persons we ascribe the Work to, we must be convinced,
that he did, by no means, consult his own Interest in it.

But if some unknown Person was the Author of the New Testament, and the whole
History of it is pure Fiction, as must be allowed in the Supposition we are at
present concerned to disprove, then is it utterly impossible to find out what
Advantage he could propose to himself by a Performance of this Nature. I cannot
conceive, for the Reasons before given, that he should design any Interest of
his own at all in it; and his being unknown, is no small Argument that the
Advantages gained, whatever they were, were too inconsiderable a Recompense for
such a noble, well-invented Scheme, as he has given us in the Scriptures of the
New Testament.

'Twas not then for any Private Interest or Advantage assignable by us, That
any Person, who thought fit to conceal himself, could frame and contrive the
New Testament; and much less can it be supposed, that a desire of Reputation
put him upon such a Work, since he has taken such effectual care to suppress
his own Name, and attribute the Glory of his Invention to another.

Nothing therefore remains, but that we say 'twas purely the pleasure of
deceiving, which occasioned the writing that Book: But this is as unlikely and
insufficient a Cause of such an Effect, as any of the other before mentioned:
For the secret Pleasure of deceiving, without the Reputation which is wont to
attend an artful Deceiver, could never work so strongly, as to produce any
thing of that excellent Skill and Contrivance in the making, and of such mighty
tendency in the Consequences of it as the Christian Religion is.

Besides, when a Man acts for no other End, but to deceive, his Designs can
never be such as serve for the procuring and promoting the benefit of Mankind.
The pleasure that an ill Man takes in deceiving, is always a malicious
pleasure, which is raised and heightened by the prospect either of the Folly or
Misery of the deceived. Had such an Impostor as this, contrived the Christian
Religion, he would never have taken the pains to oblige the World with such a
Rational Scheme of Life, as was never before exhibited, and could never since
be mended; he would rather have chose to triumph over the Ignorance and
Credulity of Mankind by giving them false and pernicious Rules of Action, as
well as monstrous and improbable Articles of Belief; but those who considering
the Christian Facts and Doctrines as mere Imposture, talk of them under that
Style, are forced to allow, that the Christian Morality, whether it be of
Humane Invention, or Divine Revelation, is certainly the most perfect
accomplished Piece that was ever declared to Mankind.

There is no other Motive imaginable the Author of the New Testament, if it be
all a Forgery, could have acted upon; and the insufficiency of those alleged,
has been already shown, and might be further made to appear, if there were
occasion for such an enlargement; But the absurdity and impossibility of the
supposed Forgery, appearing more plainly from the following Head, I shall add
but one Argument more for the Confirmation of what I have said very briefly
upon this.

Now the Argument I shall insist upon, is this; That it is utterly
inconceivable, that the supposed Author and Contriver of that Book, could have
imagined that such a Scheme of Things, as we there find delivered, should ever
come to be believed and established in the World; and without such a Thought
and Persuasion of this in the Author, we can never account for either the first
Contrivance or Publication of it. Whatever it was that determined him to frame
the Christian Scheme; whatever End he proposed to himself from his Labor and
Skill in making it, he must certainly design that the whole Fiction should be
believed by those it was communicated to; otherwise it was impossible for him
to compass the End he aimed at: If therefore it is certain, That the first
Author and Publisher of the Christian Religion did design and intend to have it
believed; and if he was a Wise, Understanding Man, of great Reach and Sagacity,
as the Enemies of his Religion allow, and is very evident from that Rational
Draught of Morality the World is obliged to him for; then does it plainly
follow, That Christianity is no Imposture, and that the Books of the New
Testament are not Forged and Invented.

For how was it possible for a Wise Man to think, that such a Multitude of
strange, unheard of Facts as are Recorded in the New Testament, and made the
Foundation of the Christian Religion, should be believed without any manner of
Proof, or Evidence, of the Truth of them? But if he did not distrust the
credibility of the Facts themselves, what could induce him to give such a
particular circumstantial Relation of them, as submitted them to every Bodies
Enquiry and Examination, and made the discovery of their Falsehood easy and
obvious? How could he persuade himself, that such New and Difficult Doctrines
should be entertained, which no former Notions of Learning or Religion,
prepared Men to receive, and which no Discovery or Revelation could make them
fully comprehend? And how was it possible for him to imagine, That such
Doctrines and Facts as these, should set off and recommend his Morality to the
World, which considered by it self, is granted to be unexceptionable?

Had the principal Aim and Design of this supposed Impostor, been to establish
the Christian Morality, he would rather have Published it alone, in the Name of
some admired Prince or Philosopher; or have pretended, by some secret way of
conveyance, to have received it from Heaven. This, any Man of common Sense,
would have judged a likelier Method of getting it believed, than the mixing and
blending so many strange Facts and Doctrines amongst it, and laying the whole
Work upon such a Foundation as he knew had no manner of Support from Reality.

And, on the other side, had it been his chief Intention to abuse the Credulity
of Mankind, by making them believe so many strange and unaccountable Lies, as
are contained in the History and peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, if they
are all False, he would have taken care to have made his Morality more easy
and palatable, and more suited to the common Prejudices and Inclinations of the
generality of Mankind, that so the other parts of the Scheme might have been
taken down readily, and without Examination, for the sake of this.

But taking the Christian Religion altogether, as we now find it, it is not to
be imagined, that a Wise Man should believe he was able to bring People over to
embrace it, supposing it purely an Invention of his own, which he knew had no
Foundation in true Facts: And therefore there could be no End or Motive
sufficient to Influence him to contrive what he could not believe would ever be
received so far, as to answer any End proposed.

But, supposing it possible that there should have been some Man, who was Wise
enough to invent the whole Christian Scheme, as we now find it in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, and who was at the same time so absurdly
foolish, as to think it would be believed so far, as to recompense him for the
pains of making, and the hazard of Publishing it: Supposing, I say, all this,
which to me is perfectly unconceivable, yet the Books of the New Testament
could not be forged: Because,

2. If the Principal Matters of Fact contained in the New Testament, both
Common and Extraordinary, had not been true, 'twould have been utterly
impossible, that the Christian Religion should ever have been believed and
propagated in the World, in the manner we find it is at present; which I shall
endeavor to prove in the following Method.

That the Christian Religion, such as we find delivered in the Books of the New
Testament, is at present owned and professed in a great part of the World; and
that, wherever this Religion is professed, those Books are appealed to as the
Rule and Standard of it, as to every thing therein contained, are Truths I
shall take for granted.

It is likewise as evident, that there was a Time when there were no such
Books, or Religion known or heard of.

The inquiry then will be when, and how, the Christian Religion came to be
Established in the World? In answer to which, it must be allowed, that either
the Books of the New Testament were written first, and the Christian Religion
Propagated from them; or the Doctrines therein contained, were spread first by
Preaching and Conversation, and afterward committed to Writing: But which
soever of these Suppositions we take, the Publication of the Christian History,
and the Doctrines built upon it, cannot possibly be placed above the Times
mentioned in the New Testament; because there are abundance of Names, and other
Circumstances allowed to be true, which could not be known before without a
Spirit of Prophecy, which Imposture has nothing to do with.

In the Account the New Testament gives of this Matter, the first Scene of the
Imposture, if the Christian Religion be accounted such, is laid at Jerusalem,
in the time of Tiberius Caesar, and consequently the Period fixed upon for first
acquainting the World with what is pretended to have happened then at Jerusalem
must be at, or near that time, or at some distance since. Let us consider this
great Event in all these different Periods, and see what the Success will be.

In the first place then, let us suppose the Christian Religion Invented and
Published at Jerusalem in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar: It Is plain the way of
Propagating the belief of it must have been by Writing or Preaching; if the
Work was begun by Writing, it must be by some of the Gospels, none of the other
Books of the New Testament can be pretended to be then Written without
Prophecy: But whether it were by one or more of the Gospels, or by Preaching
the things contained in them, 'twas absolutely impossible such a Scheme of
Falsehood should be believed by those who by an Infallible Consciousness must
know it to be so; or be spread, propagated and defended by those who did not
believe it themselves, in places where every body was as capable and certain a
Judge of the Cheat as they.

Was not there such a Man as Christ? Did he not, in all appearance maintain
such a Character? Did he not pretend to such Discoveries, and Wonderful Works,
and did he not really Suffer such things upon account of his Pretenses, as we
find Recorded in those Books called the Gospels? All this must be granted in
the present Supposition, which fixes the real Publication of that Religion, we
now profess, at the same date we find mentioned in the New Testament: And if it
be allowed that these Facts were true, then does it certainly follow that all
the Pretenses of Christ were real, for otherwise they could never have been
believed, as has been sufficiently proved already, and will more fully appear
under another Head, where I shall show the necessary Connection betwixt the
truth of the Common and the Extraordinary Facts mentioned in the New Testament.
But if these Common Matters of Fact just now instanced in were false as well as
the other, then must the whole Story be much more Ridiculous and Incredible.

If the Forgery be dated about Forty Years lower at some time near the
Destruction of Jerusalem, then must we take in the Acts of the Apostles and the
other Books of the New Testament into our Account, which will render the
difficulty of believing the Christian Religion much greater: For here we have
abundance of New Matters of Fact to believe as strange as those in the Gospels,
and as easy to be known and disproved, but vastly more Numerous, and more
Public, to the truth of which a great many more Cities and Nations are brought
in as Witnesses, all which are supposed false and consequently could never
obtain Credit in the World at that time.

If the Christian Religion was not heard of any where, till some time after the
Destruction of Jerusalem, how could it possibly be then believed, when its
chief Pretense was, that it had been Published, Believed, and Establisted in
many places long before, which was palpably and notoriously false? Now that
this must be the Pretense upon which the Christian Religion was first Founded,
whatever Period we suppose, this Event happened in after the Destruction of
Jerusalem, is very plain from the Nature of the Religion its self, and the
Manner of its Publication, which are entirely built upon Matters of Fact; so
that if the History of Christianity, or the Principal Matters of Fact contained
in the New Testament are false, the whole Religion must fall: And the Nature of
those Facts it is built upon is such, that it is imposible for any body to
believe them at any distance from the time in which they are affirmed to
happen, if they were then first invented, when he is required to believe them.

For, let us fix the Period when we will, how can we imagine that the History
contained in the Books of the New Testamen should be believed by those who are
supposed to live after the Times of all the Transactions therein mentioned, and
yet who had never before heard or read of any of them? Can it possibly be
thought, that any People would change their Laws and Religion upon such a Story
as this, without enquiring into the truth of it? And how could they be
satisfied upon enquiry when the supposition of an Imposture makes all other
Information, but that of the Publishers utterly impossible? And what reason
could there be to believe him, who gives only a positive bare Relation of
Matter of Fact, done before his time, which he delivers without any pretense to
Revelation himself, and without any Authority but his own to confirm the truth
of what he endeavors to impose upon the World? Would not these have been every
Man's Questions? Why was not the Religion now offered to us embraced when it
was first prescribed to Mankind, with all those wonderful Evidences of its
Divine Original we are told of? Why were not those strange Facts believed by
those that were the immediate Witnesses of them? If they were, and if the
Christian Religion spread and increased upon the Credit of them (as is
affirmed, and if the Miracles were true, must needs be allowed) How came it to
pass that neither We nor our Forefathers ever heard of these things, and that
we have no History or Monuments of them remaining? How should such a New
Religion as this, Established upon the evidence of Sense, and Propagated by
vast Multitudes of Professors, be quite lost and worn out of the memory of Men
already? How came you that Publish it to be the only Person that could recover
the Knowledge of it? What reason have you now to believe what has been laid
aside by those, who, by being nearer the Original, were better Judges of the
truth of it? And what Authority have you to receive it, and enjoin Mankind the
belief of it? These were Questions which an Impostor could never give any
Answer to; and without satisfaction in these Matters, so great and wise a part
of Mankind as are now, and were formerly thoroughly persuaded of the truth of
the Christian Religion could not voluntarily lay aside all their ancient
Prejudices and Engagements, and embrace a New Religion, with all the dangerous
Consequences that they knew must attend such a change.

It is therefore manifestly absurd, to suppose there ever were any Men Foolish
and Impudent enough to Publish a false History of Matters of Fact, pretended to
be done just before the Publication, and in the very Place where the Scene is
laid, within the immediate Cognizance of all the People to whom the Relation is
directed; and if there were any such Pretenders, it is impossible to think there
should be any People so Stupid, as to believe they themselves saw and heard
such Things as were never said or done among them, and this purely upon the
Information of others, without which they had remained entirely ignorant of
them; from whence it necessarily follows, that the Christian Scheme could not
be Published at the Time it is dated at, if it were mere Forgery and Invention.

It is likewise very ridiculous and irrational to imagine, that a long series
of Public Notorious Facts, said to be done in the presence of great Multitudes
of all sorts of Persons in different Countries and Nations; the Consequences of
which, are pretended to be very great and concerning to all Mankind; and which,
by the Credit they had obtained, and the Opposition that had been made to them,
had occasioned mighty Changes and Alterations in the World: It Is very absurd, I
say, to maintain that such Facts as these, which never happened at all, should
at any distance, from the Time in which they are pretended to have happened,
ever come to be genenerally believed, in, or near those Places they are
appropriated to, barely upon the Authority of their Publication; when those
that were supposed to believe them, can have no other Reason for their Faith
but this, That some body had the confidence to Publish a strange, unheard of
Story: And if there be any absurdity in this supposition, it is impossible the
Christian Religion should have been first Promulg'd any time after the Period
assigned for its Publication in the New Testament; because it was impossible it
should ever have been believed, as it now is, if it had.

A great deal more might be said to prove the Christian Religion no Imposture,
and to expose the gross absurdity of such a Supposition; but I do not think it
necessary to enlarge upon this Point, both because I have, in a great measure,
prevented my self in the direct Proofs I have before given of the Truth of the
Christian Religion; which, with a different manner of Application, would serve
the same purpose here; and because this is thought, by the Enemies of
Christianity themselves, too weak a Post to defend, and is rarely insisted upon
by them, any further than as Trick, Cheat, and Imposture are odious
discrediting Names, which serve to blacken the Cause they want Arguments to
overthrow.

The chief strength of Modern Infidelity, or, as its Favorers and Professors
delight to call it, Deism, consists in a great many loose Objections, levelled
against something or other in the Scriptures, without any certain aim, without
any relation to a Scheme or Hypothesis to account for all standing Appearances,
and without any regular Deduction of Consequences from what is Objected, or
Answer to contrary Proofs.

But, before I enter upon a particular Examination of these Objections, it is
to be observed, that they are directed indifferently against any part of the
Scriptures of the Old or New Testament; and therefore I shall think my self
obliged to consider them only so far as they are made use of, or intended to
lessen the certainty of Divine Revelation in General, or of the truth either of
the Jewish or Christian Religion, both which we pretend, and undertake to
maintain, did come from God.

I have not indeed given a particular Proof of the Jewish Revelation, because
it is supposed in the Christian, and confirmed by it; and therefore what proves
the Latter must establish the Former: But if any Man will take a short view of
the Jewish Revelation, as we find it delivered in the Books of the Old
Testament, and impartially consider the Nature, Variety and Number of the Facts
there Recorded; the Relation and Connection they have to one another; the Time
and Manner in which they were Recorded; the Ways and Methods of preserving the
memory of them; together with the Characters and Circumstances of all the
Persons concerned in them; He will never be able to doubt but the Principal
Matters of Fact mentioned in the Old Testament were true; it being impossible
to conceive they should have been Forged, either altogether or separately,
since they are the Foundations of all the Jewish Religion and Policy, and are
of such a nature that we cannot suppose any time when the Forgery should begin
without a discovery of it; which would appear more evidently if we applied all
the Characters of Truth and Divinity, remarkable in the Christian Revelation to
the Jewish; but such a Repetition being altogether unnecessary in its self, and
without the bounds of my Present Subject, I shall immediately proceed to
examine the Deist's Objections to Scripture and Revelation.

Now the sum of what they have to say, which has not been already particularly
considered, tends to show that the Miracles and Prophecies mentioned in the
Scriptures (allowing the Accounts there given of the Facts to be true) are no
Proofs of a Divine Revelation; and that there are a great many such Faults
observable in the other parts of Scripture as prove the whole to be a pure
Humane Composure.

What they object against Miracles being used as an Argument to prove a
Doctrine Revealed from God is, that it Derogates from the Nature and Perfection
of God to work Miracles; and that the Regular Frame of the World, with a
constant unalterable Connection of Causes and Effects in it, gives us a truer
and juster Idea of God, and is a better Argument of his Being, than any
Extraordinary Interposition of Providence, which alters and perverts the course
of Nature: To which I answer.

First, That I cannot see how it Derogates from God, to suppose his immediate
Interposition in some Cases, or how his working of Miracles is a perverting of
the Course of Nature, any more than it Derogates from the Soul, or the Soul
perverts the Course of Nature, when by a Thought it changes or stops the Motion
of the Animal Spirits, which according to their usual course would have moved
otherwise: When the Soul exercises this Power over the Body, the Sinews and
Bones continue as they were, and so do the bulk and principal parts of Nature
for all Miracles. God does not order Men to be born of Beasts, nor change
Beasts into Men, nor create New Suns, nor annihilate any Systems of Matter to
work Miracles; but by a Thought he separates or unites the insensible parts of
Matter, he stops, retards, or quickens their Motion, or alters their Figures:
This is God's common Method of working Miracles.

But, in the next place, what if we should say that God did every thing by an
immediate Will? What if we affirmed that he often Created some Beings and
Destroyed others, that he changed the Laws of Motion, and suspended the Effects
of it? None of these ways of acting can Derogate from God, forasmuch as they
cannot be proved, either to imply a Contradiction in themselves, to be
inconsistent with the Happiniss of God, or to be repugnant to the Goodness or
Justice of his Dealings with his Intelligent Creatures. These are the true and
only Measures of all the other Notions we frame of the Perfections of the
Divine Nature: And therefore when we say God cannot act contrary to Nature, we
must mean it in one of these Senses, either that he cannot act what is a
Contradiction in it self, or what is contrary to his own Nature, or to the
Nature he has given his Intelligent Creatures: But when any Changes or
Alterations in Material Beings, consistent with the forementioned Principles
are said to be contrary to Nature, that is only a popular Expression which
signifies that the course of things is different from what it constantly
appeared to us before: but no color of reason can possibly be given either
from the Properties of Body, or the Constancy of Appearance, why such a change
should not be made by God.

That Miracles are not, in their own Nature, a better proof of the Being of
God, than the standing Frame and regular Order and Disposition of things is
certain; but if the generality of Men are apt to forget God, notwithstanding
they are surrounded with so many visible Evidences of his Being, Why is it not
agreeable to the Wisdom and Goodness of God to raise and excite their Attention
by new and surprising Manifestations of his Power; the impression of which
would be much livelier and stronger than those they received from a constant
Repetition of the same appearances? But it is not to prove a God or Providence,
or the first General Principles of Natural Religion, that Miracles are urged;
these things are all so plain and easy, without such a confirmation, that they
are altogether without excuse who do not believe them or act contrary to their
belief; but when Men are lost and gone out of the way, and are become
altogether Corrupt; when through Blindness and Ignorance they know not how to
serve God aright, and when those who use their endeavors to do it can have no
assurance of being accepted; if in compassion to this sad and distressed Estate
of Mankind God is pleased to reveal himself to them, and acquaint them with a
true and certain way to Happiness, which they were not able to find out of
themselves, what Perfections of God is it contrary to to make such a discovery
to his Creatures? And how could he take a more effectual way to convince them
of the truth of the Revelation than by Miracles, which are real Effects of
Divine Power, and which Men are readily disposed to acknowledge as Infallible
Signs and Indications of it? If these were the Works of God, and might
certainly be known to be so, as has already been proved in the former part of
this Discourse, then were they very fit and proper Proofs that the Doctrine
they were intended to comfirm came from God, though they were not brought about
by an immediate Interposition, but were part of the General Scheme of Nature.
And therefore, though it should be allowed to be a Derogation to God to make
him the Author of those Works we call Miracles, by a present and immediate
exercise of his Power; yet it can be no diminution to any of his Perfections to
affirm, that originally at the beginning of the World, he ordered such Effects
to proceed from the General Laws of Nature, at such a time, that they might be
for Signs and Tokens to Mankind, that the Revelation which should then be given
them came from him.

Another Objection made to the Argument of Miracles is, that Miracles have been
wrought by other Men, as well as Moses and Christ, and as great as those that
were Recorded of them; from whence it is inferred, that the Doctrines they
taught are never the truer for their Working Miracles: To which I Answer, that
the Matter of Fact is none of it sufficiently attested; a great deal or it
manifestly false; and were it all true, the Inference drawn from it does not
hold.

To make good this Charge, I shall instance in the Miracles attributed to
Vespasian and Apollonius Tyanaeus, which have been particularly made use of by
the Enemies of our Religion to lessen the Credit and Authority of it.

Of Vespasian it is Recorded, That he once cured two Blind Men; but the strange
and wonderful Works of Apollonius, fill a Book writ on purpose to give an
account of them. Now as to Vespasian's Cure of the Blind, it is but one single
Miracle, and therefore is very unjustly compared with that Multitude of mighty
Works that were wrought by the Hands of Christ; neither is it so well attested,
but Reasons may be given why it should be false, notwithstanding the reality of
all the appearing Circumstances of it: Several Inducements might be alleged,
that very probably disposed this Emperor to pretend to such a Miracle; it is
very easy to conceive how his Design might be brought about in the Presence of
a great many People without their discovering the Cheat; and, should any have
found it out, it is very obvious to imagine why they did not Publish it: But
nothing of all this would hold when applied to Christ, had he pretended to no
more than the Cure of two Blind Men: A Man of his Character and Condition in
the World, could not promise himself any Honor, Respect, or Advantage from
such a Pretense; and should he have made this use of it, he would very probably
have raised the Envy of all the People of the same Rank, and the Jealousy of
his Superiors; upon these, and other Motives, as well as Natural Curiosity, a
great many would have been very Industrious and Inquisitive in searching into
the Truth of the Fact; and whom can we imagine so far concerned for such a
Pretender, as to be privy or assisting to his Cheat at the first, or to conceal
his shame after they had found it out: But, supposing an Account could be given
in one or two Instances, how 'twas possible for Christ to pretend to such Works
as were never done; there are abundance still remaining upon Record, that are
manifestly incapable of such a Solution; which puts an unanswerable difference
betwixt the Miracles of Christ, and the Pretenses of other Men.

As to the Story of Apollonius, the whole Credit of it depends upon the
Testimony of one single Author, who lived too long after him to be a competent
Witness of the Truth of what he Relates, and was too Credulous and Partial to
be believed if he had lived at the same time with him. The strange unusual
Things Related to have been done by this Apollonius, bear no Proportion to the
Miracles of Christ, either as to the Number of the Facts and Persons concerned
in them; the Wonderful and Extraordinary Nature of them, the beneficial Design
of them, or the public and hazardous Manner in which they were done; and a
great many of these have been proved to be false upon examination, from the
manifest inconsistencies and contradictions in the Relation of them.

But supposing the Miracles attributed to Vespasian and Apollonius were true in
Fact, what Reasons can we allege, either from the Characters of the pretended
Authors, the Ends and Designs they acted upon, the Consequences and Effects of
the Pretenses, or from any other Circumstances of their Story, that the strange
Things Recorded of them, were not done by the Ministry of Evil Spirits?

Let us suppose farther, That the Facts were not only real, but true and proper
Miracles, performed by the express and immediate Assistance of God; What can be
inferred from thence? Not that the Heathen Religion was true; because these
Miracles were not designed or intended for a Confirmation of it: Not that the
Christian Religion was purely Humane; because the whole End of Christ's working
Miracles was to prove that his Doctrine came from God. There may be several
Reasons given why it may please God sometimes to work Miracles indifferently by
the Hands of good or ill Men, Men of a true or false Religion; but it cannot
possibly be supposed of God, that he should employ Good Men, or concur with the
Wicked, in working Miracles, in order to their deceiving Mankind, and
establishing a Lie by such Evidence as cannot be disproved; and no Instance can
be given where any one true Miracle was wrought by a Person that made use of it
to prove any other Doctrine by, than what we have delivered in the Scriptures.
By a true Miracle I mean such as is as well attested to have been done as those
Recorded in the Scriptures, and can no more be accounted for, without the Power
of God, than they can; many of which I will allow to have been done upon other
occasions, without any Application of them to the advantage of the Religion of
those that performed them.

It Is true indeed many Signs and Wonders may have been wrought for the
Confirmation of false Doctrines, and may have deceived many whom Simplicity and
Bigotry to the Cause they made for disposed to entertain them; but we have no
Records of any such ill-intended Miracles left, which by the Nature,
Circumstances, Effects, or Attestation of them, can dispose a rational Man to
ascribe them to God. And, whatever Pretenses of this kind there may have been,
it is a very good Argument that the World can distinguish betwixt the wonderful
Works of God, and the little Feats of Men and Evil Spirits; That there are now
no Opinions or Doctrines whatsoever remaining, besides what are contained in
the Jewish and Christian Revelations; nor any particular Explications of, or
Deductions from them, which were at first Believed and Propagated upon the
Strength and Authority of strange and wonderful Facts publicly and really done
for that end.

The next Intimation made use of to overthrow the Truth of the
Scripture-Revelation concerns the Prophecies which make a great part of it: And
this, as well as the first Objection against Miracles, is wholly new, the
Invention of these latter Days, wherein the Improvements of rational Knowledge
have forced the Patrons of Irreligion upon new Absurdities. Now the Argument,
as far as it is capable of being expressed in such a form, is this, That the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, upon which the Christian Religion is
principally built, proceeded from Impressions made upon the Imaginations of the
Prophets; which Impressions were always agreeable to their several Tempers,
Complexions and Opinions; from whence it must be inferred that such Visionary
Scenes, and Figurative Expressions as these Prophecies are delivered in, could
be attributed to God only in a popular way, as all other extraordinary and
unusual Events were, and therefore cannot be made use of to prove a Divine
Revelation, because they proceeded wholly from Natural Causes though unknown to
us.

But, whatever of this nature is advanced by Spinoza, or whatever Inferences
are drawn from it by others, who apply it further than he durst openly assert,
nothing can be concluded from his Account of Prophecy to the Prejudice of the
Scripture-Revelation; were all his Observations upon this Subject true, as it is
manifest to any one that reads the Bible, they are not. For supposing all he
says upon this Head were true, viz. That the Prophets were Persons of livelier
Imaginations than others, (as it is plain of some of them that they were not)
That the Angry, Cheerful or Melancholy Prophet always Prophesied things
suitable to his particular Temper (as there are several Instances to be given
to the contrary) and that the Jews had a pious way of Attributing every thing
strange or unusual to God, etc. What if all these things were so as Spinoza
observes? The Knowledge which these Angry, Cheerful, etc. Prophets, of lively
Imaginations had of Future Things must be allowed to come from God, in a
different manner from that whereby they received all their other Knowledge, as
Spinoza himself plainly owns; and if it be so, it is a very good Argument that
the Doctrines Preached by those Prophets were delivered to them by God also, in
the same way that their Prophecies were; which is sufficient to enforce the
Obligation of them upon us, whatever Natural Causes God was pleased to make use
of in the Revelation; and that is all we contend for, or are concerned to
maintain.

This is all that either the Ancient or Modern Enemies of the Christian
Religion had, or can have to object to the Miracles and Prophecies Recorded in
the Bible; excepting what has been already Answered in the direct proof that
was given of the Truth of them.

The other parts of Scripture are charged with almost all the Faults which any
Humane Writing is capable of, viz.

Contradictions to Reason and Philosophy.

Contradictions of one part to another.

Mistakes as to the Authors of the Books, Connection of the Parts, Chronology,
Geography, etc.

Ridiculous and Improbable Stories.

Absurd and Irrational Laws and Injunctions.

Trifling and Impertinent Reasons and Arguments.

Low and Unartful Language.

The Injustice of which Objections I shall show very briefly, as sying very
open and obvious.

As to Contradictions to Reason and Philosophy pretended to be in the
Scriptures, no body has been acute enough yet, or sufficiently instructed in
the true System of things to make good this Charge. We have lived to see
several New Schemes, Hypotheses and Theories of the World Confuted and
Exploded; but the Plainest, Simplest, and most Demonstrative Account of Nature
that is now extant, is found to be the most agreeable to Scripture, and answers
all the Ancient Blasphemies against Providence which were grounded upon false
Hypotheses then in Reputation.

But, after all, the Scriptures were not written to teach us Philosophy: If
this had been the Design of them, no doubt but we had had a truer Scheme of
Knowledge than any Philosopher has been yet able to give us; but then it is
certain we should have had much less Religion, if that and our Philosophy had
been revealed to us together.

Had the Language of Scripture been every where adapted to the true Nature of
Things, it is hard to conceive how it should ever have come to be believed. For,
supposing these Notions to be true; That the Earth moves; That the Sun is a
Hundred thousand times bigger than the Earth; That the Moon and the other
Planets are inhabited; That Beasts are senseless Machines, and mere Clock-work,
and the like: And supposing all the popular Expressions of Scripture concerning
such Matters were changed, and suited to these Notions, would not all the
Learned part of Mankind, who lived before these new Discoveries in Nature were
made, have been apt to reject the whole Revelation as absurd, and
unphilosophical? But if some of the Learned had been so sensible of their
Ignorance of Nature and the Power of God, as to make all the Prejudices of
their Reason, Submit to their Faith, it is hardly possible to imagine how the
People should ever have been induced to believe such Opinions as shock those
Common Natural Notions they have of Things, which come to them without
teaching, and Opinions that will always seem to contradict their Senses. The
greatest Evidence of Miracles would not be sufficient to convince the People of
the Truth of such Notions as those beforementioned; for though strange and
wonderful Things which they actually and certainly perceive come to pass, may
satisfy them, that as strange Things as these may happen hereafter; yet even
such Signs and Wonders as these which they see, can hardly be supposed to
convince them, that there are at present other strange Things which they do not
see, and which they believe their Senses as capable Judges of, as of those
which they do see.

But whether the Scriptures were believed in this Case by few or more, those
who had not been disposed to like them, would have had greater, and more
unanswerable Objections to make to them from Reason and Philosophy, than our
present Unbelievers have: How could a faithful Christian who lived before
Copernicus and Des Carts have defended the Philosophy of the Scriptures
against such as rejected the forementioned Notions, and exposed them as
ridiculous and absurd? The bare Authority of the Revelation without the
Assistance of all our Modern Experiments and Observations, would have been less
effectual to convince Gainsayers then, than it is now; because the Opinions
contrary to the Doctrines of Scripture then would have been more easy and
popular, than those contained in Scripture; and therefore if the Scripture
Notions were not true, no Reason could be given why they should be there: For
it could not then be said, as it is very justly and properly now in several
Cases, that the Expressions of Scripture were suited to the common Notions of
the People who were to read them: from whence it follows, that the appearing
Falsehood of the Opinions abovementioned, if they had been found in Scripture,
would have been a more puzling Objection to the Christians of former Times,
than the allowed Falsehood of the Common Vulgar Notions of Philosophy, which the
Scriptures are at present charged with, can be to us.

And what we suppose of the Times before Copernicus, would hold good of the
present upon the like Trial: For it is not to be contested, but there are a
great many other true Notions in Philosophy hitherto unknown to us, which upon
the first discovery, would appear as shocking, and contrary to all our former
Knowledge, as the Motion of the Earth, the Planetary Worlds, etc. did to our
Predecessors; and were these delivered in our Bibles, as we have supposed the
other to be, they would furnish as much matter of Cavil to our Modern, and all
succeeding Scepticks, as those would have done to the Philosophers of former
Ages, till further Experience had reconciled them to their Reason; which could
never be expected in all Points: For, had every Thing the Scripture has
occasion to mention, been expressed according to the true Philosophy of it, the
whole Race of Mankind could never make Experiments and Observations enough to
satisfy themselves of the Truth of all the Scripture-Notions, without the
Authority of the Revelation, as long as the World indures.

But beside this general Defense of the Philosophy of Scripture, it may be
said, that several seeming Contradictions to Reason, which the Enemies of our
Religion have laid a great stress upon, have been proved to be true and
consistent by Learned Men, and some of them that were capable of it,
Mathema^ically demonstrated? As particularly the Capacity of Noah's Ark.

The same Thing may be answered to the next Objections made to Scripture, viz.
That several Places which seemed to contradict one another, have been plainly
reconciled, and several things which have been looked upon as Mistakes, as to
the Authors of the Books, Connection of the Parts, Chronology, Geography, etc.
have been clearly proved to be none, by those who have particularly undertook
the Examination of these Difficulties: And as to those Places which do not
admit of such a Solution, all the Faults and Defects they are charged with, are
wholly owing to the Tradition and way of Conveyance which was purely Humane,
and were not in the Original Revelation which we say was Divine, and have
proved to be so by many incontestable Evidences.

Allowing therefore, that the Text of the Scriptures, like that of other Books,
has received some alterations by Time and variety of Copies; That some of the
Rolls or Sheets of the Old Testament have been misplaced; that some Things have
been inserted afterward; Words and Sentences have been left out, Letters have
been changed, and other Mistakes have been made by Transcribers: That some of
the Books, or some parts of them are ascribed to wrong Authors; and that it has
been much controverted, whether some of them should be admitted into the Canon:
Should we, I say, allow all this, I do not see what use could be made of it, to
the prejudice either of the Truth or Divinity of the Jewish and Christian
Revelations. For variety of Copies from whence all the alterations of the Text
proceed, are a very great Argument of the Sincerity and Importance of the
Original, as being the best Preservative against all Corruption in the
Substance and principal parts of it: And the Controverted Books only show what
care and faithful Examination there was of every Book, before it was admitted
into the Canon.

But, to give all the force and weight to these Objections which they can
possibly have; should we reject all Controverted Books and Passages whatsoever,
and should we establish any Reading we please where there is variety, only
letting the authentic, undoubted Places be the Rule of Exposition to the
doubtful (than which nothing can be more reasonable) in this Case I dare
affirm, that not one Article of Faith or Rule of Practice, or any of the
principal Facts our Religion is built upon, would be cut off, but might be as
evidently proved from what remains uncontested as from the whole. It does not
therefore follow from those Changes and Alterations that have crept into the
Scriptures since they were deposited in the hands of Men to keep, or the
Contests they have had about the Authority of some parts of them, that what
remains unaltered and uncontested, is not true and of Divine Original; because
God has no where promised to exempt the Books, in which his Revelations to Man
are preserved, from the accidents common to other Books.

Nay further, should we allow what some have the confidence to assert, That the
Sacred Writers themselves were liable to the same Mistakes as other Men are, in
the Relation of Matters of Fact from (...) own Memories, or the Information of
credible Witnesses; it cannot be concluded from hence, that any of the
principal Facts which make a necessary part of our Religion are false: Because
these were all so very extraordinary and notorious, and so impossible to be
believed, or passed by without Censure and Contradiction, if they could have
been denied, that had the Authors of the Books of Scripture had no peculiar
Assistance from God in the Composure of them, we can have no manner of Reason
to disbelieve or question the Truth of any Thing of the Substance and principal
Parts either of the History or Doctrine there delivered: For supposing those we
call the Sacred Writers were not Divinely inspired (as we believe they were;)
yet were they capable, and faithful Witnesses of what they writ; and did not
this appear to us from their Way and Manner of Writing, and from the Testimony
of others concerning them, yet are the Accounts they give us of such a Nature,
and Writ at such Times, that it is impossible they should ever have been
believed, if they had not been true; from whence it follows, That the History
of the Scriptures must be true, and the Doctrines they contain, given by Divine
Inspiration, though the Persons that Recorded the wonderful Works and
Revelations of God were not Divinely assisted in the same manner in the
Writing, as they themselves, or others they write of, were in the first
Preaching and Publishing the Will of God.

As to the remaining Objections to Scripture, viz. Ridiculous and Improbable
Stories, absurd Laws and Injunctions, Impertinent Reasons and Arguments, low
and unartful Expressions: All those will admit of one common Answer, and are
easily and justly accountable for, from our Ignorance of the Language in which
the Scriptures, and especially those of the Old Testament were writ. Ancient
Customs and Vsages in speaking and acting, and the Temper and Circumstances of
the People where the Things were said and done.

The Wisdom of all Laws and Institutions, is to be judged of by the Temper and
Circumstances of the Persons for whom they were made, particularly at the Time
when they were made.

The Eloquence and Propriety at all Discourses, and the Force and Weight of
Arguments depend likewise upon the Character of the Persons the Discourses were
directed to, or intended for; and their peculiar Disposition and Circumstances
at such and such Times.

Ridiculous and absurd are arbitrary and relative Terms, and vary according to
the different Notions of the Persons that use them, there being several Things,
which to some appear absurd and ludicrous, which considered by others in
different Circumstances, appear proper and grave.

From these Considerations, might all the particular Things objected under the
forementioned Heads be answered, as a great many of them have been already,
were we thoroughly instructed in those Matters which are absolutely necessary,
in order to make any Judgment upon the Things in question, which at this
distance from the first delivery of them, is in several Cases impossible.

But in defect of such Information as is necessary to give a clear and
particular Account of all the Passages of Scripture excepted against by
Profane and Cavilling Men, it is sufficient to say in general what has been
before unanswerably proved, that all the principal Matters of Fact Recorded in
the Holy Writings, upon which the Certainty of the Revelation, and the
Obligations of the Religion therein contained, are founded, are beyond all
exception true; for the Authority of these, will bear down and overruled all
other seeming difficulties that occur in Scripture, which are not manifestly
inconsistent with the first Principles of our Knowledge upon which all our
Faith as well as Reason is grounded.

There are several Relations of Things, in the most approved Books, which I
should not believe so readily if they were not supported by the Authority of
the rest: But when I have unquestionable proof of the Veracity and Wisdom of
the Writer in some things, I can easily believe other things which he says must
be true and wise though they seem to me foolish and untrue. And therefore when
I am certainly convinced, it is God that speaks, by Infallible Signs, and a
great part of the Discourse appears to me worthy of God, I cannot doubt but all
the rest must proceed from God, and be worthy of him, though it would not
appear so without this support. Had the Bible came down to us with all the
exceptionable Stories and Expressions put together, without the other parts of
it, I could not have perceived it belonged to God, without many wonderful Signs
to confirm it, and I should have been very distrustful of the Signs; but when I
am thoroughly convinced of the Authority of a Testimony nothing but a downright
Contradiction would shock my Belief. Did Twelve Men of known Integrity to me,
affirm they heard an Ass or Serpent Speak, or any such thing as is Recorded in
Scriture, I should believe them without any manner of Scruple or Hesitation;
and according to the Nature and Importance of what was said I should judge it
proceeded either from the secret force of Nature, or from Evil Spirits, or from
God.

If therefore we are satisfied by undeniable Arguments, that the Substance and
Principal parts of the Scripture-History are true, and consequently that the
Bible is the Word of God; it necessarily follows, that all the questionable
Places of it are capable of such a Solution as is very consistent with the
Wisdom and Designs of God, and with all the Principles of our Reason, though we
should not be able to give it: And indeed such Answers have been already made
to several things which seemed most liable to Exception, that it is very easy
to conceive how those that are yet unanswered might be Solved, were we
furnished with all the Knowledge requisite for such a Performance: But it has
not pleased God to give us such Light, and it does not seem Repugnant to any
thing in the Divine Nature to deny it us; and therefore the Difficulties of
Scripture, as well as those of Natural Providence, may be a proper Exercise of
our Faith, but are a very unjust and unwarrantable ground of Infidelity; since
in both he has vouchsased us such plain and certain Manifestations of himself,
as cannot be darkened by all that infinite abyss of Knowledge which is veiled
and concealed from us.

I shall not therefore concern my self any further, to give a particular Answer
to the many minute Objections that are made to Scripture; because if the
Authority of the Holy Writings depended upon the Force or Invalidity of these
Objections, in order to prove the Truth of those Writings, every one of them
must be distinctly and satisfactorily Answered; and that is plainly impossible,
by reason that they cannot all receive their proper Solutions without a through
insight into the whole compass of Humane Knowledge, which no Man, or Generation
of Men, is capable of; and without such a Penetration into the Ways and Designs
of God as is not attainable but by Revelation.

But if it be urged that there are some particular Objections which do of
themselves, without the assistance of any other Arguments, overthrow the Credit
and Authority of the Scriptures, these having been never yet alleged, it is
time enough to give an Answer to them when the whole Cause is put upon that
Issue.

But, besides all this, a particular Answer to all or any Objections is a
needless trouble, because the proof that has been given of the Christian
Revelation is sufficient to Establish the Authority of it, notwithstanding any
Objection that can be made to the Books of Scripture; which I shall endeavor
more fully to make out under the next General Head of Discourse.

IV. Forurthly then I shall show the Sufficiency of such a Proof as has before
been given by Matters of Fact, to induce us to believe the Christian Religion,
and render us inexcusable if we do not.

Now the Matters of Fact I have undertook to prove, lying out of the reach of
our own present Perceptions and Memories, and being not Communicated to us by
Immediate Revelation from God, we can be informed and assured of the truth of
them no other way than by Humane Testimony; the Connection of present
Appearances with former; and from the Nature of things either in General, or
the Particular Facts in Question. If therefore it can be shown that those
Matters of Fact which make up the Christian History, and upon which the
Christian Religion is Founded, are as well attested as any other distant Facts
whatsoever; that there is as necessary a Connection betwixt them and the present
state of things in the World, as betwixt the present and any former
Appearances; and that we have as much assurance both from the Nature of things
in General, and these in Particular, that they are true, as we can have that
any thing else is so at a distance from us: If, I say, it can be shown that the
Proof before given answers all these Characters, then does it evidently follow,
that there is as much reason to believe the Christian Religion, as there can
possibly be to be believe any Matters of Fact out of the Notice and Observation
of the Living; and that there are some such Matters of Fact as these, which
deserve our assent to them, as well as any Truths concerning the real Nature of
things, cannot be questioned.

1. First, Then as to Humane Testimony; What true Matters of Fact are there now
believed in the World which are better attested than the Christian are? There
is no History of former Times, now extant, confirmed by such a Cloud of
Witnesses, and there never were any Witnesses of such unquestionable Characters.

We have a great many Authors now extant, who had themselves a Principal
Concern in the Transactions they write of; They were all Persons of great
Probity and Integrity, of a disinteressed, undesigning Simplicity of Manners,
Men without Guile, and without Deceit; They were bred up in a different
Religion from that they Recommended in their Writings; They were very much
Prejudiced against the Pretenses of their Master who came to instruct them in
it; They were slow to believe the Account he gave of Himself and the Gospel he
Preached; and the Meanness and Poverty of his Condition while he Lived, the
Scandal of his Death, and the many Afflictions and Dangers his Disciples and
Followers were exposed to after his Death, were very great Discouragements from
embracing his Doctrine.

The History these Persons acquaint us with, consists of such a multiplicity of
Public Notorious Facts, so easy to be known, so curious to be enquired into,
and of such vast Consequence and Importance for all Persons to be rightly
imform'd in, that every body might have disproved them if they had been False,
and every body that did not believe them would have thought himself concerned
to have done it if he could.

After these first Christian Writers, we have a large Succession of other
Authors, who Lived at different Times, during the space of Three Hundred Years,
and in several distant Countries and Nations throughout the Roman Empire, who
do unanimously acquaint us, that Copies of those first Writers were carefully
preserved in every Place; and who confirm their Characters, and the Truth of
their Relation; which they assure us were every where believed so firmly and
heartily, that vast Multitudes of People, in all Places, forsook the Religion
they had been bred up in, laid aside the old Laws and Customs they had lived
by, restrained the Inclinations, and denied the Appetites they had indulged,
and conquered inveterate Prejudices and Aversions, in order to comply with the
Doctrine and Institution of Christ, according as it was delivered in the
Scriptures of the New Testament.

And in the same manner we are informed, that during these Three Hundred Years,
all sorts of Christians were exposed to great Troubles, Losses and Sufferings,
upon account of their Profession; and that abundance of them endured various
Tortures, and suffered Death and Reproach, for not renouncing their Faith; of
which number were most of the Writers of those Times, of whose Sincerity,
Piety, and Diligent Enquiry into the Truth of the Christian History and
Revelation, we have ample Testimonies remaining: Several of them were likewise
very Learned Men, of great Fame and Reputation for Philosophy, and who would
not yield to the Simplicity of the Gospel till overruled and bore down by the
Irresistible Authority of Matters of Fact well proved and attested. All of them
writ at such Times, and in such Places, when and where every body that read
what they had writ, was as capable of imforming himself of the Truth and
Integrity of the Christian Tradition as the Authors themselves were, there
being a great many other Writers cited by them, and diverse other Monuments and
Records appealed to, which were then extant and publicly known.

It is moreover very remarkable, That, during this forementioned Term of 300
Years, while Christianity was new, and under Persecution, neither the Jews nor
Heathens, those industrious Enemies and Opposers of the Gospel, who were every
where mixed with the Christians, and were continually Disputing with them: This,
I say, is a further confirmation of the Truth of the Christian Religion, that
not one of all its Ancient Enemies, either Jew or Heathen, should ever deny or
call in question the great and wonderful Facts 'twas built upon; but that
several of them should corroborate the Christian Accounts by many Circumstances
mentioned in their own Writings, as it is manifest they have done.

Thus stands the first and earliest Proof of the Christian Religion from Humane
Testimony; which is further confirmed by an innumerable and continually
increasing Company of Writers, and the Constancy and Universality of Belief
ever since, which, by reason of some Opposition or other, has been, in every
Age almost examined over again, and stood the Test of the most Malicious
Examination.

2. In the next place then, without considering these Humane Authorities in
particular, let us examine what Connection there is betwixt the present State of
Christianity in the World, and the Ancient History of it.

That the Christian Religion is now owned and professed in a great many
Countries; that, wherever the Christian Religion is believed, there the
Scriptures of the New Testament are acknowledged also as the Rule and Standard
of it; and that all the wonderful Facts therein Recorded, are believed by
Christians to have really happened at the Times and Places there mentioned, are
Matters of Fact which every Body may, by his own Observation, find to be true,
and I shall here take for granted.

This therefore being the present State of Things in the World, it necessarily
follows from hence, That the Christian Religion had a Beginning: There was a
Time when the Christian Religion was no where practiced, nor any of those
Facts, Recorded in the New Testament, believed. How then came it to pass, That
any Body should Contrive and Publish such a Scheme as this? And how came any
Body to believe it when Published, if it had not been true?

It Is plain that the first Contrivers, Publishers, and Believers of the
Christian Religion, whoever they were, must have been either Persons of no
Religion at all before, or of a different one from the Christian; they must
have been either Good Men or Ill Men, such as lived up to the Rules and
Principles of the Christian Religion, or contrary to them: But whichsoever of
these Characters we suppose belonged to the first Christians, I cannot possibly
account for the Present State of Christianity, if the Principal Facts related
in the New Testament were not true.

I cannot conceive that an Atheist, or a Wicked Man, that was bred up in
different Notions of Religion, and whose Practice was contrary to the Christian
Rules of Life, could invent such a Scheme as contradicted and condemned all his
former Opinions and Practices, or would have been at the pains to do it if he
could. And I can as little imagine that there was any Person before the
appearance of Christianity in the World, who could, by the strength of his own
Capacities, without any Divine Assistance, find out such a noble Plan and Model
of Humane Life as that contained in the New Testament, and by the extraordinary
force and goodness of his own Disposition, live up to it himself before he
recommended it to others; and as impossible is it to suppose that such a good
Man as this should throw off those contrary Sentiments and Impressions of
Religion he had been brought up in, for being False and Ineffectual for the
promoting a good Life; and at the same time forge a Set of the most
unaccountable Lies that were ever known, and make use of this Imposture to
enforce the Belief and Practice of his new Principles, which are plainly and
directly inconsistent with such Methods.

But could we suppose any Person capable of framing such a Scheme as the (...),
without the help of Revelation for the Doctrines of it, or true History for the
Facts it is built upon; What End or Motive could be imagined sufficient to
determine him to do it? He could not propose any Profit or Advantage to himself
from a Work which he knew would render all the Promoters of it liable to
Reproaches, Troubles and Afflictions, and every thing that was hard and
grievous in Life: For this, whoever Published the Christian Religion first,
assures us was to be the Lot and Portion of those that embraced it: This is one
of the Principal Doctrines of the Gospel; where we are commanded to quit all we
Possess; to renounce all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of the World; to expect
Tribulation and Anguish, Ignominy and Death, and to suffer all manner of
Persecution gladly for the sake of the Christian Profession. How could a Man
that made this a part of his Religion, and had foresight enough to know he
should have occasion to practice it himself, think of advancing his Interest in
the World by such an Invention.

And how can we imagine any uncertain, doubtful Prospect of Future Reputation
after Death should be strong enough to bear him up against all the sure and
sensible Discouragements he was to meet with while he Lived?

As this cannot well be imagined, so neither is it probable to believe, that
the mere pleasure of deceiving should put a Man upon the contrivance of such a
Scheme as was very unlikely to take, very hazardous to the Impostor, and very
beneficial to all that were deceived.

It is moreover very unconceivable how any Man should think of advancing the
present Interest and Welfare of Mankind by persuading them to believe all the
Wonderful Facts and Extraordinary Doctrines of the Christian Religion, which
have no manner of relation to it; and how he should come to be so mightily for
their Happiness in a Future State, which he had no certainty of from
Revelation: Neither is there any reason to be given why he should imagine the
belief of those Facts and Doctrines necessary to their Happiness in a Future
State, if he had been sure there was one; nor why he should pitch upon the
grossest Forgeries imaginable, in order to promote the practice of such Virtues
among Men as are directly opposite to the means he used for this end.

We cannot therefore account for the contrivance of the Christian Religion from
any End or Motive that was likely to put a Man upon such a Work, because it is
very manifest from the whole Tenor of this Religion, that the Author of it, if
it had been an Imposture, could not have promised himself any kind of advantage
from his Undertaking.

And upon further Enquiry and Examination, it will appear, That if any Man had
been wise enough to invent such a Religion, and foolish enough to have had some
certain aim and prospect in effecting it, his Success could never have been
answerable to his Expectation. For how could such a Religion as the Christian,
have ever obtained so general a Credit in the World, as we find it now has, if
it had been purely Humane Invention? The Morality of it is so Pure and Holy, so
contrary to all the prevailing Inclinations and Interests of Mankind in this
Life, that we find it the hardest thing in the World, by continual Care and
Instruction, to bring Men to submit to it, who have been accustomed by
Education to believe it Revealed by God, and Established upon the Conditions of
Eternal Happiness and Misery in another World, who are confirmed in that belief
by the concurrent Faith of all they know and converse with, and who are left
without a possibility of disproving the Truth of the pretended Revetion, if it
had been at first an Imposture: How then can we imagine that the Christian Laws
and Rules of Life should have been so easily received at their first
Publication, so widely Propagated afterward, and so absolutely and entirely
submitted to, that they should become the standing unalterable Laws of so many
different Countries and Nations as do now profess the Christian Faith; How, I
say, could this have ever happened, if the first Set of Persons that embraced
this Morality had not been fully convinced that it had been expressly revealed
by God, and enjoined Mankind under the Sanction of Eternal Rewards and
Punishments? And how could any Man be persuaded of this without believing those
wonderful Facts, upon the Credit of which the Truth of the whole Revelation is
Founded? But if we suppose the first Christians that ever were, believed all
those Matters of Fact, how can this be supposed of them except they were true?
How can we possibly imagine that the Principal Matters of Fact related in the
New Testament, which are now a necessary part of the Faith of all Christians
should be believed by those in whose times the Scheme is laid, in contradiction
to all their Senses, or first obtain Credit among those who lived afterward,
without any proof of their being done or believed before? And if we suppose the
Christian Morality Entertained and Established in the World, without the
present History we have of it, the Forgery of that afterward would have been
wholly unnecessary, and the difficulty of getting such a Forgery believed, much
greater.

From hence then it plainly follows that there could never have been such a
state of things in the World as we now perceive, if all the Principal Parts and
Substance of the Christian History, as it is at present generally believed,
were not true, and had some time or other really happened out according to the
Relation we find given of them.

This does likewise further appear from the way and manner in which those Books
that contain this History are Written; where we find so many extraordinary
Marks and Characters of the Simplicity, Integrity, and undesigning Humility of
the Writers, their hearty Belief of what they wrote themselves, and their great
Zeal and Concern for the Good of Mankind, as plainly show them to have been
Influenced not only by the force of well-attested Truth, but by some
extraordinary and more than Humane Impressions.

3. These are in short the Reasons we have to believe the Truth of the
Christian Religion: The Validity and Force of which I shall endeavor to make
out more fully under the Third Head; where I am to show the Sufficiency of the
Proof that has been given of the Christian Matters of Fact from the Nature of
Things, upon which the certainty of all Matters of Fact, as well as other
Truths, is ultimately founded.

Now the chief and immediate Reason of believing most Facts, being taken from
the Nature of Man, and there being nothing we are so well acquainted with as
the common Original, Capacities and Powers, Inclinations and Aversions of
Mankind, and consequently their Ends and Motives of acting, it will be easy to
show from hence, that the proof of the Christian Religion before given, is not
only sufficient to determine our assent to it, but does in Evidence, and
Multiplicity of Conviction, far exceed the Proof any other Matters of Fact are
capable of.

In the first place then, let us consider why we believe any Matter of Fact,
which never fell within our own particular and immediate Cognizance? Why do we
so firmly believe the Story of Julius Caesar, and William the Conqueror, that
there is such a place as Italy or China, etc? Now the reason of this, upon
examining our selves, we shall find to be, because a great many Men have
acquainted us that there were formerly such Persons who did such and such
Things; and that there are now such Places in the World, etc. which Men were
competent Judges of what they tell us, had sufficient Opportunities of knowing
the Truth themselves, no Motives conceivable that could dispose them to lie to
others, and are contradicted by no body of equal Authority with them; these are
all the grounds of Credibility, upon which Matters of Fact are generally
believed; and no further Characters of Truth are required by one that is
satisfied of these. But we have all these Reasons to believe the Common Matters
of Fact related in the New Testament, in the fullest Force and Extent of them,
and several other besides, as the Incapacity of the Witnesses to deceive, if
they had been disposed to do it, the greater Motives they had not to say what
they did, than to say it if it had been false, and the greater Motives other
Persons had to contradict them if they could have been disproved. Let us
examine all these Characters of Truth, and see how far the Proof of the
Christian History exceeds that of other Matters of Fact; and how far the
supposed Falsehood of it, notwithstanding these Characters, is consistent with
that certain Knowledge we have of Humane Nature.

As to the first Character required for the Proof of Matters of Fact, the
Number of the Witnesses; there never was certainly so vast a Multitude of
Persons, all unanimously agreeing to assert the Truth of so great a variety of
Matters of Fact, as there is in the Case before us; because the Progress of
Christianity was so swift, that we cannot suppose more Persons could have been
acquainted with the History and Doctrines of it in so short a time; and there
never was such industrious Care taken to propagate the Belief of any other
Facts and Opinions that we ever read of.

It is likewise as certain, that the whole Multitude of the first Publishers,
and Professors of Christianity were as competent Judges of the Matters they
bear witness of, as it is possible for any Man to be of any thing else
whatsoever. We will only suppose now, that Christ and his Apostles and
Disciples, pretended to such Things as are Recorded of them in the Scriptures,
and consequently to believe their own Pretenses; and that all others who
professed the Gospel of Christ, did declare their Belief of all those Things
which are related as said or done by Christ and his Apostles: And surely a Man
may infallibly know his own Thoughts and Imaginations; he can tell whether he
believes such or such a Thing or no, or at least he can be certain that he
thinks or fancies he believes it; and, if there be any Intercourse or
Communication betwixt Men, one Man may know that another pretends to believe or
do a Thing, whether he really believes or does it or no. If a Multitude of Men
can be deceived in such Judgments as these concerning themselves and one
another, it is evident that there is no such thing as Knowledge at all.

If therefore it must be allowed, that a vast Multitude of Persons did pretend
to believe all those things that they are said to believe in the New Testament,
it necessarily follows from hence, that they did really and truly believe them,
or else they pretended to believe what they certainly knew to be false. But
that they did not pretend to believe what they knew to be false will evidently
appear from these further Reflections upon Humane Nature.

First, then it is certain that every Man must act for some End or Motive, and
here is no End or Motive conceivable that could determine any of the first
Publishers or Professors of Christianity, to pretend to believe those Facts
which they knew to be false. All the Ends and Motives we can imagine any Man to
act upon in such a Case, we have reckoned up before; and we find, that if we
put our selves into the same Circumstances with those first Witnesses of
Christianity, it would have been impossible for us to have been influenced by
any of them to make the same pretenses, being infallibly assured at the same
time, that they were utterly false and groundless; from whence we conclude,
that neither did they, since all Men are so made and contrived, as to be
determined by the same general Motives, though, according to the difference of
the Objects that affect them, and the difference of the Imaginations of those
that are affected, the Influence may be stronger upon some than others.

If we consider the Power and Force of Truth in general, the natural Ease and
Pleasure that accompanies Sincerity, and the Difficulty and Reluctance with
which Men practice known Deceit and Falsehood; we cannot but infer from hence,
that it very rarely happens, that any Men come to find a pleasure in Lying,
purely for deceiving sake, without any further End or Prospect; and all
Observations upon the History of Mankind confirm this Conclusion; and therefore
we judge it contrary to the Nature of Man to suppose there was a whole Age of
such Deceivers as these, who pretended to believe a great number of
unprofitable Lies, which were to bring them in no other Pleasure or
Satisfaction than what every one found in deceiving others. But it is plain,
that if Christianty was an Imposture, this must be supposed: For none of the
first Christians ever pretended to any other Pleasures or Advantages of Life:
They made it part of their Religion to renounce them all; and the World was not
so kind as to force them to accept what they had voluntarily abandoned.

And if it be contrary to Humane Nature in General, to imagine that a vast
Multitude of People of different Tempers and Inclinations, should all conspire
together to pretend a Belief of what they knew to be false, without any further
prospect of Pleasure and Advantage, than what immediately resulted from such
Pretenses; much more repugnant is it when we consider the Characters of these
Pretenders; the greatest part of which were Persons of such steady integrity
before, that Lying must have offered the greatest violence imaginable to their
Consciences.

But further, supposing the first Christians had some Motives sufficient to
determine them all to agree in the same false Pretenses, notwithstanding that
great contrariety of Interests such a Multitude is commonly governed by;
whatever Advantages they proposed to themselves, they found such mighty
disappointments every where in their Hopes, and endured such unspeakable
Troubles and Afflictions for the sake of their Profession, that they had
stronger Motives for their discovering and relinquishing the Cheat they had
maintained, than they could have at first to begin it; and therefore, if none
of them were induced to confess their Pretenses false, in such occasions where
other Men have been often tempted, or forced to disown the Truth, we must infer
from hence, that they did really believe all they pretended to, or they were
not like other Men, but of a strange Nature, different from whatever we have
known or heard of.

This must be likewise said too of all the other People of that Age when
Christianity was first Published, who refused to believe the Christian
Pretenses: For how otherwise can we account for their not contradicting and
disproving them when they had all those Motives and Reasons for discovering the
Imposture, which were manifestly wanting for the Invention and Propagation of
it.

From all which, I think we may with confidence conclude, that the first
Authors, Publishers, and Professors of Christianity, did really believe all
they declared and asserted: From whence it immediately and necessarily follows,
that all the Common Matters of Fact which they believed to be true, were
actually true, they having the same Evidence of Sense for them, as we have now,
or any other Generation of Men ever had, for whatever fell under the Cognizance
of their Senses; so that if they were deceived, we must call in question all
our own Sensations, which are the Foundations of all our other Knowledge. And
the same Evidence that they had for these Common Matters of Fact, they had also
for all the Extraordinary Facts mentioned in the Christian History, so far as
concerns the Things done, and the Pretenses of the Authors; and as to the Power
by which they were done, I am as sure they exceed all Humane Strength and
Skill, as I am sure any thing else does. And then, according to the best and
truest Notions we are able to frame of the Divine Nature, we cannot but judge
they were very proper Marks and Indications of his Power, manifest Tokens of
his Goodness to Men, and so suited and adapted to their Capacities, that we
cannot frame or imagine a way whereby God could have more effectually revealed
himself to us, if he ever designed to reveal himself to us at all; and it
appears very agreeable both to his Wisdom and Goodness, that he should make
such a Revelation as the Christian Religion is to us, as has been shown more at
large before.

If therefore there was an Age when the several Persons mentioned in the New
Testament did pretend to do what is there Recorded of them, and all the
principal Matters of Fact which make up the Christian History were believed far
and wide, according to the Relation there given, it is inconsistent with all the
Principles of Humane Nature, and repugnant to the Nature of God, that they
should be false, as far as we are able, by all the Knowledge we have of the
Nature of God and Man to judge.

That there was such an Age as this, we have the constant, universal, and
uninterrupted Testimony of all the succeeding Ages; and when a great many
different Countries and Nations do all Unanimously agree to assert, that their
Immediate Forefathers did receive such a Religion, consisting of a great
variety of Facts and Doctrines; and all these being contained in certain Books,
and Copies of those Books being dispersed throughout these several Countries,
the Faith is every where the same: In such a case as this, it is not to be
doubted, but so far as the succeeding Generation of Men agree in their
Testimony concerning the Faith of their immediate Predecessors, so far they
were of the same Faith with them. If this be not allowed, it is impossible to
know any thing beyond our own Time, and no Humane Testimony is to be admitted
upon any occasion, a greater and more unsuspected Testimony then this being
utterly inconceivable: But, if such Evidence as this be certain and
unquestionable, as indeed it is, then is the present universal belief of the
Scriptures of the New Testament an undeniable Argument that there was a time
when the Principal Matters of Fact there Recorded were pretended to be done,
and were believed by vast Multitudes of those who lived at that time, to be
really done in the way and manner in which they are now related to have
happened; and if they were then believed, they must be true for the Reasons
before given.

Thus far the Sufficiency of the positive and direct part of the proof of the
Christian Religion is manifested from the Nature of Things: And in the same
manner it will appear, that what has been before offered to show the absurdity
of supposing the Christian Religion an Imposture, is sufficient to determine
any Man to believe it.

For if we thoroughly and impartially consider the whole Christian Scheme, as
delivered in the Writings of the New Testament, which we have before laid
together in a short Draught and Representation of the Principal Parts and
Characters of it; and if at the same time we take a just view of Humane Nature,
we shall find it utterly impossible that such a Scheme as this should ever have
been contrived or believed without any Extraordinary Interposition of Divine
Providence.

All the Notions we have of the Powers and Capacities of the Soul of Man, will
not enable us to conceive how such a Set of Thoughts as compose the Christian
Scheme, could be brought together by the mere unassisted Force and Agitation of
the Soul, whatever Internal Springs we imagine that Force derived from.

But when we consider further, that if there had been any Man capable of such
an Invention, there was no End or Motive sufficient to determine him to
undertake it, and Conduct and Support him in the Management of the whole Work,
we must conclude that it was not of Humane Composition. And this we are assured
of, because there are but such and such Ends that Mankind can act upon, and
none of these could have any influence in the Contrivance of the Christian
Religion in the manner we find it delivered to us in the New Testament; for it
is so Framed and Contrived in all its Parts and Circumstances, that 'twas
impossible for any one that could be the Author of it, not to perceive that all
the Ways and Methods he took of Establishing his Invention would most certainly
and effectually defeat the End he aimed at, whatever we suppose that to be; and
no Man could make use of such means for the obtaining an End which he knew
would destroy it.

But besides the difficulties of the Invention, which cannot be accounted for
by all the knowledge we have of the Nature of Man, the Propagation of the
Christian Religion does plainly surmount all Humane Art and Power. For
supposing the first Christians never so well inclined to believe Christianity
when it was proposed to them, it is impossible for Men to belive what they will.
The Evidence of some things is so great, that we cannot resist; and, on the
contrary, there are some things of such a Nature, that no Bias or Prejudice
whatsoever is strong enough to make us believe them without their proper
Evidence; and such are all the Principal parts of the Christian History, as
appears from the Reflections before made upon them. But if we consider the
first Christians, as being all strongly disposed to reject the Christian
Religion before they embraced it, as it is certain they were, whoever we suppose
them to be, then was their difficulty of believing much greater: From whence it
is necessarily inferred that if the Principal Matters of Fact contained in the
Christian History had not been proved to be true, when they were first
Published, they could never have been believed; and if they could not have been
truly and really believed, 'twas full as impossible that great Multitudes of
People should pretend to believe them when they did not; because all the
Reasons and Motives that can be supposed for such Pretenses, could have no more
Influence in the first Profession then they had in the Invention of
Christianity, and there they had none at all, as we have shown before.

Thus does it plainly appear from the whole Frame and Texture of the Christian
Religion, the Nature of the Facts and Doctrines contained in it, and the manner
in which it is delivered to the World, compared with the Nature of Man, that
the Christian Religion, as we now find it contained in the Scriptures of the
New Testament, was Discovered, Published, and Propagated in the way and manner
there Recorded: From whence I shall infer, that it certainly came from God, for
the Reasons given in the former part of this Discourse, concerning the Nature
of God, and Evil Spirits, which I shall not repeat here; because if the first
Point be granted, this Inference, I believe, will not be disputed by any Man.

Now that the Arguments here taken from the Nature of Man have all the force
and weight that is laid upon them, I shall further endeavor to make good, by
showing that we have as much reason to conclude that these are Just and True,
as we have that any other Arguments drawn from the Nature of Things are Valid:
In order to which end I shall take the liberty to go over the chief Proofs of
the Christian Religion again, and consider them with this particular View.

Let us then examine what ground we proceed upon in our reasoning upon other
Matters, and how we arrive at any certainty concerning them. How come we to
affirm that a Body of such a Density and Bulk is of such a Weight; that a Body
of such a Weight, has such a force in Projection; that such a particular Body,
in such and such Circumstances, will certainly produce such Effects; that it is
impossible that such a Body should exceed such limits in its Motion, and the
like? Now the only reason we have to conclude such Propositions concerning
Bodies to be true, upon which all the fine Mathematical Demonstrations in
Natural Philosophy, and all the useful Inventions in Mechanics are grounded,
is this, That all the Observations and Experiments that have ever been made
upon these things do assure us, that they have always been after this manner;
and the like will hold in our Reasonings from Humane Nature.

I can no more believe the whole Christian Scheme an Imposture of mere Humane
Contrivance, than I can believe that all the Materials which composed the City
of Rome met together, and put themselves into that Form: For as I cannot see
what should give those Materials a determinate Motion toward the building that
City, no more can I comprehend what should influence or determine a Man to
Frame and Contrive such a History and Religion as the Christian. And, as it is
impossible to believe that, if all the Materials necessary for the Building of
Rome had, by some extraordinary Motion, been carried to that Place, they would
have fashioned themselves and fell into that exact Form we find that City built
in; so likewise is it equally impossible to conceive, that if there was any End
or Motive in Nature sufficient to determine a Man to invent such a Religion as
the Christian, he should have made and contrived it, in all its Parts and
Circumstances, just such as it is delivered to us in the Scriptures, and that
so contrived it should have been Entertained, Propagated, and Fixed in the World
upon lasting Foundations.

Now the reason why I conclude both these things equally impossible is, because
there never was any thing like either of these Events ever known to have
happened in the World, and because upon the utmost stretch of Thought, grounded
upon the most intimate Knowledge we can have of the Nature of the Things
concerned, and the greatest compass of Observation that can be made upon the
course of things in the World, it cannot be conceived or imagined that such
Events as these should ever happen.

That there never was an Instance of any thing like the Christian Scheme, which
was proved or allowed by any body in the World to be an Imposture, I shall take
for granted, since none of the Enemies of Christianity have ever produced one.

As for Mahometism, which some have had the impudence to compare with
Christianity; so far as both they and we allow it to be an Imposture, it can
have no manner of place here as a Parallel Instance. For it is on all hands
granted that there was such a Man as Mahomet, who lived at the Time and Place
it is pretended by his Followers he did; it is granted likewise that he wrote the
Alcoran, and pretended to the things there Recorded of him; and that his
Religion prevailed, and was Propagated in the way and manner there related and
described by him: But, in the present supposition of the whole Christian
Scheme's being an Imposture, it must be affirmed that call the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and the whole History therein contained, are mere Forgery
and Invention, without any Foundation of Truth in the Common Matters of Fact
there Recorded, which makes the case of Christianity, in all the important
variety of Circumstances and Events possible, unlike that of Mahometism.

And as no Instance of such an Imposture, as is here pretended, can be given
out of the History of former times, so likewise is it utterly impossible to
imagine that such an Instance as this could ever happen at all.

To give our selves a fuller and more sensible Conviction of this, let us take
as exact and extensive a view as we can of the State of the World, just before
we affirm that Christianity was discovered, or at the latest Period of Time
mentioned in the New Testament; Let us consider the General Temper,
Inclinations, Opinions, and Interests of the Jews at that time, together with
the highest Improvements in Learning and Religion then amongst them; Let us
make the same Reflections upon the Roman State and Government, and the
Principal Nations and Countries within that Empire: Then let us carefully weigh
and examine the Christian History and Religion contained in the Scriptures of
the New Testament; let us represent to our selves, in one continued Prospect,
all the Principal Facts there Recorded, drawn forth in all their variety of
Circumstances, the whole System of Doctrines and Rules, in their just
Dependence and Connection, the Characters of the Persons concerned in the
Publishing and Establishing them, together with the way and manner in which all
these things are Written; and when we have done this, let us truly and
impartially ask our selves whether we can possibly conceive how any Person
could at that time Invent and Publish that whole Scheme of Things at Jerusalem,
Rome, or any other part of the Roman Empire, without any ground of truth to
build upon; and, supposing it Published, how it could be Believed so firmly,
and Propagated so far and wide, that it should be fixed and continue in all this
part of the World to this day, without any Footsteps or Motives remaining
whereby we might be able to detect the Imposture. This, I say, appears to me as
hard to conceive, as that Rome should build it self; and I am verily persuaded
would appear so to any one else, that had as fully and impartially considered
the Matter as I have endeavored to do.

If we date the Imposture later, the same difficulty will attend the Invention
and Propagation of it, and we shall be further puzzled to account for all the
Signs and Monuments of Christianity, which will appear to have been before the
Period assigned for its Original, wheresoever we place it.

But if we deal as fairly by Christianity as we do by Mahometism, and allow the
Common Matters of Fact Recorded of it to be true; if we grant that there was
such a Man as Christ, who lived at the Time and Place it is affirmed by
Christians he did; that he and his Disciples pretended to what is Recorded in
the Scriptures of the New Testament of them; that those Books were written by
the Persons whose Names they bear; and that the Christian Religion spread and
prevailed over the World in the way and manner, and by the means of those
Pretenses we have there an account of: Granting, I say, all these things, as by
the general acknowledgement of all sorts of Persons, and the impossibility of
their being false just before proved, they must be granted: From hence it
necessarily follows that all the other Extraordinary Facts are true, and
consequently that the Christian Religion came from God, and lays a necessary
Obligation upon Mankind to believe it, and conform themselves to it.

This is certain in the same way of Reasoning we used before, because there
never was an Instance, and it cannot be conceived there ever should be one,
where such Marks and Indications of Truth, as accompany these things, should
all belong to an Imposture.

Upon this account therefore it is that we affirm all these things to be
impossible; viz.

That Persons of such Characters, as Christ and his Disciples were represented
to be, should invent and contrive the Christian Doctrine and Institution, or
perform those things that are Recorded of them, merely by their own Skill and
Power.

That Christ and his Disciples should pretend to have done such Extraordinary
Facts as are attributed to them in the New Testament, if they were not the true
and immediate Instruments by whom they were done.

That such Multitudes of Persons as we there Read of, should believe these
Facts, and embrace Christianity upon the Credit of them if they were not true,
or should pretend to believe them if they were not really persuaded of their
truth.

And if all the Principal Facts, both Common and Extraordinary, were certainly
true, as far as the Persons concerned in bearing Testimony to them were capable
of perceiving their Truth; It is likewise impossible but the whole Christian
Religion, and all the Conduct and Management in the Discovery and Propagation
of it must come from God.

All these Propositions we are firmly assured of upon this ground, viz.
because, if we suppose the contrary of any thing here alleged, no Parallel
Instance can be given to prove the truth of what we suppose; and if we
represent any of these Cases to our selves fairly in all its Circumstances, we
cannot possibly conceive it should ever happen.

It Is true indeed there have been Persons of low Fortunes and mean Employments
in the World, who have, by the mere force of their Natural Genius, spoke
Wisely, and acted Gallantly, upon some Occasions; but 'twas never known, and
it is impossible to conceive, that Persons of no Learning or Education, who knew
nothing beyond the mean Affairs of their own Village, and never Converst with
any of higher Improvements than themselves; it is impossible, I say, to imagine
that such Persons as these should be able, by the mere strength of their
Natural Parts, to Compose such Poems as Virgil's, and such Orations as Tully's,
and should likewise at the same time exceed all others in the Skill of
Explaining hard Authors, and in the Knowledge of Physic: But it is much harder
to conceive, that Christ and his Disciples, being Persons of such Education and
Character, as they are represented to us to be, could, by their own unasisted
Capacities, Compose the Christian Religion, Interpret Ancient Prophecies,
Foretell Future Events, Cure all manner of Sick and Maimed, and perform all
those other Mighty Works that are Recorded of them.

We have heard of several Persons who have pretended to Revelations, to
Prophecies, to Miracles, and to all of them falsely, without any ground for
their pretenses; but there never were any who pretended to such Revelations,
such Prophecies, and such Miracles, as we find in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, so many, and so public, so far exceeding all the conceivable Power
of Art and Confederacy, so liable to discovery and contradiction, if they were
false; so hazardous to the Undertakers, and so beneficial to the World, in such
a continued Series, all of them concurrent to the same End, and accompanied
with such other Circumstances as these are related to be. Whoever will be at
the pains to consider all this wonderful Scheme of Things together, will find
it impossible to contrive such another, though he has the Advantage of a Model
before him, which the Author of this had not; and, supposing he had succeeded
in such a Contrivance, he would find it impossible to prevail upon himself to
pretend to act it over; there being no Motives conceivable which bear any
manner of Proportion to the plain and certain discouragements he must foresee,
supposing he knew all his Pretenses to be false, as in the present Case must be
supposed: And the same will hold with respect to the first Professors of
Christianity: 'Twould be equally impossible for them to pretend to believe all
these Things, if they were not really and fully persuaded of the Truth of them.

Lying and Deceiving are a pleasure to some Men, and the more notorious and
gross the Deceit is, the greater is the Satisfaction: But then it is certain
likewise, that there are very few of such a temper, as to be pleased with Lying
and Forgery, without any other design or prospect; but that there should be a
large Succession, and continual increase of such Men in diverse Countries and
Nations, is much more difficult to conceive, than that there should be an Age
of Crookedness, and Deformity, when, in a considerable part of the World, the
generality of People of all sorts, had, of a sudden, by some strange unknown
Influence, some parts of their Bodies distorted; and the Calamity was
continually propagated all the time by an unusual sort of Infection.

But if this were allowed; if all the first Christians were granted to be pure
Deceivers; 'twould be exceedingly more difficult to imagine, that the pleasure
of Deceiving was so strong, as to be able to support such vast Multitudes of
Persons under all the other Losses and Sufferings Humane Nature is capable of.
It Is possible indeed, for Men to suffer all manner of Affliction, and even to
die Martyrs for the falsest and most absurd Religion that can be devised; and
frequent Instances may be given of such as have done so; but then it is certain
also, that they truly and firmly believed what they Suffered for. There never
was, nor ever can be such an extravagant Army of Martyrs and Confessors, as
did, or will renounce all the Comforts and Satisfactions of Life, endure Grief
and Pain cheerfully, and be ready, upon all occasions, to lay down their Lives
for the Profession of such Matters of Fact, as they are all infallibly
convinced are false, and which, they are sure all their Persecutors have the
same Reason to know are false that they have: To affirm or imagine that any Men
can act upon such disproportionate Motives as such Men must be supposed to act
upon, is full as absurd and ridiculous, as to suppose that the Sea may be
restrained with Bars, and that the Hills and Mountains are lighter than the
Dust of the Balance.

But if it be granted, as we have shown it must, that all those who pretended
to say and do such strange Things as are related of them in the New Testament,
and those who pretended to be persuaded of the Truth of what was said and done,
did all really and truly believe what they pretended to; then is it impossible
to conceive, that the Things thus believed to be true, should notwithstanding
be false. There are, it is confessed, no Opinions so extravagant and absurd,
but a great many Persons may be thoroughly persuaded of the Truth of them; but
there never was an Instance of such Stupidity or Enthusiasm yet, where such
Facts as those related in the New Testament, were by great Multitudes believed
to have happened within their own immediate Cognizance, when no such Things did
really and truly happen at all: And it is impossible to conceive there ever
should be such an Instance as this in the World, without a through change of
Humane Nature, and all the Powers and Faculties of it: And we have no more
reason to think it was so in the Case before us, than we have to believe that
there was a Time when the Earth and all the Bodies belonging to it, did exist
in the same State of outward appearance we now perceive them without Motion,
Figure, or Extension.

And, if all the Principal Matters of Fact, both Common and Extraordinary, were
really true, or did really and certainly happen, so far as Humane Perceptions
are to be relied on; it cannot be doubted but God was the Author of the whole
Christian Scheme, because we have no Example of any such Scheme as this, that
was ever made by any other Power but the Divine. We cannot, by the utmost
Knowledge we have of all the Powers that be, conceive that any Power less than
the Divine, could produce such an Effect; or that any other, besides such as
were Commissioned by him would have produced it if they could. By what we know
of the Nature of God, the Work appears very worthy of him, and very agreeable
to all his Attributes; and we cannot possibly imagine what more proper and
effectual ways God could have taken to manifest himself to us, if he was
pleased to vouchsafe us that Favor.

These are the Reasons upon which we conclude that the Christian Religion came
from God, supposing all the Facts beforementioned to be true, as I think they
have been proved to be; which Proof being allowed, we have as much Reason to
believe that the Christian Religion proceeded from God, as that the World was
Created by him.

Thus does it plainly appear from the Nature of Things, that the Proofs before
given of the Christian Religion, severally examined, were all very well
founded. And now, if we take a just view of them, and consider them all
together, we shall be obliged to make the following Conclusions.

1. That there never was any Thing discovered, or so much as suspected to be an
Imposture, that had so many Marks and Characters of Truth upon it, as the
Christian Religion has.

2. That there never were any true Matters of Fact so well attested, or that
were capable of such a Proof, as the Christian Facts are: There being no
Ancient Facts which have so many sensible Monuments and Effects of them left,
and in the Proof of which, Mankind was so nearly and necessarily concerned.

3. That it is impossible to conceive, or frame any Notion how, or in what
manner the Christian Religion might possibly have been an Imposture,
notwithstanding all the present appearances of its being true.

And, if all these Conclusions are right, as I am thoroughly and irresistibly
convinced they are; and, I think, have proved them so to be; there can be no
room left to disbelieve the Christian Religion, without distrusting all our
Knowledge, and renouncing all pretenses to Reasoning.

But, supposing these Conclusions were not any of them fully proved, and it
could be shown, That something else, which had once all the appearance of Truth
that the Christian Religion now has, had afterward been detected to be false;
that some other Ancient Matters of Fact are as well attested and proved to be
true, as the Christian seem to be; and that it is possible to imagine, which way
the Christian Religion might come to obtain its present Credit in the World,
notwithstanding it was at first an Imposture, none of which I am sure can be
proved: Yet, even in this Case, the Proof that has now been given of the
Christian Religion, is sufficient to build our Faith upon; because the most
that can be inferred from all these Arguments, is only this, That there is a
bare possibility in the Nature of Things, that the Christian Religion may be
false: But he that from hence should conclude, that it was really so, without
any other Reasons to support his Opinion, and in opposition to all that
multiplicity of Proof that has been offered for the Truth of it, must not
pretend Reason, but only Resolution for his Infidelity.

Such therefore is the Sufficiency of the Proof before given, whatever be the
Nature or Kind of it; or however it may be thought to differ from, or fall
short of the Demonstration used in other Matters, that we are utterly
inexcusable, if we do not believe the Christian Religion upon it, and God may
justly Condemn us for our disbelief, and that upon these two accounts:

1. Because we believe other Matters of Fact upon less Evidence; and,

2. Because we are obliged to believe such Facts as have these appearances of
Truth, which the Christian Religion has, though they should really be false.

1. That we believe Matters of Fact upon less Evidence than the Christian
Religion is received upon, is manifest, by what has been before proved, that no
Matters of Fact have or are capable of so great; and therefore, to confirm this
Point, I shall only bring that one Instance of Mahometism.

Now it is certain that those who look upon the Christian Religion as an
Imposture do at the same time profess to believe all the principal Parts of the
History of Mahomet: Such as his Pretenses to Revelation, his Writing the
Alcoran, and his Propagating the Belief of the things contained in it, in the
way and manner therein mentioned: These, I say, they do not in the least
question, notwithstanding that the Mohammedan Religion pretends to a Divine
Original as well as the Christian, and is in like manner addressed to Mankind
under the Promises and Threatenings of Future Happiness and Misery; though it is
withal a very absurd Composition in it self, and of very pernicious Consequence
to the World to be Believed and Established. It is therefore very unreasonable
for Men that believe these things, to deny the Common History of Christianity;
such as the Pretenses of Christ and his Disciples to Revelations, Prophecies,
and Miracles, the Writing of the Scriptures of the New Testament by those whose
Names they bear, or at least by some of Christ's immediate Disciples; and the
Propagation of the Christian Religion according to the Times, Places, Ways and
Methods Recorded in those Books: It Is very unreasonable, I say, for Men who
believe the History of Mahometism, to question the truth of these things;
because they are attested by a much greater variety of Books and other
Monuments, and a greater multiplicity of the Copies of the Scriptures; all
which Testimonies we are sure, by a numerous succession of others, were extant
nearer the date of the several Facts attested, and in an Age of Learning, among
People of much higher Improvements than the first Mahometans were; and moreover
because it is certain that the Pretenses of Christ were more difficult to be
Feigned by himself, or Forged by others afterward; that the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel are of more Concern and Importance to be enquired
into; and the Establishment of Christianity, whether true or false in its
Original, would so certainly contribute to the Happiness of Mankind, that it is
one very good Argument of its being true, that it is impossible to make and
contrive any other Scheme every way so suitable and agreeable to the truest
Interests of Humane Nature.

From whence I conclude, that we cannot question the Truth of the History of
Christianity so far as concerns the Common Matters of Fact, without distrusting
all the Knowledge we have of every Thing that happened at any distance from us:
And if the Common Matters of Fact are true, all the other are plainly
demonstrable from them; as far as we have any certain Knowledge of the Natures
of Things; as has already been proved: We are therefore obliged either to
believe the Christian Religion, or to renounce our belief of all other Facts
whatsoever; because whatever of this kind we believe besides, we believe upon
less Evidence.

2. But Secondly, Whatever degree of Evidence other Matters of Fact may be
supposed to have, we are absolutely obliged to believe the Christian Religion
upon that Evidence that is brought for it, because we are obliged to believe
such Facts as have those appearances of Truth the Christian Religion has,
though they should be really false.

We are to judge of Things by the Faculties God has given us, according to
those grounds and measures of Truth he has suited and proportioned to them: and
therefore, when we have the greatest assurance of a Thing that we are capable
of according to the present frame our Nature, and the State of Things in the
World, it would be highly unreasonable in us to deny it whatever it was, barely
upon a Suspicion it might be false, though it should afterward really prove to
be so; but, if what we had this apparent Proof of, was a Matter of concern and
importance to us, upon the Belief or Disbelief of which, our utmost Happiness
or Misery seemed to depend, and we should prefer a mere Suspicion to all the
appearing Marks and Characters of Truth, God might as justly punish us for
disbelieving a real Error upon such grounds, as for rejecting the Truth. It is
not whether our Opinions are true or false, but whether we have judged well or
ill, that we are accountable for; neither in Matters of mere Speculation is it
of much concern whether we judge well or ill, because it is of no great moment
whether we judge at all; but it is not indifferent to us whether we will be
happy or no; Happiness is, and must be, the end of all our Thoughts, and the
governing Principle of our Lives; upon this Account it is, as we have seen in a
former Discourse, that we are necessarily concerned to know, whether there be a
God, or no; whether he requires any thing of us, if there is; and whether he
has appointed any Future State of Life for us. And these things our Reason has
assured us are true, and fit to be believed, notwithstanding any Suspicions we
may have to the contrary, because we venture all our Happiness by disbelieving
them: And upon the same Score it is, that the Christian Religion challenges our
Assent to it; because, if all the forementioned Principles be true, we venture
our Happiness as much in denying it. For, if this does not contain the Will of
God, it is impossible to know what is required of us; because we can never give
so strong, and certain a Proof of what our Particular Duty to God is without
Divine Revelation, as we can that the Christian Revelation is true. We are
therefore in as high a manner obliged to believe Christianity as Natural
Religion; because the Proofs of that are very near, if not quite as strong, as
those that are brought for the other, and our Happiness is more certainly
ventured here than there, for this reason; that, if the First General
Principles of Religion should be false, he that denies them will suffer nothing
for his denial; but, if those be true, and the Christian Religion should be
false, he that rejects that, runs as great a hazard as if it had been true;
because God will certainly Judge him according to the Evidence, and not
according to the Reality of things: And therefore he that believes in God is
obliged to believe in Christ also; since it is certain that the Christian
Religion has a great many Extraordinary Marks and Characters of Truth to
recommend it, and is pressed upon our Belief under the Considerations of
Eternal Happiness and Misery, and we have nothing to oppose to all the
appearing Evidence it is built upon, but barely a Suspicion, that
notwithstanding what appears to us, it may possibly be false.

The two first of these Assertions are manifest; and the Truth of the latter
will be very visible to any one, that will give himself the trouble of
considering all the Objections that have ever been made to the Christian
Revelation; which taken altogether, will not so much as make out the mere
possibility of the Christian Schemes being false; but amount to no more than
this, that something else, like something contained in the History of
Christianity, has been proved to be false, therefore the Christian Religion is
an Imposture.

For all that has ever been urged against the Truth of the Christian Religion
is, in short, but this; that Histories have been false; Prophecies and Miracles
have been counterfeit; there have been false Pretenses to Revelation; Books
have been forged; strange Things have been said and done by Men, and stranger
by Evil Spirits: But it can no more be inferred from hence, that the Christian
History and Revelation, and all the Christian Prophecies and Miracles are
false, and the Scriptures of the New Testament are forged; than it can be
concluded that all Men are mad or asleep, because there have been several in
these Conditions that have thought themselves awake and in their Senses; or
that all the Arguments and Proofs made use of in Mathematical Knowledge are
false, because some pretended Demonstrations have been Undemonstrated and
Confuted: And yet this is the utmost defense that Infidelity can make for it
self, as has before been more particularly shown. Wherefore they are utterly
inexcusable, whoever they are, who believe there is a God, and that he is a
Rewarder of all those that diligently seek him; and yet reject so plain and
evident a Revelation of himself as the Christian Religion is.

But there are very few, I believe, of this Character to be found in the
Christian World: It Is more reasonable to think, that those among us, who will
not have the Son of God to Reign over them, have as little regard for the
Father that sent him; and that if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets,
nor be persuaded by one that rose from the Dead, neither will they understand
the Eternal Power and Godhead by the things that are made. And if this be the
Case of our Modern Deists and Unbelievers; if their Minds are Blinded, and
their foolish Hearts Darkened to such a degree that they cannot perceive God in
any of the other ways he has took of Revealing himself to them, we must leave
them to be convinced by the last Revelation that will be made of the Righteous
Judgment of God, when they shall be forced to Believe and Tremble.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Bennet.
Folio.
THuidides Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire Mannscript Copies, and
all the Editions Extant: Also, Illustrated with Maps, large Annotations, and
Indexes; by J. Hudson, M. A. and Fellow of University Coll. Oxon. To which is
added an exact Chronology, by the Learned Hen. Dodwell; never before Published:
Printed at the Theater. Oxon.

Octavo and Twelves.
Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions; by Dr. Stradling, Dean of
Chichester: Together with an Account of the Author; by James Harrington, Esquire:

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions; by Dr. Meggot, Dean of
Chichester.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antonius the Roman Emperor; Translated out
of Greek into English, by Dr. Causabon, with Notes. To this Edition is added
the Life of the Emperor, with an Account of Stoic Philosophy; as also, Remarks
on the Meditations: All newly written by Monsieur and Madam Dacier.

The Inspiration of the New Testament Asserted and Explained, in Answer to the
Six Letters of Inspiration, from Holland, etc. by Mr. L. Moth.

THE CERTAINTY and NECESSITY OF Religion in General, etc.
The Contents.
INtroduction showing the design of the Discourse, and the Method in which it
is Prosecuted. Page 1. An account of the Nature of Man, so far as concerns
Religion. p. 9. Of the Nature of God. p. 16. Of the Relation there is betwixt
God and Man. p. 18. A direct proof of the Being of God. p. 19. Considered as
Possible, p. 20. Considered as Probable, p. 26. Considered as Certain. p. 40.
The certainty of God's Existence proved, Indirectly and Negatively, by showing
that none of those Suppositions which exclude the Being of God can be true. p.
57. Matter alone considered at rest could not be Eternal, and in time produce
the Present Frame of the World. p. 59. It Is impossible to account for the
Production of the World, by the Atheist's Hypothesis of moving Atoms. p. 61.
It Is absurd to suppose that the World has Existed Eternally, under the same
Form we now behold it, without a God. p. 64. The Eternal Coexistence of Matter
and Mind, improbable. p. 71. Supposing it probable, neither Matter alone, nor
Matter and Motion, nor the present Constitution of things could have been
Eternal Independently of God. p. 77. The Original of all things from God,
further evinced from General Reflections. p. 81. A positive and direct Proof of
Religion drawn from the Nature of God and Man, and the Relations there are
betwixt them. p. 91. Of the Nature and Ground of Obligation, together with the
Right and Power of Obliging. Ib. That Man is obliged to order his Life
according to the Will of God, is proved. p. 102. From the Natural Judgments we
make concerning our Actions. p. 105. From the End and Design of God in making
us, which appears by several Tokens and Indications p. 117. in the Frame and
Disposition of our Mind, p. 118. and in the Economy and Constitution of Humane
Society. p. 125. From the Nature of Religion it self, a regular practice of
which conduces to the greatest Happiness we are capable of in this Life. p.
129. And from the certainty of a Future State which is proved, p. 137. From the
defect of a General and Regular Practice of Religion here. p. 138. And from the
General Wants, Necessities and Imperfections of our present Nature p. 141. From
all which Considerations it appears, that it is more for our Happiness to live
Religiously then otherwise, and therefore we are obliged to live so. p. 146.
The Certainty and Necessity of Religion further shown, from the pernicious
effects of all kind of Irreligion, with respect to the Happiness of Mankind. p.
149. The absurdity and folly of all the Grounds and Pretenses of Irreligion,
and whatever is alleged in defense of it. p. 181. Irreligion not capable of
any direct proof. p. 183. The usual Ways and Methods of defending it Improper
and Insufficient. p. 187. Ridiculing Religion proves nothing against it. Ib.
Requiring a more certain and Mathematical proof of it unreasonable. p. 188.
Schemes and Hypotheses to account for the present state of things, without God
and Religion, absurd and inconsistent. p. 192. The chief and most common
Objections against Religion answered, viz. p. 200. Mysteries, seeming
Inconsistencies, and Absurdities in Scripture. p. 201. Extravagant Notions and
Pernicious Doctrines maintained under the name of Religion. p. 202. Variety of
Opinions among the Professors of the same Religion. p. 204. Foolish and
Ridiculous Arguments urged in defense of it. p. 205. Scandalous Lives of great
pretenders to Piety and Virtue. p. 206. Religion the effect of Fear and
Education. p. 209. Religion a politic Contrivance. p. 211. The absurdity and
folly of Irreligious, Principles and Practices demonstrated from General
Reflections upon the different Grounds and Foundations Religion and Irreligion
stand upon; and the different Conduct of those that act under the Influence of
the one and the other. p. 213. Irreligion further exposed from the causes and
Reasons that induce Men to take up Atheistical and Profane Opinions. p. 227.
The chief Causes of Atheism shown to be these two, The Fear of an after
reckoning for a wicked Life, and the Vanity of appearing greater and wiser than
other Men. p. 230. The Doctrines of Irreligion the sole result of Prejudice,
and not deliberate reasoning more plainly made out. p. 239. From the Character
and Capacities of the Atheists. Ib. From the manner and process of their
Infidelity. (p. 242. And from the Confession of several Atheists themselves. p.
246. An account of the Notions of Atheism and Deism, and how they are to be
distinguished. p. 249.
THE CERTAINTY Of the Christian Revelation, And the Necessity of Believing it,
etc.
The Contents.
THe Connection of this Discourse with the former. Page. 1. The Method laid down
for the Establishing the Certainty of the Christian Revelation. p. 3. An
Abstract or Summary of the Christian Scheme, as it is delivered in the Books of
the New Testament. p. 8. The General Subject of the several Books or Volumes of
the New Testament. p. 9. The Character of Jesus Christ. p. 19. A short Account
of his Doctrine or Gospel. p. 31. The Character of those that believed in him.
and that assisted him in the Publishing and Propagating his Gospel. p. 42. The
Character of those that Persecuted Him and his Disciples, and opposed the
Establishment of his Religion. p. 50. The way and manner in which the Books of
the New Testament are writ, with all the important Circumstances which refer to
the form and composition of those Writings p. 51. All the Principal Matters of
Fact related in the New Testament shown to be true, by a plain direct proof,
according to this distinction of them premised; viz: Common Matters of Fact,
Miracles and Prophecies, Divine Assistance and Revelation. p. 59. The Common
Historical Facts mentioned in the New Testament, proved to be true in the
following manner. p. 60. The Original of Christianity rightly assigned in the
New Testament. p. 61. A Survey of the Christian Religion in the time of
Constantine. p. 70. The Christian Faith the same in the time of Constantine as
it was at and immediately after the first Publication of the Gospel. p. 74.
This Proposition made out from the constant Tradition of such a Belief,
together with many sensible Infallible Effects of it. p. 75. And from many
other extrinsick Signs and Monuments remaining at the Meeting of the Council of
Nice under Constantine. p. 105. Such as were several Customs and Vsages, p.
107. Relics, Buildings, and other the like Monnments: p. 108. Books and
Written Records of several kinds, viz. p. 109. Copies of the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament. p. 110. Public Acts and Records belonging to Societies:
p. 113. Genuine Writings of Orthodox Christians: p. 119. Books Written by
Heretics: p. 132. Jewish and Pagan Books. p. 133. Forged and Suppositious
Writings of uncertain Authors. p. 137. The Miracles and Prophecies Recorded in
the New Testament shown to be true Facts, according to the Relation there given
of them. p. 140. An Account by way of Introduction of what is meant by Miracles
and Prophecies in this place. p. 141. And what kind of Evidence these Facts are
capable of. p. 143. The Miracles considered by themselves, according to the
different Periods in which they were done, and the different Persons they were
done by. p. 144. The Prophecies considered apart according to the same
distinction of Times and Persons. p. 158. The Truth of these Extraordinary
Facts, called Miracles and Prophecies, and the Reasonableness of those Grounds
upon which the first Christians believed them, evinced from General Reflections
upon the Scripture-account of them. p. 161. What is said in the New Testament
concerning Divin Assistance and Revelation, proved to be true. p. 183. The
Miracles Prophecies and Doctrines Recorded in the New Testament (which are all
the Matters to be inquired into under this Head) did certainly proceed from
God. p. 185. The Person themselves who appeared to be the immediate Authors of
them, might be infallibly satisfied that whatever of this kind they said or did
was from God. p. 186. Others may be likewise convinced of the same Truth by a
certain proof of the following Points, viz. p. 194. That the Miracles,
Prophecies and Doctrines contained in the New Testament could not be the Work
and Contrivance of mere Men. p. 195. That God was the Author of them all. p.
222. And that it is absurd to ascribe these things to Evil Spirits. p. 242. The
Truth of the Christian Revelation delivered in the Books of the New Testament
proved indirectly, by showing the absurdity of a contrary Supposition, and the
Weakness of all the Objections raised against Scripture and Revelation in
General. p. 245. The Scriptures of the New Testament could not possibly be
Forged and Invented. p. 250. Because there is no end or design imaginable
sufficient to have determined the supposed Author of this Work to have
undertaken it. And because further, if the principal Matters of Fact, both
Common and Extraordinary, had not been true, it would have been utterly
impossible that the Christian Religion should ever have been Believed and
Propagated in the World. p. 264. The principal Objections against Revelation,
and the Scriptures answered, viz. p. 272. That the Miracles and Prophecies
mentioned in Scripture, are no Proofs of a Divine Revelation. p. 276. And that
there are such Faults observable in the other parts of Scripture, as show the
whole to be a pure Humane Composure. p. 288. The sufficiency of the proof
before given of the Christian Revelation fully and undeniably made out. p. 303.
From Humane Testimony. p. 305. From the Connection of present Appearances with
former. p. 309. And from the Nature of Things in General, and the particular
Facts in Question. p, 317. The Arguments taken from the Nature of things
further made good; by showing that they are as just and concluding in the case
of the Christian Religion as any other Arguments drawn from the Nature of
things are. p. 332. The sufficiency of the Proof before given is such, that God
may justly condemn us for not believing the Christian Religion upon it. p. 349.
Because we believe other Matters of Fact upon less Evidence; and Ib. Because we
are obliged to believe such Facts have those appearances of Truth, which the
Christian Religion has, though they should really be false. p. 352.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Bennet.
THE Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces; to which is added, the Life of his
present Majesty King William III. from his Birth to his Landing in England. By
Mr. Tho. Brown. Together with all the Princes Heads, taken from the Original
Draughts, by Mr. Robert White.

A Voyage to the World of Des Certes: Translated from the French, by T. Tailor,
M. A. of Magd. Coll. Oxon.

Thirty Six Sermons, upon several Occasions; in Three Vol. by Robert South, D.
D. The second Edition.

The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in general; or, the first Ground and
Principles of Humane Duty Established. In Eight Sermons, Preached at St.
Martins in the Fields, at the Lectures, for the Year 1697. Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; By F. Gastrel, B. D. and Student of Christ Church
Coll. Oxon.


