The Apostles Paul and James reconciled in the Point of Justification, and the
Controversies about it among Christians amicably composed.
1. Sola side nos justificari Doctri^a est saluberrima, ac consolationis
plenissima. Anglic. Confess. art. 11.

Verum and id tamen non imus inficias, justificari nos etiam ex operibus, ut D.
Jacobus dixit, rependit enim Deus unicuique secundum sua opera. Et non qui
legem audiunt, sed qui faciunt, justificabuntur, Romans 2. Sed ista nostri
justificatio, id est, ultima vitae aeternae adjudicatio and exhibitio, nascitur
and pendet ex justificatione fidei, ex qua. and ipsa opera bona proveniunt, and
habent id, ut licet ex se nihil minus valiant, vitam aeternam nobis mereantur.
Inde sane, quod per fidem jam Deus nos inter filios suos habet, nostra ex ejus
Spiritu patrata opera ipsi tanti sunt, tantaque compensare mercede dignatur.
Bucer Cont. Episcop. Abrinceus, page 54.


EVangelical Justification is considerable two ways; as a Gift, and as a
Reward. Considered as a Gift, so it is absolutely free, and freely given of God
in Christ by the Gospel; and we through Faith, and through Faith only, do
thankfully, siducially, obediently and constantly receive it, and so from the
nature of the thing it becomes ours. This I think is Paul's meaning, Romans 3.28.
and 11.6. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.

2. Considered as a Reward; so also it is absolutely free, of Grace and not of
Debt; yet it is conferred upon none but the penitent, the faithful, the
regenerate, the Lovers of God and his Saints, the fruitful in good Works, the
godly in Christ Jesus; and these are evangelically worthy of it, because of
God's Promise in Christ. This I think is James's meaning, Romans 4.4. Jam. 2.21,
24. Romans 2.6, 11, 16.

3. Both Apostles mean Justification before God, and by it they understand the
Absolution of one who has sinned, from all his Sins, and from eternal Curse
and Damnation for the same. In this only they differ; Paul considers God as a
Donor, as infinitely good and gracious to some and not to others; to Abel and
Peter, and not to Cain and Judas. And so the sum of his Doctrine is plainly
this, That the whole of a Sinner's Justification, Pardon, Adoption and
Salvation, from first to last, is from the mere Grace and Mercy of God in
Christ by the Gospel through Faith, and through Faith only, as distinct from,
precedent to the cause of, and inseparably connexed with Sanctification and
good Works. Mat. 13.11. Joh. 10.28. Ephesians. 1.3, 4.

4. James considers God as a Judge, infinitely just and righteous, and passing
Sentence upon Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel, without out respect
of Persons. And so the sum of his Doctrine is clearly this: That God, as he is
the Judge of all the World by Jesus Christ, cannot but (...), for ever
difference between the righteous and the wicked, the penitent and the
impenitent, the faithful and the faithless, the Lovers and Haters of God and
his Saints, the fruitful in good Works and the fruitless, the obedient and
disobedient, by loving, delighting in, approving, pardoning, and glorifying the
one of his mere Grace and Goodness, because of his own holy Oath and Covenant
in Christ; by hating, abhorring, disapproving, cursing and damning the other,
of Debt and due Desert, because of their Sins persisted in, and never truly
repented of; by rendering to both according to their Works. Genesis 18.25.

5. According to Paul, Justification and Pardon of Sin, as a free Gift in
Christ, received by Faith, is antecedent to, and by gracious necessity the
cause of all our holy Love; and therefore the more is forgiven us, the more we
love; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little: Luke 7.47.

6. According to James, not only Faith, but also Love, hope in God's Mercy,
filial Fear, hatred of Sin, heavenly Knowledge, forgiving others their
Trespasses against us, and the like Evangelical Virtues and Graces, these are
antecedent to, and by gracious necessity prepare and make us meet for, and
capable of pardon of Sin, Justification before God, Adoption, and right to
eternal Salvation, as a Reward of Grace assured by God's holy Oath and Covenant
in Christ to Persons so and so qualified. Of a Truth I perceive that God is no
Respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him. Act. 10.34, 35.

7. According to Paul, no Sinner, while unpardoned and liable to eternal
Damnation, A holy Sin-hating God, engaged in Justice to damn the Sinner, is not
such an Object as a guilty Soul can love. Mr. Baxter's Life of Faith, p. 218.
can sincerely love God: Fear and flee from him, as his righteous and terrible
Judge, he may, and needs must; but love and draw nigh to him with filial
Reverence, as his gracious God and reconciled Father in Christ, he cannot. But
as soon as we are by God's Grace and Mercy in Christ through Faith freely
pardoned all our Sins, and by the same Faith perceive that so we are, then we
cannot but by sweet and blessed necessity love God, resign our selves to his
Will, and be sincerely obedient to him in all things. In whom also after that
ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the
Earnest of our Inheritance. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. That is, as I conceive, Pardon of
Sin, and Justification through Faith in Christ, is antecedent; and fealing with
his holy Spirit (whereby is meant Assurance and Sanctification) is by gracious
necessity consequent, and so they are related; and as related, they are by
nature together without all possible Priority.

8. According to James, no ungodly and impenitent Person, while such, is
capable of Pardon of Sin and Evangelical Justification; it is a Contradiction
to the eternal Nature of the holy, just and good God, to pardon and justify a
Sinner in his Ungodliness, and set his Conscience free from eternal Guilt and
Condemnation before and without heavenly Repentance; and there cannot be
heavenly Repentance without Faith, Hope, Love, and Participation of the Divine
and Godly Nature. For what Fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness?
And what Communion has Light with Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with
Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. The penitent Thief upon the Cross who was pardoned,
justified and saved, as at the last Gasp, yet was he not without good Works in
the sight of God: For together with Faith, he had Hope, Love, filial Fear,
hatred of Sin, godly Sorrow for it, penitent Confession, earnest Prayer, giving
Glory to Christ, Meekness, Patience, holy Submission to God's Will,
compassionate, wise and faithful Reproof toward the other Thief, wise care for
his own Soul, and all other heavenly Graces and Virtues necessarily comprised
in Regeneration, and being a new Creature.

9. According to Paul, we must first receive from God before we can return any
thing to him worthy his Acceptance: For all things come of him, and of his own
it is that we give him; 1 Chronicles. 29.14. What have thou that thou did not
receive? 1 Cor. 4.7. Now there are two sorts of Blessings, which we need, and
God has to bestow, temporal and eternal. Temporal, worldly and corporal
Blessings are common to all, both good and bad Persons, and by themselves
cannot cause in any Sinner holy Love to God. For if we love God, All true Love
unto God, and (consequently) all true Godliness and Uprightness of Heart
springs from a lively Faith, even such a Faith as makes known to a Man God's
Love to him in Christ, and makes him able to receive Christ, and to rest upon
him. Mr. Hildersham on Psalm. 51. page 366.

It is certainly, either the want of Faith, and assurance of God's Love, or a
false and carnal assurance of it, that is the true cause of all that
Licentiousness and Lewdness that reigns in the World. Id. ib. p. 576.


only or chiefly because of Worldly, Temporal and Corporal Blessings, such Love
is not chaste and sincere, but adulterous and false: Eternal, Heavenly and
Spiritual Blessings cannot be had save by God's free Gift in Christ, this free
Gift in Christ we cannot have save by receiving it, (for giving and receiving
are relative) and receive it we cannot save only by Divine Faith; this being
the substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
Being made partakers of Pardon of Sin, Justification, Adoption, and right to
eternal Salvation, by God's free Gift in Christ through Faith, and by the same
Faith inwardly perceiving this our blessed and happy State, we cannot but by
gracious necessity love God, and live unto him, and be fruitful in all good
Works in some measure. We love him, because he first loved us; 1 John 4.19.
That is, God's electing, eternal, and distinguishing Love to our lost Souls in
the free and full forgiveness of our Sins, for the sake of Christ through
Faith, is the Spring and powerful cause of all our holy Love to him; Articulus
stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae.

10. According to James, God does first make us sincere Converts, he gives us
Faith, Hope, Love, heavenly Repentance and Regeneration, and thereby makes us
amiable and lovely in his sight, Rev. 3.4. 1 John 1.9. Acts 3.19. Romans 2.2, 6.
Acts 5.31. Ephesians. 2.8. Gal. 2.16. Rev. 22.14.
and evangelically worthy of Pardon of Sin, Justification, Adoption, and right
to eternal Glory, for the sake of his gracious Covenant in Christ; and then he,
as sitting upon his Throne of Grace and Mercy, does judge his Servants to be
what really by his Grace they are, not absolutely sinless, but sincerely
penitent, truly just and upright in Heart before him, real Saints, and
evangelically worthy; and accordingly he does instantly pardon their Sins,
justify them from the Curse of the Law, adopt them for his Children, and give
them right to the Kingdom of Heaven. Herein God is supreme Judge, renewed
Conscience is his Agent, the Person justified is a penitent Sinner, the Heart
or inward Man is the Court, the Gospel is the Rule of Judicature, Fagi
Enchirid. Disp. 61. These. 24. Bucer de vera Ecclesiar. reconcil. p. 145.

Dr. Goodwin of the Punishment of Sin in Hell, p. 85. Mr. Flavel of the Soul,
p. 21. Mr. Downam's Guide to Godliness, p. 66.


Faith is the Organ, Instrument, or Mean whereby renewed Conscience does act,
heavenly Repentance and Regeneration is the Evidence and Testimony of the Holy
Ghost, Jesus Christ is Advocate, and Justification is the Sentence whereby God
does graciously acquit and absolve the penitent Person from all his Sins and
from eternal Curse and Damnation for the same, and gives him right to eternal
Glory as a Reward of Grace. As when the Minister does foundly preach the
Gospel, the Word in his Mouth is not the Word of Man, but the Word of God by
Man his Ambassador; so what renewed Conscience in the Sinner's Bosom, shall, by
Authority and Commission from God, according to his Word, by Faith rightly and
truly pronounce, sentence, and decide touching his spiritual and eternal State,
this is not the sentence, Judgment, and Decision of Man, but of God by
Conscience, his Agent and Minister inwardly through Faith; and therefore it
must needs be supreme and infallible, we may most safely rely on it, it is a
sure Rock, and fills the Soul with found Joy. For our rejoicing is this, the
Testimony of our Conscience, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. If our Heart condemn us not,
then have we Confidence toward God: 1 John 3.21.

11. Bradsha. de Justis. cap. 3. Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, p. 105.
And his Consideration of the Substance of Mr. Cartwright's Exceptions, p. 5.
There is a kind of Justification in the Conscience of the Devil: For once he
was a good and holy Angel; for so long as he continued Good and Holy, God, by
Conscience his Agent in Satan's Bosom, will for ever justify and acquit him,
and lay nothing to his Charge. But because he wilfully forsook God, and became
his most implacable Enemy; therefore the same Conscience in Satan's Bosom
cannot, but against his Will, for ever justify and acquit God, and silence and
condemn himself. This is proper legal Justification for ever in the Conscience
of the Devil, of Debt, and not of Grace, without all favor and compassion to
him.

12. Mr. Jer. Dyke of Scandals, p. 99. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. Psalm. 50.21. Rev.
2.9.
There is a Justification of a Sinner in his Ungodliness, and there is a
Justification of a Sinner from his Ungodliness. The former is no Mercy, but a
dreadful Judgment, a dismal Justification, of which Satan is Author; it is the
chief Pillar of his Kingdom, whereby wicked Ones bless themselves in their
Wickedness, and promise to themselves Impunity, Pardon, Peace with God and
Eternal Salvation, without Heavenly Repentance and Regeneration. Luther (as
Cassander relates, Consult. Art. 4.) thought this a worse Error than any in
Popery.

13. The latter is a most sweet Mercy and precious Privilege the principal
Pillar of Christ's Kingdom. For whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans
8.30. Of this Justification we thus read; But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness, Romans 4.5. That is, as I conceive, Abraham once was Ungodly, and
by Nature a Child of Wrath, even as others. God of his mere Grace and Mercy in
Christ, gave him divine Belief of the Gospel, differing in kind from Belief in
the Devils and all reprobate Men. By this divine Belief, Abraham did deny and
go out of himself, renounce all Trust in his own Righteousness, see an utter
emptiness and insufficiency in himself, see an all sufficiency of Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption for his Soul in Christ, truly
repent of his Sins, lay hold upon God's Promise of eternal Mercy in Christ, and
became a new Man; and therefore God did graciously reckon, repute, and judge
this his divine Belief to be what really it was, Heavenly, Supernatural,
Evangelical, and Soul-saving Righteousness.

14. Credimus totam nostram justitiam posit am esse in peccatorum nostrorum
remissione, quae sit etiam, ut testatur David. uni^a nostra felicitas. Gallic.
Confess. Art. 18.

Cr^dim^s ^^st^^^am b^^titudinem sitam esse in pr^catorum nostrorum, propter
J^^um Christum, remissione, atque in ea justitiam nostram coram Deo contineri,
ut David and Paulus docent, etc. Belgic. Confess. Art. 23.


Dr. Owen in his Book of Justification, p. 478. supposes, That the Pardon of
Sin can in no tolerable sense be called the Gift of Righteousness. Pardon of
Sin is one thing, and Righteousness another. As to which I grant, that Pardon
of Sin can in no tolerable sense be counted the Righteousness of the Law as
distinct from the Gospel, because that stands in perfect and perpetual
Obedience; and the Law being once broken, can never by it self justify the
Transgressor, but only curse and condemn him. But the Righteousness of the
Gospel, as distinct from the Law, stands in perfect pardon of Sin for the sake
of Christ, through Faith in his meritorious Cross and Passion, causing in us
holy Love and sincere Obedience to all God's Commands, whereby we do
Evangelically fulfill the Divine Law. This perfect pardon of Sin, is perfect
Evangelical Righteousness, it has no flaw or defect at all, it gives us
boldness with God, and sure confidence at his Bar; it frees the Conscience from
inward Guilt, Terror, Curse and Condemnation; and these being abolished, in
their room come Righteousness, Joy, Peace with God, spiritual Consolation, some
degree of Victory over the World, the Flesh, the Devil, Death, and the Gates of
Hell. Tho our Faith and Repentance be weak and imperfect, yet being genuine and
sincere, they qualify and make us meet for, and worthy of perfect Pardon of Sin
for the sake of Christ. And having this perfect Pardon of Sin, we are blessed,
we need no other Righteousness for Justification and Admission into the Kingdom
of Heaven; dying pardoned, we are most surely for ever happy and blessed. This
perfect Pardon of Sin, is the Righteousness of God in Christ, he is the sole
Author of it; it is not legal, but supra-legal Righteousness, a more Noble,
Divine, Transcendent, Sublime, Glorious, Mysterious, Sure, Stable, Permanent,
Sweet and Precious Righteousness, than that of the Law, such as Adam had before
his Fall; for that was defectible, but so is not this; for, as I before noted
of God, whom he justified, them he also glorified.

15. Mr. Truman in his Great Propitiation, p. 258. holds, That there is no such
thing as receiving Righteousness, or Justification, or Pardon. As this
Assertion contradicts many plain Scriptures, Ps. 24.5. Romans 5.11, 17. Acts
10.43. and 26.18. 1 Cor. 4.7. Joh. 3.27.
so it is contrary to the Grounds of Religion: For if there be no such thing as
receiving Righteousness, or Justification, or Pardon, then there is no such
thing as giving them in Christ; and then we have these supreme Blessings of
Debt, and not of Grace, and then we owe no Thanks at all to God for them; but
God is altogether beholden to us for our Merits, and not we to him for any
special and differencing Grace. If it be said, that our Receiving is but
Metaphorical, it will unavoidably follow, that God's giving heavenly good
Things in Christ, is but Metaphorical, and so we can owe him but Metaphorical
Thanks; which Doctrine Christian Ears cannot bear to hear.

16. There are two kinds of Receiving, 1 Cor. 4.7. Mat. 23.14. Romans 13.2. Heb.
2.2. Jam. 3.1. Luke 23.41. Romans 11.35, 36.
Voluntary and Involuntary. In the former sense, all Elect Angels and Men
receive the first and the last Grace from God, the beginning, the middle, the
end, even all: in this receiving they are free, and not forced, willing, and
not unwilling; for no one can be Holy and Happy against his will. In the latter
sense, all the Devils and Reprobates in Hell, receive Damnation as the due
reward of their Deeds; in this Receiving, they are forced, and not free,
unwilling, and not willing; though they love Sin, yet they do not love Hell;
and though they are willingly wicked, yet they are unwillingly damned.

17. Le Blanc. These. Theolog. de Remiss. peccator. number. 15.
God did from everlasting purpose and determine, in time, for the sake of
Christ, and of his meritorious Cross and Intercession, to give Faith and
Repentance, and consequent Pardon and Justification, to Peter and Paul, and the
rest of the Elect, and to none other. This supposed, their Faith and
Repentance, and consequent Pardon and Justification, are from Eternity
infallibly future and sure to be; and things future are as present to God, who
calls those things which be not, as though they were, Romans 4.17. But then it
is plain, that till God give them Faith and Repentance, they remain faithless
and impenitent, dead in Sin, and reprobate to every good Work; and till they do
sincerely believe and repent, they remain unpardoned, unjustified, condemned
already, under the Wrath of God, accursed, and liable to eternal Perdition. As
God's purpose to create, is not Creation it self, John 3.18, 36. Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3. Tit. 1.15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. Gal. 3.10. 1 Cor. 16.22.
and God's purpose to judge the World, is not judging it; so God's purpose to
give Faith and Repentance, is not giving them, and his purpose to pardon and
justify, is not Pardon and Justification; they truly differ as Cause and
Effect, as Antecedent and Consequent; which two being confounded, there must
needs be Error and Confusion throughout the whole Frame and Method of Practical
Divinity.

18. By Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is
the Gift of God: not of Works, lest any Man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the Promise
might be sure to all the Seed, Romans 4.16. It is by divine Belief of the
Doctrine of Repentance, and Remission of Sins in Christ's Name, and by divine
Belief only that we discern spiritual Things spiritually, choose the way of
Truth, renounce the way of Sin, give Glory to God, trust wholly and only in
him, and his eternal Grace and Mercy in Christ, for pardon of Sin and Life
Eternal, receive Jesus Christ and all Spiritual Blessings in him; overcome
Satan and the World, walk with God in Holiness and Comfort; and ending our
Course in true Faith, we pass to Heaven, Dr. Preston of God's All Sufficiency,
p. 12.
where Faith is turned into Vision, and Hope into Fruition. And therefore it is
that this same divine Belief is in the Scripture so frequently said to be
reckoned, counted; and imputed to us for Righteousness, Jam. 2.23. Gal. 3.6.
Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3, 5, 9, 10, 22, 23.

19. We read of the ancient Saints, who through Faith wrought Righteousness,
Heb. 11.33.

Here are three things clearly distinct, the Agents, the Instruments, and the
Work wrought.

(1.) The Agents; and those are real Saints, such as Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, David, God's Elect and peculiar Ones.

(2.) The Instrument by which they did act and work, and that is Faith, and
Faith only, the divine Belief of the Doctrine of Repentance and eternal
Redemption to lost Mankind for the sake of Christ, the sole Mediator between
God and Men.

(3.) The Work wrought by them, and that is Righteousness, consisting in Piety
toward God, in Justice and Charity toward our Brethren, in Sobriety,
Temperance and Chastity toward our selves.

20. This I think is the true way of reconciling Paul and James, and the only
sound Mean between the two pernicious Extremes of the Antinomians and
Legalists. The Doctrine of the Antinomians subverteth Natural Religion, and
sets up all Impiety, Licentiousness, and abominable living by Law, for that it
teaches Pardon of Sin, and evangelical Justification by an imaginary and
unscriptural imputation of Christ's Righteousness, before and without Faith and
Repentance. The Doctrine of the Legalists subverteth Supernatural Religion, and
leads to despair, for that it confounds the Law and the Gospel, Moses and
Christ, and makes Eternal Salvation to be of Debt, and not of Grace. Jude 3. It
was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should earnestly
contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints.

FINIS.

