A DISCOURSE Concerning Public Oaths, AND The Lawfulness of SWEARING in
Judicial Proceedings.

Written by Dr. GAUDEN, Bishop of EXETER.

In order to answer the scruples of the QUAKERS.

1 Cor. 13. 2. Without charity I am nothing. 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness
instructing those that oppose. Ne putemus in verbis Scripturarum esse
Evangelium, sed in sensu; non in superficie, sed medulla; non in Sermonis
cortice, sed in rationis radice. Hieronym. in Ep. ad Gal. LONDON, Printed for
R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, 1662.

To the truly Honorable, ROBERT BOIL, Esquire, Son to the Earl of Cork, etc.
SIR;
SUch as have the happiness to know you, need no more then the mention of your
Name, to put them in mind of your merit upon mankind; whose learned,
industrious and pious accomplishments, have, as with the greatest modesty and
civility, so with the least austerity or reproach, given the Nobility, Gentry,
(yea and Clergy too) of these three Kingdoms at once to see in your studious
and virtuous example, the best way of proportioning their lives and manners to
the eminency of their Names and Stations; thereby to preserve or redeem
themselves from that Civil war and sad captivity to which idleness, fermented
by inordinate passions, or vain and vicious affections, is prone to expose not
only their estates, healths and honors, but their religion, consciences and
souls, while men of Noble birth, good breeding, ingenious parts and generous
estates, do miserably debauch their Dignity, and squander away those noble
advantages they have above other men, to do well and worthily. As if one should
cut out goodly Timber Trees into Loggs or Chips; and instead of stately Pillars
or Beams, make only Bed-staves, or Cat-sticks, or Tooth-picks of them. So
degenerating from all true sense of honor becoming Gentlemen and Christians,
as to glory in their shame (I mean their sin and folly;) and to be ashamed of
their true glory, which is, to be as rational and religious as they can be in
this state of mortality.

Your Nobleness will excuse me, if I venture to offend you, by telling the
world (what I have many years longed to do) how high a value I have for you, of
whom I have so pleasing and complete a prospect; not more for your rare
endowments of Nature and Art, then for your rarer Ornaments of Grace and
Virtue; while you neither superciliously fancy Learning to be any diminution to
your Noble Birth, nor yet Piety to be any disparagement to your great Learning.
I must not (now) in my maturer years compare you to our so famous Sir Philip
Sidney (whom I heretofore valued very much, nor do I yet undervalue him)
because I think you have out-vied his Eloquent Valor and Heroic Romances,
with greater Essays and more useful Achievements both in Philosophy and
Divinity.

The more retired and solid grounds of the first (Philosophy) you are daily
searching and discovering, with your generous Associates, by accurate and real
Experiments; which are the Anatomies of Nature, and the Keys to her Cabinets,
opening a Door to the true prospect as of the causes, so of the virtues,
operations and efficacies of things, and by them to the Creators glory; which
is much eclipsed by that occult, conjectural and skeptical Philosophy, which is
rather imaginary then real, a parturiency without birth, a meet abortion as to
knowledge; indeed, a kind of Legerdemaine in Learning, and Sophistry, rather
then Science verified by Experience.

The fountains also of the second (that is, Divinity) your self have lately
cleared, in vindicating by your Pen the Sacred, yet unaffected style of the
Scriptures, with a most Eloquent and Learned Zeal, against some men's profane
and Atheistical cavils, who are so wittily wicked, as to disdain even salvation
it self, in that plain, but sure way, which the wisdom of God sees fittest for
humane capacities: whereas few (I believe) of those curious Gallants would be
so foolishly morose, as to refuse a fair Estate which were settled upon them in
the ordinary legal way of Deeds, because it is not conveyed to them in such
oratorious Harangues and flourishes of speech as they most fancy.

I have dedicated this little Piece to your great Name, because it covets a
resemblance to, yea and has an emulation of, your candor and humanity toward
all persons that are not wholly profligate in their opinions, or desperate in
their actions. The design of this Tract is to correspond, as much as I may,
with your principles and genius, who have the happiness to render the severest
virtues amiable, and to confute the grossest Errors with the gentlest Truths.

I confess both in Religion or Charity, and in reason of State or Policy, I am
not for inflicting at first dash sharp Penalties on seduced or simple people,
merely upon the account of their Opinions, (modestly dissenting in some lesser
things from the Religion or Laws established; yet without any rude blaspheming
or opposing them as to the main of Faith, Morality and Civil subjection) until
such rational and charitable means have been used to convince them of their
errors, as may at once discharge those duties of Humanity and Charity which we
owe to all men, specially to our Countrymen and Fellow Christians.

The Cudgel and Sword, Prisons and Banishments, Plunderings and Sequestrations
were the late cruel and flagellant Methods of our most tyrannous times; which
had nothing of Reason, Law or Religion to support them: but these are not (in
my judgment) either the first or the fittest means to confute the falsities of
men's private opinions, or to rectify the obliquities of their inconform but
innocent actions, flowing from them upon the account of Conscience and plea of
Religion. (Although it may be as just as necessary to repress by legal
coercions and penalties those petulant obstinacies, which do resist all softer
applications, and endanger the public tranquillity by giving affronts to
settled Religion, or obstructions to the proceedings of Justice by established
Laws.) I am indeed for ( cuncta prius tentanda) those Divine Essays and
Appeals first, which render men most unexcusable (quid amplius poteram, what
could I have done more, etc.) using lenitives before lancings, and fomentations
before incisions or amputations, until there be no other remedy; then rigor and
severity to some parts; becomes the greatest Charity to the whole; where not
the scratch of a petty opinion, but the gangrene of an obstinate and rebellious
humor forces the abscission of one part, to prevent a deadly contagion to
others, yea to the whole Body.

Not that I think it any Religion to have an indifferency to that true Religion
which is once established by public consent and Law, as best and fittest for
the Nation; nor is it any part of Mercy always to suffer public Justice to be
baffled by the refractoriness of any persons or parties. No, I am far from a
tame permitting Tares to be openly scattered by the bold and evil hands of any
men, who seek, as enemies, to choke that good seed of Religion which is sown by
the public Ministry, and fenced by legal Authority.

As I would have that Religion only settled in its Doctrinals, Devotionals,
Discipline and Government, which is by public consent (according to the word
of God and Catholic prudence) judged to be the best for Truth, Sanctity, Order
and Decency (which, blessed be God, is in England:) so I would have It (and It
only) to enjoy all public countenance and encouragements, by the injunction
and protection of the Laws, by the favor and example of the Prince, by public
maintenance and honor, by the use of public Churches and Oratories: To the
Preachers and professors of this, public Offices and Employments of honor and
authority, foraign and domestic, ecclesiastical, civil and military, should be
chiefly appropriated; of these advantages dissenters should be generally
deprived, because they are the proper honoraries of those who most serve the
public Peace, by their due observance of the Religion and Laws established;
from which whosoever openly va^ies and dissents, lays the foundations, as of
distraction and division, so of destruction and confusion.

With these outward advantages added to that internal power of truth and
holiness which are in the established Religion, it may (as I think) not only be
happily suppo^ted, but easily prevail in a short time (by Gods blessing)
against all factious and feeble oppositions; unless the scandal, negligence,
levity and luxury of its Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters and Professors
overthrow it, by casting such immoral disgraces upon it as make people
dissbelieve and abhor both it and them; as was in the case of Eli's Sons.

But I confess I would not have this legal and avowed Religion of the Nation
so rigorous, sharp and severe (as Sarah to Hagar) by the sudden overawing or
violent overlaying of all other different persuasions in peaceable men, as not
to let them breath in the same common Air, or not to enjoy their lives, civil
liberties and estates, with their dissenting consciences, in all modest privacy
and safety: I abhor (as much as I dread) all racks and tortures of men's
souls, or those cruel no less then curious scrutinies of men's consciences,
which covet, first (like God) to search men's hearts, and then (like the Devil)
delight to torment them in their Estates and Liberties, only because they are
not so wise or apprehensive as themselves, but as honest (perhaps) and sincere
in the sight of God.

True; I think that some little pecuniary mulct, as one or two Shillings to the
poor, for every Lords days absence from the public Church or Assembly, may be
justly (laid as a mark of public dislike) upon Dissenters and Separaters from
the established Religion; not for their private difference in judgment, (which
possibly is not their fault) but for their public deformity in practice, to
the scandal of the established Religion, and to the endangering of the public
welfare, whose strength and stability consist in unity, and this in uniformity
to the settled rule, and in conformity, to outward practice: yet still no
Inquisition to be made into free men's Consciences, nor any great penalty laid
upon them for their persuasions, further then their words and actions do
discover their Principles, Opinions, Correspondencies, and Adherencies to be
contrary and dangerous to the public Peace, Order and Justice, which all are
founded in, and flourish by our settled Laws and Religion: Thus permitting sober
men not a declared toleration, or public profession, by way of open rivalry to
the established Religion, but only such an arbitrary connivence and conditional
indulgence as gives them no trouble for their private and untroublesome
Opinions, while they are kept in their breasts and closets; or in their private
houses and families: to which all dissenters ought in reason to be confined on
the Lords day, without any convention of strangers to them; though (perhaps) on
the weekday they may have their meetings allowed, yet so as to be kept within
parochial bounds, or to such a number of persons and families as shall be
thought safe.

But for Dissenters to have multitudinous Conventicles, as it were musterings
of their forces, when, where, and as many as they please, cannot be safe: for
thereby they not only affront the established Religion, but confirm each other
in their opinions; yea and (as Charcoals in heaps) they more kindle and inflame
each, other by their numbers, to such proud animosities and rebellious
confidences, as may hope to set up their Faction supreme, not only in the
repute of Religion, but in civil power; which is the ambitious aim of all
parties, (except that which is purely Christian, and wholly resolved into
suffering principles.) All others (we see) whether Papists, or Presbyterians,
or Anabaptists, or Independents, affect ( summam Imperii) as Diotrephes, to
have the preeminence; as Lucifer and Antichrist, to exalt themselves above all:
and therefore they must by wise and vigilant power, as well as by good
preaching and living, be kept* as fire, within the hearth of their private
opinions and parties, left they prevail by popular Arts against the public
established Religion, which is the Palladium or Conservator of civil peace and
prosperity, and never to be rashly changed, or rudely contemned while it is
authorized.

The great Charity to which includes even a charity to all those which differ
from its present settlement; who commonly are more miserable in the riotous
mutations which their folly and rudeness affects, then in those sober
restrictions of which they are so impatient, that from different persuasions
they break out to petulant oppositions by Tongue and Pen; thence they are
betrayed to seditious projects; and at last these must be brought forth in
tumultuary and violent actions; which are so intolerable, that the very first
sparks of their insolent and seditious Expressions, especially in Pulpits and
Presses, ought by great penalties to be suppressed: there being nothing more
unreasonable, then for any man rudely to blaspheme and reproach that Religion
which his Prince and Country profess; unless he be so impudent (as many are)
to blaspheme that also which himself owneth as the true Religion with them.
This tenderness, moderation and indulgence I bear only to humble, modest and
innocent dissenters, upon the account of Christian Charity, which ought in all
things, becoming humanity, to exceed all other men, as Tertullian well observes.

To which Christian Charity of mine toward sober dissenters, (besides the
confidence I have of Truth and its prevalency) perhaps my native temper and
candor may contribute something, which abhors, after the genius of Primitive
Christians, all severity or rigors only upon the score of Religion, farther
then is necessary for the cure of offenders, and the conservation of the
public Peace. I know the roughness or smoothness of men's educations and
complexions, like Esaus and ^acob's, have much influence upon their opinions
and conversations; yea, and upon their consciences too. If this may seem to
some too great a facility and gentleness in me, yet it is an error on the right
hand, and nearest the medium both of humanity as a man, and of charity as a
Christian, measuring all Policies by Christ's golden Rule, To do as I would be
done unto.

Secondly, In point of State Policy also, or methods of true Government, I do
conceive that mere plagiary counsels and punitive courses are never likely to
obtain the main End, which is to stop the contagion of errors, and to extirpate
those depraved opinions, which are justly thought to be the spawn of dangerous
actions: For, unless the generality of credulous people, who are spectators of
those that differ and suffer for their opinions and consciences, do also see so
much light of Reason and clear Religion, as may justify the severity of the
Laws executed upon those offenders, who profess Conscience for their
Disobedience, and Scripture for their Consciences; it is most certain, that the
spectators of their sufferings will very much soften to a compassion for them;
and by sympathizing with their persons in affliction, they will, by degrees,
symbolize with their opinions; easily running, as metal that is melted, into
the same mold: at length the populacy, if not fortified by pregnant
demonstrations of Truth against those spreading errors and their
Pseudo-Martyrs, will mightily cry up their Piety, admire their Courage, and
magnify their Constancy: At last they will conclude those sufferers to have
some special support, or diviner Spirit above ordinary men, because they seem
to be so much above the ordinary passions of fear and hope, self-love and
preservation; which prospect of patience Justin Martyr tells us, was the first
occasion of his examining the Doctrine of Christians, that he might see on what
ground so fixed a constancy grew, which showed a Divine security midst humane
infirmity.

By such popular pity and applause, not only sufferers will be confirmed in
their pertinacy, but their spectators also will daily increase and multiply, as
the shootes of Trees do by the lopping off their branches: especially if the
lives and actions of such dissenters and sufferers be morally just and civilly
innocent. For nothing sooner discovers and blasts such cross opinions, and
withers the glory of their factious spectators, then vile, injurious and
insolent demeanor either in words or deeds; such as all men confess to deserve
the Jail and Gibbet. This indeed (as in the mad pranks of John of Leyden and
his Anabaptistick crew in Germany, and so in our Hacket and other
Disciplinarians in England; in the late presumption of the Presbyterian
Reformations, and Independent Confusions, full of Perjury, Sacril^dge, Treason
and innocent Blood) This, I say, will, as the barking of Trees round, presently
bring any Opinionists and Factionists to public scorn and hatred; as it did
those Papists who heretofore in the Marian Persecutions, in the horrid
Powder Plot, and in the late Irish Rebellion, full of perfidy and cruelty, have
so blemished the repute of that Catholic cause, as it can never be redeemed
from just jealousies, but by actions of extraordinary Loyalty, Meekness and
Humanity; besides the renouncing of some opinions.

But where harmlesness of life sets a gloss on Opiniont, and Errors thereby
grow more lusty and rank, (as ill weeds in good ground:) there mere robust
power or punitive severity can no more pull them up, then a strong arm does
thorns and bushes when they are deeply rooted; breaking off the stem or top of
them, but leaving the roots still in the ground, which will spring again, and
spread farther. Here nothing is so effectual to do execution upon errors, as
clear demonstrations of Reason and Religion; which reaching men's Consciences,
by the proper methods of conviction, do, like a sharp Spade and Mattock, fetch
up the very roots and fibers of evil opinions, to the utter extirpation of such
noxious plants in a short time, except where knavery and hypocrisy do husband
Opinions to the best advantage of secular ends and interests of reputation,
profit or power.

After this charitable method and temper were those many learned Works and
elaborate Tracts of the Ancient Fathers of the Church, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Saint Austin, Prosper, Cyril, Hilary, Optatus, Saint Jerome and others,
written, conform to the Canons and Decrees of Ecclesiastical Councils, guided
by the Word and Spirit of God; and seasonably applied by their skilful and
charitable hands, to cure the maladies and stop the Gangrenes of such pestilent
opinions as sprang up in their days from Heretics, Schismatics and
Fanatics. Nor did those holy men at any time so despise the meannesse of any
Christians outward condition, or the fatuity of their opinions, as not to set a
great value on their souls, for which Christ had died; ever applying, first the
sword of the Spirit, the Word of Truth, in meekness of wisdom, before they
craved the assistance, or encouraged the severity of the secular Sword, from
Christian Emperors and Magistrates; using all rational and religious means,
until they found, that depraved opinions put men upon desperate actions, as in
those of the Novatians, Donatists and Arrians, also of the Manichees, Euchites
and Circumcellians, (a primitive kind of Quakers) who by a specious constancy
in praying, and affectation of suffering, so seduced the vulgar people, that
the numbers of their devout, idle and hungry associates, at length, gave them
confidence to make a prey and spoil of other men's goods, estates and lives
too; till by armed Forces they were repressed, and by just Laws prohibited, in
Honorius and other Emperors times.

Then indeed Charity to the public peace and welfare must be preferred before
any pity, charity, forbearance or indulgence to private persons, parties and
opinions, which growing rude and insolent in their words or deeds, sufficiently
discover they are not upon the pure account of Conscience, or principles of
true Christian Religion; which is as far as Heaven from Hell, or Christ from
Belial, from teaching or impelling men to any actings or approvings of private
sins and immoralities, much more from public conspirings and practisings of
Factions, Schisms, Sedition and Rebellion in Churches and Kingdoms: for which
Christ never gave any Commission to his Disciples, nor the least countenance;
but on the contrary, most eminent precepts and examples of humility, meekness
and patience under any sufferings for conscience sake; sufficient for ever to
confute the most specious pretensions of any, who violently carry on their
private Opinions and pretended Reformations, against the will and power of
lawful Magistrates and settled Churches.

I do judge it both Piety, Charity and Policy, to establish the rule of public
Religion by L^wes for uniformity in Doctrine, Devotion, Discipline and Decency,
accompanied, as with Rewards and Privileges to the Conformers, so with some
moderate pecuniary Penalties on Dissenters, according to men's estates and
influences: but, I confess, I am not for heavy mulcts, and rigorous exactions,
which shall imprison, banish, impoverish or destroy modest Dissenters and their
families only for the variety of their judgment; when their civil actions are
otherwise moral, just and inoffensive. This severity would in some Countries
(and possibly now in England) be not only destructive to many thousands, but
very disadvantagious to the King and Kingdom, to the Trade and Commerce of the
Nation, by opening a little Wicket of Royal Clemency only to some few, and
shutting the great Gate to many, whose tender and unsatisfied, or scrupulous
Consciences do as much expect, need and deserve it, as those that have it in
petty matters; while all others scruples are driven to discontent and despair
by denial of all* indulgence to them in greater scruples.

There are but these four ways of treating any party that dissents from the
public establishment of Religion and its Laws in any Church and Kingdom. 1.
Either to impoverish, imprison, banish and destroy all Dissenters, as the King
of Castile did the Moors of Granada; which is a very rough, barbarous,
unwelcome and unchristian way, disallowed by all wise men of all persuasions:
Or, Secondly, by rational convincing them of their errors; which is a work of
time and dexterity, not to be done on the sudden, no more then bodily cures,
without a miracle; though very worthy to bear a part in the Discipline of the
Church, which should require of every one a reason why they differ from, or
forsake the established Religion, and treat them according as their persuasion,
passion, or pertinacy shall appear to the Conservators of Religion: Or,
Thirdly, by changing established Laws for their sake; which is not for the
Piety, Prudence, Honor and Safety of a Nation and Church, when it judges its
Constitutions to be religious, righteous and convenient: Or, Fourthly, by way
of discreet connivance and charitable indulgence, so far as the civil peace
of the Nation will bear; until Reason and Religion (of whose prevalency wise
and good men never despair) have by calm and charitable methods recovered
people from the error of their ways, by the sacred Doctrine and good examples
of those who conform to the established Laws in Church and State. This being
first done, will render Dissenters unexcusable, and justify any severity which
shall be inflicted upon the extravagancies of those opinions and actions which
do any way perturb the public peace, or affront the established Religion.

And in this particular case of the Quakers (who refuse all legal Oaths, upon
scruples of Conscience, and so threaten either to subvert our Laws, or to
obstruct all judicial proceedings, pleading for their disobedience to man's
Laws, the express command of Christ and his Apostle Saint James) no sober man
can think by mere penalties to reduce them to a conformity with our Laws, or to
stop the spreading of their Opinions, until it be plainly showed, that it is
not true Religion, but only Superstition in them; a fear where no fear is; a
being righteous overmuch, by a mistake of Christ's meaning; a wresting of those
Scriptures, by their own unlearnedness and unstableness, to their own
destruction, as well as to the public perturbation.

Noble Sir, this great work (for so it is, to convince weak and wilful men of
the error of their ways) I have undertaken in this little Treatise, by Gods
blessing, not unseasonably (I hope) as to our times, nor unsuitably, as to my
profession. If I may be happy to do any of them good (who possibly may err in
this with no evil mind) by redeeming them from their mistakes, and so from the
penalties of the Law, I shall more rejoice in that success, then those
Soldiers did, who among the Ancients were rewarded with Civick Garlands for
preserving any of their Contrymen and fellow-Citizens: which Honor (you
know) the Roman valor esteemed more, then any victorious Laurels for
destroying their Enemies. And in this charitable endeavor ( prospered by Gods
grace) I shall the more seriously triumph, because I believe it most agreeable
as to my Saviors preoept and primitive examples of Christian Bishops, so to
your generous Soul, whereby this piece may probably be fortified with the
approbation of so pieus and judicious a person; whose single suffrage is to me
more valuable then the sequacious and vulgar votes of thousands, whose empty
brains and clamorous mouths, like hollow places where Echo hides her self, do
commonly receive and report things, not as the Truth is in them, but as the
noise and cry is lowdest. I know you are as much above plebeian censures, as
titular Honors, traditional Philosophy, and popular Religion; being every way
judiciously devoted to God and his Truth, full of Loyalty to the King and Laws,
also of sober Conformity to the established Religion of this Church, whose
royal Law is that of Charity, the bond of perfection, and center of Peace: In
all which respects you deserve and have the love and honor of all worthy
Persons, and particularly of him, who may, without vanity, own this as an
instance of some worth in him, that he is,

(SIR) Your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, JOH. EXON.
March 20, 1661.
A DISCOURSE, Concerning Public Oaths, and the Lawfulness of Swearing in
Judicial Proceedings, etc.
FInding lately in the most Honorable House of Peers, The Occasion of writing
this piece.
that a Law was likely to pass in order to punish, with great Penalties, those
English Subjects, who, under the name of Quakers, shall refuse to take, as
other legal Oaths, so those which are usually required in Judicial proceedings,
thereby to prevent, either the alteration of the good Laws and Customs of
England, according to private men's fancies, or the obstructions and violations
of public Justice; (the free course of which (as that of the Blood and Spirits
to the Natural) is the preservation of the Life and Health, the Peace and
Honor, the Happiness and very Being of the Body Politic) which by the Laws
and ancient Customs of this Kingdom of England cannot be duly administered, but
by those forms of solemn and religious Oaths in the Name of the true God, which
are the highest Obligations to Truth and Justice upon them that swear; also the
greatest satisfactions or assurances that can be given to others, for the
belief of what is so attested, and for acquiescency in what is so decided:

I was hereupon bold thus far humbly to intercede with that Honorable House,
My interceding for some respit of Penalty, till better information is offered
to the Quakers.
in the behalf of those poor people who are likely to fall under the Penalties
of that Law,

That however I might consent to the passing of that Bill, out of that justice
and charity which I owe to the public peace and welfare (to which all private
Parties, Interests, and Charities must submit;) yet I craved so far a respite
for some time as to the execution of those Penalties upon any of them, as
Offenders, until some such rational and religious course were taken, as might
best inform those men of the lawfulness, by God's as well as Man's Law, of
imposing and taking such public Oaths: That so answering first their Scruples,
and fairly removing their difficulties, either they might be brought to a
cheerful Obedience in that particular; or else be left without excuse before
God and man, while the truth of the Law was justified against their error, and
the severity of it only imputable to their own obstinacy.

I further recommended this previous method of Christian Charity or meekness of
Wisdom, as best becoming the Piety, Humanity and Honor of that House; 2. as
most agreeable to the wonted Clemency of His Majesty to all His good Subjects;
3. as the aptest means to reclaim such as were gone astray from their duty, by
the error of their fancy; 4. and to stop for the future the spreading of this
and other dangerous Opinions, which are usually known under the name of
Quakerisme; the Cure of which is easilier done by rational applications, then
by only rigid inflictions upon those, who pleading Conscience, will by the
Vulgar be thought Martyrs for their Sufferings; their patience spreading a love
and esteem of their Opinions, by that pity and sympathy which people will be
prone to have for their persons. 5. I further asserted this humble motion as
very suitable to my Profession, as a Minister of the Gospel, as the special care
of the Bishops and Fathers of the Church; relations which carry in them great
obligations to Humanity, Charity, Ministerial Duty, Episcopal Vigilance, and
Paternal Compassion to any men, specially Christians who are weak or ignorant,
erroneous in their judgment or dangerous in their actions. 6. Lastly, I urged
the pattern of Divine Justice, whose usual forerunner is Mercy; Vengeance
rarely following but where Patience has gone before, instructing men of their
duty, warning them of the danger of their sins, bearing with their manners for
a time, Zeph. 2. 2.
and calling them to repentance, before the Decree come forth to execution.

To this purpose I am sure I spoke; how I worded my meaning I cannot exactly
recollect; confessing, that I never found my self (who am thought neither a
barren nor a diffident speaker) more surprised with an ingenuous horror in any
Audience, then when I adventured to speak in that most august and honorable
Assembly of the Lords in Parliament, where there are so many excellent Orators,
and accurate Censors; among whom it is safer to hear then to speak, and easier
to admire then imitate their judicious Eloquence.

As the Motion seemed to have some favorable Acceptance in that Honorable
House from many Lords Temporal, The Acceptance of the Motion.
and from some of my Brethren the Bishops; so I presume it will not be
displeasing to their Piety and Charity, if I do that by a private and single
hand, which I persuade my self all of them would readily assist me in by their
joint suffrages and consent, if their leisure would permit them in common to
consult and determine of this point. Nor can I but believe that His Majesty's
Royal Clemency, which has sought in the gentlest way to convince and conquer
all His Enemies (whose Pride and Folly has not made them desperate, and so the
severest punishers of themselves) will graciously approve this my charitable
endeavor, to redeem many of his well-meaning Subjects from those mistakes in
Opinion, and mischiefs in Practice, which must either expose His Majesty and
his Kingdoms to great troubles and dangers, if unpunished and permitted; or
else compel His Native Gentleness to use at last (and it may be too late) those
Severities, which not His own Benignity, but the public Necessity, will
require of a Wise and Just King, whose Lenity to any party of his Subjects,
contrary to Law, will soon become an injury to the Community, which cannot be
safe or happy but by an uniform obedience to the same Laws, which must be the
rules and measures of all men's public Actions, the tryers of their failings,
and the inflicters of their punishments.

This Office of Christian Charity I have undertaken for Christ his sake,
Charity the only motive to this Intercession.
by whom I have received many mercies; not bespoken, or in the least sort
obliged, by any of that Sect called Quakers, with whom I have so little
correspondency, that I have not any acquaintance, not knowing any of that way
by Face or Name, or one hours conversation: They being a Generation of people
so supercilious, or so shy, that they are scarce sociable or accessible;
speaking much in their Conventicles behind men's backs, but seldom arguing any
thing in presence of those that are best able to answer or satisfy them;
seeming wiser in their own conceits then seven men that can render a reason. I
have seen indeed some of their Papers, and received some of their Letters
written to my self; truly, not very rudely, nor malapertly; yet with so abrupt
and obscure a way (so blindly censorious, and boldly dictating,) that saving a
few good words and godly phrases in them, I found very little of rational or
Scriptural demonstration, many passages so far from the beauty and strength of
Religion, that they had not the ordinary symmetry of Reason, or the lineaments
of common sense in them; at least in my apprehension, who am wholly a stranger
to any Canting or Chemical Divinity, which bubbles forth many specious Notions,
fine Fancies and short-lived Conceptions, floating a little in an airy and
empty brain, but not enduring the firm touch or breath of any serious judgment.

Nor do I expect any thanks for my pains from any of that Faction, The general
m^roseness of the Quakers.
while they continue in their morose Opinions, in their surly, rude and
uncourteous Manners. I do not hear that they are generally a people of so soft
and ingenuous tempers, as to take any thing kindly or thankfully from those
that are not of their own Persuasion: many of them seem to affect a ruserved
and restical way of clownish, yea scornful, demeanor; prone to censure,
despise and reproach not only their betters, but even their Benefactors and
Instructors. Their rude and levelling humor denies to show common courtesy
and wonted tokens of civil respect to their Superiors; contrary to the
reverent, gentle and humble behavior of all God's people, in all Ages, Jews
and Gentiles, then whom none were more full of inward humility, or of outward
respect and civility, according to the custom of their Countries. Possibly,
these Quakers may in a fit fear and flatter some men in power; but they do not
seem much to regard any man with any true love or honor as to real worth,
unless they be of their Fraternity; who pretending to a diviner spirit and
higher lights then either Reason, Law or Scripture afford to other men, do
think they have cause to glory in their own imaginations, and to despise all
those who are not yet arrived to the pitch of their presumption.

Some men I find look upon these Quakers with an eye of public Fear and
Jealousy, The fears and jealousies had of the Quakers.
lest the leaven of their Opinions and Practices, spreading far among the
meaner sort of people (to whose humor that rude and confident way is very
agreeable, while in a moment all their defects of Reason, Learning, Education,
Religion, Loyalty and Civility are made up by a presumed spirit and light
within them) lest, I say, it should, after the pattern of other Sects, both
later and elder (such as were the Montanists, Manichees, Circumcellians,
Euchites, Samosatenians, Anabaptists, Familists, Presbyterians and
Independents) give occasion and confidence to common people to run to Tumults
and Commottons under pretense of setting up God, and Christ, and the Spirit, by
the way of new Powers, new Lights, and new Models in Church and State. Of which
rare Fancies we have had of late so many Tragical Experiments in England, under
other Names, Notions, and Pretensions.

Certainly, it will become the public care and wisdom, A just cause to be had
of any new Sect or Faction.
as not easily to permit the rise and spreading of any novel humors and ways
contrary to the good Constitutions and well-tried Laws of this Church and
Kingdom: so never to trust them, though never so soft and seemingly innocent at
first. Horns, as in other Creatures, grow out of men's heads and hands too, as
their Bones and Smews grow stronger, as their strength and members increase.
Nothing but truly Christian and Evangelical Principles (which are in the good
and old way) do secure Kings, or sufficiently bind Subjects to their good
behavior. Though Factions at first may seem but as a Cloud of an handbreadth;
yet they will in time grow big and black, covering the whole face of Heaven,
and pouring down showers of Civil troubles upon any Church and Nation, if they
be not dispelled by Authority. Let them go never so soft and silently at first,
as Cats and Lions do on their Paws; yet they have all of them sharp Fangs,
hidden and reserved Talons, till they find a fit prey and opportunity for their
designs: then you shall see what cruel Claws they have. We see not only the
greater Hornets of rigid Presbyterians, but the lesser Wasps of Independents,
and the Gad-flies or muskeetos of Anabaptists, with other Insects, after their
pious buzzing at first, used their stings at last, and in their season, both
jointly and severally, they sought to sting to death this Church and Kingdom:
though at first, like Serpents in Winter, they seemed very tame and meek, as to
their principles and practices. There is a Wolf under the Sheeps clothing of
all Novelizing Humorists. All of them did either begin, or continue, or
increase our late Miseries, and will renew them by their emulations and
ambitions, from which the miraculous mercies of God have delivered us. The only
advantage which these our late Tragedies can afford us, is, to learn wisdom by
them, to govern our hearts and affections with greater evenness and exactness,
also to look to the Peace of Church and State with all possible circumspection
and vigilance; never to trust the most innocent smiles and harmless
simplicities of any Innovators, dissenters and repugners against well-setled
Laws and ancient Constitutions, no way contrary to Reason or Scripture.

For my part, Quakers may be pitied, but not trusted.
though I have pity and charity for these silly Quakers, as they may now appear
wrapped up in a kind of clownish garb, and ignorant plainness; yet I should
forfeit my prudence much to trust their Hands: because I find the Tongues and
Pens of some of them are full of bitterness, scorn and reproach; arguing much
pride and presumption in their spirits, not beseeming truly mortified
Christians, and least of all such as are, for the most part, but mean people
for birth or breeding, for reason and understanding, as well as estates. And
for the pretended Inspirations or inward Lights of which they vapor, I never
yet saw any beams or effects of them, that might give the least cause to think
of them above other poor men, who live by the more sure and sufficient light of
the Scriptures and our Laws, which raise them to much a higher pitch of
knowledge and prudence, sanctity and due obedience, then ever yet I observed in
any of this way, who seem very much infected with affectation and self-conceit.

I never conversed with any of their persons; and for their Writings, private
or public, The usual manner of their writing and discourse.
(in which I suppose they show their best abilities) I must profess there
appears to me so nothing of an excellent or extraordinary spirit in them, that
there is much of silliness, and never well-catechised ignorance, ^et off with
great confidence; an odd way of folly dressed up with some Scripture-phrases:
like Sepulchers painted with sweet flowers and fair colors, but void of any
true life and beauty within; either as convincing of sin and error, or as
vindicating any truth or necessary point of duty and morality. They generally
seem a busy, petulant and pragmatick sort of people, measuring themselves by
themselves, admiring each other, even in their most ridiculous affectations and
falsities: a kind of Dreamers, at once deceiving and being deceived, doting and
glorying in their rude and contemptuous carriage toward all men that do not
either favor or flatter them in their rusticity and petulancy, which has in
it a great seed of pride and ambition.

Nor do they seem wholly void of other evil principles, Their Covetousness and
Injustice in refusing to pay Tithes.
which look very like Covetousness and Injustice, while they deny to Ministers
of the Gospel, never so able and faithful, that maintenance by Tithes, which by
the Laws of the Land are as much due to them as any man's Estate, and by no Law
of Christ forbidden, but rather allowed* yea, 1 Cor. 9. 13.
ordained and proportioned by the Lord under the Gospel, by a paritie of
justice and gratitude, in way of homage to Christ, and of due wages and hire to
Gods laborers, as the livelihood of those that serve God and his Church in
holy ministrations. Nor is it a small insolence in them to endeavor, in an age
of so much light and learning, to obtrude, yea oppose, the rudeness and
silliness of their covetous and crude fancies, against the Prudence, Justice
and Piety of this Church and Kingdom.

But my design in this place is not to ravel into all the petty Opinions, My
pity for them on a treple account.
Enthusiastic Raptures and odd practices of the Quakers: nor will I here
severely perstringe them, because I have a great pity for them upon a threefold
account. First, because I perceive them to be so very unlearned and unstable
people; ever learning, but never coming to any solid knowledge of Truth, or any
great improvement in Christian gifts; men of low parts, and small capacities as
to any point of true wisdom or understanding in things Humane or Divine; tossed
to and fro with every wind of Doctrine; easily seduced with specious
pretensions and strange notions, even to Raptures and Enthusiasmes, which are
presented to them as rare novelties by some that are Masters of that Art, and
Agitators for that Party; for what design, private or public, foreign or
domestic, God knows. Some suspect Jesuitick Arts to be among them. Quakers
suspected of Jesuitick Arts and designs.
Indeed they seem so far to conspire with the craftiest Lotolists, as they bear
a most implacable hatred against the Church of England: and under religious
pretensions they may in time undermine the civil Peace, as other Factions
formerly have done. The way to make them better Subjects is to make them wiser
men and seberer Christians, by some public care to have them better instructed
as well as justly restrained.

My Second ground of pity to them is, The first life or breeding of Quakers.
because they are a Sect lately bred by a kind of equivocal generation, as
Vermin out of the putid matter and corruptions of former times, in which so
many Factions cast forth their spawn and filth to the deformity and confusion
of all things Civil and Sacred in this Church and Kingdom. They had their
beginning from the very rabble and dregs of people, uncatechised, undisciplined
and ungoverned in England. No wonder to find these people fly to inspirations
and new lights, when they were hatched in dark times, which sought to put out
all the old light of Law and Gospel. They might easily run to Rudeness toward
their betters, and Refractoriness against our Laws, and Obstinacy in their
Errors, and Impatience of any just coercions, when they had their first
original and extraction out of that squalor, mud, and fedity of times which
destroyed all fear of God and reverence of Man, which denied the holy
institution of Ministers, the orderly presidency of Bishops, the just
authority of Magistrates, the freedom and honor of Parliaments, and the
Sacred Majesty of Kings. All these being trodden under the feet of profane
Levellers and cruel Usurpers, who can wonder that the impiety and scandal of
those times should lead such silly people in those temptations, which sought by
some unwonted ways to make even their obscurity remarkable at least by the
parallel boldness of their Opinions, and the rudeness of their Actions?

3. Lastly, I pity them, because to me it is no wonder, How they were first
scared from all public Oaths.
if people of so plain breeding, of unpolished manners, (and possibly of no
evil minds, compared to others of those times; though easy and unwary, as the
Quakers for the most part are) if (I say) they were scared from all Swearing by
the frequent forfeited Oaths and repeated Perjuries of those Times, in which
the cruel Ambitions and disorderly Spirits of some men, like the Demoniack in
the Gospel, brake all bonds of lawful Oaths, by which they were bound to God
and the King; daily imposing, as any new Party or Interest prevailed, the
Superfoetations of new and illegal Oaths, monstrous Vows, factious Covenants,
desperate Engagements, and damnable Abjurations.

Poor men, the Quakers, as well as others, had cause to fear lest if they took
an Oath to day, they should to morrow be forced to renounce and abjure it; not
as to own a quiet submission and profession of passive obedience to Powers at
present prevalent and protecting (which is the way of temporary and reciprocal
Oaths of Allegiance, among those Subjects whose fortunes lying on the frontiers
of Dominions, expose them to the vicissitudes of Wars and change of Governors)
but to a formal comprobation of most unjust Actions, yea to renounce and abjure
the undoubted rights of others, to attest even by Oath the Usurpations of those
as lawful, which were most diametrically contrary to the Laws of God and Man.

This great temptation under which these Quakers then lived, The great
temptation of those Times upon the Quakers.
makes me have much compassion for them; it being not only easy and obvious,
but venial and almost commendable, for them to be carried to an utter
aversation from all Swearing whatsoever, when they saw such desperate abuse and
breaking of public and solemn Oaths in those dismal days. But as the abuse of
things lawful and good must not take away the lawful use of them, no more then
some men's gluttony and drunkenness may deprive us of all eating and drinking
soberly: so neither may Christians therefore deny all Swearing, because some
men cared not what and how they did Swear and Forswear. Here a little clearing
of those superstitious fears and prejudices which first possessed these men
against all Swearing, may at once let them see the liberty they have for doing
that which our Laws require, and our Savior in the Gospel no where absolutely
forbids, but only regulates and restrains.

Nor do I only thus pity the Quakers, The Quakers in some respects commendable.
but I praise them also in some respects; being as no enemy to their persons,
so a friend to any thing that is good in them.

First, 1. For choosing to suffer rather then sin against their Consciences.
for their choosing (as they profess in those Papers given in that day to some
of the Lords) rather to suffer then sin against their Consciences, and so
against God; whose holy will shining on the Soul in Reason and Religion, either
seeming or real, is indeed the present rule of Conscience: Nor may any man act
contrary to these dictates which he judges to be Gods; though he err as to
the Truth of the Rule, yet his judgment binds so far as it represents, though
in a false Glass, the supposed light of Gods will. For he that will venture to
act against Conscience, though erroneous, will also act against it though never
so clear and perspicuous.

Here the first care must be, that the ((...)) judgment be according to Truth,
and then to act accordingly: Else, however the integrity of intention may be
commendable, and so mitigate the fault; yet the sin of the action may be great,
as to the enormity or aberration from the rule of eternal Truth and Justice. As
that of Paul was when he persecuted and blasphemed the Christian Religion,
being verily persuaded that he ought so to do, against that way. Acts 16 9.
So others should think they did God good service, while they killed Christ's
Disciples. Joh. 16. 2.
A Conscience thus erring, falls into the snare or dilemma of the Devil: if it
act according to its error, The Dilemma or Snare of an erring conscience.
it sins materially against the intrinsecal Justice and Truth of God and his
holy Will, (the conformity to which is the measure of moral good and holiness:)
if it act contrary to its appearing Principles, it sins formally and
maliciously, as wilfully rebelling against the supposed will of God.

So much it concerns every Christian to be fully informed of that Divine Truth
and Light, Isa. 5. 20.
which alone shows the right and good way: Else they will easily be brought to
call evil good, and good evil, to call light darkness, and darkness light;
Eccl. 7. 16.
to be over-righteous, by adding to the commands of God, or over-wicked, by
making or esteeming themselves sinners, when indeed they are not so: either
negatively superstitious, Of supersticious fears.
in abstaining from that as sin which is no sin; or affirmatively
superstitious, in counting that a duty which is not so. Both are injurious
usurpations upon the sovereignty of God, whose Scepter is infallible Truth, as
his Sword is just and irresistible Power. So dangerous are erroneous fears,
where no fear is; Psalm. 53. 5.
or presumptuous confidences, where is no Divine permission. Men must not set
up the Idols of their own imaginations in Gods place; nor may they be
falsaries, or forgers of that Coin, which as to duty is only then current when
it has not only good metal, but also the clear stamp of Gods express will on
it. The Mint of humane fancies, either melancholy and timorous, or pragmatick
and adventurous, is but an adulteration of Religion, and a kind of stuprating
of Conscience. The will of God, The perfect and sure Rule of conscience.
which is clear either in right Reason or true Scripture-demonstration, is
sufficient to make the man of God perfect to every good word and work, without
any additions or detractions, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
which are but as the Wens or witherings, the excrescencies or deficiencies of
men's extravagant minds and actions; so far from advancing the peace of
Conscience or the honor of true Religion, that they debase and deforme both of
them. As no Laws of men contrary to Gods Word are to be actively obeyed; so
Laws of men which are not contrary to right Reason and Scripture must not be
disobeyed, but conscientiously observed for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans
13. 5. in whose wisdom and authority such Laws are made and executed. The
contrary will not only trouble the public Peace, but that also of a man's own
soul, at least, when after the vain flashes of light kindled from the sparks of
their private fancies, they shall lie down in darkness as to their comfort and
reward from God, Isa. 50. 11.
whose judgment is according to righteousness and truth.

Secondly, 2. Quakers commendable for their regard to the Scriptures.
I cannot but commend the Quakers for their declared esteem in this of the
authority of the holy Scripture, as the rule of Faith and holy life. For as by
their instances alleged out of Scripture they profess a fear to sin against
the commands there given by Christ against Swearing: so I may charitably
presume* however they are by many suspected to slight the Scriptures, and fly
to Inspirations or Lights within them) that they will be no less strict in
doing what therein is required of them, as to Truths to be believed, Mysteries
to be celebrated, and Duties to be done to God and Man.

The only Caution that here must be given them is, Caution against
misunderstanding and wresting the Scriptures.
to take heed that they do not wrest the Scriptures (2 Pel. 3. 16.) by their
ignorant and unstable minds; that they believe not every Spirit, or seeming and
partial Allegation of Scripture; since the Devil often feathers his temptations
and fiery darts (as against Christ, Mat. 3.) with Scriptural Citations
partially and preposterously applied. Not the Letter in its abruptness or
nakedness of sense must be swallowed presently, but the mind of God must be
searched out in the scope and end also, in the manner and emphasis of what is
expressed. Scripture is indeed sufficient for the substance of all necessary
Truths to be believed, and Duties to be done, or left undone; but it does not
stretch it self to the instances of every particular circumstance or ceremony,
which private Prudence or public Laws may regulate, according to order and
decency, to edification.

Nor is Scripture to be well understood in retaile (that is) by single places,
taken apart by themselves, but in wholesale, by the proportion of Faith, Romans
12. 6.
the analogous or concurrent sense, which is made up or twisted from many
places. Many things in some Scriptures are expressed darkly, metaphorically,
figuratively, parabolically, comparatively, by way of allusion, in Metonymies,
Synecdoches, Ironies, and Hyperboles, in Vniversalities, which are limited to
the subject intended. Many popular expressions have special regard to
particular times, places, persons, customs and usages; and must be so taken, as
temporary and occasional. These must have commodious interpretations, consonant
to that grand tenor of Gods word, which as the life and spirit runs through
all the parts of it, but resides most eminently in some places, (as the Soul in
the Brain or Heart) which are as the essential, vital, integral and principal
parts of Scripture; the main standards and measure of all others, and of true
Religion, both as to Morals and Evangelicals, Mysteries to be believed, and
Duties to be performed.

Unless we observe these prudentials in searching the mind of God, and taking
the true meaning of the Scriptures, we shall (as Saint Austin observes) draw
poison with Spiders from those sweet flowers which would afford us honey. 2
Pet. 1. 10.
A depraved and private interpretation is the corruption, wrack and torture of
Scripture, whose every line is as the Sunbeams, light and straight of it self;
but erroneous minds, like Glasses of Refraction, or false Mediums, pervert them
from their simplicity to their own destruction, as S. Peter speaks. 2 Pet. 3.
16.


It were endless to enumerate those places of Scripture which have either more
or less, The true sense of Scriptures, how to be found out.
or something other in their meaning and design, then the Letter seems to hold
forth in the bare words of it.

Extraordinary Commands, as to Abraham for sacrificing his Son Isaac, to the
Israelites to rob, by way of borrowing, and recompense the Egyptians; the
heroic impulses and actions of others, as Moses, Phineas, Elias, and Sampson;
Commands to do things less comely and honest, either in a reality, or in a
vision and representation, as Hosea's marrying an Harlot; Hosea 1. 2.
the faults or failings of others, which were holy men as to their integrity,
barely recorded, but not there blamed, as Rebecca's and Jacob's supplanting by
a lie and fraud; the officious lies of the Midwives, Rahab and others, David's
feigning himself mad; the equivocations and dissimulations of others; These
and such like, that have any thing in them which seems or is contrary to the
constant rule of Morality, Piety, Sanctity, Honesty and Veracity, must be
salved by such an interpretation, and taken in such a sense, as may no way
bring them into an ordinary rule or imitable example, contrary to the express
and constant command of God in his Word, which is never to be allayed by the
mixtures of humane Passions, Frailties and Infirmities.

So in things that are preceptive, Of commands affi^mative and negative in
Scripture.
either enjoining or forbidding, by way of proverbial speaking, the meaning
must not be stretched on the tenter or rack of the Letter; but as we gather
some fruit that grow with thick shells, only to gain the small kernels in
them, so in these, no more is to be collected from the Letter then what may
have due regard to the design and scope of the speaker. So in the fifth, sixth,
and seventh Chapters of Saint Matthew, Christ's Sermon in the mount has many
such expressions: Mat. 5. 29, 30. 6. 16.
as of anointing the Head and Face in fasting; pulling out the right Eye, and
cutting off the right Hand; giving to them that ask; to sell all and give to
the poor; to turn the other Cheek to the smiters. These do not run Christians
upon maiming and deforming their Bodies, or expose them to poverty and
stupidity; but only they teach them to bear with patience repeated injuries,
rather then be put beyond the bounds of Christian patience and charity; and to
sustain any outward difficulties, rather then inward enormities of lust or
covetousness, and the like.

So not to lay up treasure on earth; Mat. 6. 19. 25, 31, 34.
to take no thought for their life, or care for to morrow; Labor not for the
meat that perishes, etc. Joh. 6. 27. to call no man Father or Master on Earth
Mat. 23.9. not to salute any man by the way, Luke 10. 4. not to put on costly
Raiment or Jewels, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 3. So Hosea 6. 6. I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: So, Rent your Hearts, and not your Garments, Joel 2. 13. Who has
required these things at your hands? Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13. viz. in this
hypocritical fashion. Of Scripture general negatives limited.
These seeming Negatives, are not absolutely but comparatively spoken, to such
a degree of love or care, or fear, reverence and duty, as are due to Gods great
Commands and chief Designs, which must be the main biass of men's affections and
obediential actions, as most intent to morality, and not to content themselves
with empty formalities.

So in Ironical assentings, or seeming concessions, which are the sharpest
prohibitions and reproaches: as, Mat. 23. 31.
Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers; He that is filthy let him be
filthy still, Rev. 22. 11.
and he that is unjust be unjust still. These are not spoken in a flat and
plain way, but in such a dialect and emphasis of familiar Oratory as the times
and country did well understand, to signify other then the words sounded,
either more or less. And it had been a very ridiculous childishness to have
urged the Letter in its syllabical appearance, and against its rational
meaning; which (as S. Austin long ago observed) must never be so put upon the
biass of the bare words, as to sway or swerve them contrary to that Divine
Verity, Morality and Sanctity which shines most clearly in other places, and
whose light must be brought to enlighten those that are more involved and
obscured, by reason of some proper phrase or idiotisme of expressing things
after the manner of men in those times: Else many things spoken even of God,
and by God himself, and holy men after the manner of men, as seeing, hearing,
smelling, being injured, angry, and repenting, etc. will be as blasphemies and
irreconcilable (as both Jewish Rabbis and Christian Doctors observe) to his
essential Attributes and immutable Perfections. R^b. Maimon. in Morch Nabucihn.
Here the words look to the appearance (as when Angels are called young men,
Mark 16. 5. Joh. 20. 12. Luke 24. 4.) but the sense must look to the essence
and reality.

Men will make as mad work of Scripture as Hogs will do with Gardens and
Fields, when in stead of orderly plowing and sowing, that we may reap a fair
and fruitful Harvest, we inordinately and rashly root up all things by a
confused rudeness, which ends either in barrenness, or in briars and thorns,
endless janglings and perplexities.

What long and sad contentions have the Papists made in the Western Churches
the last 300. years, The Papists rigid urging the Letter.
by rigidly urging those words of Consecration in the Lords Supper to a literal
severity, making the Bread after Consecration so much Christ's Body
substantially and not sacramentally, which all good Christians believe) that
there remains no more natural substance of the Bread, but only under the
accidents of Bread, the sole and entire substance of Christ's Body; the same
which is at once in Heaven and in every place where this Sacrament is
celebrated, yea in every crum of it? By which Superseraphick opinion, Faith
must not only forsake the senses and look above them, but flatly deny and
contradict them, in every verdict which they give of their proper objects,
according to experience and right Reason, which are a part of the Creators
light to mankind. And all this by a magisterial, novel and seraphick severity,
beyond the judgment of the ancient Churches, is imposed by pressing the
((...)) rigid Letter of the words in that part of the blessed Sacrament, and
allowing no Metonymy or Symbolical speaking, which is so frequent in
Scripture-Mysteries, and sacred correspondencies between the signs and things
signified (as the Lamb is called the Passover, and Christ our Passover, and
the Rock, Vine, Dove, etc.) While yet in the other part of the same Sacrament
they are forced to subdue and soften the words to their due sense by such
Metonymues and Tropes as must make the Cup to signify or mean the Wine, and
the Cup or Wine to signify the New Testament in Christ's Blood.

Certainly, as in such expressions which Christ there uses, and which we read
in other Scriptures of parallel sense, to set forth Divine Mysteries (by their
adapted Signs and Symbols, or Emblems and Seals) there must be believed
something more sublime in them then the narrowness of the words, or perhaps the
hearts of men in this world can fully comprehend; so, to be sure, nothing is by
Scripture imposed upon us to be believed which is flatly contradictive to right
Reason, and the suffrages of all our senses, and to the Analogy of Faith in the
Scriptures. But here the meaning of the words must be measured by semblable
places and like expressions, which are not wanting in the Scriptures; and yet
are not so wrested by any Christians that are Masters of Sense, Reason, and
true Religion, who do not cease by believing to be rational Creatures, or to be
men by being Christians.

If the Quakers will fairly admit such Cautions and limitations as they do to
other places, in the interpreting these Scriptures which they chiefly allege
to justify their denial of all Swearing whatever, I shall not doubt to
reconcile them to my sense of them, nor shall I grudge to give them this second
commendation, for their due regard to Scripture as the sure and sufficient rule
of a Christians actions for the main and substance of them. But these
Scriptures must be duly examined, exactly weighed, and aptly reduced to that
standard of Truth which is most constant and clear in both Morals and Fiducials.

Thirdly, A third commendation of the Quakers, for their fearing an Oath.
Yea, I shall add a third (Commendation of these Quakers (who shall rise in
judgment at the last day against many of those that speak much against them)
for this, That they seem to have so great a fear of an Oath, that out of a
jealousy of Swearing amiss, they will not swear at all. Eccl. 9. 2.
Although they are superstitious in the degree of their fear (which I shall
prove to be not justly grounded on the words they allege,) yet no good man can
blame them to have, as God commands, Zach. 8. 17.
a just abhorrence of the sin of profane, easy, trivial, familiar, false and
inconsiderate Swearing, for which the Land mourns, Jer. 23. 10. which so
disposes men (as Saint Austin says) to false Swearing and gross Perjury;
Jurandi facilitate in perjurium labimur.
which are sins of the first magnitude. Nor can indeed much credit be given
(any more then to a Liar) to any man that swears never so solemnly and in
Judicature, who is a common Swearer, August. Contemptor religionis ad jurandum
facilis.
and has no reverence either of the Majesty of God or the sacredness of an
Oath.

I formerly observed the great dread and just horror of all Swearing, Ulpian.
(...), Eccles 23. 11.
(even that which the Laws required) wherewith the poor. Quakers might easily
be scared and possessed in those barbarous times of their first breeding, when
so many lawful Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19.
Oaths were despised and impudently violated; nay when Perjury and Rebellion
were adopted to the Family of Religion, and voted for Reformation; when men
were grown so preposterously zealous for God, that they would both lie and
forswear to advance his Interest and Kingdom (as they pretended) in the World;
till themselves beca^e as Sodom and Gomorrah, the abhorrence and abomination of
all people of common honesty, who saw the Land not only defiled with innocent
blood, but most sadly mourning under the burden of such prodigious Swearings
and hypocritical forswearings, as were not only vulgar and trivial, but solemn
and authoritative.

It was and is well done of the Quakers to be wary of such Swearing, because
the brands of Perjury (as the Devils stigmatizings) are among the marks of fin
hardliest to be wiped off or worn out, without a wound and scar on the
conscience, no less then the credit and reputation of a Christian.

But yet I cannot consent to them, But not for their Superstitious fear,
against the good ends of Oaths in judicature.
nor commend them, for their being righteous overmuch, by their absolutely
denying and condemning, as sinful, the solemn, sacred and judicial manner of
Swearing required by the Laws of this Kingdom, and allowed by this and all
other Christian and Reformed Churches: In which Oaths either the recognition of
a known Truth, or the agnition of a Right, or the profession of a loyal Duty,
or a sure Testimony in matter of Fact, are required both in allegiance to the
Prince, and in justice and charity to our neighbors, for the trial of doubtful
Cases, and determining of them in judgment, Jer. 4. 2.
righteousness and truth, as with least error in themselves, so with most
reverence and fear of God, the fountain of Justice, Truth, Order and Peace
(whose the judgment, power, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
and authority is;) also with most security to the public peace and welfare,
which are bound up in the due execution of Justice and lastly, to the most
satisfaction of all men, who can desire or expect no higher appeal or
attestation, then the Omniscience and Omnipotence of the Judge of all the
earth, called as a witness upon their souls.

These grand and public concerns, in which Gods glory and the good of mankind
are involved and carried on by the sacred solemnity of public and legal Oaths,
as they do command a great strictness and conscientious cautiousness in all
such Swearing, so they do, upon Scriptural, moral, and political grounds,
sufficiently justify the use of that Swearing which they thus require, and
which without this method of religions justice cannot be obtained in the now
inveterate wickedness and degeneracy of humane Nature: For a (...) and remedy
to which good Laws are appointed, and these executed with that equity, sanctity
and solemnity, which at once befits both men and Christians; that is, persons
related and responsible not only to humane society and authority, but owners
of, and appealers to, divine Justice and Vengeance: of whose last great and
dreadful Tribunal our little Courts of Justice and judicial proceedings on
Earth are previous Emblems and Forerunners.

For the preserving and asserting these great and good Ends is that Law now
enacted against the Errors and Obstinacies of the Quakers; The end of the Law
against the Quakers.
seeking by just penalties to remove those Obstructions which their contrary
declared principles and avowed practices endeavor to put upon all judicial
proceedings; yea, and to shake that mutual security which both King and
Subjects have by the enterchange of their respective Oaths to each other, in
the name of the blessed God. These good and necessary Ends do justify the
severity of those means which the wisdom of the Parliament applies, consonant
to Gods word: nor may any Subjects complain, since, as the Law is imposed by
all Estates, so upon all sorts of people without respect of persons: nor can
any Nation be thought cruel to it self, or to inflict too severe punishments
on it self, when not only the regard to the personal offense, but the care and
caution for the public welfare and indemnity is the measure of such Penalties
inflicted.

Against all this the Quakers plead their consciences, The ground of the
Quakers plea for their not Swearing.
which they say will not permit them in any case to Swear. The ground of this
their conscientious Resolution of not Swearing, lest they should sin, is
produced, as appears by their Papers, from those too pregnant places, Mat. 5.
34. where our Savior citing the old Law from Exodus 20. 7. Lev. 19. 12. and
Deu. 5. 11. as allowed by the Jews, commanding them to swear only by the name
of the Lord; and in those cases not to forswear themselves, but to perform
their Oaths to the Lord; adds by way of reformation, But I say unto you, Swear
not at all: and Saint James 5. 12. where the Apostle to the same sense and
words repeats the command of Christ, Above all things, my Brethren, swear not
at all.

Both places indeed seem at first sight point-blanck (as some Commentators
observe) to forbid all manner of swearing among Christians, P^^ma facie ille
videtur seas^s Ev^ng^licus, (...) Christianos (...).
both have emphaticall or vehement words. The first, Christ's Authority,
reforming not only the Pharisaick corruptions of the Times, but even the
Mosaic indulgences in some things, which were rather not de^^ed for the
hardness of the Jews Hearts, then positively granted: I say unto you, Swear not
at all; Mat. 19. 8.
that is, not by those Oaths in which you make now no scruple to swear and
forswear.

So the Apostle Saint James, writing to the dispersed Jews; Above all things,
my Brethren, swear not: evidently referring to the words of our Savior, and
the same ends.

Nor are the fears and scruples of the Quakers in point of swearing to be
wholly despised; when they have two such notable Texts in their way, which seem
to stand, as the Angel of the Lord against Balaam, with a Sword in their hand
to stop the way of any Swearing whatsoever. Both Texts are allowed on all
hands, as the word of God; All are agreed that the words are a divine and
strict prohibition against the sin of Swearing; and therefore in all charity
the words ought to be cleared, and their scruples removed.

The Questions about the interpretation, Three Questions.
scope, and meaning of the words are: 1. Whether all Swearing be utterly
forbidden, because it is and ever was in its nature a sin against morality.

2. Or whether all Swearing is therefore now a sin, because thus forbidden by a
positive Law of Christ under the Gospel.

3. Or whether only some sort of Swearing, which is a sin, is forbidden, but
not such Swearing as is no sin, but rather an act of special veneration, or
sanctifying Gods name, also an act of justice and charity to our neighbors or
our selves.

As to the first Question, 1. Question answered: Swearing was lawful among the
Jews.
whether all Swearing be now by Christ forbidden, because it is and ever was in
its Nature a sin against Morality, that is, against the eternal rectitude and
goodness of the Divine Nature and Will:

I suppose the Quakers are not herein positive; nor dare they condemn as
morally and always evil, all swearing by the Name of the most high God. For
which practice of old among the Jews we have not only so many precedents or
examples of holy men, approved by God, as Abraham, Jacob, David, and others,
(yea and the example of God himself (as I shall after instance in) swearing by
himself, as the high and holy one, whose supreme power and inimitable
excellency is the highest asseveration or ascertaining of what is so spoken,
either to win us to belief, or to strike us with terror, leaving men without
excuse, if being so happy as to have the Oath of God to assure them of a truth,
yet they will not believe God, no not swearing for their sake, as Tertullian
speaks) But also we have express commands of God: First, that great one in the
Decalogue, where the Negative, of not taking Gods name in vain, or falsely, does
include the Assirmative, of using the name of God in thinking or meditating, in
reading and writing, in speaking, praying, blessing, praising, promising or
attesting, vowing or swearing, with due reverence and adoration to his Divine
Majesty, which is intimated by his holy name, as the summary of all his
Attributes. And agreeable to this great Command are those many other places so
frequent in the Old Testament, which command the people of God to swear only by
his Name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and this in righteousness, judgment, and truth, Jer. 4.
2. of which I shall after give more particular account, when I prove that
moral, divine and eternal good which is in lawful swearing.

Hence Gods frequent reproof, Zach. 5. 4. Mal. 3. 5.
threatening and punishing with a curse, not all men that did swear, but only
such as swear falsely, either as to their present judgments and intentions, or
as to their after violating of their Oaths, to the pro^aning of the name of
God; yea, and those who by trivial, light, and inconsiderate swearing, took the
name of God in vain, having no reverence to his Majesty when they made mention
of his name with their lips: lastly, those that swear, though truly, Jer. 12.
16. Zeph. 1. 5.
by false Gods, as Baal, or by any Creature, as if it were to them in stead of
God.

This then I suppose is so clear, even to the sillicst and most scrupulous
Quakers, that they cannot doubt of the lawfulness of swearing lawfully among
the Jews, not only as permitted, but commanded.

Nay (perhaps) they will grant that a Christian in some cases may give his Oath
to an Heathen Prince, or others of different Religion from Christianity, when
in cases of safety, or ransom, or life, or other great concerns, they may be
thereto required of them, and will by no other way be satisfied: It being a
Principle of natural Divinity bred in the hearts of all mankind, that the
invocation, attestation and adjuration in the name of the God which they
respectively own, is the greatest assurance which can be given or desired; as I
shall make to appear afterward, when I come to show the consent and practice of
Nations as to deciding of Controversies by swearing.

The scruple then lies only upon these prohibitions in the Gospel given by
Christ and the Apostle Saint James; (...), whether among Christians all
Swearing be so bidden.
forbidding absolutely (as they suppose) all swearing, at least among
Christians, whatever was used or indulged among the Jews (as were Revenge,
Polygamy and Divorces, and other political dispensations, for the
uncharitableness, wantonness and hardness of their hearts) Christ, as they
presume, restoring the communication of Christians both public and private to
that integrity of mind, simplicity of speech and sanctity of manners, which may
deserve of one another as much credit as if they swear; (...). Joseph. de
Essenis.
according to that strictness which the Esseni among the Jews used, whose word
was, As sure as an Oath. So that they say, we may not in charity either exact
of our Brethren, or give to them any Oath; since they deserve to be believed
upon the same terms which they believe others, that is, their bare Yea or Nay,
simple affirmings or denyings, without any swearing; which they think an old
Iudaick superfluity of speech now circumcised, and precisely cut off from the
lips of Christians: No man deserving to be believed on his Oath, (...). Cl.
Alex.
who has lost by lying the credit of his bare word; nor any man deserving to
be confirmed by any honest man's Oath, who has not the charity and humanity to
believe him without it.

And certainly the affairs of Christians, both public and private, would be no
less to their honor and ease, if there were in no case any need or use of any
Oaths or Swearing; but such an authentic veracity and just credulity on all
sides, as might well spare even the most true, sincere and lawful Oaths,
keeping on all sides as great a distance from lying as from false swearing. And
certainly as these two, true speaking and true swearing, are near of kind, of
the same Father, God, and the same Mother, an honest and veracious heart; so
the other two, lying and false-swearing, are progenies of the same parentage,
of their Father the Devil, and from a persidious heart. Perjury and Lying are
of the same Web or Spinning; only the first has the stronger twist, and the
deeper dye or tincture of Hell, being more the Devils color and in gram.

The Eutopian desire and aim of these Quakers is not to be found fault with, if
it were feisable. Yea, The specious design o^ the Quakers not practicable.
it were to be wished that the evils of men's hearts and manners, the jealousies
and distrusts, the dissimulations and frauds of many Christians, Quamvis jurato
nollem tibi credere.
their uncharitableness, unsatisfactions and insecurities, were not such, as by
their diseases do make these applications of solemn Oaths and judicial
swearings necessary; not absolutely, Juram^ntum non aliter qaam medicamentum
urgente necessitate usurpandum.
and morally, or preceptively (as the Schoolmen note well) but by way of
consequence and remedy; as good new Laws are necessary for the curb or cure of
new evils in Polities and Kingdoms. Possibly as Christians (truly such) we
should need no swearings in public or private: but as men, weak and unworthy,
Non adhib^tur ju^jurandum nisi ad subveniendum desect^i.
we cannot well be without such Oaths to end Controversies, and to secure, as
much as man can do, the exact proceedings of Justice.

If it do appear that all swearing is absolutely by our Lord Christ forbidden
to his Disciples, Levitas hominum and inconstantia diffidentiam geauit, cui
remedium quaesitum est ju^ejucando. Grotius.
God forbid we should not obey his word, and rather change the Laws of man,
then violate his commands, to whom we Christians owe the highest love, loyalty
and obedience. But if it shall appear to religious Reason, that the words of
Christ do not import any such absolute forbidding of all use of swearing,
(...). Cle.
but by the scope of them and the analogy of Scripture they have another true
interpretation and limited meaning, we must not be so much slaves to the
Letter, as to lead Truth and Reason captive, or to deprive our selves of that
religious liberty which is left us, and so is not only lawful for Christians to
use, but in some cases it may be prudentially necessary, as to the expediences
of men's jealousies, lives, liberties, estates, and good names, even in private;
much more in the dispensations of justice to the public peace, and general
satisfaction of whole Polities and Communities, wherein men live socially,
under law and government.

The Controversy therefore which is risen between the Quakers and almost all
other Christians will come into this narrow room. The true state of the
Controversy.


1. Not whether a Christian may swear vainly and rashly, Not whether vain
swearing be forbidden.
by a spontaneous and occasional easiness, either promising or asserting,
although it be a truth, and by the true God, but without reverence to God, and
in matters of so little, yea no importance or difficulty, as neither deserve,
nor need, nor require an Oath. To this we all agree with the Quakers, Christ's
words condemning all such profane and trivial swearing; much more if it be in
fraud and falsitie, which makes such Oaths, as the Coin of an Usurper, which is
false metal and stamp too, a complicated sin, and one of the strongest chains
of darkness which the Devil and a man's own lusts hamper the Soul withal.

2. Not is it any question whether Christians may swear in any case by any
Creature as such, No^ whether one may swear by any Creature.
not relating by it and through it to God above all, who is the Alpha and
Omega, the center and circumference of all things, from whom they have their
being, and in whom is the Idea or Prototype of all their perfections. To
terminate an Oath in a Creature, is to put the stamp of Divinity on it, to make
it an Idol in Gods stead, and to profane his holy name, by swearing by it as by
a false God. The swearing by any Creature as such, we all own to be a great
sin, according to those instances which our Lord Christ, and Saint James from
his mouth, give us, when they explain their meaning of Swear not at all, etc.

3. Nor is it a question whether an Oath made by the name of any Creature, Nor
whether an Oath by any Creatures name may be broken.
and in a thing lawful, may yet be broken; or whether it be a sin to swear
falsely by them. All agree, that though the Oath be rash, as by a Creature, yet
it binds in things lawful no less at least to truth and justice then any simple
promise; and it may be something more. Here that is true, Fieri non debuit,
factum valet: Like Bastards, they should not have been begot, but they must be
kept; unless the matter be sinful, as Herod's Oath was which beheaded John
Baptist, Mat. 14. 9.

4. But the question is, 4. The only question is, whether all Swearing is
forbidden to Christians.
Whether those words of Christ and the Apostle do utterly forbid all Swearing
in any case whatsoever to all Christians; so that by the Law of Christ it is a
sin to swear, as in private, so in public transactions, or any Courts of
Judicature, be the matter of the Oath never so just and true, and the manner of
it never so solemn and sacred, and the Authority requiring them never so lawful
in civil respects.

This the Quakers affirm, led thereto, as they profess, merely by the
Conscience of that obedience they oweto Christ, whose will they say is expressly
declared in those words to all his Disciples, Not to swear at all, in no case,
at no time, upon no man's command. Nor do they argue any thing further by way of
rational deduction, moral grounds, or religious principles, either from the
nature of an Oath, or from the consent of other Scriptures, or from the Divine
Attributes and glory; but barely insist upon the words, and urge the ((...))
Letter, as an absolute or universal Negative, without any limitation or
dispensation: So feeding on the rind or shell of the Letter, and gnawing the
bone of the bare words, that they never come at the kernel and marrow, or true
meaning of them.

On the other side, I do deny, All Swearing is not by Christ or the Apostle
Saint James forbidden.
in the behalf of my own Conscience, and the consentient sense of this Church
and Kingdom, yea, of all Christian and Reformed Churches of any renown, That
all swearing is forbidden by those words of Christ and his Apostle: But that
our Saviors words are to be understood with such a limited sense and strict
interpretation as suited to his scope and design, which was to rectify popular
errors, and remove common abuses in Swearing, but not wholly to forbid the use
of it in a religious and lawful way.

And because it is not sufficient in order to my design (which is to justify
the legal proceedings of this Kingdoms Justice by Oaths, and to satisfy the
scruples of the Quakers) to oppose my Nay to their Yea, or to offer the husk
and chaff of words void of such Reasons as either slow from the nature of all
things and all actions as good or evil morally, or from the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures, which is a Treasury of right Reason as well as a
Rule of true Religion; I will endeavor to give those Reasons which induce me
to believe, that the Quakers (as Christ said to the Saducees) do err not
knowing, or not right understanding, Mat. 22. 29.
the mind of Christ in those Scriptures, which is not to forbid all Swearing,
nor such as the just and religious Laws of England do require of all under its
subjection in some cases.

I will not seek to oppress or confound the Quakers with the show of many
Reasons, as if I would carry the cause by number and not by weight; but content
my self with those few which are most pregnant, plain, and easy to be
understood by them.

1. Reason; Reasons to prove all swearing is not forbidden by Christ.
From the occasion of Christ's and the Apostles words, and the scope or end of
them, to which his own instances by way of explication of his meaning do best
direct us, both as to what he forbids and enjoynes: to some of which the
Quakers themselves do consent.

2. Reason; From the moral and religious nature, end and use of Oaths, which
God had instituted and approved, without any repeal by Christ or his Apostles.

3. Reason; From other places of the New Testament which give light to these,
both by principles granted and suitable examples expressed.

To these Reasons I will add (by way of full measure heaped up and running over
the concurrent judgment of other Christians and Churches, ancient and modern,
in their interpretation of these words; with answer to the Allegations made
from the sayings and manners of some Primitive Christians.

This done, the conclusion will easily follow with great clearness and good
authority to all that are truly wise, and have their eyes opened and senses
exercised to discern good and evil.

The first Reason is from the occasion, 1. First Reason from the occasion,
scope and end of Christ^ words.
scope and end of our Saviors words, and so of the Apostles. For these, as the
biass of all speech, do best discover the speakers mind; there being no surer
way to wrest and pervert Scriptures, then to take them abruptly and absolutely,
when they have a relative, comparative, or limited sense in the aim and purpose
of the speaker.

Our blessed Savior in this Divine Sermon on the Mount (of which Saint Matthew
gives us so large an account) makes it his main aim and scope, The end or
design of our Saviors Sermon in the Mount to reform abuses; not to take away
the right use of things.
first, to set forth those spiritual, heavenly and eternal blessings, which
beyond those sensible, earthly and temporary ones (which were so much of old
set before the Jews to invite them to obedience of Gods Laws) were now to be
chiefly regarded by Christians, as their peculiar comforts, hopes and rewards
under the Gospel; which though attended with many persecutions, yet was not
without many blessings peculiar to true believers: from verse. 3. to verse. 12.

Secondly, our Savior gives many singular lessons or precepts of more eminent
deligence, patience, charity, mortification, self-denial, sincerity,
conspicuity, perseverance and perfection of obedience required now under the
Gospel, above what either the Letter of the Mosaic Law seemed to exact, or by
the Pharisaical Interpretations were taught to the Jews. So that unless their
righteousness did exceed that so popularly admired of the Pharisees, they could
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, verse. 20.

Thirdly, our Savior with much earnestness and exactness applies in this
Sermon to reform those abuses, which either by the Pharisaical glosses (either
too much loosning or restraining the meaning of Gods Law) or by their depraved
examples, or by popular custom had prevailed among the Jews, contrary to the
true meaning of the moral Law of God, and the primitive Institution, which
gives us the clearest view of the Lawgivers intention.

For the exact observation of which, however by Divine indulgence and
connivence, or by the hardness and uncharitableness of their own hearts, and
the customary depravedness of times and manners, they might seem to have had
some temporary dispensation heretofore granted to them, or at least had
presumed to take it to themselves; yet now under the Evangelical strictness to
which Christ came to restore or raise the Church, they might not fancy to
themselves any such liberty, but were to keep themselves in thought, look,
desire, word and deed, to that sanctity and severity which was required by the
Law, and most conform to the holy Will, Attributes and Nature of that God whom
they ought to imitate as their heavenly Father in all sacred perfections, which
humane Nature, assisted by the light of the Gospel, Mat. 5. 45, 48.
the grace of Gods Spirit, and the visible example of Christ, was capable to
attain, at least sincerely to aim at and endeavor.

So verse. 22. He tells them that not only wilful murder, or malicious killing,
was forbidden, but rash, unreasonable and irreconcilable anger.

Verse. 28. That not only Adultery, but all lust inordinate after a Woman (that
is not in order to marriage, and the honest ends of it) were so severely
forbidden, under pain of Hell fire, that it were better to deny those sensual
pleasures of the flesh, which seem as dear to men as the delight of their eyes,
or the strength of their hands, then to indulge them with the danger of their
souls.

Verse. 32. So in the case of humorous and lascivious Divorces usually given to
Wives upon no just cause, Christ restrains that indulgence only to the case of
a Wives deserving to be put away, for having broke her conjugal vow and band of
Matrimony by her Adultery.

Not to instance in many other particulars of abuses which Christ reckons up
and reforms in that Sermon; (as touching private Revenge, verse. 39. not public
and vindicative Justice; so of loving our enemies, verse.44. of alms, prayer
and fasting, without ostentation, pride or hypocrisy, against immoderate love
and care for things of this world, and the like) the immediately next is this
of Swearing, verse. 33, 34. In which, as in many other things, the Jews had much
depraved both the true nature and use of Oaths.

1. They pretended indeed (as Philo and Josephus tell us) a great reverence of
the Name of God, The depravedness of the Jews in this point of Swearing.
Indicorum est in levicu^is ad Deum trans^urrere; sufficit per creaturas jurare.
Ex Philon. (...).
and seemed to make great conscience of swearing in small matters by the name
of the Lord, according to the Letter of the Scripture; yea, they made scruple
to swear at all in any case by ((...)) the Lord lives. For which the Heathens
mocked the Jews; (...).
as in that of Martial, Jura, verpe, per Anchialum. These Oaths they thought
binding; nor would they in these easily swear or forswear themselves. Which
regard to their Gods was in use among the gravest Heathens; as is observed out
of Homer: therefore they took any obvious thing to swear by.

2. But they indulged themselves in other familiar Oaths, Probatieres Ju^ae^um
magistri absterreb (...) bemines a fa^ilitante jurandi in qua D^us nominaretur;
at quo minus in quotidiano usu purres minores jurarent, non interdicebant.
Grotius.
or forms of common Swearing (as many Christians now do) by whatever came next
to their minds or tongues: as by the Temple and holy City, by their own or
others Heads, Hands, Lives and Souls; so by Heaven, and Earth, and the Light.
Thus waving the attestation of Gods omniscient Justice, and the swearing by his
name (as was commanded) in righteousness, judgment and truth, they put this
Character of Divinity on the Creatures, no way competent for them, unless as
they are in relation to, depending on, and derived from the blessed God.

3. These vulgar Oaths they used not only in a familiarity and facility of
inconsiderate swearing, upon small and light occasions, yea, and in asserting
of things not true, as to their knowledge and intention, which was doubly a
false swearing; but in things of weight and concern, as to that charity,
justice, and equity which they owed to others, they chose this way of
Creature-Swearing, both promissory and assertory, Jurabant Judaei per creaturas
obvias; n^c se istis teneri cred^bant, quum tamen omne jusjurandum in Deo
terminatur, in quo and agnoscunt omnia. B. August.
because they fancied such Oaths, being not with the solemnity of invocating
Gods name, were not binding upon their Souls either as to truth or right; but
they might play with them at fast and loose, according as their own interest or
pleasure did sway them. Hence as they swear amiss in point of form, so also as
to the matter, without any regard in these cases to that Command of God against
forswearing, and for the performance of Oaths to the Lord (which places Christ
cites, and to which Law they professed to adhere, so far only as they used the
name of God; else they dispensed with their Oaths, and easily digested even
perjury it self.)

Upon this occasion, and to reform these gross abuses, our blessed Savior
gives this Command, Swear not at all; that is, (as Erasmus paraphraseth) not
after those usual, Christus non simpliciter jurare ve^uit, sed ^o m^re qu^
vulgato si^bat. E^asm.
presumptuous and unlawful forms, by the names of Creatures, of which he gives
so many following instances to express his meaning. For he does not instance in
the lawful use of religious Oaths, by the name of the true God, which was not
only allowed, but, in such cases as did require an Oath, with its due
circumstances of Judgment, Justice and Truth, commanded.

2. He tells them, that even in those Oaths which were attested only by the
naming of any Creature, as by Heaven, or Earth, or Jerusalem, or their Head,
etc. there was a tacit calling of God to witness, In omnibus jurande modis
taci^^ D^us continetur.
since every Creature depends on God, and relates to him as the Center and
Circumference, the Source and Sea of all things. Heaven is Gods Throne, Earth
Gods Footstool, the Temple Gods Sanctuary, Jerusalem the City of God, the
most eminent place of the great King of Heavens residency on Earth.

3. He implies, Unlawful Oaths as to form do bind in things lawful.
that however such various and irregular forms of Oaths, by the name of any
Creature, were as to the manner of them unlawful, yet they obliged men to
perform them, if the matter of them were lawful; nor were they excused from
perjury or false-swearing in those cases, if in assertory Oaths they swear
falsely, Non putabant Judaei se teneri jurejurando si per ista jurassent; nic
reddendum Domino tale juramenum: Quum tamen n^hil tam vile in creaturis Dei ut
per hoc quisquam pejera^dum arbitretur; quum a summis ad insima. Dei
providentia reguntur creata. Aust. Ser. 18. de Verbis Apost.
or in promissory, either not intending to perform what they so swear, or not
after performing them, so far as was in their power. But the Yea and Nay, the
Affirmative or Negative of such swearing in word, ought to be also Yea and Nay
in the purpose and performance. And although they ought not so to swear, yet
having so sworn they were obliged to the moral ends of an Oath, Qui per salutem
suam jurat Deum jurare videtur; resp. (...) en^ m Divini numinis jurat. Ulpian.
which is to make it good in Truth and Faith.

Agreeable to the same end and scope, and almost in the same words, Saint James
writes to the dispersed Christian Jews, who still retained that evil Custom
of ordinary Swearing by the Creatures, as Heaven and Earth, and other such like
Oaths, without any conscience of the manner or matter, or making good in
effect such Oaths.

The meaning therefore of both places (as the learned Grotius and others
observe) is no more then to take away the ordinary abuse of such swearing, The
meaning o^ Christ's words against Swearing.
but not that right use which God had allowed and commanded in his word: Non
vetat Christus ju^jurandum ut rem in se (...); sed ut rem qua nisi in negotiis
maximi momenti usu pare non liceat; and in illis quam potest religi^sissime.
Grotius. Erasm, in loc. Multos uno ictu solvit nodos; non simpl^citer vetando
juromentum, sed eo modo qualiter vulgo fi^bat: quemadmodum vetuit iram,
laborem, ^^ram de terrenis, vindictam, etc.
Nor is there more implied in these words, as to the subject matter, then in
those, where God complains, that because of Swearing the land mourns, Hos. 4.2,
3. that is, by unlawful Oaths; and the curse shall come into the house of the
Swearer, Zach. 5.4. that is, such as use idle, false, and forbidden Swearing,
Zach. 8.17. Not those who swear as they might do by the name of the Lord in
righteousness, judgment and truth, which God no where reproves.

As if one should inveigh against drinking and feasting, and singing, and
danoing and dalliance, there where the usual viot, excess and wantonness of any
people had generally run these things to an inordinacy; which does no way
condemn the sober, modest and seasonable use of them.

That this thus limited sense of Christ's words against the abuse of Swearing,
This limited sense of Christ against some, not all Swearing, proved by his
affirmative command of Yea and Nay.
so familiar among the Jews, was Christ's meaning in the negative part of his
words, appears by the affirmative part of them, which the Quakers themselves
will, I suppose, confess must not be taken in an exclusive latitude, or such a
broad universality of command, as enjoynes us to use no other words in any
communication by way of affirming or denying any thing, but only Yea, Yea, and
Nay, Nay. Which words the Quakers so much affect to use, as if they would fancy
themselves literally or verbally tied to those Monosyllables, and those to be
repeated in all their assertions or promises: yet none of them in case of more
full declaring their assent or dissent upon any matter, do seruple to use such
paraphrases or enlargements of speech as the matter or the parties
understanding or diffidence may require. For if they would keep all their
communication to those precise words, Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, they would be no less
obstructive to civil and private conversation, then they seek to be to judicial
proceedings by their refusing at all to swear.

Doubtless our Saviors own larger expressing of himself in many cases, R.
Maimonidis dictum, (...) S^picus ubi negat, dicit Non; ubi affirmat, Etiam.
D^cterium erat illo^um temporum, (...).
by such periphrases or commentaries of words as amount to affirmations or
negations (besides and beyond the bare terms of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay) do
abundantly justify (together with the practice of all the Apostles) that these
proverbial Phrases or Epitomes of speech here commanded under the words of Yea
and Nay, do only import that plainness or simplicity of Christians meaning and
doing as may be consonant to their words, in truth and honesty, without fraud
or falsity in common speech: not at all forbidding either more ample
expressions of their sense in private converses, nor yet forbidding such
religious and judicious use of Swearing in great and public matters, Hinc
naucus dicitur homo levis and inconstans, cujus (...) erata (...). Festus.
as are necessary to carry on humane affairs with justice and Peace; but only
such false, frivolous and fraudulent Oaths, as for the matter, manner and
meaning are by the Law of God, by all right Reason and Religion prohibited; and
which then were so familiarly used and abused by the Jews, Justorum Etiame st
etiam, and Non est non. Dius. int. Proverb. Hebr. -- Contra omnia solum Et
respond bat, vel Non -- Ausonius ad Paulinum.
upon those presumptions and dispensations which they had taken up. As then the
affirmative part of Christ's words are not to be understood literally, as a
confining of all Christians communication to Yea and Nay, but only to that
truth and honesty of mind, intent and action which Christ aims at, and beyond
which whatever is of fraud and falsity is from evil in men's hearts: so as to
the negation of swearing not at all, it cannot in Reason or Religion be
extended further then that swearing which is from evil, and tends to evil; not
that which is from good, Concordent dictis sacta; pactis promissisque v^stris
idem robur and veritas esto, as si sirmata essent juramentis. Coram Deo negatio
vel affirmatio simplex loto juramenti habetur. V^tatur om^is disconvenientia
aut animi aut facti cum juramento. Grot. in loc* (...) non (...), nec (...),
Philo.
and tends to good; namely, the veneration of God, and love of Truth and
Justice, which are not from the evil one, the Devil, nor from evil principles
in men, nor for evil designs.

As for that absolute and universal Negative which they urge from the words of
Christ, Negatives and Affirmatives in Sc^^pture li^ited in the sense, though
seeming universal in the Letter or words.
of not swearing at all, nothing is more clear and usual in Scripture then to
confine the meaning of such Generals to the particular subject and scope
intended, as I formerly showed in many instances out of the holy Scriptures:
but yet further to clear this truth from the most short and exact way of the
Scripture-style, which is in the commands of the Decalogue,

In the second Command we are forbidden to make to our selves any graven Image
or similitude of Creatures in the way of Worship or Religion: yet we read, that
Moses in the Tabernacle made the Cherubins; so did Solomon several Images of
Flowers and Beasts in the Temple, and for his Throne, and without sin.

So in the fourth Command, All manner of work is forbidden on the Sabbath day:
yet the intent is only against ordinary works of our civil callings, not
against works of Religion, or decency, or charity, or necessity; against which
the Pharisaical rigor and severity had stretched the Letter of the Law beyond
the meaning: as our Savior convinces them, Mat. 12. Mark 2. 27. Luke 14. 3.

In the sixth Command, Thou shall not kill, Sicut Non occides est generale
praeceptum, cum debitis tamen circumstantiis occisio potest and licita esse and
necessaria. Caje^.
the putting men to death in just and legal ways, or in self-defense, is not
forbidden, but only as to private revenge and malice.

So the tenth Command, Thou shall not covet any thing that is thy Neighbors,
is to be understood only of an Isa. 57. 17. Haba^. 2. 9.
evil and injurious coveting of what is our Neighbors; but not of such a
desire as is commensurate to Justice and Charity, which desires, in honest
ways of buying or exchanging, to get those things which our want requires, and
our Neighbors sufficiency willingly affords us: Else we must always want, but
never wish, or fairly endeavor for supply, by those ways of commutative
justice, Societatis commune vinculum mutua indi gentia.
which by mutual necessities invite men to society.

Such commodious Interpretations of Scriptures are as necessary to attain their
true meaning, Talibus benigna interpritatio adhibenda.
as the contrary wrestings of them upon a bare Letter are pernicious to all
Reason, Justice and true Religion; Decalogus summa peccata nominat; catera ex
mente auth^ris vult colligi.
and indeed contrary to the very word of the Law, and the intent of the
Lawgiver: Else what shall we make of that seeming contradiction, Jer. 7. 22. I
spoke not to your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day I brought them out of
Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings, etc. But this thing I I commanded them, Obey
my voice, etc. Here the principal intention of God must give the
Interpretation, and take away the Contradiction.

Nor are affirmative places of Scripture to be many times less limited from
their seeming Latitude, Limitations of general affirmatives in Scripture.
Indefiniteness and Universality. As, All things are yours, takes not away meum
and tuum, 1 Cor. 3. 21.
the properties of Christians, as to what they have by private right and
possession. 1 Cor. 6. 12. 10. 23.
So, All things are lawful, must not be stretched to any immoral
licentiousness; but confined to such things as are by no word of God forbidden,
but left in an indifferency, and to be used as Reason and Religion requires, or
the moral end of all things does permit. 1 Cor. 10. 33.
So, I please all men in all things. Tit. 1. 15.
So, To the pure all things are pure; the meaning must not be, after the
Manichean and Familistical imagination, as if such as are pure might do or use
any thing, even to those mixtures which are morally impure or sinful; for these
are always and at all times forbidden to all men, who may not fancy that pure
which God has marked with the brand of sinful impurity; nor may they count
that sinfully impure on which God has set no such stamp, ^y any Law forbidding
it.

If Scriptures (as I have largely showed) must be understood only by the bark
or shell of words, and not by the kernel and intent, we shall make those
expressions to be approbations which are the sharpest reproves and
prohibitions, yet by way of Irony and seeming concession. As Eccl. 11. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; walk in the ways of thine heart and the
light of thine eyes.

So Christ's commending the unjust Steward does not import his justifying of his
(...), Luke 16. 8.
but of that prudence (though sinister) which he showed to preserve himself
from temporal extremities: the more to reproach the improvidence, negligence
and supineness of those who will not use honest means for their eternal
preservation.

It were easy by many more parallel instances (besides those I for merly gave)
to* manifest to the Quakers, or any men (not wilfully shutting their eyes
against that light of Reason and Religion which shines in the Scriptures) That
since the Holy Oracles of God are spoken or written for the instruction of men,
Non tam ex verborum apicibus, quam ex rei ipsius natura m^tienda sunt multa
Scripturae loca. Grotius.
and in such a familiar style or mode of speech as was used among men in the
several times, languages and occasions of writing them, which the Hearers or
Readers then easily understood; it cannot be any part of Religion so to urge
any Letter, Phrase or Form of speech, as to swerve the sense of words from the
evident scope, intent or end of the speaker, which is gathered both from the
rise or occasion and end why he spoke, and any additional instances which are
often given as explications and special marks or boundaries of the speakers
meaning; which are here evident. For the Jews were not blamable for swearing
by the name of the true God, as by the Law and Prophets they were commanded, in
righteousness, judgment and truth, (nay they even superstitiously waved this
kind of swearing) but for their new and customary forms of swearing by the
Creature, and fancying it no forswearing themselves in case they were false,
either in intention or execution. This being the usual and almost only swearing
in fashion among them, it is no wonder that our Savior aiming only at this,
gives such a prohibition of Swear not at all; that is, not at all for matter or
manner as you have accustomed your selves to swear, contrary to, or beyond what
God allows in his Law: which was the thing I was to prove. Second Reason for
the lawfulness of some Swearing from the light of Nature.


2. My second Reason to prove that our Savior and the Apostle do not forbid
all swearing, with its due reverence and integrity, is from the moral nature,
end and use of an Oath.

First, by the light of Reason, and principles of innate Divinity (yet
unextinguished in the heart of mankind) it has ever been and still is owned
and used as a special part of Religion, Inter Aegyptios (...). Diod. Sicul.
a solemn agnition of the Divine Being and Attributes, in Omniscience, Justice
and Power; which all men attest, as believing that none can escape that Witness
and Judge of all things. Thus Egyptians, Scythians, Persians, Greeks, Romans,
(...). Nullum vinculum ad astringendam fidem jurejurando majores sanctius esse
voluere. Tullius. Offic. l. 3. (...), Hierocles.
and all Nations that had any thing Civil and Religious among them, have used
some form of Swearing by their respective Deities, as a special honor and
appeal to their Sovereignty; as the only means in cases dubious to give
satisfaction, gain credit, and make men assured of the veracity and honesty of
the speaker, in their promises and testimonies, in their leagues and contracts.

And however the noblest and wisest of the Heathens required no less veracity
and certainty in the bare words then Oaths of men; Phala. Ep. (...) Perjurus
est, 1. (...) 2. (...).
yet they highly distinguished between swearing and forswearing, ((...) and
(...).) This last they thought a great sin, and to be punished by the Gods; if
either they meant not as they swear, or performed not what they had justly
sworn: yea, and they often brought in their Gods, and Jupiter himself as chief,
swearing.

Polybius observes, that in the better and simpler ages of the world Oaths
were seldom used in Judicatures: R^rus apud veteres jurandi ususin judiciis,
sed crescente perfidia crevit jurispurandi usus. Polyb.
but after that perfidy and lying increased, the use of Oaths increased, as
the only remedy meet to restrain those mischiefs; that where men could not see
or be sure, the omniscience and vengeance of God should be invocated on men's
consciences, In totum jurare nisi ^bi necesse est, gravi viro parum convenit.
Quintil.
which none could elude or escape.

Hierocles also tells us, Obres egregies and necessarias, quae citra
j^sjarandum obtineri nequeant. Hierocles.
That men ought not to swear but for great and necessary ends, which cannot
otherways be obtained. But where the end was good, and this a necessary means,
there they thought agreeable to true Reason and Religion, that swearing was a
lawful means.

Secondly, God himself, The true God commanding Swearing in Scripture among
Jews.
the great pattern of all holiness and perfection, would not have given so many
express commands and regulations concerning Swearing, if all swearing had in
its nature been morally and so eternally evil.

The moral precept is Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain, or upon falsity: which imports a lawful use of Gods name; as is
explained L^^. 19. 12. Ye shall not Swear by my name falsely, nor shall thou
profane the name of the Lord thy God. Which sense is further cleared, Deuteronomy. 6.
13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his
name: which is repeated Deuteronomy. 10. 20. So of vowing by an Oath to God Number. 30.
2. Deu 23. 21. So Is. 45. 23. To me every tongu^ shall swear. So again, Isa.
65. 16. He that swears in the Earth shall swear by the God of Truth. Jer. 4.
2. And thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment and in
righteousness, i. e. To what we know to be and just.

Nor does the Lord ever by the Prophets condemn the Jews for swearing simply
and sincerely, but only for vain, false, Mal. 3. 5.
perfidious, and perjurious swearing; as he does Zedekiah, Ezekiel. 17. 16.
for despising the Oath he had given to King Nebuchadnezzar.

Answerably we read the unblamed practice of many holy men, Abraham, Jacob,
Joshua, David, and others, who themselves swear, and exacted Oaths and adjured
others, without any sin or offense, in such serious and weighty cases which the
Law of God, right Reason, Justice and Charity did permit or require. Among the
Jews all public testimonies were ratified by an Oath, as Buxtorse, Drusius,
and others observe, Apud Judaeos in judiciis omnia jurisjurandi religione
firmata, Dei n^^mine interposito. Drusius.
who write of the civil administrations of Justice among them.

Yea, we find (as I formerly touched) the Lord himself confirming this by his
own great and most holy example, Genesis 22. 16, 17.
swearing more then once by himself, by his own life and great name, to create
credit, and give confirmation to what he says.

If then, from all these premises it be clear, Deuteronomy. 1 8.
that some swearing is morally lawful, as an act extraordinary of Religion,
Jer. 22. 5.
a high glorifying of God by appeal to him, Heb. 3. 11.
agreeable to the express Law of God, even in the third Commandment, in which
we are not only forbidden to profane the name of God, but the affirmative is
also included, of sanctifying his name by all ways of praying, praising, vowing
and swearing, as he allows us; if in doing thus upon just occasion, private or
public (in a lawful manner) we sin not against any moral Law of Pretty, Justice
or Charity; it must undeniably follow, that Christ did not by this procept
Evangelical forbid or annul the old Law, as to the sanctity and morality of an
Oath, but only take away the corruption and abuse: It being no design of our
Lord to do so, as he expressly assures the Jews, to take off their jealousies
and prejudices in this kind, That he came not to destroy or diminish, but
fulfill the Law (moral.) However he came in the way of fulfilling to abrogate
the Ceremonial, yea and the politic Laws too, so far as they were peculiar to
the Jewish polity in Church and State. This speech of Christ being the Key
which opens his meaning in all his following emendations of Iudaick pravities,
and in all the constitutions of Evangelical rectitudes; it must needs be
preposterous to contradict so clear and emphatick, a Scripture, in order to fix
such an interpretation on these places (at which the Quakers now stumble) as is
only conform to their own fancy, but contrary to the evident tenor of both Law
and Gospel, (...). Clem. Alex.
in this particular of lawful swearing, in lawful cases and manner, which was a
part of that moral Law which Christ signally tells them he did not come, or
ever intended, to abolish, but to maintain, so far as the love of God and our
Neighbor are great accomplishments of all Laws; to both which religious
swearing is most conform, it being to Gods glory and our Neighbors good.
(...). Phil. Jud.
There is no danger then of doing hurt to our own consciences, any more then in
serious affirmations or negations; an Oath having only the attestation of God
to it, who is witness of all we say and do.

3. The third Reason for the limiting these words of Christ against some, Third
Reason to prove some Swearing lawful under the Gospel among Christians.
but not all kind of swearing under the Gospel, is from those after-evidences
in the Gospel, which sufficiently clear the meaning of our Savior.

First, his own frequent asseverations, Amen, Amen, are by many esteemed as a
solemn form of assertion, (...) In veritate, forma juram^nti apud Judaeos.
Capellus e R. Jonah.
next degree to swearing, by attestation of the truth of God upon the certainty
of his words.

But if this amount not to so much in our Saviors form of averring what he
uttered; yet we read in the Apostle Saint Paul's writings more then once, not
only attestations, but obtestations and adjurations of others, as Saint Austin
observes, even to the very form of Swearing. Romans 1. 9. God is my witness, etc.
Gal. 1. 20. Behold, before God I lie not. 1 Cor. 15. 31. I protest by your
Rejoicing; which has the very form of common Oaths among the Greeks: (...),
as (...), per Iovem. 2 Cor. 11. 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not. 2 Timothy 4. 1. I
charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 13.


As a ground to justify his own practice in things weighty and of great
concern to Gods glory, Quis credet Paulum praec^p^i D^minici suisse ^mm^m^rem?
Grotius. Juravit Paulus, at non in resu^, non in re modica alterius; sed in
r^bus maximi m^m^nti, ad D^um and aliorum salutim pertinentibus.
the vindicating of his own fidelity, and the inducing others to belief, in
cases that cannot otherwise be so fully cleared, decided and confirmed to them;
this great Apostle, who well knew his Masters meaning, tells us, That, Heb. 6.
16.
an Oath (not was, but) is among men for an end of all controversy or strife:
and therefore men swear by God, as greater then themselves, and all Creatures
whatsoever: intimating, that the sanctity and validity of an Oath still remains
in use under the Gospel, as among all men, where the matter, form and ends
required by the moral Law, and immutable principles of Piety, Justice and
Charity, are duly observed.

Nor does the Apostle there or any where intimate that this former liberty of
Swearing by the Law of God among the Jews was abrogated under the Gospel, as
if Christians might not Swear in any case: which had been so necessary a
lesson, as none more in practicks; considering that all those civilized Nations
where he most preached, and to whom he wrote so many Epistles, would never have
believed all swearing unlawful; which the light of nature dictated, and the law
of God allowed, with due regulation, unless they had some special precept from
the Apostle, that he had so received it of the Lord: which had he written, he
had contradicted himself as to his practice, and made himself an offender.

But the reproof of Christ, and so of the Apostle Saint James, was peculiar to
the corrupt custom among the Jews, to whom Christ spoke, and the Apostle
Saint James wrote that Epistle: especially in promissory Oaths, to which the
learned Gro^ius thinks the words of Christ wholly and only relate. Apparet
Christum hoc l^co agere de juramento promissorio H. Grotius. Rev. 10. 56.


To conclude this Reason; we read the Angel in the Revelation by his example
justifying the lawfulness of some swearing, for he is brought in thus, lifting
up his hand to heaven, and swearing by him that lives for ever and ever, etc.
after the same manner as the Angel in Daniel did swear lifting up both his
hands to Heaven. Dan, 1^. 7.


In which forms we cannot think the holy and good Angels would have so solemnly
appeared on record in Old and New Testament, as exemplary to the Church and
people of God, if the great Angel of the Covenant, our Lord Jesus Christ, had
precisely forbidden all Swearing; either because in its nature morally and
utterly unlawful (which cannot be said without blasphemy, and contradiction to
the Law of God of old) or as now become evil and unlawful, because absolutely
forbidden by a positive Evangelical command, without any moral reason either
alleged or imaginable from any nature of sin. Which false gloss of Christ's
words cannot be reconciled with the other principles, places and examples,
evident and authoritative, in the Gospel; or with that express and signal
Oracle of Christ, which is a salvo for all that is morally good, that he came
not to destroy any part or tittle of the Law, which had any moral, internal and
eternal holiness in it; as being therefore expressed in his revealed will or
word, because it is conform to the glory of Gods nature and essence, which all
reasonable Creatures ought ever to fear, reverence, adore and admire above all
things. As those do, who by religious swearing give glory to God, as the
supreme Judge of all men and things, as the searcher of all hearts, and as the
infallible dispenser of Justice. Which sacred celebrations of the Divine Glory
and Majesty in solemn Swearing being no way derogating from Gods honor, but
highly advancing it in the world, and no way injurious to our selves or others,
but advantageous to Justice, Truth, Charity and Peace, cannot be looked upon as
abolished or forbidden by Christ to us Christians.

Fourthly, The judgment of all Christian Churches and eminent Divines.
having thus examined First the occasion and intention of our Saviors words,
Secondly, the moral nature of an Oath, Thirdly, the Evangelical practice; my
Fourth and last work is to justify this limited sense and Interpretation of
our Saviors and the Apostles words, which I have given consonant to the
practice of the Church of England, by the concurrent judgment of other
Churches, and learned Interpreters, both ancient and modern.

Nor that I think any humane or Ecclesiastical authority swayes much, if any
thing, with the Quakers, who are mostwhat strangers to all Learning, and not
much to be moved by any such Engine: but only to confute the more evidently
their singularity and pertinacy; also to satisfy others of my Contrymen,
that this is no novel Interpretation put upon the words of Christ and his
Apostle, whose true meaning the ancient and later Churches might without any
vanity be thought to understand, as well as any of this new Generation. And
certainly we may with more modesty appeal to, and acquiesce with conscience in
their judgment of places dark and dubious, then listen to any men in later
times, who superciliously dissent from them all. Doubtless if the Catholic
Church has been a faithful preserver of the Scriptures, it may not be
suspected to have been an unfaithful Interpreter of them in any main points of
Faith or of Morality, and such as this of sober, serious, reverent and judicial
Swearing.

The primitive Christians were not only very cautious of Swearing rashly,
vainly, falsely; Primitive Christians and Fathers judgment.
but if they took any Oath, they made such conscience of keeping it, that they
would sooner dye, then break it wilfully or basely.

Indeed, in private conversation Christians were then esteemed so strict, exact
and cautious of their words in asserting or promising, that there was no need
of an Oath among them: yea, they so kept up the sanctity and credit of their
profession among unbelievers, that it was security enough in all cases to say,
Christians sum, I am a Christian. If any urged them further to any Oath, for
matter, or manner, or authority unlawful, they repeated this, as the only
satisfaction they could give. There needed no more then the veracity of their
bare word. They thought it not lawful for them in such cases to Swear; being in
this emulators of the Esseni ad observationem religionis jurejurando adacti.
Joseph.
Esseni among the Jews, of whom Josephus tells us, that their word was as sure
as an Oath; and that they avoided not only all forswearing, but all swearing,
or that which brought their fidelity in question, and lessened the reputation
of their Sect. Ios. bell. lud. l. 2. c. 7. (...).


Thus Christians, that they might not come short of the Esseni among the Jews,
Just. Mart. asserit, (...) Plat. (...), Ep^^^et. (...). Menan. Jurisjurandi
fidem nec promittes nec exigas. Fi micus ad Lollianum. Flamini diuli jurare
nefas. Plut. Ea esto probitate ut nec Iurato tibi credant.
who would not swear but in Judicature, or of any men in this pious severity,
especially in abstaining from all unlawful swearing, did keep themselves from
all kind of swearing, especially Heathenish and Idolatrous; their profession
and reputation being test enough to their words: Nor did they think any men
under Heaven were so worthy as Christians to make good some of the ancient and
soberest Heathens dictates in this kind. Such as were that of Menander, so to
avoid evil Swearing, as not to swear, though in things just and true. And that
of Solon, A good man should have that credit, that no man should believe him
the more for his swearing; it being some diminution to his reputation, to be
put to swear, or to need an Oath to gain credit. Diogenes Laert. tells us, that
the Athenians would not suffer Xenocrates, a man of great integrity and honor,
to take his Oath at the Altar, as a thing unworthy of his reputation. Nor did
the Romans exact Oaths of their chief Priests; Indignum credentes, viro tanta
sanctimoniae sine juramento non credere.

Hence we find some of the Ancient Fathers, Origin. Tract. 5. in Matthew. Non
oportet ut vir qui Evangelice vivit juret omnino. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. Genesis Hom.
19 ad pop. Ant Mat. 5. ad Romans 7. (...). Vir bonus non pejerabit, ne Deum
Iudib^io habeat; sed ne jurabit quidem, ne quando vel consuetudine in perjurium
cadat. Lactantius. Evangelica veritas non recipit juramentum. Hieron. Ne
facilitate jurandi in perjurium prolabamur. Aust. Ser. In Verba D^mini.
as Origin, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Hilarie, Athanasius, S.
Jerome, Theodoret, Lactantius and others, frequently inveighing without any
limitation or reserve against Christians swearing, as to private conversation:
yea and Saint Austin himself, in his Sermon on these words of Christ, advises
to abstain from cesie and ordinary swearing in cases never so true and honest;
lest by wontedness of swearing we get a proneness to swear, even falsely. S.
Basil commends Clinias a famous Greek, that he rather suffered a mulct of three
Talents, then he would save it by swearing, to the loss of his honor; which he
thought caution sufficient for his honesty.

Not that Saint Austin held it unlawful for a Christian in any case of great
and weighty concern solemnly to give Oath, Tu autem malum non facis, qui been
uteris juratione; quae si non bona and propter se appetenda, tam^n necessaria
est, ut alteri persuadeas quod utiliter suades. Aust.
as a further ratification of Truth and Justice; yea he asserts it as lawful,
and proves it by those instances of the Apostle Paul's swearing or obtestation
in his Epistles which I formerly produced. Not as if (faith he) Saint Paul had
forgot, or were ignorant of the words of Christ; but by his practice he shows
us the meaning of them is, only to forbid false and frivolous swearing.

As the graver and eminentest of the Jews did not deny Oaths of Allegiance to
Herod and their Governors (as Josephus tells us) so neither did the
Christians, Joseph. Antiq. l. 17. c. 3.
however the zeal of some of the Ancients in their Sermons or Homilies to the
people, wholly cry down all customary and vain swearing, especially according
to the wonted forms of Heathenish swearing: as by their Gods, or Emperors, and
the like.

So Polycarpus (in the first Century) answered the Prefect, Jura per fortun^m
caesaris, and te dimittam. Resp. Christianus sum (...) Anno Christi, 205.
Baron. Annal. Tertul. Apol. cap. 31. Juramus ut non per Genios caesarum; ^ta
per salutem eorum, quae est augustior omnibus geniis. Veget. l. 2. Milites
jurant per Deum, per Christum, and Spiritum Sanctum, and per Majestatem
Imperatoris, se strenue factu^os qua praeceperit Imperator, nunquam deserturos
militiam, nec mortem recusaturos pro Romans Rep.
who promised to dismiss him if he would swear by the Fortune of Caesar; but he
refused, affirming, I am a Christian.

In like manner Basilides the Martyr, when the Officers exacted an Oath of him,
replied* It is not lawful for me being a a Christian to swear. So Speratus the
Martyr about the same time denied to swear so, because he knew not what the
Genius of the Emperor meant.

Tertullian tells us in the second Century, That Christians would not swear by
the Genius, or Demon, or Fortune of Caesar: but by the health or safety of the
Emperor they did; because they understood by that, God and the Lord Christ.

And when other Christians did in public cases swear, being required by
Authority: yet the Bishops of the Church were not put to swear: as Basilius a
Bishop pleaded for his privilege, when in the Council of Chalcedon he was
required to give Oath; the sanctity of his Life and honor of his Order being
assurance sufficient for his truth.

The Christian Soldiers, as Vegetius tells us, took Oath in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, to obey their Commanders, not to desert their
Colors, and to dye for the common welfare: which was called Sacramentum
militare, both before and after Christianity had prevailed in the Empire. And
hence the name Sacrament came to be applied to Christian Mysteries, which are
special and solemn dedications of them to the true God and Savior.

In the Nicene Council Arrius with an Oath renounced his heretical Opinion.
Council. Nicen.
So in the Ephesine Council it was ordered that Nestorius should abjure all
heterodox and profane Doctrines. Ephesinum.


In the Sixth Synod of Constantinople, Constantinopolitanum.
Gregorius the Librarian made Oath (tactis Evangeliis) upon the Bible, that he
left the Books in the Library such as he found them, without any blotting out,
or inserting; which Oath I wish the Romish Expurgators had taken and kept, as
to their Edition of ancient Church-Authors, Fathers and others.

Athanasius, Athanasius Juramento se pur^at a calumniis, Apologia ad
Constantium. Manu extenta Deum in animam testor, etc.
who seems and is very zealous against profane and popular swearing, yet in his
Apology to Constantius purges himself by Oath from the calumnies cast upon him
by impudent persons, citing for his defense the example of S. Paul.

Nor is it any news to read of Christian Kings and Magistrates requiring, and
Subjects giving their Faith by Oath, in matters civil, sacred and solemn, when
the form of Oaths were such as consisted with the truth of Christian Religion,
and the honor of the true God: Nor did any Canons of the Church ever forbid
such Swearing.

Indeed while Christians lived in persecution, without any protection from the
civil Indicatories, there can be no examples of their Swearing after the
heathenish manner. But when Christianity and Christians came to be wrapped up
in the Imperial Laws, and defended by the Supreme powers, and were enabled to
vindicate their civil rights in judicial proceeding, they did not think that
unlawful which God had of old commanded; Juramentum est Actus (...). Aquin.
which has a moral, that is, an eternal, good end in it; as an act of trust
and appeal, of agnition and veneration toward God, of justice and satisfaction
to man, also of private and public charity, Qui jurat aut ex^cratur aut colit
eum quem jura^. Hieron.
as the Schoolmen truly observe, for the ending of controversies and taking
away of jealousies. Only due circumstances were strictly required, according to
the word of God, in judgment, righteousness and truth.

Yea we read, of old, some condemned by the orthodox part of the Church (as S.
Austin and others tell us) for this error among others, Aug. Ep. 137.
that they denied all swearing to be lawful. So did the Samosat^nians, and some
Pelagians in Syracuse; so the Massilians and Euchites; Bern. in Cant. Hom. 69.
so in S. Bernard's days some of the Albigenses: and of later days some
Anabaptists, and now the Quakers: whether out of policy and art, or simplicity
and ignorance, God knows.

It were as needless as endless (in respect of the Quakers satisfaction, The
judgment of modern Divines.
who do not value them) to produce the consonant judgments of Modern Writers
of the Reformed Churches or the Romanists, and the most eminent Divines among
them; which may easily be seen in the Harmony of their Confessions, or in their
particular Tracts in this Subject (Swearing.) All agreeing, as in just severity
against false, idle and profane Oaths; against all perjury, intentional and
eventual:

So they do all assent to the moral good in a judicious and solemn swearing,
with due circumstances, upon just occasions, by lawful Call of Authority, in
cases honest and true; especially to end controversies, to secure Princes, and
preserve the common welfare in Justice and Peace. Nor do they think that by
any positive Law of Christ all swearing is become now unlawful to Christians
(among whom the same end, use, necessity and sanctity of Oaths may be and still
are to be had, which was once lawful to the Jews, and used in all Nations) but
only that kind of evil swearing which then was become customary, and thought
either not sinful, or venial. This is, and ever was forbidden, as by the Law of
God of old, so by the renewed vigor and force of it which Christ restored,
after it had been so much depraved by the Pharisaical presumption and popular
profaneness; which imposed rigors where God had laid none, and affected
liberties where God had given none.

Agreeably, all eminent Writers of the Greek and Roman Church, among the
learnedest Papists, Lutherans and Calvinists, Canonists and Cas^ists, as well
as those in these British Churches, do assert the Authority of lawful
Magistrates to require and impose religious Oaths; and the duty of Subjects to
obey both God and them in taking them as becomes Christians with due reverence
to the Majesty of God, and with fitting obedience to these commands of
Superiors, who have their power from God, and are to use it to his Glory. Nor
do they disallow even private and spontaneous attestations of God in weighty
matters; as to quench the fire of jealousy, (...). Hierocles.
or to purge away an unjust infamy, or to give some such security as justice
and charity may require for our own and others goods: as a sober Heathen tells
us, (...). Isocrates. Conclusion.
to the just condemnation of Christians, who in trivial affairs venture to
prostitute the sacredness of an Oath.

And thus I have with greater prolixity then I intended (my wonted fault and
Apology) endeavored to vindicate the Divine and true sense of our Saviors
words: First, to remove the crying sin of Swearing vainly, rashly,
irreverently, profanely, falsely, in small or great matters: Next, to show the
moral end and religious use of Oaths lawful for matter and form; and
particularly those required in Judicial proceedings according to the Laws and
Customs of England, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, or common, agreeable to the
word of God, and the judgment of the best Christians in all Ages.

Having herein no design, but to give Testimony to that Truth which I believe,
to justify the sanctity of our Laws, to serve His Majesty, and to do the duty
of a good Subject, a good Christian, a good Minister of Christ, and a good
Bishop of this Church; dispelling the needless scruples and superstitious fears
of these poor people called Quakers, showing them their safe liberty to obey,
and how to escape the Penalties for disobeying the Laws and obstructing Justice
by refusing lawful Oaths.

If my pains and charity may be acceptable to those who are now distinguished
by the name of Quakers or Antijurists, or to any of my Countrymen, to clear
their understandings, to remove their scruples, and reduce them to due
obedience, safety and peace, I shall obtain my end; either by redeeming them
from the Penalties of the Law, by rectifying their judgments, or at least by
stopping the contagion of their error and superstition to others in this point;
which will not only conduce to men's private, but to the public Peace, in the
due administration of Justice, by the right use of religious Oaths, and to the
Glory of the true God, by whose name only men do Swear in judicial proceedings.

I pray God give (...) blessing to my endeavors; that true Religion, Justice
and Peace may again flourish in this Church and Kingdom: to which ends I wholly
devote this and all my endeavors.

FINIS.

