Some Considerations Concerning the TRINITY: AND The WAYS of Managing that
CONTROVERSY.

LONDON, Printed; and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCVI.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THIS Discourse was Written some time ago for the Private Satisfaction of the
Author, who thought that a proper Season for an Impartial Enquiry into the
Doctrine of the Trinity, when several Persons of different Opinions in that
Point had just before appeared in the Controversy about it, and their Printed
Papers being canvas'd over again in Conversation, had produced many New Remarks
upon the same Subject. Which Advantages, together with what he had formerly
read, having, as he judged, given him a pretty full comprehension of the
Matters in Dispute, he took the following Method of Re-examining that part of
his Faith, and Justifying what he believed to his own Reason and Conscience.
Some Persons to whom he communicated what he had writ, advised him to Print:
Which he had done before now, upon the Judgment of a Great and Learned Man of
the Church, lately dead, who was pleased to approve the Papers, without knowing
to whom they belonged: But Occasion being given him to foresee some little
Objections, which might, probably, at that particular time, have in some
measure obstructed his Good Intentions in Printing them, he thought fit to
defer the Publication of them till a more convenient Opportunity, such as he
judges this to be, when the Controversy of the Trinity is managed in such a
manner as to offend a great many, and satisfy very few; and the Church is like
to suffer very much by the too Adventurous Attempts made by some to Vindicate
her Doctrines.

Those who pretend to Explain the Distinction in the Godhead by Modes, Offices,
Relations, and the like, are censured as saying too little, and coming much
below the Characters of Distinction to be found in Scripture; though, at the
same time they use these Terms, they acquaint us that they use them in a
different Sense from any they are taken in, when applied to Creatures, and in a
sense importing greater Difference, but such as is not conceivable by Human
Understanding.

And some of those who call the Three Divine Persons Three Infinite Minds,
Spirits, or Substances, would not be thought to mean by these Expressions, That
the Three Persons in the Godhead are as much distinguished from one another as
Three Men, or Three Angels are; but that the Distinction betwixt them is so
great, that no other Terms can reach it, though these do somewhat exceed what
they would signify by them: Which Distinction, less than these Expressions, in
the common use of them, do import, and higher than any other can come up to, is
acknowledged likewise to be inconceivable.

Which being observed by the Author of this Discourse, he thought it more
Advisable to use no New Terms with a Design of Explaining what, by the
Confession of Persons of different sides in the Dispute, is not to be rendered
more conceivable. And, to Justify his Opinion in this Matter, he has
endeavored to prove that no New Terms can be used to any such purpose. And
this, he thinks, he has made very Evident by the Account he has given of what
we can distinctly conceive, and what we can confusedly believe of the Doctrine
of the Trinity; which ought carefully to be distinguished in all Disquisitions
upon Subjects of this Nature.

As for those who will allow only a pure Nominal Distinction in the Godhead; or
that apply the Terms Son and Holy Ghost to mere Created Beings, he has only the
Language and Design of Scripture to oppose to them; which seem to him utterly
irreconcilable to such Notions, and he hopes those general Reflections he has
drawn from thence will make this appear: so to others. But the Opinion of those
who make the Persons in the Godhead as distinct as Three Men, or Three Angels,
he is sure, both from Revelation and Reason, is false: And that advancing any
such Explications of the Trinity, as will fairly bear this Construction, is of
such dangerous Consequence, that he hopes he has done some Service to Religion
by proving, That Three Persons in the Godhead as distinct as Three Men, or
Three Angels, is not only an Incomprehensible Notion, but an Impossible Thing;
which implies a manifest Contradiction to the plainest and surest Principles of
Knowledge.

Having given this short Account of the Author, and his Performance in this
Discourse, I have only this further to acquaint his Readers with, That he
desires they would believe him to be a sincere Man, that has a serious Regard
for Religion and no other aims behind what he professes: For, whatever his
Arguments are, he is sure his Design is good: And, that his Reasoning may
appear so too, he would be glad that They who take up these Papers would give
them the Reading over, before they pass any Judgment upon what is advanced in
them; For, the Discourse being written in the Demonstrative way, where the Main
Conclusions are established by a long Train of Preparatory Proofs, no true
Judgment can be made but upon the whole together.

May it please God to make these Endeavors of the Author successful to
Satisfy and Unite the Minds of Men in their Belief of the Doctrine of the
Trinity; or may He direct some abler Persons to find out more Effectual Methods
of Establishing the Primitive Faith, and settling the Present Peace of the
Church.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING THE TRINITY, etc.
There Is no part of the Christian Faith has produced so many Disputes and
Controversies, such a numerous Variety of Opinions and Sects, as the Doctrine
of the Blessed Trinity. If we consult the large Catalogues of Primitive
Heresies, we shall find the far greatest Number of them nothing else but so
many several Modes and Ways of Explaining the Common Undivided Nature and
Essence of the Trinity, and the different Offices and Operations of each Person.

How far the uncertainty of our Faith in these Points, the many Absurd and
Blasphemous Expositions that have been made of them, and the warm and
indiscreet Management of contrary Parties, have contributed to the Prejudice of
Religion, and the Scandal of its Professors, has been a common Observation and
Complaint in all Christian Ages. And several Expedients have been proposed for
the Redressing of this Mischief, but all Attempts of this kind have hitherto
miscarried. The principal Reason of which I humbly conceive to be this: That
those who have labored in this good Design, have for the most part proceeded
upon wrong Measures.

Now, the Methods that have been generally and chiefly insisted upon, are
Three, which are all improper, or insufficient, and have therefore proved
ineffectual, as will plainly appear upon a particular Examination of each.

1. First then, There are some who are for Reverencing the Mystery of the
Trinity without ever looking into it at all, who think it not to be the Subject
either of Dispute or Enquiry; imagining every thing of this high and
transcendent Nature is proposed to us only as a Trial and Exercise of our
Faith; and the more implicit that is, the fuller do we express our trust and
relyance upon God.

Nay, farther, There are those who do not scruple to say, the more
Contradictions the better; the greater the Struggle and Opposition of Reason,
the greater is the Triumph and Merit of our Faith.

But there is no likelihood of suppressing any of our Doubts or Disputes in
Religion this way: For besides the Natural Propension of the Soul to the search
of Truth, and the strong and impatient desire we have to know as much as ever
we can of what immediately concerns us, it is generally and very justly looked
upon both as the Privilege and Duty of Man to Enquire and Examine before he
believes or judges; and never give up his assent to any thing but upon Good and
Rational Grounds: And therefore 'twould be a very hard thing to persuade the
World to stifle and restrain so many Powerful Motives of Action: But should
they be farther prevailed upon to go directly contrary to their Reason, 'twould
be much more difficult to Conquer the uneasiness of the Reluctance.

And indeed it is well the difficulties of subduing the Understanding are too
great to be mastered; For a slight Reflection will serve to convince us, that
the necessary Consequences of a blind Resignation of Judgment would be far more
Fatal to Christianity than all our present Divisions.

What Blasphemies and Contradictions may and have been imposed upon men's
belief, under the Venerable Name of Mysteries? And how easy are Villainous
Practices derived from an absurd Faith? This is matter of common Observation,
and has brought a just Scandal upon a large Party of Christians, and given
occasion to Men of light, undistinguishing Capacities, to deny and scoff at the
Saving Truths of the Gospel, because they were accompanied with a ridiculous
mixture of Errors.

No doubt therefore we may, and ought carefully to Examine the Faith and
Principles we design for the Rule of our Lives, and endeavor to understand all
our Religion so far, as to be able to Justify it, both to our Selves and
Unbelievers.

We ought indeed to proceed with all the Caution and Humility imaginable, and
take a just Estimate of our Task and Abilities: But to deny us the Liberty
either of using or obeying our Reason, is a suspicious as well as an unjust
Restraint.

2. There are others, who call the Doctrine of the Trinity an Incomprehensible
Mystery, and yet are at a great deal of pains to bring it down to a Level with
Humane Understanding; and are all very earnest to have their own particular
Explications acknowledged as necessary Articles of Faith: But the number and
disagreement of the Expositors plainly discover the vanity of such Pretenses.

This has proved so unsuccessful a way, that instead of uniting the different
Judgments of Christians in one Point, it has broke the Controversy into a
Thousand more: For Zeal and Opposition raising up a great many Assertors of the
Common Belief, and every one looking out for some new Terms and Modes of
Speech, which should be fuller and more expressive than those in Question, the
Differences and Disputes were by consequence proportionably multiplied. For the
Terms and Forms of Speech made use of being capable of several senses, and each
of them attended with other Accessory Idea's, Mistakes must necessarily arise,
and diverse new Thoughts be suggested to such whose Heads were employed upon the
same Subject: And thus it came to pass, that Defenses and Vindications of the
Orthodox Faith produced more Heresies.

Wherefore in all such Matters as these, which are too big to be grasped, we
had better sit down contented with what we have firm hold of, than tire our
selves with vain Endeavors to take in more. 'Twould certainly be the truest,
and the safest way, strictly to confine our selves to Scripture Expressions,
and never speak of Supernatural Things, but in the Language of Revelation;
which being the proper Standard of all other words that shall be used on these
Occasions, it is in vain to shift the Measure, when there is never another to be
found which can or ought to reach farther.

It may, however, sometimes be necessary to change this Method, and introduce
New Terms to secure the True Faith against the False Interpretations of such as
pervert Scripture. For if Heretics will make use of New Expressions to
contradict the received Doctrine, we must have New Terms to express the same
Truth in, in Opposition to their Heresy. And in this case the Church may very
reasonably require her Members to show their steady continuance in the Ancient
Faith, by the use of such Terms as plainly infer their denial of any later
erroneous Inventions set up against it.

3. There are a Third sort of Men in the World, who pretend, That there is no
Mystery proposed to us as an Object of Faith; and in order to make this of the
Trinity appear to be none, they bring a Cloud over the whole Bible, and with
strange forced Criticisms and Allegories give the very plainest Texts such an
unusual Mysterious turn, as neither the Language will bear, nor is any ways
consistent with the Design or Character of the Holy Writers.

But this is a very odd preposterous Method of Explaining Scripture, by
darkening a great part of it to illustrate the rest, and as ridiculous a
Project of healing Divisions, as pulling down a whole side of standing Wall to
mend a Breach.

And after all, the Socinian Hypothesis seems to me to have more of Mystery,
and Contradiction to Natural Reason in it, than what is objected to the
Catholic Doctrine.

I am not for clogging the Faith, nor multiplying Mysteries; yet we ought not
presently to deny what we do not understand, but soberly, and impartially
consider how much we are able to Comprehend, and how far we are obliged to
Believe, what we do not.

The Method therefore I design to observe in the following Discourse, shall be
different from any of those now mentioned. I shall not go about to press Men to
a Blind Veneration, or Presumptuous Belief of any thing without Examination; or
in Defiance to Reason: I shall not offer to impose any New Arbitrary
Explications of my own upon other men's Consciences, but confine my self wholly
to the usual warranted Forms of Expression. I will not wrest and strain
Scripture to help out a Private Notion, nor do any thing to betray the Just
Rights and Privileges of our Common Reason; but carefully endeavor to
distinguish How far the Doctrine of the Trinity is a Mystery, and how far a
Mystery may become an Object of Faith. From whence I hope to make it appear,
that nothing hard or unreasonable is required of us by our Church for the
belief of this Article.

In order to which, I shall rank all my Reflections upon this Subject, under
these Three Heads of Enquiry.

I. What it is that perplexes and obscures our Faith in the Trinity. II. What
is sufficient for Christians to believe concerning this Point? III. What ill
Consequences can attend such a Faith.
First then, I am to Enquire, What it is that perplexes and obscures our Faith
in the Holy Trinity. For before I enter upon a distinct and particular
Consideration of the Doctrine it self, it is necessary to point out some of the
Principal Causes which have occasioned so many False, Absurd, and Ineffectual
Expositions of it. And they are these four:

The Prejudice and Bigottry of Men indiscreetly Pious. The Vanity and Design of
such as value themselves upon inventing New Notions, or laughing at the Old
ones. The not discerning or considering the Bounds and Limits of our Knowledge.
And lastly, An imprudent Choice of improper ways of Expression.
The two first of these have a general Influence upon all Religious
Controversies, but are more especially concerned in this: For there is never
more room for Superstitious and Rigorous Impositions, nor fairer Advantages for
Cavilling, and drawing absurd Consequences, than where a Mystery is the Subject
of Debate.

There are some who are apt to be concerned, and cry out, as if the very
Foundations of all Religion were overturning, when any particular Scheme or
Notion they are fond of, is called in Question. On the other side, I have no
small Reason to believe there are several who strike at Christianity it self,
under the Pretense of bringing down the value of Mysteries.

And indeed if we consider the general Temper of Mankind, it is no wonder that
there is more Superstition and Infidelity in the World than True Religion: For
believing every thing, and believing nothing, a sudden Veneration or Contempt
of whatsoever is proposed to us, equally gratify the lazy Inclinations of the
Soul, which loves an easy undisturbed course of Thoughts, and is very
difficultly brought to endure the Labor of Attention and Enquiry. Nay, of
those who seem to have conquered this Trouble, there are few who lay themselves
out in a free and impartial search of Truth, but are wholly employed in the
pursuit of some Notion they have beforehand taken up, and are resolved to
maintain: They are already determined what to believe, and only seek out
Arguments to Justify or Recommend their Opinions to others.

How far these general Reflections are applicable to the present Case, has been
hinted already in the beginning of this Discourse, where it is very discernible
from the Ways and Methods made use of for settling the Doctrine of the Trinity,
that Prejudice and Vanity, a false Zeal, and an ill-grounded Contempt have had
a large share in the Management of this Controversy.

Another Reason why our Endeavors of Expounding this Point have been vain and
unsuccessful, is the want of discerning or considering the Bounds and Limits of
our Knowledge; from whence it comes to pass, that oftentimes we strive to soar
above our pitch, and imagine we understand some things better than really we
do. But especially Men of abstracted Thinking are very apt to deceive
themselves with false Idea's, and are firmly persuaded they conceive things
distinctly, which they have but a confused Notion of. As for instance; It has
been delivered down, as the constant Faith of a long Succession of Eminent
Philosophers, that the whole Substance, Nature, and Essence of the Soul is
wholly and entirely in all the Body considered together, and wholly and
entirely in every single Particle of it. And this is a Notion which at first
view has a great appearance of truth and clearness, and is such as the
Understanding readily closes with: But if we would strictly and distinctly
Examine our selves, what we mean by those Terms, I believe we should be able to
give but a very obscure Account of our Opinion; and at last, be forced to
confess we understand no more than this by them, That the Soul is the Principle
of all the Operations performed in the Body. But so it sometimes happens, that
we are transported too far in our Enquiries after hidden Truths, till we are
lost in Speculation, and vainly think to Fathom the depths of Knowledge and
Wisdom, without considering the shortness of our time. Whereas we ought rather
to examine, and find out the Bounds of our Thoughts, know the just extent and
compass of our Understanding, and then rest satisfied with what we are Capable
of, without desiring to know more than we can, or pretending to know more than
we do.

But further, the Doctrine of the Trinity has suffered very much by the
Discourses made about it upon another Account; And that is, that some of the
Authors of such Discourses have imprudently made choice of improper ways of
Expression: Either perplexing plain Revelation too much with Philosophical
Terms and Niceties, or exposing the Faith to contempt, by homely indecent
Similies, and disproportionate Comparisons.

Now, to keep clear of all those Rocks I have discovered others to have split
upon, I have endeavored, what I could; to deliver my self from Prejudice and
confusion of Terms, and to speak Justly and Intelligibly: And not being yet
prepossest in favor of any particular Explication, the better to preserve my
freedom of Examining the Subject in hand, I have purposely forborne to search
the Fathers, Schoolmen, or Fratres Poloni, or read over any later Treatises
concerning this Controversy while I was composing the present Essay, resolving
to consult nothing but Scripture and my own Natural Sentiments, and draw all my
Reflections from thence, taking only such which easily, and without constraint
offered themselves.

2. And thus having cleared the way, and removed every thing which I thought
might obstruct or misguide my Enquiries, I come, in the second place, to
consider the Doctrine it self; and Faithfully and Impartially to Examine what
is sufficient for Christians to believe concerning the Trinity, or, which is
all one in this case, what is necessary to be believed: For certainly he
believes enough, and cannot in reason be taxed for a narrow defective Faith,
who believes as much as is required of him.

For the better proceeding in which Enquiry, I shall lay down this as an
evident Truth, which every Man will grant me, that nothing is necessary to be
believed, but 1. what is possible to be believed; and 2. what is plainly revealed.

But here I would be understood, as to the last part of the Assertion, only of
such matters which are known to us no other way than by Revelation. For in
several other cases, I confess, we may be obliged to believe merely upon Humane
Testimony: Nay, even Revelation it self, as it is a matter of Fact, claims our
Assent upon no higher a ground.

But further, I shall take this for granted too in a Protestant Country, that
Scripture is the only Standard of all Necessary Revealed Truths: Neither in the
present Instance is there any room for a Traditionary Faith. For besides that,
all the Fathers and Ancient Writers ground their Expositions of the Trinity
wholly upon Scripture, I cannot conceive that the Subject is capable of a
plainer Revelation, as I shall endeavor to show more fully in the following
Discourse.

We are therefore, in the first place, to consider how far it is possible to
believe a Trinity; and next, to examine what the Scripture requires us to
believe in this matter.

Now, there are two Conditions requisite to make it possible for us to believe
a thing. 1. That we know the Terms of what we are to assent to. 2. That it
imply no contradiction to our former Knowledge; such Knowledge I mean which is
accompanied with Certainty and Evidence.

First then, we can believe a thing no further than we understand the Terms in
which it is proposed to us: For Faith concerns only the truth and falsehood of
Propositions; and the Terms of which a Proposition consists must be first
understood before we can pronounce any thing concerning the Truth or Falsehood
of it; which is nothing else but the agreement or disagreement of its Terms, or
the Idea's expressed by them. If I have no Knowledge at all of the meaning of
the terms used in a Proposition, I cannot exercise any Act of my Understanding
about it, I cannot say, I believe or disbelieve any thing, my Soul is perfectly
in the same state it was before, without receiving any new Determination. If I
have but a general confused Notion of the Terms, I can give only a general
confused Assent to the Proposition. So my Faith will always bear the same
Proportion to my Knowledge of the Subject Matter to be believed.

To make this plainer by an Instance, suppose I am required to believe that A.
is equal to B. If I don't know either what A. or B. stands for; or have no
Notion of Equality, I believe nothing more than I did before this was proposed
to me; I am not capable of any new determinate Act of Faith. All that I can
believe in this case can amount to no more than this, That Something has some
respect to something else; that the Matter I am required to believe, is
affirmed by a Person of great Knowledge and Integrity, who ought to be credited
in what he says, and therefore the Proposition here laid down is probably true
in that sense the Author means. And what am I the wiser for all this? What
addition is there made to my Faith or Knowledge by such a Proposition? But
farther, suppose I know that A. and B. stand for two Lines, and that by Equal
Lines is meant Lines of the same length; such Knowledge can produce only a
general confused belief, that there is some certain Line imaginable just of the
same length with some other Line: But if by A. and B. are meant two right
Lines, which are the sides of a given Triangle, and I take a Mathematician's
Word for it, without demonstration that they are equal, or of the same length,
this is a particular distinct Act of Faith; by which I am satisfied of the
Truth of something which I did not believe or know before.

From whence it follows, that Terms and simple Idea's must be clearly and
distinctly understood first, before we can believe any thing particular of the
respects and relations they bear to one another, which is the only proper
Object of Faith.

Another Condition necessary to render a thing capable of being believed is,
that it implies no Contradiction to our former Knowledge. I cannot conceive how
it is possible to give our assent to any thing that contradicts the plain
Dictates of our Reason, and those evident Principles from whence we derive all
our other Knowledge.

As for Example: I do not see how any Authority of Revelation can overthrow the
Truth of this Proposition, That the Whole is bigger than any of its Parts. For

First, I cannot more clearly and distinctly perceive any external Impressions
made upon my Soul, nor be more certain that such Impressions proceed from God,
than I can perceive and be assured that the Idea's I have of Whole and part
bear this relation to one another.

Secondly, The nature and constitution of things makes it impossible that this
Proposition should be false; for such and such Things or Notions being
supposed, such and such Habitudes and Respects must necessarily result from
them. So long therefore as I have the same Idea's of whole and part, and the
same Faculties of Perception, I shall always perceive the same relation betwixt
them: And if my Idea's of whole and part were changed, or a new Texture and
Frame of Soul given me, I should indeed perceive different: relations betwixt
these new Idea's; but this would by no means destroy the Truth of my former
Conceptions, 'twould still be certain, according to the Idea's I had before of
whole and part, that the whole was bigger than any of its parts: Which Idea's
will always unalterably have the same relation to one another. But

Thirdly, Was it possible this Proposition could be false, considering only the
nature of the things themselves, the Nature of God furnishes us with other
Arguments of the Truth, and Certainty of it. And

1st. It is not consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, or Goodness of God, to
require us to believe that, which, according to the Frame and Make he has given
us, it is impossible for us to believe: For however some Men have advanced this
absurd Paradox, that God can make Contradictions true, I am very certain, that
upon an impartial Trial of their Faculties, they would find 'twere perfectly
out of their power to believe explicitly, and in the common Sense of the Terms,
that a Part can be bigger than the Whole it is a Part of. But

2dly, Admitting it possible for us to be deceived in such Propositions which
have a constant, uniform, and universal appearance of Truth and Evidence, this
would destroy all manner of Certainty and Knowledge, and leave us wholly in
Darkness, Ignorance, and Despair; or, which is more Injurious to the Divine
Goodness to imagine, under an absolute necessity of being deceived: For it is
not only impossible for me to believe, that such a Proposition as this, That
the Whole is bigger than any of its Parts is false; but I cannot deny my
positive express assent to it as true: The Light and Evidence in this Case is
so clear and strong, that I am not at Liberty so much as to suspend my Judgment.

3dly, It Is Blasphemy to think, that God can contradict himself; and therefore
right Reason being the Voice of God, as well as Revelation, they can never be
directly contrary to one another.

Now to apply all this to the present Case; suppose I am required to believe,
That One and the same God is Three different Persons: I only suppose it here,
because I have not yet proved how far, and in what sense, we are obliged to
believe a Trinity. If this, I say, be the Proposition I am required to give my
assent to, it is plain, by what has been proved before, that I can believe it no
farther than the Terms, of which it is made up, are known and understood, and
the Idea's signified by them consistent.

In order therefore to form a determinate Act of Faith in this Point, I must
carefully examine my self what Notions I have of God, of Unity and Identity,
Distinction and Number, and Person.

As to the Notion of a Deity, it is true indeed I have not a full and adequate
Idea of God, neither is my Soul capable of it; but what Conceptions I have of
his Nature and Perfections, are, according to my Apprehension, so far clear, as
to enable me truly and justly to determine which of those distinct Idea's, I
have in my Mind, are applicable to him, and which are not. And such a Knowledge
of the Divine Nature as this, is a sufficient direction of my Faith in any
Proposition concerning God, where I clearly understand all the Idea's
attributed to him.

In the next place therefore, I am to consider what Notions I have of Unity and
Identity, Distinction and Number.

And here I confess I am at a Loss how to deliver my self, these being some of
our first and most simple Idea's which are so clear of themselves, that I
cannot find clearer to explain them by.

For this is certain, that every Man is conscious to himself, that he has a
power of perceiving and comparing his Perceptions, and consequently must know
when any thing is presented to his Mind, whether it be perceivable at one
entire view, and whether the Object have one uniform appearance or not: He must
be also sensible in a succession of Idea's, when the same Appearances are
repeated again, and how often the Representation is varied.

However, notwithstanding the Clearness of these Notions, with respect to what
passes in our own Minds, we are not able to make true and distinct Judgments of
the unity or multiplicity of things without us: For it does not follow, that
what is represented to the Soul at once, under one Idea or Appearance, should,
according to the reality of things, be one undivided nature, neither can it be
inferred, that what is represented to the Soul under different Idea's are so
many distinct real Beings: For there are some Idea's purely of the Soul's own
making, and not copied from any external Patterns, where there are a great many
particular real Beings, of different kinds and natures, comprehended under one
Representation: Thus all the Hills, Plains, Rivers, Trees, and Towns, etc.
which the Eye can reach from such or such a Point, we put into one Picture, and
call it a Landscape or Prospect. Thus does the Soul enlarge its View to all the
Works of God and Nature; it takes in the whole Creation at a Thought, and calls
it World. On the other side, the real Natures, and Essences of Things, which
are allowed to consist in a simple undivided Unity, are not conceivable by us
at once, but at different Views, by different partial Conceptions, which the
Soul afterward compounds and calls by one Name. Thus when we endeavor to
comprehend the Nature and Essence of what we call Man* we form, at different
times, several confused Notions of Substance, Body, Life, Sense, and Reason;
every one of which is a complicated Idea, and to be resolved into a great many
others more simple and distinct: As for instance, I must form a great many
Idea's of particular Actions, and the Modes, Differences, and Relations of
them, before I can have any tolerable knowledge of what Reason is; and so for
the rest.

All therefore that we understand of the unity of things without us, is this:
When we perceive any Object in a continued Position, bounded and fenced out
from other things round about it, all within such Terms and Limits we call One:
And then again, observing a great many different Actions, produced in and by
such an Object, we judge all these Actions and Operations to proceed from one
common Principle, in some such manner as Streams from a Fountain, or several
Lines from the same Center. And whatever we thus judge to be One, though a great
many Thoughts and Conceptions go to the forming of such a Judgment, we
endeavor, as well as we can, to represent to our selves under one Idea or
Appearance, though the Representation be often very confused and indistinct. And
this we do, as supposing it wholly and uniformly conceivable at one single
View, were it not for the Imperfection of our Faculties: Which Supposition is
not without good Ground; for this we have plain Experience for, that when any
visible Object is of such a magnitude, or in such a situation that the Eye
cannot receive the whole Image of it at once, we take it in at different times,
from different points of Sight; and yet for all this, we find no more Reason to
doubt of the real Unity of such an Object, than of any other, whose Image came
into the Soul entire at one Act of Vision; for we easily conceive there may be
other Organs of Sight, which would reflect the whole Object together: And from
thence we conclude further, that there may be also some other Mind more perfect
than ours, which perceives that as one simple Idea which we cannot apprehend,
but by a union of several different Conceptions: From whence it follows, that
the most perfect Mind, which is God, is the only true and proper Standard of
all Unity and Distinction.

The Sum of all my Thoughts is this: What is meant by one or more, the same
or different Idea's is better to be conceived by inward Reflection, than can
possibly be explained by Words.

Such an Idea, which is not distinguishable into different Appearances, I call
a simple Idea.

When I have any Thought or Perception, which is resolvable into several
Idea's, I call this a complex or compounded Notion. And hence I term any Being
simple or compounded, according as it is perceivable by some Mind, under one
simple Appearance, or a complex Idea.

Whether my Idea's are agreeable to the real Natures of Things, or those
original Fatterns in the Mind of God, I cannot certainly know; but when they
are the same, and when they differ from one another, I plainly perceive, though I
cannot always judge of the Identity or Distinction of Things, according as they
are represented to my understanding, under the same or different Appearances:
For here I should be sometimes mistaken too, as it is plain I often must, if I
judged of the real unity or multiplicity of Things by my own Idea's.

The Notions we have of the unity of Things without us, come the nearest that
can be imagined to our Idea's of Point, and continued Extension; one of which
represents simple unity, the other compounded; the one we apply to what we call
spiritual Beings, the other to material: For it is certain the Conception we
have of Body, can never furnish us with any Idea of simple Unity.

By a Spirit then we mean something without extension, and consequently
indivisible, capable of performing some such kind of Actions, which do, in some
manner or degree, resemble those we are conscious of: But what that is, from
whence I suppose such Actions to proceed, I have not the least conception of;
for all that I conceive, is only several Idea's of different particular
Actions, which no more express the Idea of that Principle from whence they
spring, than the Idea's of several particular Lines express the Idea of that
Point they are drawn from.

All that we can perceive or imagine of corporeal Unity, is nothing else but a
Connection or joint Position of several Bodies, which, according as it is more
or less perceivable, according to the simplicity or multiformity of the Figure
resulting from it, and the easiness or difficulty of Separation, makes several
degrees of Union, which all receive the common Denomination of Unity.

Now as Extension, by reason of its perpetual divisibility, cannot give us a
true Notion of simple Unity, so neither can I have any distinct knowledge of
Union or Composition, abstracted from all Considerations of Extension. I do not
understand how a Mind and Body are united, any otherwise than that I perceive
such and such spiritual Actions produced within the Compass of such a Body
which I call One: Neither am I able to comprehend the Union or Separation of
Two spiritual Beings, without considering them as in the same or different
Localites; for I have not distinct Idea's of several spiritual Natures, nor, if
I should perceive the several Operations of different Spirits, could I
distinguish the several individual Beings, or Principles, they proceeded from:
For who is there that, if all the Thoughts and Motions of the Souls of several
Men were communicated to him, could tell which proceeded from which? Nay, we
cannot tell what difference of Actions is sufficient to determine the different
kinds of Principles they proceeded from; neither can any Cooperation, or
Consent of Actions, make us conceive a spiritual Union, without conceiving the
same Term of Action too. For suppose two Souls were so exactly framed alike,
that they always thought and willed the same Things at the same times, and were
conscious of each other's Thoughts and Actions, if they were put into different
Bodies, it is plain we could not properly say they were united or made one: And
again, supposing they were in the same Body, we could not possibly conceive
them to be two, any otherwise than we knew them capable of a separate
Existence; that is, if we examine our Thoughts honestly, of a separate Vhi, in
different Bodies, or elsewhere: Not that I think local Presence, or
Determination, is any way contained within the Idea of a spiritual Being, but
it helps us to conceive it better, and discourse more distinctly about it. And,
if we observe it, there are several cases where our Conceptions and Judgments
must necessarily differ.

These then are all the kinds of Unity and Distinction I can possibly imagine;
namely, in Idea, Principle, and Position. Whatever else is called Unity, is
more properly termed Agreement, the very Notion of which implies a distinction
in some of the forementioned kinds.

Identity is nothing else but a repetition of Unity, as Number is of
Difference, with the Judgment of the Understanding upon it.

What Personal Unity and Distinction are, will be easily understood by
explaining the word Person, which signifies one of these two things; either a
Particular, Intelligent Being, or an Office, Character, or some such complex
Notion applicable to such a Being. In the first sense one Man, or Angel, is one
Person, and several Men or Angels are several Persons. In the second sense of
the word there may be so many Persons as there are different Combinations of
the Actions, Relations, and Circumstances of Intelligent Beings.

And thus having given an Account of the meaning and signification of the Terms
in which we are required to express our Faith, we are next to Examine, how far,
and in what sense we can believe this Proposition, That One and the same God is
Three different Persons.

Now it is certain, that if those before-specified are all the Notions we are
able to frame of Unity and Distinction, then God must be One and Three in some
way or manner there laid down, or else in some other way or manner not
conceivable by Human Understanding.

First then, let us see how and in what manner God can be One and Three,
according to those Notions our Souls have framed of Unity and Distinction.

And here it is granted on all hands, that nothing can be One and Three in the
same manner and respect: We cannot conceive a thing to be in One determinate
Position or Vbi, and in Three separate Vbi's all at once; We cannot conceive
that One Principle or Nature should be but One, and yet Three different
Principles or Natures too; or that any Object should be truly and adequately
represented to any Mind or Understanding under One Idea, and truly and
adequately represented under Three different Idea's. It Is impossible to believe
any thing of this kind, because it implies a plain Contradiction to the
clearest and most certain knowledge we can have of Unity and Distinction; so
that if One may be Three in the same respect it is One, then One and Three must
stand for other Idea's than we conceive when we pronounce these words; and if
so, they ought to have other Names, and not be called One and Three.

Since therefore we cannot say, that God is One and Three in the same respect;
in the next place let us Enquire, In what different respects this may be
affirmed of him. Now, as to the Unity of God, this is easily believed and
acknowledged, as being very agreeable to all our other Notions of the Deity.
The chief difficulty lies in assigning the Distinction: In attempting which,
the best and clearest way of proceeding will be by going over the several kinds
of Distinction beforementioned.

I will begin with that of Position: And here it is plain at first sight that we
cannot possibly conceive God under any difference of Position; we cannot
exclude Omnipotence from any imaginable point of space: It Is the limited Powers
and Faculties of created Beings which are the Foundation of all Local
Distinctions: And therefore when we endeavor to represent God to our thoughts
in this manner, we consider him as Omnipresent; and I can no more conceive
Three Omnipresents, than I can conceive Three straight Lines drawn between the
same Points.

But though there can be but One undivided Omnipresence, may there not be Three
Infinite Beings Coequal to one another, and Commensurate to One Infinite
Space? This is far above my Conception too: Infinite swallows up all my
thoughts. Whatever Idea we apply this Term Infinite to, I think it impossible
to apply it to another of the same Denomination: As for Example; If I apply it
to Power, I cannot consider it as applicable to more than One Infinite Power:
For Infinite Power includes all the Possibilities of Action; so that to
conceive more than One Infinite Power, would be to conceive more Power than is
possible; which is a gross and palpable Absurdity. And therefore we cannot
conceive Three Infinite Beings distinct from one another, any more than Three
Infinite Powers, or Three Infinite Spaces, because all Distinction implies some
Limitation, and Limitation is a Contradiction to Infinity. We can indeed
conceive Infinite Power, as in some manner bounded by Infinite Wisdom, Justice,
Mercy, or the like; but in no wise as limited by any other Power. We cannot
therefore conceive one Infinite Being as bounded by another Infinite Being; for
then we should conceive Infinite Power limited by another Power, and the like
of all other Attributes, which are the same in both: For the Notion of an
Infinite Being includes in it all the imaginable kinds of Infinite Perfection.

But if we say, there are Three Infinite Beings, and all the Perfections of
each are coincident, what ground can we have for such a Distinction? Not so
much, to use the former Instance, as for that of three straight Lines between
the same Points; for there the different times of describing the same Line may
in some manner help us to form a confused Conception of different Lines: But
it is not in the Power of the Soul to represent to its self Three Eternal Beings
of Coincident Perfections. Here Is nothing for the Imagination to lay hold of,
no manner of ground to deceive our selves into a confused belief of such a
Distinction. And therefore I do not see how it is possible for us to believe
there are Three distinct Principles or Natures all of the same Infinite
Perfections, which together we call God.

And if there be but One Omnipresent, Infinitely Perfect Being, how can he be
truly and fully represented to any Mind under Three different Idea's? The truth
of an Idea consists in its Agreement and Conformity to the Original it
represents; And if so, how is it possible there should be Three Idea's exactly
and adequately conformable to the same Original, and yet different from one
another? Either these Differences found in the Idea's are not in the real
Pattern, and then the Representation is false; or they are, and then the Unity
of the Object is destroyed.

It Is true, indeed we do often apply different Idea's to the same individual
Object; but these are either Partial and Inadequate Conceptions of the Nature
and Essence of it; or Expressive of something Accessory and Extrinsecal to the
Nature of the thing, such as Modes, Circumstances, and Relations.

Those Partial Conceptions we frame of the Divine Nature are what we call the
Attributes of God: Which, how different soever from one another in our
thoughts, are all necessarily included in the simple Idea of God; and therefore
cannot be the ground of such a Distinction as we are now enquiring after. For
when I say, that God is Holy, Wise, or Powerful, I only say that explicitly and
in part, which I said implicitly and in full, when I pronounced the Name of
God; and the meaning of such Propositions is no more but this, That a Holy,
Wise, Powerful Being, of all other Infinite Perfections is Holy, Wise,
Powerful, etc. All which Perfections, though considered separately under
different Appearances by our imperfect Faculties, being really but one simple
Idea, can be applied to but one Single Person in the first sense of the word
Person, as it signifies a particular Intelligent Being, Nature, or Principle;
and that for the Reasons just now mentioned concerning the Conformity of Idea's
with their Patterns.

From whence it follows, that according to the Notions we are capable of
framing of Unity and Distinction, which I have particularly examined, with
Reference to the Holy Trinity, all the Personal Distinction we can conceive in
the Deity must be founded upon some Accessory Idea's Extrinsecal to the Divine
Nature; a certain Combination of which Idea's makes up the Second Notion
signified by the word Person.

And if we fairly and impartially Examine our own Thoughts upon this Subject,
we shall find, that, when we name God the Father, we conceive the Idea of God
so far as we are capable of conceiving it, as Acting so and so, under such
Respects and Relations; and when we name God the Son, we conceive nothing else
but the same Idea of God over again under different Relations; and so likewise
of the Holy Ghost.

But if this be all that is meant by Trinity in Unity, Three Persons, and One
God, where is that stupendous Mystery so much reverenced and adored by some?
What becomes of the great Difficulty and Obscurity complained of by others?
What is it that has puzzled the Understandings, and staggered the Faith of so
many Learned and Inquisitive Men in all Ages since this Doctrine was first
delivered? This is an invincible Prejudice against the Account now given, and
indeed against any other Explication whatsoever that has nothing in it hard to
be understood, or believed: For how can it be imagined that what has passed for
a Mystery these Sixteen Hundred Years, should now at last be comprehended as
plainly as a common ordinary Notion?

But if this Account of the Trinity be too easy, and falls far short of those
High Expressions of Distinction found in Scripture (as I think it does) and no
other grounded upon any Notions our Souls have framed of Unity and Distinction
can be true or consistent (as I have before particularly proved) then it
necessarily follows, that God must be One and Three in some way or manner not
conceivable by Humane Understanding.

And what we are to believe in this case is the Subject of my next Enquiry;
which I am persuaded may very easily and quickly be resolved: For if we are
fully satisfied from Revelation, that these Terms, One and Three, may, and
ought to be affirmed of God, but not in any sense of the words we are here in
this present state capable of conceiving. And moreover, if it be true, as I
have already shown it is, that we can believe a thing no farther than we
understand the Terms in which it is proposed to us; it is plain from hence that
all we can possibly believe in the matter of the Trinity is, That One and the
same God is Three in some way or manner we are not able to comprehend. And if
we are sure we cannot comprehend what this Distinction is whereby God is Three,
in vain do we look out for Terms to express something which we have no manner
of Conception of. Whatever words we use, whether Person, Hypostasis, or any
other we can invent, or Languages furnish us with, they all signify the same
thing; that is, some kind of Distinction we do not understand. And we may rack
our Thoughts, tire our Imaginations, and break all the Fibers of our Brain, and
yet never be able to deliver our selves clearer.

All therefore that we can know of the Trinity by Reason, can amount to no more
than an Obscure confused Knowledge, which we are forced to express in general
and abstracted Terms, because we are sure no other reach our thoughts, though
these are not sufficient to explain all we mean by them.

Nor is this to be wondered at, that we should have confused Notions of things
which no particular Idea's our Minds are furnished with can render clearer to
us: For if we consider the Degrees and Limits of our Knowledge, and take a
strict Survey of our whole stock of Thoughts, we shall find there are very few
things that we know fully and distinctly. Most of our Notions differ only as
more or less confused, more or less general. There is a certain Scale of
Knowledge, wherein every thing is so fitted and proportioned to our Faculties,
that we cannot descend below such a determinate pitch in our Conceptions or
Explications of any Object proposed to us.

As for instance; suppose a Blind-Man has a desire to know what Color is; it is
certain he can never form a true distinct Idea of it; but yet he is capable of
a general confused Knowledge, which wants but one degree of Particularity to be
clear and perfect Conception. He may know that Color is not any Substance, but
some Mode or Determination which owes its Existence and Support to some other
Being; that it is not Extension, or any other Accident or Quality perceivable
by any of the Senses he enjoys: He may further be made to understand, that it
is some kind of Sensation, produced by the impression of other Bodies upon that
part of a Man's which is called the Eye, which other Men perceive though he
does not. Now it is plain that such a Man knows a great deal of the Nature of
Color, more by far than another Blind-Man who has not made the same Enquiries
and Reflections about it; and so much as will secure him from having any other
Idea imposed upon him for that of Color, which is so distinguished and
circumstantiated to him, that, should he now receive his sight, he would
presently acknowledge the marks before described to him. And yet after all, it
may be truly said, while he continues blind, he has no manner of Idea of
Color, because he has no distinct Idea of that particular kind of Sensation to
which his general Idea's are applied. And therefore he can go no lower in his
Explications of the Notion he has of Color: For if he explains it by any
Sensation which he receives from his other Senses, the Idea's he has then in
his Mind are indeed more particular and distinct, but the Judgment he makes
upon them must be utterly false, whereas before, his Knowledge was only general
and confused, but yet true.

I have made choice of this plain, familiar Instance of Sense, to show the
unreasonableness of those who in higher Speculations complain that the terms
brought to explain them are too general and abstracted; and demand a further
Explication of what we cannot possibly know beyond such a degree of
Particularity, which the Terms already made use of, do express.

In vain therefore, and unjustly, are we urged to explain the Doctrine of the
Trinity more particularly, when we have brought it down to the utmost
Particularity we are capable of conceiving, and at the same time freely
acknowledge, we don't know it so distinctly as it is capable of being known.

For then only is the Use of general abstracted Terms to be condemned, either
when the subject we are upon will admit of a more particular and sensible
Explication; or, if it will not, when by too much Refining and Abstracting, we
deceive our selves, and think some Terms we have found out make the Thing clear
to us, though we have not really more distinct Conceptions of it than we had
before, and at the same time these very Terms make it more obscure and
difficult to others. And this is what I remarked before as a Prejudice to be
avoided in an impartial Search after Truth.

But so long as we acknowledge we have only a general confused Notion of the
Trinity, or such a Threefold Distinction in the Godhead, as is consistent with
the unity of the Divine Nature, we may be allowed to explain this Notion in
general abstracted Terms; because we lay no greater a Stress upon the Terms
than they will truly bear, and require only a Faith proportionate to our
Knowledge; that is, a general confused Faith, which we expect a clearer and
more distinct Revelation of hereafter.

And thus I have dispatched the first Branch of my Discourse, wherein I
proposed to consider how far 'twas possible for us to believe a Trinity.

II. I come now to my Second General Enquiry, viz. What it is the Scripture
requires us to believe in this Matter? For a distinct Resolution of which
Question, I shall observe the following Method:

First, I shall barely and positively lay down the Doctrine of the Trinity, so
far as I judge it expressly contained in Scripture. Secondly, I shall endeavor
to prove the Truth of what I assert. Thirdly, I shall consider the particular
Additional Explications that have or may be given of the Scripture-Account of
this Article.
1. In speaking to the First, it must be allowed, that there is no such
Proposition as this, That One and the same God is Three different Persons
formally, and in Terms, to be found in the Sacred Writings either of the Old or
New Testament: Neither is it pretended that there is any Word of the same
Signification or Importance with the Word Trinity, used in Scripture, with
relation to God. There is one Text which plainly enough affirms, without the
help of Inference or Deduction, that God is Three and One: But this being a
disputed Passage, and no where else repeated in the same or the like Terms, I
shall not insist upon it. Nor do I think such a Trinity as we profess to
believe, stands much in need of the Support of this Text; the Matter and
subject of our Faith in this Point being frequently, largely, and
circumstantially mentioned; and, as it appears to me, interwoven into the very
Design of the Scriptures.

Now the Sum of all that the Scriptures plainly and expressly teach concerning
a Trinity, is this: That there is but One only God, the Author and Maker of All
Things; but that One God ought to be acknowledged and adored by us, under those
Three different Titles or Characters of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Which
Terms, whatever they signify, according to my Judgment, upon a fair and
impartial Consideration of all Circumstances that can determine their Sense,
are evidently applied to God in many Places of Holy Writ; and consequently are
truly and properly applicable to him.

2. The Proof of which Assertion is the Second Thing I undertook.

But here I find my self forestalled by the successful Endeavors of a great
many Learned Men, who have carefully and nicely examined every Text that can be
brought, either for the Establishment, or Confutation of the Doctrine of the
Trinity. I shall not therefore trouble my Reader with a particular detail of
all their Arguments; but only acquaint him truly and fairly what were the chief
Motives which influenced and disposed me to make such a Judgment as I have,
just before, declared.

Now the Reasons which determined my Opinion in this Matter, were such as
freely offered themselves upon an unprejudiced reading of Scripture, and
considering the Design, Connection, and Analogy of those Writings: And I am apt
to believe, if any Man else took the same Method, and considered Things
togegether, and not only in loose Texts and Passages, the first Result of his
Thoughts would be the same, viz. These Terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must
all be so understood, as to include the same God in their Signification; and
that any other Sense or Explication of the Words, would be attended with
greater Difficulties.

But this being a Reflection which is founded upon the Agreement and Coherence
of all the Parts of Scripture, 'twould be a very improper and ineffectual
Design to go about to confirm the Truth of it from some particular Passages.
Omitting therefore all those Texts, which are a great many, where any of these
Terms, Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, appear to be directly affirmed of God,
according to a fair Construction of the Words, I shall only observe Two or
Three Passages from the History of our Savior and his Gospel, which, to my
Apprehension, do as strongly prove what I have advanced as the most formal
Expressions, and are less liable to be perverted by the Criticisms of Language.

The first Observation I have to make, concerns the common Forms of Baptism,
Salutation, and Blessing, used in several Places of the New Testament.

Now these are Matters no way controverted: That our Savior commanded his
Disciples to go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. That St. Paul makes use of such Salutations as
these: The Lord be with you; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all; Grace be to you, and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ: And particularly closes his Second Epistle to the Corinthians with this
(...) and fuller Blessing; The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of
God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. From whence I infer,
that all these Terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, signify God; because I
cannot possibly conceive it is agreeable to the Nature of the Christian
Religion, that the Ministers of it should Teach, Baptize, or Bless the People
in any other Name but God's.

It cannot be imagined but the People must equally believe in those, in whose
Names they are Baptized or Blessed: They must believe that those, who are
called upon to bestow Graces and Blessings upon them, are able to give what
they are called upon for. And whatever is meant by Baptizing in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it seems very plain that these Three are all
equally concerned in what is done in that Sacrament. Whether by this Form of
Baptism be signified on the Minister's Part, the Authority or Commission by
which he acts in his Administration; or whether on the Part of the Person
baptized, be meant any Acknowledgment or Confession, Submission or Dedication
of himself; or whether this Phrase in the Name, or, as in the Greek, into the
Name, does imply all this, and more, the whole Force and Importance of the
Expression, does in the same Extent belong to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The
Power and Authority here received, is derived from all Three: They are all to
be acknowledged as Authors of our Salvation; all infallible, and to be believed
in what they Teach; have all the same Title to our Submission and Obedience,
and are Joint-Parties in that Covenant we make in Baptism.

The Inference from hence is very Plain and Easy: That if any one of these
Terms signify God, they must all Three signify God; and if all Three signify
God, they must all Three signify one and the same God; for God is but One. Now
that the One Supreme God, the Lord and Maker of All Things, is here meant by
the Word Father, is a Thing not questioned; and therefore Son, and Holy Ghost,
are Terms expressive of the same Divine Nature.

Should we but suppose the contrary, That by Son was meant only a mere Man, or
some Heavenly Being, of highest Rank under God; and by Holy Ghost was signified
only some created Spirit, inferior to the Son, or the Power, Efficacy, Love,
Favor, or Virtue of God how strange would such a Form of Baptism appear? I
Baptize thee in the Name of God, Peter the Apostle, and the Power or Love of
God; or, I Baptize thee in the Name of God, Michael the Archangel, and Raphael
a Ministering Spirit. There needs no more but a bare Mention of such an
Exposition to show the Falsehood of it: What absurd Consequences may be drawn
from it, I shall leave to every Man's particular Reflection.

Another Thing which mightily confirmed me in this Belief, that the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, so often named in Scripture, are One and the same God,
under those Three different Appellations, was this, That the Son, who is the
same with him that is in other Places called the Lord, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and sometimes only Jesus, or Christ, was worshipped with a Religious
Worship by those that followed him and embraced his Gospel: For if he that was
called the Son of God, or Christ, was thus to be worshipped, it plainly and
evidently follows from hence, according to all the Notions we have of God and
Religion, either from Nature or Revelation, that the Son was also God, the same
true and only God with the Father.

And if the Son be allowed to be God as well as the Father, it will be easily
admitted that the Holy Ghost is so too, who appears in Scripture invested with
all the same Characters of Divinity: For Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are as
consistent with the Unity of the Godhead, as Father and Son only; and besides,
there is greater difficulty in conceiving the Son to be God, than the Holy
Ghost, because of his Humane Nature. But that he was God manifest in the Flesh,
is, I say, apparent from the divine Worship that was paid to him: For that God
only is to be worshipped, is an evident Principle, as well as an indispensable
Duty; and I can as soon believe a thing to be, and not to be, as that any thing
that is not God should be worshipped as God.

Now that Christ received the Honor and Worship due to God only, is plain from
abundance of Places of Scripture, where we find he was not only adored with all
the outward Expressions of Reverence and Devotion, but confessed and
acknowledged to be God by an Application of the Divine Attributes to him, such
as agree only to God, and are incommunicable to any other, as might be proved
at large if it had not been done already: But this being fully insisted upon by
others, I shall only name Two Passages to this Purpose; the one, Phil. 4. 13.
the other, Act. 7. 59. which, if there were no other, are of themselves
sufficient to show what the Faith of the first Christians was: For who, but one
that believed that Christ was God, could say with St. Paul, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me; or, with St. Stephen, at the instant of
Death, cry out, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

From these, and many other Texts, it seems plain to me, that Christ was
worshipped, and acknowledged as God; and that therefore he ought so to be
worshipped, and acknowledged, we have all the same Reasons to believe, as we
have that the Scriptures are True; the Establishment of a False Worship being a
thorough Disproof of the Authority that Commands it.

Supposing therefore the Truth of the Scriptures, there is no way of eluding
this Argument, but by giving another Interpretation to all those Places which
seem to ascribe divine Honor to Christ; which can no otherwise be done, than
by framing a particular Dialect for this Purpose, and giving new Significations
to Words, when applied to our Savior, which they never had before, when used
upon other Occasions.

I shall not enter upon a particular Proof of this, but pass on to

Another Argument I observed from Scripture, which gave me further Assurance of
the Divinity of the Son, and consequently of the Truth of the whole Proposition
before advanced; and that is, The Character of Jesus Christ considered merely
as a Man. Now it is certain, that the Man Christ Jesus, the Son of David,
according to the Flesh, is represented by all the Evangelists, as having his
Conversation in this World with all Lowliness, and Humility, and with perfect
Holiness, and Unblameableness of Life. And it is not imaginable, that a Person
of this Character should have suffered any Titles to have been given him, any
Honor or Respect to have been paid him, which were not strictly and
indispensably due to him; much less have taken the Honor and Worship, peculiar
to God only, to himself, if he had not been infallibly conscious that of a
Truth God dwelt in him. I cannot possibly conceive that one, who declined all
Appearance of Grandeur, Dominion, and Authority, should have allowed of any
thing that looked like Worship, or Adoration, or might have been mistaken for
it; or that he, who knew he was believed to be the Son of God, in such a Sense
which some thought Blasphemy, would not have undeceived his Followers, and
justified himself to his Enemies, had he not really been what 'twas Blasphemy
to have pretended to be, if he were not.

I might easily pursue these Reflections a great deal further, and bring more
Arguments to confirm the truth of what I have asserted, that these Names or
Titles of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are applied in Scripture to the One True
God; but I judge it altogether unnecessary, not only because it has been fully
made out already in several set Discourses upon this Subject, but because it is
so plainly and expressly revealed, that I am verily persuaded every Man that
reads would believe, were it not for the additional Explications such a Belief
is charged with.

3. Which is the next thing to be considered: And indeed here lies the whole
difficulty of the matter, the main stress of the Controversy. For that God
should be called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is as easily to be believed, as
that he should be called Adonai, Elohim, and Jehovah; That the same thing
should be signified and expressed by several names, is no such incredible
Mystery: But if we allow that these Terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are all
applied to God in Scripture, it is not thought sufficient to say, that these are
three several Names which signify God; but we are further required to believe
that God is One and Three, the same God, but three different Hypostases or
Persons; And that one of these three Hypostases or Persons, is both God and
Man. These are the hard sayings which puzzles some Men's Understandings, and
make them choose rather to wrest and pervert the plainest Texts, than admit such
seemingly inconsistent Consequences.

Here therefore I shall Examine, what grounds there are in Scripture for such
an Exposition:

And what we are obliged from thence to believe when we express our Faith in
this particular manner.

First then, as to these forms of Expression, That God is One and Three, etc.
It is to be observed, that these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
applied to God in Scripture in a different way from what any of his other Names
are: For the other Names of God signify only Partial Conceptions of the Divine
Nature, such as Self-Existence, Power, etc. and are all contained within the
same Idea of God; and so are indifferently used upon any occasion to express
the whole Idea of God to which they belong, which is the same under every
denomination. These therefore cannot be the Foundation of any distinction in
the Godhead: But Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to our way of
conceiving things, signify something Extrinsecal and Accessory to the Divine
Nature, as much as we know of the Divine Nature by reason, the whole Idea of
God being conceived as full and complete before the application of these terms;
And though all of them are separately and together affirmed of God, yet each of
them in so peculiar a manner, that there are several occasions where when one
of these terms is used with relation to God, 'twould be improper to use either
of the other. From whence it follows, that these three Names of God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, must denote a threefold difference or distinction
belonging to God; but such as is consistent with the Unity and Simplicity of
the Divine Nature. For each of these Names includes the whole Idea we have of
God and something more; so far as they express the Nature of God, they all
adequately and exactly signify the same; it is the additional signification
which makes all the distinction betwixt them.

What particular kind or manner of distinction this is, is not expressed in
Scripture; but since the Church has thought fit to assign a Name for it, that
of Person seems to me as proper and agreeable to the whole Tenor and Design of
the Holy Writings, as any other that could have been chosen for that purpose.
For Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whether we consider the Primitive sense and
intention of the words, the general and constant use of them, or the particular
Connection and Circumstances in which they are mentioned in Scripture, have
plainly a Personal Signification; each of them, without any figure of Speech,
being determined to signify some intelligent Being Acting in such a manner as
is there related.

There needs no Proof of this, the plain distinction of Persons imported by
those Terms being the chief Argument made use of to show that they cannot all
be applied to God, but must necessarily signify Three distinct Beings: But
that they are all applied to God in Scripture, has been proved already; And
therefore Father, Son, and Holy Ghost may be considered as Persons or Personal
Characters, which do not imply any distinction of Being or Nature.

The Greeks are supposed to have meant the same by Hypostases as we do by
Person; this word being sometimes the very Translation of the other; And if so,
there is the same ground for the use of both: But if they meant any thing else,
they could hardly have so good Warrant for it from Revelation.

Now, that one of these Persons or Hypostases should be both God and Man, there
is this Foundation in the Scriptures for. He who is there called the Son of
God, did certainly appear in the likeness of Men, being in all respects, Sin
only excepted, truly and properly Man; as his Birth, Necessities, Sufferings,
and Death sufficiently testify. It Is certain also that the same Jesus Christ,
who was called the Son of God, and was made in the likeness of Man, is affirmed
by St. Paul, Phil. 3. 7, 8. to have been in the form of God, when he took the
Nature of Man upon him.

But besides this and many other Texts to the same effect, it is plain, from
what before has been proved, that God did suffer himself to be worshipped and
adored in and by the Man Christ Jesus: The least that can be inferred from
which is, that God was more immediately and peculiarly present in Christ, than
ever he is said to have been any where else: As in the Heavens, Jewish Temple,
between the Cherubims, in Prophets and Holy Men, who spoke as they were moved
by the Spirit of God. What created Object was ever allowed to intercept the
Worship paid to God, or share with him in it? Were the Heavens, the Temple, the
Cherubim or Prophets to be adored? Nay, has not God taken a particular care to
preserve Men from Idolatry, by forbidding them to Worship him in or by any
sensible Representation? Did not the Apostles, who worshipped Christ, forbid
others to Worship Men of like Passions with Acts 14. ver. 15.
themselves, commanding them to direct all their Devotion to the Living God,
who made Heaven and Earth? How then can we suppose that Christ was only a mere
Man, or some other Creature, and not rather believe that he had the Fullness of
the Godhead dwelling in him bodily?

But here it is Objected; How can God and Man be united? And to this I must
fairly Answer, that I cannot tell. I have confessed already in the Account I
have given of those Notions of Unity and Distinction, that I have not any just
or distinct Conceptions of the Union of Spiritual Beings, either with Bodies,
or with one another: But this I will venture to say, that I can as well
conceive God and Man together under one Idea, at one view, as I can conceive a
Soul and Body so united.

All that I know of the Union of Soul and Body is; that there is some
Intelligent Power that makes use of the Organs of my Body, and Acts in
conjunction with the Motions there produced. And I may as well consider God
united to Man, when he so Acts by the Ministry and Operation of Man, that the
Actions of God seem conveyed to us the same way as the Actions of one Man are
to another. Had those who upon some occasions spoke by the extraordinary
Assistance of a Divine Power been constantly so directed, and assisted, how
would they have distinguished the Motions of their Souls from the Impressions
of God? And why then should not we think such an Extraordinary Power as this as
much united to such Men, as that Common ordinary Power we call the Soul is to
those Bodies in which it acts and exerts it self?

Some have been of Opinion, that what we call the Soul, is nothing else but a
constant regular Inspiration, or a determinate Concurrence of God Almighty with
such and such Motions and Capacities of Matter: But whether this be so or no,
as most probably it is not, it seems to me very plain from Scripture, that such
a Power which we ascribe to God, did as Constantly and Regularly Act in and
through Christ, as the Human Soul is perceived to do in any other Man: As
appears from his absolute security from all manner of Sin and Error, from his
constant knowledge of the Thoughts and Designs of Men, and the Will and Decrees
of God; and from his Readiness and Ability to work Miracles at any time, and
upon any occasion. All which are manifest Tokens of an uninterrupted Presence
and Concurrence of the Deity: Especially if we consider the Calmness and
Evenness of Spirit observable in our Savior, entirely free from all the
transports of overruling Impressions, it is a further Argument that he did not
receive the Spirit of God at times, or by measure; but was as conscious of all
the Divine Perfections in himself as a Man is conscious of his own Thoughts.

Such are the Grounds we find in Scripture for those particular Explications of
the Trinity beforementioned.

In the next place, we are to Enquire what the Scriptures necessarily oblige us
to believe in this Point.

But before this Question can be resolved, there are two things to be premised:

1. That whatever Articles of Faith are absolutely necessary to Salvation, all
Persons of every Rank and Condition are equally obliged to believe them. There
is not one Religion for the Peasant, and another for the Scholar: We have the
same general Rule to walk by, though particular Obligations may be greater or
lesser, fewer or more, according to different Circumstances and Relations. And
whatever Principles and Duties are of general Necessity, ought to be so plainly
revealed, as to be easily understood by ordinary Capacities upon a fair and
careful Examination.

2. That in order to this end it seems to have been the Design of the
Scriptures to represent God in a sensible manner; though at the same time they
take care to assure us that God is in his own Nature a Being of different
Perfections not conceivable by Human Understanding: And is thus represented
only in condescension to our weakness, for the help and assistance of our
Devotion. So that all Expressions of this kind, where God is the Subject, are
to be understood in a higher and more Spiritual sense, but still with some
Analogy to what they properly and usually signify. Thus, to use a common
Instance, when it is said, that God looks down and beholds what is done among the
Children of Men; that he hears the Cries of the Righteous, and the Blasphemies
of the Wicked, it is not to be imagined that he sees as Man sees, that he makes
use of any Organs of Sense; but it is thus expressed to give us more lively
Notions and Impressions of the certainty of God's Universal Knowledge; to
assure us that God more plainly, fully, and infallibly knows whatever is done
in all the Earth, than we are capable of knowing those things which fall within
the reach of our Senses.

This being premised, it seems very plain to me that the Doctrine of the
Trinity is not to be looked upon as a nice abstracted Speculation designed for
the Exercise of our Understandings; but as a plainer Revelation of God's Love
and Good Will toward Men, and a greater Motive and Incitement to Piety than
any we had before this Doctrine was delivered.

Had man stood confirmed in his Original Righteousness, and there had been no
need of Redemption, it is highly probable God had never been considered by Man
in his state of Probation under any such Distinction as is now revealed to us;
And therefore I should think those different Titles and Relations by which God
has been pleased to express that Eternal Distinction in the Godhead to us,
should be chiefly considered by us with reference to the great Work of Man's
Salvation.

Thus far then the Scriptures require us to believe; That the One only Supreme
God upon his foreknowledge of Man's Fall, did from all Eternity Purpose and
Decree to Redeem Mankind into a capacity of Salvation, by the Death and
constant Mediation of a Man chosen and enabled for this Work by the fullness of
the Godhead dwelling in him: And in consideration of his Passion and
Intercession, to impart such Gifts, Graces, and Spiritual Assistances, as would
be sufficient to render this Redemption effectual to the Saving of much People.

And moreover we are to believe that God has accordingly executed this his
Gracious Design toward us: By sending into the World Christ Jesus, the Man who
before he had ordained, should in the Fullness of Time be born, and suffer for
our Sins; in and by whom, as has already been shown, God acted in a wonderful
manner, was worshipped and adored, and acknowledged in all his Attributes; and
with whom he abides in the Fullness of Power and Glory for ever: And, since his
Death and Reception into Heaven, by a plentiful Effusion of Spiritual Graces
and Influences; by which means a great many have embraced the Gospel of Christ,
and become Heirs of Salvation, and more from henceforth to the end of all
things shall daily be added to the Church of God, be supported in the Faith,
and be made Partakers of the purchased Inheritance reserved in Heaven for those
that are Sanctified by the Spirit of God.

Now, with respect to this great Design of Saving Mankind, and the Order and
Method of the Divine Wisdom in the Execution of it; To give us as full and
distinct Apprehensions as our Souls are able to conceive of the Misery of our
sinful Condition, the difficulty of Deliverance, and the unspeakable Mercy of
God in restoring us to the Happiness we had justly forfeited; and to raise our
Souls to the highest pitch of Veneration, Love, and Gratitude we are capable of
expressing for such an inestimable Blessing; God has been pleased to reveal
himself to us under several Personal Characters and Relations: Such as Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; Savior, Mediator, and Comforter. By which Names, and all
other Expressions consequent thereupon, we are directed to consider some such
kind of Distinction, and Subordination of Offices and Relations in God, as the
Terms made use of do commonly import.

Thus when God is pleased to represent his Love to Mankind, in the highest
Image of Nature; that of a Father sacrificing an only well-beloved Son, the
exact Transcript and Resemblance of himself, perfectly Innocent, and Obedient
to his Will in all Things, we are to believe that, by the Sufferings, and Death
of Christ, God has given greater Proofs of his Love toward us than any Man is
capable of doing to another; and that such an Action of an Earthly Parent
suggests the nearest and likest Conception we can possibly frame, of what our
Heavenly Father has done for us; though at the same time we must acknowledge it
comes infinitely short of expressing the Riches and Fullness of his Mercy and
Loving Kindness.

And the same Use and Spiritual Improvement is to be made of all other
Revelations of this nature.

And thus we have seen how far we are capable of conceiving a Trinity, and what
the Scriptures expressly oblige us to believe concerning this Point.

All that is beyond, lies far out of our Reach and Comprehension, and no
particular Explications can add any thing to our Faith; for the Terms made use
of for that End, being in use before this Doctrine was taught, must either
signify the same they did before, or not: If the same, where is the Mystery? If
not, what do they signify? Something that we cannot explain but in Words used
already, and then the Question will return again. The same Difficulty would
attend new Terms invented on purpose; for either they would have no meaning at
all affixed to them, or else they would be understood in the sense of some
other in use before. And therefore, had the very same Terms and Forms of
Expression been found in the Scriptures, as are now in our Creeds, the
Revelation of the Trinity had been no plainer, nor we obliged to believe any
farther than the present Language does import: For upon a fair and distinct
Examination both of Scripture and Reason, it plainly appears, that what is
already revealed amounts to as much as we are capable of conceiving, and does
besides imply something more which we can not comprehend; and it is not in the
Power of Language to make us understand any thing better: For it is utterly
impossible to frame any Notions above our own Level. And should God be pleased
to stamp some new Idea's upon the Minds of Men* they could not be conveyed to
others by the help of Words, or any other Signs, but only by the same Divine
Impressions: so that whatever Idea's the Apostles, and Inspired Writers, might
have of a Trinity by immediate Infusion, the Terms they have made use of can
give us but this imperfect Discovery of them, that they were such as we are not
able to comprehend without the like Assistance.

This then is the utmost we are required to believe, or are capable of
believing, concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, viz. That these Three
different Terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are all applied in Scripture to
the One only supreme God; That all the Actions, Offices, and Relations, which
are in Scripture ascribed to any of these Names, (excepting those proper to the
Humane Nature of Christ) are there plainly attributed, and do truly belong to
one, and the same Divine Nature; That there are such frequent and evident
Assertions of the Unity of God in Scripture, and yet such plain Expressions of
distinction, signified by these Terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as imply a
consistency of unity and distinction in the Godhead.

That this Distinction, whatever it be, is not the same with that we conceive
betwixt the Attributes of God, which are partial Conceptions of his Essence,
nor a mere difference of Name, Office, or Relation, such as is signified by the
like Terms, when applied to Men, (though these are all the Differences we can
expressly conceive, as applicable to the Divine Nature) but some other
Distinction, which we have but a confused perception of, and cannot comprehend
or explain by any particular Idea's; which unknown inexplicable Distinction is
the Foundation of all these Differences expressly conceived by us.

And since the Church has thought fit, for the Sake of Unity and Peace, and for
the Suppressing all Private Disputes and Interpretations, to appoint set Forms
to express this our Faith in, I think the Athanasian Creed as rational an
Explication of the Trinity as can well be made. The Worst that the Enemies of
this Doctrine can say of it, is, That it is an unnecessary Multiplication of
Terms, and too nice an Endeavor to Explain what cannot be Explained; but not
that it is False, or Absurd; nothing being there asserted in any sense
inconsistent with the Unity of God, or the Principles of Right Reason: All such
Meanings and Significations of any Terms or Expressions in that Creed being
very improper, as they are there applied, and utterly disclaimed by the Church
that enjoins the Use of it.

Nor can it be esteemed an unreasonable Imposition, That we should be obliged
to profess our Faith of something which cannot be conceived, but confusedly and
indistinctly; nor expressed, but in general and obscure Terms. For where is the
Hardship of being required to believe as far as we can believe? God is
Incomprehensible in his Nature and Perfections, but are we not obliged to
believe there is a God who is Incomprehensible? Are we not obliged to believe
there are Joys in Heaven, which it has not entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive? And, to repeat a former Instance, may not a Blind Man be obliged to
believe what a Friend of unsuspected Integrity tells him of the general nature
of Color, though he is not able to form a particular Idea of it? And, if these
Things cannot be denied, What difference can be assigned why we should not be
under as great an Obligation of believing the Trinity, though we are not able to
conceive it distinctly?

A Threefold Distinction in the Godhead, consistent with the Unity of God, is
as plainly revealed in Scripture as any other Article of Faith: Nor are those
general Abstracted Terms we find in our Creeds, to be condemned as mere useless
and perplexing Niceties; for though they are not sufficient to make us understand
the Trinity fully and distinctly, yet they are proper Limitations to exclude
all the False and Unworthy Apprehensions of this Doctrine, which Pretenders to
a more particular Explication might introduce.

III. And now what dangerous Consequences can possibly attend such a Faith as
this? It Is true indeed, the Adversaries of the Trinity have drawn up a heavy
Charge against this Doctrine, and taken a great deal of Liberty in their
Discourses about it: But the principal Objections that have been made by any of
them are but Three; to which all the rest may be reduced: And these I shall
endeavor to show, by the Account before given, are very Frivolous and Unjust.

1. The first Pernicious Consequence the Doctrine of the Trinity stands charged
with, is, the Introduction of a Plurality of Gods: But it is very plain from
what we have said in the former part of this Discourse, that it is utterly
impossible to believe a Trinity in any such sense as implies a Plurality of
Gods: For according to the Notions I have there showed we have of the Nature
and Attributes of God, it is undeniably certain to every Man's Experience, that
we cannot conceive more than One God: All our Endeavors to comprehend more are
only repetitions of the same Idea.

Let Those therefore take care to Answer this Accusation, who, under pretense
of giving a more Rational Account of what we are to believe in this Point, set
up created subordinate Gods to be Partners with their Maker in the Glory and
Worship due to him.

Besides, we do explicitly declare, that there is but One God at the same time
we make Profession of our Faith in a Trinity, or Three Persons.

2. In the next place, therefore we are accused of believing Contradictions;
and consequently of destroying all the certainty of Natural Knowledge: Which
Fence being down, there is no Error so gross or absurd but may be obtruded upon
us; and Transubstantiation has as good a Pretense to be an Article of our Faith
as the Trinity. But I need not make any particular Answer to this Objection,
having proved at large already, that we neither do nor can believe a Trinity in
any sense that contradicts the plain and evident Principles of Natural Reason.
We do not believe there can be more Gods than One, that One can be Three in the
same respect it is One; or that One God can be Three Persons in the same sense
three Men are three Persons; or any other Proposition that is inconsistent with
those Natural Notions which are the Foundation of all our other Knowledge. But
the Patrons of Transubstantiation cannot make this Plea, who in this one
Particular deny those very Principles which upon all other occasions they rely
upon with the greatest Assurance. Did they only affirm, that Christ was present
in that Sacrament in some way or manner they could not comprehend, but in no
way repugnant to the plain and necessary Dictates of well-informed Sense, and
right Reason, there might be then some Resemblance found betwixt this Doctrine
and that of the Trinity; but at present the Comparison is palpably and
notoriously unjust.

3. But Thirdly, it is further Objected, That though the Doctrine of the
Trinity, as we explain it, could not be proved to contain downright
Contradictions; yet at least it must be counted and esteemed as a Mystery, and
the Imposition of Mysteries for Articles of Faith, is a thing of very ill
Consequence.

In Answer to which Charge, it is to be observed, that as in the Doctrine of
the Trinity, so in most other Objects of Faith and Knowledge, there is something
that we plainly and certainly understand, and something that we cannot possibly
comprehend: Thus a Man by inward Reflection is Infallibly conscious of his own
Thoughts, and he judges, whatever he perceives within himself, to proceed from
one Common Principle, which he calls his Soul; and which, from the Nature of
its Operations, he is fully persuaded is something of a different kind from his
Body, though it always Acts in consent with it: But what this Soul is, or in what
manner united to his Body, he is not able to conceive; and therefore the
Doctrine of the Human Soul, taken all together, may as justly be styled a
Mystery, as the Trinity. We ought not then to be offended at the word Mystery,
since, if we strictly examine our thoughts, we shall find that almost every
thing we pretend to know, comes under that name, even those things we have the
greatest Assurance of, our very Souls and Beings.

This being observed, we may consider the Trinity either with respect to what
may be understood of it, or what cannot: So far as we are capable of conceiving
a Trinity, it is no Mystery, and consequently no Oppression of our Faith; And so
far as it cannot be comprehended, it does not bind us to any Explicit Act of
Faith: As is plain from what has been said before concerning the Nature of
Faith, and the Persons obliged to believe this Article: For all things
necessary to Salvation are to be believed by all sorts of Men; and nothing can
be believed any farther than the terms in which it is proposed are understood:
But a Mystery cannot be brought down to the lowest Capacities, and be delivered
in Terms that are plainly and distinctly understood, for then it would be no
longer a Mystery: So far therefore as we are obliged to believe, is no Mystery;
For whatever Terms I am bid to believe a thing in I cannot comprehend, I can
mean no more but that I believe it to be in some manner I cannot comprehend:
And I am sure there is no difficulty or danger in believing that there are some
things which we are not able to find out, or comprehend.

These are the Reflections which offered themselves upon a careful and
impartial Consideration of this Subject.

But here I foresee it may be asked, What do we understand more of the Trinity
now than we did before? What new Hypothesis is here advanced to solve all the
Difficulties of that Doctrine by? In Answer to which Objection, I have this
further to add for the Justification of the foregoing Discourse.

First, That the Principal Design of my Enquiries was, to know, what God
required us all to believe in order to our Salvation, not how far the Soul of
Man was capable of discovering the deep things of God: For I am fully
persuaded; that there may be things necessary to be believed, and yet we not
obliged to believe them in that distinct particular sense in which some
Learned. Men have explained them; Though their Hypothesis should be very
Rational and Consistent, and perhaps really true. And therefore could there be
any new way found out of making the Trinity conceivable by Human.
Understanding, I do not think we should be under any Obligation of believing
that particular Exposition of it: For besides the difficulty of such abstracted
Notions, even in their plainest dress, with respect to mean Capacities, which
are all equally concerned in necessary Articles of Faith, it cannot be imagined
that we should be obliged to believe more than the Christians who lived before
us were; that more should be necessary to our Salvation than was to theirs: And
it is certain their Faith was sufficient and effectual for obtaining Eternal
Life, who could not possibly believe what we suppose to be but lately
discovered.

But 2dly, Considering that we were permitted with Humility and Reverence to
Exercise our Souls in the search of Divine Knowledge; And moreover that we
ought as Christians, as well as Men, to give a Reason of the Faith we profess,
and defend it against all false and unjust Imputations; I have also made it my
business to enquire, how far we were capable of forming distinct Conceptions of
a Trinity; And upon Enquiry found that after a Faithful Trial of our Faculties,
and a strict Examination of all the simple Notions which make up the
Proposition to believed, we cannot arrive at greater Knowledge in this Point
than our forefathers have done; And that so much of the Doctrine of the
Trinity as was a Mystery to them, is like to be so to the end of the World.

Which if I have as fully and sufficiently proved to others as I am convinced
of it my self, I shall not think my Time or Labor lost upon this Subject. For
next to understanding a thing thoroughly is to know we cannot understand it;
next to resolving a Problem in Mathematics, is to demonstrate it cannot be
done. Our Souls are as much at rest, our Desires as quiet, and all our Designs
and Pursuits as much at an end when we despair of Victory, as when we actually
Conquer.

And therefore if these be the true and proper Limits of our Faith and
Knowledge which I have assigned; If I have given a Just Account of what we are
required to believe concerning the Trinity; How much it is possible for us to
believe of it, and how far we are capable of having distinct Conceptions about
it; it is in vain to search for new Notions and Hypotheses, which may probably
puzzle or deceive our Understandings, but can never lead us farther into the
Knowledge of the Trinity.

But I will not pretend to measure the Abilities of other Men by my own: I
shall only say this more, which I am sure I can truly affirm, that I have taken
all the care imaginable to deliver my Judgment impartially and sincerely, and
have not dared to impose any thing upon others, which I do not believe my self,
or is any ways inconsistent with the Principles of right Reason.

POSTSCRIPT.
These Papers were in the Press, and every Word in the Book, and Preface, as
they stand now, was Written before His Majesty's Injunctions came forth: The
Author is glad to find that he has not transgressed 'em; the Authority and
Reasonableness of which he pays such a Submission to, that if he had not
prescribed to himself the same Rules in Writing, that be now sees enjoined by
his Superiors, he would have showed his Obedience to 'em, by Suppressing what
he had written.

FINIS.

