OIDA SOY TA EPGA. Or, The Divine Foreknowledge of our Blessed Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, Displayed in his Epistles to the Churches. Wherein is
showed (in way of Paraphrase, and Notes,) That the said Epistles are a Prophecy
of the Church of Rome, from the Beginning to the Reformation.
By W.G.
Numb. 3.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods,
Esaias. XLI. 23.
PREFACE.
I Have brought such Clear Evidence in my Last Paper, That the Epistles are
Mystically to be Understood; and shown such Fair Probability, That, though they
speak, ad Literam, of the Churches of Asia, yet in Truth they are to be
expounded of the Church of Rome; that I presume, it may now be expected, I
should Proceed to the Interpretation of them, which if I can make good from
that Hypothesis, I shall leave but little needful to be offered further in its
behalf. Especially since it is so well known already, That this Prophecy calls
almost no Place or Person it predicts of, by its Proper Name; and so
Universally agreed on, from the XVII. Chapter, That Rome (its Church, and
Empire) are the Main Subject of the Revelation. For if Rome be not the Subject
of the Epistles too, but Ephesus, etc. as the Letter bears in hand; I should
think it altogether as Difficult an Undertaking, to bring them Fairly to the
Church of Rome (which yet I hope, by God's Assistance, Unexceptionably to do;)
as to interpret so many Verses together, in S. Paul 's Epistle to the Romans,
as if it were a Prophecy of the Church of Ephesus, etc. or of some other of the
most Noted Churches. Which when I see performed according to the Genuine and
Received Rules of Interpretation; I shall then begin to think my Pains but ill
bestowed; and all that I have done in Prophecy, confuted with a Witness. Till
then, Good Christian Reader, I commend to thy perusal, the following Exposition
of our LORD's Epistles; and hope, that by His Blessing, thou will find it to be
a very Serious and Solid thing; and tending much to the Advancing of our
Savior's Honor; the Confirming of his Gospel; and the Edifying of his Church,
in Faith, and Piety, and all Christian Virtues. Which HE vouchsafe, may be the
Effect of it. The Exposition therefore take, as follows.

REV. II.
1. Unto the Angel (Rulers, and Inspectors, together with the other Faithful)
of the Church of Ephesus, ( i. e. of Rome, till An. 65.) write, These things
says He, that holds the Seven Stars (the Ministers; and, with them, his
Other Faithful,) in his Right Hand, Supporting them with the Credit of
Miracles; who, by his Ministers, Peter, and Paul, walks (in an Unsettled
Condition) in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, the Churches.

2. I know thy Works (at any Distance of Time, or Place) (...) even thy Labor,
in Teaching, and Journeying; and thy Patience, in Enduring all things for the
Elects sake, 2 Timothy II, 10. and how thou can not Bear them which are Evil,
putting the Scandalous, and Incorrigible out of the Church, 1 Cor. V. and (for
as far as thy Power extends) Stopping the Mouths of Seducers, Tit. I, 11. And
thou have tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found
them Liars, False Apostles, and Deceitful Workers, etc. 2 Cor. XI. 13.

3. And have born, and have Patience, worthy a Second Mention; as there are
also Two of you, ( viz. Peter, and Paul,) Eminently concerned in the Character;
and for My Names sake have Labored, and have not Fainted; but though thy Outward
Man decays, yet thy Inward Man is Renewed day by day, 2 Cor. IV. 1, 16.

4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, O Church of Rome, even in this
Interval: because thou have Left thy First Love, being engaged in Hot
Contentions about Small Matters; and walk not Charitably, as at first thou
did, Romans XIV. 1, 2, 15.

5. Remember therefore from whence thou art Fallen, and Repent, and do thy First
Works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, by my Servants, your Emperors,
Romans XIII. 4. and will Remove thy Candlestick out of its Place, putting a
Sudden End to this your Interval of Tranquillity, signified by the First
Candlestick; and will bring the Smyrnean one upon the Stage, which shall be a
Time of great Affliction; Except thou Repent, and so Prevent the Impending
Judgment. NOTES. From hence it was, as is probable, That S. John, in his
Epistles, insists so very much upon Charity, viz. because he had learnt from
this Vision, How Fatal the contrary Practice had proved to the Church.

6. But this thou have (and it is very Observable in thee; as not being found
in any other Interval of the Church of Rome,) That thou Hate the Deeds, and
Doctrine, of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate; who, under Pretense that
Marriage is Unbecoming a Churchman, Inhibit such from having Wives; and teach
them to set aside those they have; which will prove a Corrupt Fountain of many
Hateful Enormities. But Thou accountest Marriage to be Honorable in All Men,
Heb. XIII. 4. My Servant Peter is a Married man, 1 Cor. IX. 5. and Paul, a
Recommender of Marriage, even to Bishops, 1 Timothy III. 2. Tit. I. 6. NOTES.
Because no other Church is Commended for Hating the Deeds of the Nicolaitans,
but only Ephesus; it is manifest, that None of the others did Hate them: and
consequently, that by the Deeds of the Nicolaitans, which Ephesus is Commended
for Hating, are meant, Not the Abominations of the Nicolaitan Heretics, which
all the World cries Shame of, and much more all Christian Churches; (the Hating
of which therefore, would be no such Commendation to the Church of Ephesus:)
but, That fact of Nicolas himself, (with other like) which gave Occasion to
them; who, being a Churchman, parted with his Wife, upon the account of
Mortification, and Self-denial; (...), because we ought to Abuse the Flesh,
that is, Fight against it, and not allow it any thing for Pleasure. So Dr.
Hammond upon the place, out of Clemens Alexandrinus, and Irenaeus But, alas!
this Fair Pretense has been the Source of Manisold Impurities; as in the
Nicolaitans, so also in the Church of Rome. See an Account of the Corruption of
the Church of Rome in this kind, in a Book entitled, Le Cabinet du Roy de
France; Dedicated to Henry the Third.

7. He that has an Ear, that is Capable, and Desirous, of Understanding these
Epistles; let him hear with good Attention, what the Spirit says unto the
Churches. For it is Spiritually to be understood, and not as the Bare Letter
sounds. To him that Overcomes, (for ye are Now engaged in Warfare, against the
Enemies of your Faith) will I, for his Faithful Preaching, and Bearing the Tree
of my Cross, Gal. III. 13. 1 Pet. II. 24. give to Eat of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, making him Partaker of my
everlasting Kingdom. To Each Individual person, in the Life to come; but to the
Church, at the Reformation also, Rev. XXII. 2.

8. And unto the Angel of the Church of Smyrna (from An. 65. to about 310.)
whose Bishops, about 30 in number, had almost All of them the Honor of
Martyrdom; Write, These things says the First and the Last; which was Dead,
and is Alive; who is Present with you in All your Sufferings, and has left you
an Example, that ye should follow his Steps, 1 Pet. II. 21. that after
Suffering ye may Live, and Reign with him, 2 Timothy II. 12. Rev XX. 4.

9. I know thy Works, and Tribulation, and Poverty, ( but thou art Rich, 2 Cor.
VI. 10.) And I know the Blasphemy, and Haughty Carriage, 2 King. XIX. 6, 22. of
them, viz. P. Victor, (195) and P. Stephanus, (250) against the other Churches;
who say they are Jews, and are not; but, in this Aspiring humor, are the very
Synagogue of Satan; and under pretense of greater Purity in Religion, and
Discipline, are indeed but Preparing the way for that Wicked one, whose Coming
is after the working of Satan, etc. 2 Thessalonians. II. 9. NOTES. It will be here
Objected, That P. Victor, and P. Stephen, were Martyrs; and How then are they
said to be of the Synagogue of Satan? Answ. For the same reason, that S. Peter
himself is called Satan by our Blessed Savior, Mat. XVI. 23. whose True
Successors the Popes have been; both as a Saint, and much more as Satan.

10. But why art thou Afraid, O P. Marcellinus! (304.) Fear none of those
things, which THOU shall suffer, but take heart again. Behold, the Devil ( i.e.
your Accusers) shall cast (...), some of you, as P. Marcellus (309,) and many
others of your Way, both in Rome, and elsewhere, into Prison; not for your
Hurt, but Only that ye may be Tried; and YE shall have Tribulation ten days,
ten Times (or Paroxysms) of Persecution; and the Last, and most Observable of
All, shall be (among you, (...), and your Brethren) of Ten Years Continuance.
Be thou Faithful, O Church of Smyrna, unto death, and I will give thee a Crown
of Life; I will set the Imperial Crown, (the Arbiter of Life and Death among
you, Dan. V. 19.) upon the head of Constantine (310) your Fellow-Christian.
NOTES. We are not to wonder, that among all the Persecutions, the Tenth only is
here Reflected on, (it being That, that Marcellinus, and Marcellus suffered
in:) but we must take good Notice, that in All Prophetic Descriptions of
things, the Characters are borrowed from the most Observable of the kind, as
was in this case, the Tenth Persecution. Examples are innumerable. I only here
observe, That hence it is, that in setting forth the Fates of the Church
before, and since the Reformation (to avoid also that Confusion, which must
needs arise from Describing a Multitude of Churches together) the Characters
are Drawn from the most Eminent Churches; to wit, the Church of Rome among the
Primitive; and that of England among the Reformed Churches. And we must here
Note also, That the Persons in this Verse spoken to, are somewhat varied. It
begins THOU, and ends THOU: but in the middle it is (...), and YE. Implying
that the Ten Years Tribulation (or Persecution) is here considered as lighting
not only on the Romans, but on other Churches likewise.

11. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
He that Overcomes, laying down his Life for my sake, if he be Called thereto;
shall not be hurt of the Second Death, Rev. XX. 14.

12. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos, (310) Write, These things
says he, which has the Sharp Sword, with two Edges, the Temporal Sword being
now joined with the Spiritual.

13. I know thy Works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's Seat is; it
being manifest by the Eagerness of all your Bishops, in Grasping at Supremacy;
that the Adversary that Opposes, and Exalts himself, 2 Thessalonians. II. has taken
Possession of the Sea of Rome: and yet thou hold fast my Name, art Zealous
for my Honor; and have not denied (but stood up stoutly for) MY Faith; the
Faith that my Name and Honor are so nearly interested in, viz. the Belief of
my Divinity; no, not even in those days of the Arrian Emp. Constantius (355)
wherein Antipas [ i. e. your Vice-Pope Felix] was my Faithful Martyr, or
Witness of my Faith aforesaid; who, for that Cause, was Slain Politically, i.
e. Deposed from his Government, among you, where Satan dwells. NOTES. It is
well known, that the Church of Rome assign this Felix a Day in their Calendar,
as a Martyr, in the strictest sense. For which see Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 4.
c. 9. But however, Bishops, in this Prophecy, are called (...) (living
Creatures) Chap. IV. 6. and being Deposed therefore, they are Slain. For which
Political Sense of Slain, see Ezekiel. XXXVII. 9, 10. etc. See also Dr. Hen.
More's Alphabet of Prophetic Iconisms, in the words, Resurrection, and
Slaughter. Compare also Rev. III. 1. The English Reader is also to Observe,
that the Greek word Antipas, is in Our Language, Vice (or Deputy) Pope; as
Felix was. I know it is objected, That this Felix obtained the Popedom by
Perjury; both his Own, and his Electors. As testify Marcellinus, and Faustinus,
(Priests of Rome, and his Cotemporaries) in their Preface to their Libellus
Precum. But then, 1. These Authors were Professed Parties against Damasus, one
of Felix's Electors: and consequently, obliged to make the worst of his, and
Felix's case. 2 They affirm, That Liberius was not Restored, but upon his
consenting to (Arrian) Treachery: and that Constantius had signified as much to
the people of Rome. 3. But that, notwithstanding, the people received Liberius
with Joy: and thrust out Felix out of the City with great Disgrace. And it is
further observable, 4. That they call the People that thus with Joy received
the Arrian, and Disgraced the Orthodox Bishop (for they dare not say, but
Felix, and his Party were Orthodox; nay, they plainly intimate they were; and
that, by the very Oath they are said to have taken; which was done in
Liberius's behalf, while as yet he was a sufferer for the True Faith: they
call, I say, this sort of People) the Multitude of the FAITHFUL; which sounds
to me a great Solecism, and makes me not know what to think of their Charge of
Perjury. Which yet, if it were never so True, would not hinder, but that Felix
might be afterward Christ's Faithful Witness. For it is very hard to judge of
Men's Actions Certainly, as to How they stand in God's Esteem; without knowing
ALL CIRCUMSTANCES: which it is Impossible for Us to know.

14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there in great
Esteem, them that hold a Doctrine like the Doctrine of Baalam, Number. XXV. who
taught Balak to cast a Stumbling Block before the children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication; for your Great Men are
now Employed, in Sophisticating Christianity with an Admistion of Heathenish
Superstitions; hallowing them, and bringing them into the Churches. [ Baron.
an. 44. to 1. art. 86. and passim alibi. Morney Mist. In. Progr. 4.] Which
Custom your Balak Julian (365) takes advantage of; particularly of your Fond
way of doing Honor to your Emperors, by Bowing to their Images; for This, by
setting up his Own, in the company of the gods, he makes a Stumbling Block to
you. For if you Bow to That, you must seem to Worship the gods too. Theod. lib.
3. cap. 16. Symson's Church History, in Julian.

15. So have thou also them in great Esteem, that hold the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, (see ver. 6.) which I hate, both Root and Branch; both Specious
Blossom, and Accursed Fruit.

16. Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, by my Servants, both
Emperors, and Preachers; and will fight against them, that pretend so vainly to
this Voluntary, Uncommanded Continency, with the Two-edged Sword of my mouth.
NOTES. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian, (382) were fain to make a
Law, to inhibit all such as made Profession of Continency, once to set foot
within Widow's Doors, etc. lib. 20. de Episc. and Cler. in Cod. Theodos.
Whereupon S. Jerome (to give the Sword a Spiritual Edge too) inveighs most
Bitterly against the Manners of the Clergy; acknowledging that there was but
too Just Occasion for such a Law. Morney Mist. In. Progr. 6. Hieron. ad
Eustoch. Ep. 22. ad Nepot. 2. It plainly appears (says Morney there) to what
a Looseness and Lewdness about Women, their Wealth had carried them, by those
Reproofs which S. Jerome gives them in his Epistles; wherein he shows, by
what Infamous services they lay at catch for Legacies and Inheritances, etc.
And a little before, out of Jerome; The Clerks, (says Jerome) who in duty should
be an Awe unto them, kiss the Ladies heads, and reaching out their hands, as if
they would bless, receive the Reward of their Salutation, etc. For this his
free speaking (as Morney there observes further) the Clergy of Rome took him
for their Enemy, and forced him to return to Jerusalem, etc. And Paulinus
Bishop of Nola (adds Morney) was for the same cause, served with the same
Sauce; as appears by his first Epistle: where he shows, that he could by no
other means, be safe and free from the Contagions of that City, but by getting
himself away far off from it. Neither does he spare the Bishop of Rome himself:
Thou know (says Paulinus) what loss we suffer of the Grace of God, by the
proud Discretion and Wisdom of the Bishop of that City. Meaning Pope Syricius;
who first established the Forbiddance of Priests Marriages, as Morney notes.
Prog. 8. But all this while Honest Vigilantius was the Man, that made the
Faithfullest Use of the Spiritual Sword; who (with certain Bishops his
Consorts) was a sharp Reprover of the then Growing Superstitions, of Forced
Continency, which he stuck not to call, Libidinis Seminarium;) Veneration of
Sepulcres, and Relics; and Celebration of Vigils, (Wakes, Nocturnal
Conventions) in Honor of Martyrs: all which, he roundly Taxt as Inlets to
Idolatry, and Fornication, (as indeed they afterward Proved;) that is, in
effect, as Balaamitish Inventions, and Stumbling Blocks to God's People. For
which see Hieron. adv. Vigilantium.

17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
To him that Overcomes, instead of the Dainties that your Bishop's Tables now
abound with, I will give to eat of the Hidden Manna, the True Bread, Joh. VI.
whose Goodness is Hid from most in these days; And I will give him a White
Stone, i.e. Absolution and Justification; and in the Stone a New Name written,
or, in plain Terms, I will Reform my Church, which is Now Degenerated; and they
shall be Called Protestants, (and not Catholics,) a Name that shall be
extremely Decryed by the Adverse Party; and which no man knows how to Value,
saving he that Receives it, and is Sincere in his Profession. NOTES. This is
spoken with regard to the Abundance of Councils, Debates, Accusations,
Sentences, and Appeals, etc. in this Interval; Decrees made pro and con;
Acquitting many times the Guilty, and Condemning the Innocent. Thus St. Austin,
with the Church of Carthage was Unjustly Excommunicated by the Popes (424) [See
Morney's Mist. In. Progr. 17.] And P. Sixtus III. wrongfully accused of
Adultery (432.) But to All such persons as are thus treated, though by the
Highest Authority upon Earth, Christ here Promises the White Stone of
Absolution, as Referring to the Cases now mentioned.

18. And unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, (440) Write, These things
says the Son of God, dishonored by your Images, which Represent him as Man
only; and by other Superstitious Usages, as Praying to Saints, and making a
sort of gods of them; who has Eyes like unto a Flame of Fire, burning with
Jealousy, [Compare Ezekiel. VIII. 2, 3, 18.] and his Feet are like unto fine
Brass, his Faithful Servants will rather Choose the Fiery Furnace, than comply
with such Practices. See Notes upon Chap. I. 15.

19. I know thy Works; ((...)) even thy Great Charity, O Emp. Tiberius II.
(577) and thy Notable (...) ( Service, in Preserving the City of Rome from the
Sword of Barbarians, O P. Leo, of a Deacon made Pope, (440.) and thy like
Service, O Pelagius, being then but Deacon, when thou savedst Rome from
Slaughter, by mitigating the Fury of K. Totilas, (542.) [See Procop. Bell.
Goth. lib. 3. c. 11.] and thy Patience, viz. that of the Ambassadors of P.
Hormisda (514) that of P. John I. (523) of P. Sylverius (536) and of P.
Vigilius (537) and thy works, worthy of a Particular Mention, O P. Gregory
(590) viz. thy Humility, in stiling thy self Servus Servorum Dei; and thy Zeal,
in Opposing the Haughty Attempts of John B. of Constantinople, who puts in for
Universal Bishop, and I know the last mentioned Works, to be more than the
First: for, in My Esteem the Humblest are the Highest; and the Last, First,
Luke XIV. 11. XVIII. 14.

20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, O Thyatira; and
particularly against thee, O Emperor Martianus, because thou suffer that
Woman Jezabel, the Church of Rome, by her Ambassadors, presiding in the General
Council of Chalcedon, where thy self art Present (454) which calls her self a
Prophetess, pretending to Apostolic Authority, the very same with Peter's; to
Teach, and to seduce my Servants, throughout thy whole Empire, by Crafty
Insinuations, to commit Spiritual Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed
unto Idols, i. e. to introduce a kind of Heathenish Idolatry. For to what other
purpose is That Saying of the Council's, Act. 11. ( Flavianus post mortem
vivit, Martyr pro nobis oret? (See Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat. lib. 1. c. 19.)
Flavianus, though Dead, is Living still; let the Martyr Pray for us. NOTES. To
this I shall add the words of Morney, Progr. 14. And note withal (says he) to
the end you may discern how their Doctrins crept into the Church together with
their Power, that in this Age, which came to close up the first 500 Years, came
in the Invocation and Adoration of Saints and Martyrs, instead of the gods; the
very Ground-plot of Heathenism, to erect the Building of Christianity upon.

21. And I gave her space to repent of her Fornication, and have not Destroyed
the Church of Rome, as I have Done her Empire (474) but she repented not; but
Superstition, and Pride, and other Vices, increased in her daily.

22. Behold, I will cast her into a Bed; by K. Totilas (542) laying close Siege
to her, that she shall not gad abroad (as she did to Chalcedon) to do mischief;
and them ( viz. the other Churches, both of the East, and West,) that commit
Adultery with her, into great Tribulation; except they repent of their Deeds.
NOTES. These were most Miserable Times, as all Historians witness.

23. And I will kill her children, the Inhabitants of Rome, with Death; K.
Totilas shall make such Waste among them, that for 40 days, or more, Rome shall
have no man in her. [See Marcellin. Com in Chron. And of the mighty Famine
raging at that Siege of Totilas, see Procop. Bell. Goth. lib. 3. c. 9. etc.]
Nay, after 3 years he shall come again, and make a vast Slaughter of the
Citizens, [ Procop. Bell. Goth. lib. 3. c. 19, 20] And I will also Chastise her
with a Violent Pestilence (590) which shall be ushered in by another Siege from
the Lombards. And All the Churches in the World, both of This, and Future
Times, shall know, that I am the True, and Only God, He which searches the
Reins and Hearts. And I will render unto every one of you, according to your
Works. Notes. This mighty Judgment here threatened to ALL CHURCHES, for the
Punishment of their Manifold Superstitions; and Heresies, relating to the
Natures of Christ; and whereby he was Particularly Dishonored, but which were
very Rife in these Days; was that of the Saracens, and Turks, (623.) A
Judgment, which carries its Cause written in its Forehead; and is a Manifest
Reproof of the Churches Idolatries, and Manifold Errors concerning the Trinity,
the Godhead of our Savior, Celibacy, and the like; and (as it is here called)
a Rendering unto them according to their Works. By this Punishment therefore
Christ is said to Search their Hearts; First, because (as it is the Nature of
All Judgments) it put them upon Searching of Themselves. And, our Spirit, we
know, is the Lord's Candle, whereby he searches all the Inward Parts of the
Belly, Prove. XX. 27. Secondly, Because by Judging us, Christ Tries us, whether
we will Reform, or not.

24. But unto you I say, O P. Pelagius (578.) P. Gregory (590.) and P.
Sabinianus (604.) (...) the small Remnant in Thyatira, being the Last Popes of
this Interval; who have not been carried down the Stream of your Predecessors
Ambition: to you, I say, as many as have not this Doctrine I am now to speak of;
((...)) that is, which have not known (or approved) but Condemned utterly, the
Depths of Satan, (as they speak) the Deep Dissimulation of John B. of
Constantinople, who arrogantly assumes the title of Universal Bishop (580.) and
is therefore commonly and rightly styled Satan, the Adversary, the Opposer, and
Exalter of himself, Luciser, the Forerunner of Antichrist. [For which see 2
To. Council. in Decr. Pelag. 2. Also, Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 36, 54 Also, Morn. Mist.
In. Progr. 20, 21.] I will put upon you no greater Burden, as to this Matter:
for I perceive you are not very Easy under it.

25 But that which ye have already, the Decrying of Universal Supremacy, in the
BB. of Constantinople, your selves, or any others, hold fast till I come, to
put an end to this Interval; that ye appear not to Dissemble with me, and to
Beat down the B. of Constantinople, only to Exalt your Selves. NOTES. Hereby
our Savior insinuates, that he Knew they did but Dissemble; as was Plainly
seen a little after, by Gregory's Detestable Flattering of the Emperor Phocas:
of which ( Gregory himself soon after dying) his Successor Boniface III. reapt
the Fruit, in the Title of Univerfal Bishop settled by Phocas upon the Sea of
Rome. See Greg. l. 11. Ep. 36, 44. Morn. Mist. Iniq. Prog. 22.

26. And he that Overcomes, and keeps, my Works (whereof the most
Conspicuous, and Exemplary, was my Humiliation) unto the end, he shall be
highly Dignified. For, to him will I give power over the Nations subject to
Antichrist, Rev. XVII. 15. a Power like that which is now Contended for, by
the Bishops of this Age; and Unjustly Usurped by him of the Eastern Church.

27. And he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, i. e. as my Lawful Vicar, Psalm.
II. 9. as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers, they being
the same that are typed by the Toes of Clay, which the Fifth Monarchy, the
Victor here spoken of, was to break in pieces, and consume, Dan. II. 33, 41,
44. even such Power will I give to the Overcomer a that time, I say, as I
received of my Father; who, as the Reward of my Humbling my self, has given me
a Name above every Name, Phil. II. 9. has allotted me the Heathen for my
Inheritance, and the Utmost parts of the Earth for my Possession, Psalm. II. 8.
Dan. VII. 27.

28. And I gill give him the Morning star, i. e. will put My Honor upon him,
who am the Dayspring from on high, Luke I. 78. the True Morning Star, Rev.
XXII. 16. whose Ensign was that Star in the East, Mat. II. And of the Womb of
the Morning is the Dew of my Birth, Psalm. CX. 3. Whereas he that Usurps my
Power (as does now the Bishop in the East) is a mere Proud Lucifer; an
Instrument of Satan, and an Antichrist. NOTES. Hereby also is insinuated, That
this vast Monarchy should be settled in that Kingdom, that first received
Christ, and was (as it were) the Morning star to bring on the rest. Which is
said to have been England, under her King (remarkably to the purpose we are
speaking of) called LUCIUS. Here is also an Allusion to P. Gregory his sending
to Recover England again from Paganism; in which Enterprise he had Success;
obtaining that Morning Star, and adding it to the Roman Dioecese. According to
that of Dr. Hammond upon the place; It is possible (says he) that the Morning
star here may note some Eminent Prince or Nation, that the Church of Thyatira
should propagate the Faith to. Lastly, This Morning Star may be very fitly also
referred to our K. Charles II. in whom our Church became completely Victorious;
a Prince of ever-happy Memory, Rev. V. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. To which purpose is also
that of Rev. XV. 2, 3. where those words, Great and Mavelous are thy Works,
etc are Eventually Answered by the very same, in our present Service for the
Father's Martyrdom. Now then, as to the Star that appeared upon K. Charles the
Second's Birth day, I shall here give the true Relation of it, in the words of
Dr. Love, late Margaret-Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, in his
Commencement-Speech, An. Dom. 1660.

In illius Natalibus triginta ab hinc annis, Nova eluxit in Coelo Stella, claro
die fulgens, dum solennes de hoe nato sibi Filio gratias Deo Pater Pientissimus
nuncuparet. Cujus rei ipse aderam Oculatus Testis. Quod etiam, in illius
temporis Articulo, non ignobilis Poeta celebravit,

Dum Rex Paulinas accessit gratus ad aras,
Emicuit Medio lucida Stella die.
Postero die Sol ipse Felipsin patitur, Stella (quam dixi) adhuc praesulgente.
Quasi tune indicante, tune spondente Coelo, Patris Eclipsin non obstituram
Splendori Filii.

That is, On his Birthday appeared a New Star, while the Father was giving
thanks to God for the Birth of his Son. Of which I my self was an Eyewitness.
Which also, in that very Moment of time, was celebrated by a Poet of no mean
account;

While grateful Charles to Paul's was on his way,
A Star shone bright in the middle of the day.
The next day the Sun was Eclipsed; the Star, I spoke of, still shining bright.
As though Heaven did then fore-shew, That the Father's Eclipse, should not
obstruct the Splendour of the Son. So Dr. Love. To which we may add, That after
12 Years Exile, He was Restored from the East. And that He, his Brother, and
our present Gracious Sovereign, are those Kings that were to come from the
Rising of the Sun, Rev XVI 12. as will appear more fully, when we come to speak
to the Vials, if God permit.

29. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

REV. III. Sardis.
1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, (606.) Write, These things
says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, (that is, All
the Ministers of the Church, the Instruments and Delegates of the Holy Ghost,)
at his Command; the True Universal Bishop. I know thy works, O P. Boniface III.
(606.) by the Favor of a Parricide mounted at last to your long Desired
Supremacy;) that thou have a Name, that thou live; a Swelling Title of
Universal ((...)) Living-creature, or Bishop (see my Notes on Chap. IV. 6.) So
that the whole Church is now become thy Dioecese; but, with Me, thou art Dead,
and no Bishop at all.

2. Be Watchful [(...)(a Paronomastical Allusion;) be as Gregory, Watchful]
against all Innovations in Faith, or Discipline, O ye Emperors of this
Interval; remembering that Notable Forewarning of P. Gregory's, If there be one
called Universal Bishop, then must the Universal Church go to the ground; if
he, which is called Universal, happen to fall; [ Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 24. Morney
Mist. In. progr. 22.] which Saying is the more observable, for P. Honorius
(624) his falling, so soon upon it, into the Heresy of the Monothelites. And
therefore, O ye Emperors, strengthen the things that remain, the Faith of the
Church, and the Power of the Empire, that are ready to die; that are, through the
Insolency of the Popes, the Fraud of Heretics, and the Fury of the Saracens,
in great danger of being Overborn. For I have not found thy works, O Emp.
Heraclius, (611) Constans, (670) Philippicus, (713) Perfect before God; for,
(which God looks much upon, to whom Ye, though the Greatest of men, must give
account, Psalm. LI. 4.) ye Deny Me to be Perfect God, and Perfect Man; Depriving
Me of One of my Wills; and are justly called by that Name of Imperfection,
Monothelites. Notes. P. Boniface his obtaining the Title of Universal Bishop,
was the Greatest Blow to the Church, that it had yet received. The Popes are
thereupon Discarded, and not looked upon as Bishops any longer; and All is like
to run to Ruin with them. The Spirit expresses it by Death. The Popes are
Dead: the Residue are ready to Die. Which, beside the Moral, has also a Natural
Sense, and Verification. For Gregory, soon after his Base Flattering of Phocas,
Drops. His Successor Sabinian, in 5 months and 19 days (as some say) followed
him. And Boniface (that, as is said, obtained the Prize, the others had been
sueing for) survived his Legitimate Episcopacy scarce 8 months; for he sat
Pope but little more. And his, and Phocas's new acquired Honors, were soon
attended with a Pestilent Air, a Barren Earth, a Frozen Sea, and a General
Mortality of Men, Beasts and Fishes. [ Cedren. in Chron. Morney Mist. In.
Progr. 22.] which the Church is here warned to Prevent, or Redress, by
Watchfulness, and True Repentance. And we may observe yet further, That the
Emp. Phocas, being a Murderer, was Dead also, 1 John III. 15. And he was also
(as Credenus reports) an Heretic; and was slain by Treachery, (Christ came
upon him as a Thief too) as All his Fellows of this Interval were, who suffered
also in like manner. As we shall hear upon Verse

3. Remember therefore how thou have Received, and Heard, and Hold fast, and
Repeut. Or, in the Words of Gregory, Lib. 4. Ep. 36. Obtestor ut constanter,
and sine Praejudicio, servetis sicut Accepistis Ecclesias: I charge you, that
ye Constantly, and Inviolably preserve the Churches, as ye have received them.
(...), If therefore thou will not Watch, and take this Warning from my Servant
Gregory; I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what hour I
will come upon thee; but all you Emperors of this Period, who have been Tardy
in your Duty (of which also the same Gregory has fore-warned you; who brings Me
in, as speaking one day to such as you are, and saying, To you have I committed
my Priests, Lib. 2. Ep. 62 and 65. And again, What will thou Answer before the
Judgment Seat of God, etc. Lib. 2. Ep. 52. and 64.) shall be brought to your
Ends by some sudden Calamity. NOTES. This was verified in them all; but
especially in the Emp. Heraclius; who Perceiving the sudden, and great Increase
of the Dominion of the Saracens, gathered a great Army, and fought against
them; but he was Overcome in Battle, and lost a hundred and fifty thousand of
his Army. And when he Renewed his forces again, to fight against the Saracens,
he found that fifty-two thousand men of his Army Died in One Night Suddenly; as
those Did, who were slain by the Angel of God, in the Army of Sennacherib.
Heraclius was so Discouraged with the Calamity of his Army, that he contracted
Sickness, and Died. [See Symson's Church History; out of whom I have
transcribed this Passage word for word.]

4. However, Thou have a Few Names, or Men of Note, even in this wretched
Interval of Sardis; viz the 150 Fathers of the General Council of
Constantinople (681.) which have not Defiled their Garments (for there is a
Particular Defilement in the Sins of the Flesh, Jude. verse 23.) with that
Really Filthy and Polluted Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, [see Rev. II. 6.] so
highly Espoused by the Popes; but have Condemned it, together with the Papal
Usurpations: and they (not Uselesly immured in Cloisters; nor Trading up and
down to Rome, for the Favors of that Court) shall walk about their business,
with me, as under my particular Care and Direction, in White, My Livery; more
pure in my Account, than those, who by a Feigned Continency, endeavor to
Appear so in the Eye of the World; for they are Worthy of My Service; who have
not Feared, by so Generous, and Open a Profession of the Truth, to Disoblige my
Adversary; though some of them were his Legates in the Council, and in his Name
subscribed the Canons so Distasteful to him. [See Balsamon in Nomocanone. Also
Mist. Iniqu. Progr. 26.]

5. He that Overcomes, the same shall be clothed in White Raiment, (according
as such are Represented, Chap. IV. 4. VII. 9. and in many other Places,) made
White in the Blood of the Lamb, Chap. VII. 14. the White Raiment of
Justification by Faith; which shall be to him instead of Pall, and Frock, the
Modish Garments of this Age: As witness, with respect to the Latter, no less
than three of your Emperors, at this very time, being the End of the Sardian
Interval, viz. Leontius (709.) Artemius (716.) Thrust ino a Monastery; and
Theodosius (717.) Choosing it. And I will not Blot out his Name out of the Book
of Life, as the Pope (714.) is blotting the Emperor Philippicus's out of Divine
Service, and out of Charters [ Paul. Diac. lib. 6. c. 34 Mist. Iniqu. Progr.
27] for Razing of Pictures set up in Churches; but I will confess his Name
before my Father, and before his Angels, let the Pope, or who will, cast out
his Name as Evil. NOTES. The Victor here, (as every where else in these
Epistles) is the Reformer, or the Reformers, of the Church. By whom, the Main
Article of All, insisted on against the Papists, was that of Justification by
Faith. Which is Here promised to the Victor, under the notion of White Raiment;
as Before, of a White Stone, Chap. II. 17. The White Stone alluding to
Absolution, in that Age of Councils: as the White Raiment, to Honor and
Reputation, in this Age of Fond and Superstitious Habits.

6. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

7. And unto the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, (718) Write, These things
says he that is Holy, and extremely offended with the Prodigious Wickedness of
those who will needs be called The Holy Church, in this Interval; he that is
True, an Utter Enemy to those Lying Wonders, whereby they now adays endeavor
to Support their Superstitious Practices; but especially, their Novel Doctrins
of Transubstantiation, and Purgatory: He that has the Key of David; he that
Opens, and no man Shuts; and Shuts, and no man Opens: no, not the
Pope himself, by whom the Emp. Leo Isaurus (718.) and a great many more Crowned
heads, have, in this Interval, been Excommunicated; and (for as much as in him
lay) Deprived of their Governments.

8. I know thy Works; Behold, I have set before thee an Open Door, at which my
People will arrive after this and another Interval, viz. that Door of
Reformation, Chap. III. 20. IV. 1. and no man can Shut it, though the Adversary
shall endeavor it with all his Might. For thou have a little Strength, which I
will Improve to a Perfect Reformation; and have kept my Word ( i. e.
Commandment) forbidding Image Worship, ver. 10. and have not Denied My Name,
nor Complied with my Adversary therein, but have Owned My Authority in despite
of him. See Mist. Iniqu. Progr. 27. about the middle. NOTES. At this Time began
those Great, and Famous Bustles about Saint, as well as Image worship, (as Mr.
Mede has Proved, in his Apostasy of the Latter Times, Part 2. Chap. 5.) made by
several of the Emperors, with the Greatest part of their Bishops, and Peers;
which lasted for about 120 years: although Image Worship bare the Name; as the
said Author observes in the same place.

9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, that Oppose and Exalt
themselves above all that is called God ( which say they are Jews, [with whom
Only, Salvation is to be had, Joh IV. 22. Infallible in All points of Religion,
and are not; but do Ly; a thing That Party is wonderfully addicted to, as was
Foretold of them, 2 Thessalonians. II. 9.) Behold, thou shall be Emp. of Rome, O
Charles, the Captain of my Witnesses against Antichrist, in the Council of
Frankford, (794.) and I will make them of that Party, (the Pope, and His,) to
come and Worship before thy Feet, Adoring thee after the manner of Ancient
Princes; and to know that I have Loved thee, testifying That their Sentiment,
by Saluting thee Unanimously by the Name of Charles Augustus Crowned of God.
[See Ado Vien. in Chron. An. 798. Mist. Iniqu. Progr. 27.] and by Canonizing
thee for a Saint. See Mr. Dorrington's Account of a Journey, etc. p. 252. lin.
33.

10. Because thou have kept the Word of my Patience, the Second Commandment
forbidding Imageworship, the Great Trial of my Patience, and Incentive of my
Jealousy; I also will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, and Great
Affliction, that by the Practices of the Popes; Rebellions of Subjects; and
Hostilities of the Saracens, and other Enemies, are coming on thy Empire; and
shall terminate in many most Expensive, Bloody, Toilsom, and Fruitless
Expeditions into the Holy Land (1099.) like that of the Israelites, in the Day
of Temptation in the Wilderness: Which are the Troubles that shall come upon
All the World, to Try them that Dwell on the Earth, who are Fast Friends to the
Earthly Synagogue of Rome; and to see, whether the Hardships they endure under
the Tyranny of Antichrist, will Open their Eyes to the Acknowledging of the
Truth. NOTES Commandments are called in the Hebrew tongue, Words, Exodus XXXIV.
28. in the Margin. Likewise, Deuteronomy. X. 4. So here, My Word, ver. 8. and the Word
of my Patience, ver. 10. is the Second Commandment: for Violating of which, the
Church of Israel, in their Passage to the Holy Land, were Visited with the Day
of Temptation, Psalm. XCV. to Humble them, and to Prove them, Deuteronomy. VIII. 2, 16.
XXXIII. 8. as the Christian Church is here, with an Hour of Temptation, upon a
like Occasion, and to a like Purpose; and in the Wilderness too, Rev. XII. 6.

11. Behold, I come quickly in Judgment upon the Empire. Hold that fast, which
thou have, O Emp. Ludovicus Pius (815.) viz. The Right, voluntarily Conferred
on Charles thy Father, by P. Adrian I. and P. Leo III. That no man should be
chosen Pope, without the Consent, and Allowance of the Emperor. Which will be a
Good Security for thee, That no man by the Instigation, and Authority of the
Popes at any time take thy Crown, or the Crown of thy Successors; a Practice,
which they will be Continually Tampering with, in this period. NOTES. This may
be referred also to the Rebellion of Bernard, Brother's Son to Ludovicus; the
Undutifulness of his Own Sons; and the Excommunication thundered out against him
by his Bishops. So soon came the Judgments on the Empire, here Denounced; and
from which it scarce had any Respite afterward, in all this Interval.

12. Him that Overcomes, (in this Interval, so Remarkable for the Devotion of
Building of Churches; and Going in Pilgrimages; the Boldness of Excommunicating
and Deposing Emperors; and the Policy of Employing them in Foreign Expeditions)
will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, the Reformed Church, (whose Door
is that that I said, ver. 8. was set Open before thee) and he shall go no more
out, as Excommunicated, or as sent on Errands by the Pope; And I will write
upon him the Name of my God, (whose Only Servant he shall be, and not the
Pope's;) and the Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which
comes down out of Heaven from my God; he shall be a Member of the Church, by a
wonderful Providence of my God, Reformed from the Corruptions, that it is at
present Overspread with; and I will write upon him My New Name, Protestant, (or
Professed, and Open Opposer of the Papal Usurpations.) NOTES. This verse, we
see, is the Close of this Interval; at which very Time there happened a Notable
Difference between the Emperor Frederic I. and the Millanese; who having newly
Rebuilt their City, would needs, (in Contempt of their Liege Lord the Emperor,
and in Honor of Pope Alexander, his Open Enemy,) call their City by the Name
of Alexandria. But the Emperor with much ado, by Force of arms, and solemn
Capitulation with the Citizens, obtained at length to have it called Caesaria.
To which Contention there is a very manifest Allusion in the verse we are upon,
that cannot miss our Observation. [See Sigon. lib. 14. de Regn. Ital. Mist. In.
Progr. 49.] We are here to note once for all, That God always Dispenses
Rewards, and Punishments, not only Equally, and Justly, with respect to our
Merits; but Fitly also, and Discreetly, with regard to our Circumstances. As,
the Proud shall be Debased; and the Humble, Exalted; and the like. Examples are
Infinite. For which reason, as you may Observe all a long, I have thought my
self Obliged to expound the Rewards of each Interval, with an Eye to the Chief
things that were Transacted in it.

13. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

14. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, (1200.) Write, These
things says the Amen (2 Cor. I. 20.) The Only Infallible Guide; The Faithful
and True Witnes's of the Will and Word of God; which is now, in this Interval
of Learning, about to break forth with great Luster, and Convinciveness; who
does not turn all Religion into a Multitude of Empty Questions, Argued pro and
con, as is the Fashion of the Schools, who Abuse their Talent: but
Peremptorily, and without Fear, or Favor, or any other partial Affection,
declares the Truth; and, in the persons of his Servants, (as Once in his Own,)
is now about to Seal his Testimony with his Blood. Who is also The Beginning of
the Creation of God, that is, the Reformation of the Church, Rev. IV. 11. which
by his Special Favor shall Commence in this Interval.

15. I know thy Works; That thou art neither Hot, nor Cold; neither so Zealous
for Religion, as to Reform it thy Self; nor so Regardless of it, as Quietly to
permit Others to do it for thee. I would thou were Cold, and would suffer
Others to Promote a Reformation; or Hot, and would set thy Self to work about
it. NOTES. This Luke warmness may also be applied to that Indifference in
Religion, which was Visible in the Schoolmen's way of Teaching it; who indeed
would Hotly Canvass every Punctilio, but with Equal Zeal for Both sides of the
Cause; and rather in the way of Fencing, than of Fighting for the Truth. And
the People too (instead of being Roundly dealt with to Amend their Lives, and
Forsake their Errors,) were only Nestled in their Sins by Pardons and
Indulgences; and Principled to Believe as the Church believes, without
Examining whether Right, or Wrong; or, perhaps, so much as knowing what the
Church Believed. But then, in this way, these words, [ I would thou were Cold,
or Hot,] will want a Convenient Sense. For, I would thou were Less than
Indifferent, (or no Christian at all,) which seems to be Imported by the Cold
Extreme of that sort of Lukewarmness, would sound very Harsh. For it is one
thing to say with S. Peter, It had been Better for them not to have known the
Truth, etc. which seems to be only a more Emphatical way of Exhorting to
Obedience; and another, to Wish they did not know it. Dr. Hammond is caught in
such a Net; and therefore leaves this Passage to expound it self.

16. So then, because thou art Lukewarm, and neither Cold, nor Hot, wilt
neither Suffer Others to Reform Abuses, nor Do it Thy self: I will even Spew
thee out of my Mouth, and will Raise up a Generation in thystead, that by their
Pious and Zealous Instructing of my People in My Name, shall make Thy ways to
appear Nauseous and Loathsome to them. The times of Ignorance in the two former
Intervals I winked at; but your Rebelling against the Clear Light of This, I
cannot away with. NOTES. This is that Cutting off, that S. Paul denounces
against the Church of Rome, if they Continued not in God's Goodness, Romans XI.
22.

17. Because thou, O P. Boniface VIII. (1295.) say, I am Rich, and Increased
with Goods, Spiritual, and Temporal; and have need of nothing; insomuch that
thou have now set up a Fair, or Market, which thou call a Jubilee, for the
Vending of thy Wares; and Know not, (but I will make thee to know, by the
Contempt that I will pour upon thee) that thou art Wretched, and Miserable, and
Poor, and Blind, and Naked; NOTES. He was Chastis'd for his Insolent Boasting
at the Opening of the Jubilee (for he was the Author of it in Rome) with being
Spoiled of All his Rich Treasures, and himself put upon a wanton Colt, with his
Face toward the Tail, and made a Ridiculous Spectacle to all the People. Soon
after which, he Died of Displeasure, that he had Lost his Riches, and Sustained
so great Shame. This is he, of whom it was truly said, That he Entered as a Fox,
Lived as a Lion, and Died as a Dog. [ Symson Eccles. Hist. in Boniface VIII.]
Where also he tells us, how in Solemnizing his Jubilee, he showed himself the
first day in his Pontifical Garments, with S. Peter's Keys carried about him;
but the second day, in Royal Apparel, with a Naked Sword carried before him;
and an Herald proclaiming, Ecce Potestas Utriusque Gladii. So Rich and
Self-sufficient is Vain Man apt to think himself; even when he is indeed but
((...), insigniter Aerumnosus,) most notably Miserable, and Poor, and Blind,
and Naked.

18. I counsel thee therefore, O Church of Laodicea, not to lay out your. Money
for that which does not Profit; but to Buy of Me Gold tried in the Fire, the
Truth and Purity of My Religion, as it is now begun to be Preached up by my
Servants with a Full Cry; whom Antichrist, as many as he can lay hands on,
will cause to be Burnt for their pains: Buy this, I say, of me, without Money
and without Price, that thou may be Truly Rich; and Buy of Me White Raiment
also, the Robe of My Righteousness, or of Justification by My Merits only, Rev.
VII. 14. [the Leading Article of the Reformation;] and trust not to
Indulgences, the Pope's False Wares, that thou may be Clothed indeed, and
that the Shame of thy Nakedness do not appear; and Anoint thine Eyes with
Eye Salve, compounded of Ingredients gathered from My Word (the True Judge of
Controversies) and not from Aristotle's Writings, and Decrees of Popes (as the
Mode of the School-Doctors is in these days) that thou may see thy Own Way,
and not suffer thy self to be led Blindfold by Blind Guides. Notes. That the
Faith Persecuted, is compared to Gold Tried in the Fire, see 1 Pet. I. 7. And
that Burning the Professors Alive, was the Usual Way of Trying the Faith at
this time, see Morn. Mist. In. Progr. 50. Sect. ult. From this time forth,
(says he, speaking to An. 1215.) nothing is more frequent than Burning, etc.
Where also he tells us (out of Trithemius, and Godfrey,) of one Conrade, an
Apostolic Inquisitor, who was wont to prove Heretics, by the touching of red
hot Irons.

19. And be not Offended at the Barbarous Usage, that my Servants meet with
from their Adversaries; for they are My Particular Care for all that. For, As
many as I Love, I Rebuke, and Chasten; be Zealous therefore for the Truth, though
persecuted; and Repent of thy Errors, giving Glory to God.

20. Behold, The time of Chastening is now over, Queen Mary of England is
withdrawn (1558.) and Queen Elizabeth entered upon the Stage; under whose
Auspices, by my Servants and Ministers, etc. I stand at the Door, and Knock;
proposing in Parliament to have it set Open to a Through Reformation. For
Encouragement whereunto, I Declare, That If any one hear my Voice, and Open the
Door, I will come in to him, and will Sup with him, by my Church in general;
which, with his Wealth, Power, and Interest, he shall constantly Defend: by my
Ministers in Particular, whom he shall Handsomely Maintain: and by My Poor
Brethren ( Mat. XXV. 40.) whom he shall Bountifully Relieve. And, upon these
Conditions, he shall Sup with Me; I am Content he should enjoy those My
Revenues, that Reverted into My Hands, upon the Dissolution of Popish Covents.
NOTES. When God destroys an Impenitent People; his Giving the Spoil to the
Victor, is Commonly called God's Supper, Feast, Sacrifice, and the like. Of
which, the following Instances are Undeniable; which we have, Rev. XIX. 17, 18.
Ezekiel. XXXIX. 17, 18, 19, 20. Esaias. XXV. 6. XXXIV 6. Jer. XLVI. 10. Zeph. I. 7,
8. Such therefore (Doubtless) is the Supper, that Christ here promises the
Victor, upon his Bringing in the Reformation: (...), If Any one, (be he of the
Clergy, or Laity) shall give Admission to My Gospel; he has My Consent, upon
the Terms aforesaid, to come in for a Share in the Revenues of Demolisht
Abbeys, and all other such Evacuated places. And the like is to be understood
to hold good in All other Kingdoms and States, that either have already, or
shall hereafter Open to Christ. And This, with all due Submission to Better
Judgments, and greater Authorities, I take to be the Meaning of this Passage.

21. To him that Overcomes, will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne, as My
Vicar on Earth; Supreme in Spirituals and Temporals; who am King of Saints,
Rev. XV. 3. and King of Kings, Rev. XVII. 14. even as I also Overcame, and am
set down with my Father in His Throne, having All Power in Heaven and Earth
conferred upon me: according to the Representation made of it in the Next
Chapter, where the Victor is seated on a Throne, as Head of the Church under
Christ. For which I must refer the Reader to my Latin Exposition of that
Chapter.

22. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
NOTES. It is time now to Observe, That in the Beginning of Every Epistle, it
is, Thus Says Christ: and the End as Constantly insinuates, that it is the
Spirit that Says it. Whereby is manifestly Implied; that (not only What One
Says, the Other Agrees to; but that) the One's Saying, is the Other's Saying.
To say, Thus Says Christ; or, Thus Says the Spirit; is All one. They are
Different Speakers, that is, Persons; as is Plain from Other Scriptures. But
the Thing Spoken, is the Saying of them Both, or of Either, Indifferently: as
Proceeding from the Same Mind, or Intellect: that is, from the Same Essence, or
Substance of Divinity.

The Conclusion.
And thus, through the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, I have given such an
Exposition of this Admirable Prophecy, as no man, that Allows of any Mere
Rational Interpretation of the Writings of the Prophets, can Fairly Disallow
of: and therefore it is True. As I am ready, by the like Assistance of the
Divine Grace, to Defend against any man, that shall call it in Question. And,
by a Mere Rational Interpretation, I mean Such a one, as has no other
Foundation, than Scripture, Managed, and Applied by Reason; in Opposition to
such Interpretations, as are Supported by the Authority of Interpreters
recommended by Miracles, and Supernatural Evidences. Now therefore (for a close
of All;) From the Exposition here Offered, let any one Judge, Whether it was
not with very good Reason, That, in the Front of Each Epistle, our Savior has
made so Solemn a Declaration, of his KNOWLEDGE of the Churches Works.

FINIS.
(...).
OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Jan. 1 699/1709.


