A SERMON Preached upon the first occasion AFTER THE DEATH OF HIS GRACE JOHN
Duke of LAVDERDALE, IN THE Chapel at Ham.

By JOHN GASKARTH, his late Graces Chaplain, and Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in
Cambridge.

I have said ye are Gods. (...). Greg. Nazian. (...). Phil. LONDON, Printed
for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

TO HER GRACE ELIZABETH DUCHESS OF LAUDERDALE.
Madam,
THIS Sermon being Preached in your Graces Audience, upon that common occasion
of grief that affected us all, and several Persons of Honor and Quality that
then heard it, urging me to make it thus public; I thought it would be at
least a very proper Presumption, humbly to offer, and Dedicate it to your
Grace; your Grace being so related both to the great Subject, and the unworthy
Composer of it, who indeed should have been more considerable, and
proportionate to such an Argument, as very rarely happens, and is the Work of
many Ages to produce. However it has had that civility in its rudeness of
addressing to your Grace, that it has intermitted a little, till time had
something moderated a very intense Mourning, and rendered your Grace more
capable of considering in general, and especially of perusing a Discourse of
this nature. If this can please your Grace when it appears upon Ink and Paper;
as well as it once did when 'twas spoken, I may boldly venture it into the
World; and have no Apprehension what the most Critical Observer can say against
it. As to that part of it which is proper, it being such manifest truth, as
your Grace can best testify, is not capable of any censure, unless it be
because it is naked truth without due clothing, or Ornament: But this I hope
will be an advantage to it, and make it more authentickly accepted, that it
addresses directly to the Understanding, and not by the mediation of Fancy,
which so misrepresents things according to the fine Words and Dresses in which
they are objected to it. Madam, what I shall add more, is only to recommend you
most heartily to the Care and Blessing of God Almighty, which shall ever be the
constant expression of that Duty that is owing to your Grace, by your Graces

Most Faithful Servant JOHN GASKARTH.

The Preface to the Reader.
MY Lord Duke of Lauderdale dying at Tunbridge wells, on St. Bartholomew's day
1682. his Body after embalming was brought to his own Chapel at Ham, where it
remained for some considerable Time privately: the State of that sad Solemnity
being reserved for another Place. At length, after several Weeks it was
conveyed by Sea into Scotland, his Graces native Country, to be deposited in a
* Called Lauder Church, where is the Mansion House, and Seat of the Family, and
from whence the Title.
Church of his own erecting: After which, against our next convening in that
wonted place of worship, I thought 'twas no more than a necessary Observance
both to the dead, and living, to prepare something that might answer such a
Circumstance. Accordingly I composed this Discourse, that I now present to
thee, and the time of our first assembling there, being on a Sunday, I then
preached it; and although it had not all the external Formalities of a Funeral
Sermon, yet as to the Matter, and Design of it, it was so: and I believe the
very being in that Place, and Service, where he always was such a constant
Attendant, and then observing his Seat empty, without the perpetual Ornament of
it at such times, was a sight as affecting to any of his Acquaintance, as if
they had had the outside of a Coffin to contemplate before them, especially
when from its late Removal thence their Fancy might easily restore that Want,
and represent it to them, and indeed, could scarce prevent, if they had been
most industrious in it, the doing so. But although this be a sufficient Reason to
justify a Funeral Sermon at a distance; that which more forcibly determined my
Thoughts this way was my deserved honor to this great Person, that while
Particulars were fresh, and ready, I might raise up a Pillar or Monument of him
in my Mind, which might preserve his Memory against the Deluge, or destroying
Nature of Aftertimes: I speak in respect of my self, let my life last as long
as it will; that it should compass this effect upon others I dare not presume.
Indeed that there should be some standing History of such a Person, that would
so completely furnish, and so well deserves one, is very requisite; and I wish
a better, and more knowing Relator of him to that purpose. The things here
mentioned are only such as concern the goodness and probity of his Disposition,
and does not declare the particular Instances of it, how he exerted it into
Action in all the Branches of his public Affairs, which would make up a just
Volume, and which may boldly offer themselves to the Judgment of all serious,
and Honest Men; yet in order to make some advance toward such an effect, this
I shall say for the present Composure in the extent of it, what soever opinions
it may meet withal, that it is done in great Sincerity, is only Truth for
Truths suke; and not any Dictate, or Influence of any secular Advantage: the
Topics that I have insisted upon, were my own repeated Observation, and were
farther confirmed to me by the Learned D. Hicks my Predecessor in the Happiness
of Living with his Grace, and who enjoyed it longer then I did. And I am
certain what I have said of this Subject will be most readily assented to by
all that had any true knowledge of him, and let those consider, who merely upon
the suspicious Report of Fame, that is always prejudiced to great Men, censure
him, and knew him not, kow unreasonable they are; and whether they do as they
would be done by. All that I can think of such Persons, is, that they are
perfect Heathens, they want the Gospel Charity, which in Truth is the
distinguishing Note, and the Whole of our Religion, and so persecute the
Christians as they used to do.

That this comes forth so late, at such a distance from the occasion of it
besides several impediments, that I could tell thee of, one of which hinted in
the Dedication, thou art chiefly to blame a Country Life, if thou think fit
to blame any thing upon that account, which was in some remoteness from the
Press.

Farewell.
A SERMON PREACHED AT HAM, Upon the first Occasion after the Death of The Lord
Duke of Lauderdale.
PSALM 82. ver. 6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and ye are all the Children of
the Most High. But, ye shall Die like Men.


THIS Psalm is an Advice to Princes, those that are placed in the Magistracy
and Government of the People, that they have a Special Care to be Just and
Righteous in their high Commissions; that they make Truth and Equity the sole
measure of all their Actions, and only respect the Merit of things, and not the
Persons that are concerned in them; that they deal impartially among the People
without any sinister design, or bias upon them, and neither favor the great
Ones for fear of their greatness, nor crush and oppress the mean Man because he
can make no resistance against them; but that they administer true Judgment and
see that Right prevail, and determine in all Cases, without any regard or
prejudice to Persons, That they defend the Poor and Fatherless, do Justice to
the afflicted and needy, and deliver them from the hand of the wicked, ver. 3,
4. And this Important Counsel is founded upon two Reasons.

First, Because God himself supervises over them, and inspects into all their
Management. God stands in the Congregation of Princes, He is a Judge among
Gods, ver. 1. And what a terrible reflection is it to consider, that the
Righteous Judge of all the World, a Being of that invariable Justice, that
cannot endure the least Iniquity, and one that is so mighty to punish all those
that are Guilty of it, that he looks upon all their Proceedings, and can when
he pleases, if they be not such as answers the Rectitude of his Nature, exact
Vengeance upon the unjust Deputies of his Sovereign Power and Authority in this
lower World? This is the first Motive that he sets down for Princes to observe
Justice.

The second is, That this Rule and Eminency of theirs is but a short-lived
thing, they can have no lasting enjoyment of it, all this State and Greatness
cannot secure them from the Common condition of Men, but they must submit to
the irreversable Decree of Humane Nature, and die, and lie down in the Dust in
the same manner with their meanest Brethren.

And therefore what folly is it ever to be transported with worldly glory, to
be proud and lofty upon this false occasion, to make this a ground of
triumphing and Lording it over others, which lasts but for a moment, and then
leaves us undistinguished in the common Mass and Circumstance of Mankind?

I have said ye are Gods, etc. From which Words we shall discourse of these
Particulars.

First, To give the Reason of their being styled by this Name.

Secondly, From hence to show the manner and Platform of their Government, how
they ought to deport themselves in the management of it.

And Lastly, from these words, That they must die like Men, we shall deduce
some Inferences relating to our own Practice.

And First, To give the Reason of their being styled by this Name of Gods, and
this may be first, because of their Power in general. Dan. 5.19. For Majesty is
given them, that the People should tremble and fear before them; whom they will
they slay, and whom they will they keep alive; whom they will they set up, and
whom they will they put down; which is true in some degree of all Princes and
Governors whatsoever.

But then Secondly and principally, the Reason of their being styled by this
Name, is, because their power has this particular respect in it, that it is
derived from God, they have a Beam of Supreme Majesty reflected upon them: God
is the true Fountain of all Rule and Dominion, and the exercise thereof does
solely belong to his own self; all other Beings of what degree and order
soever, whether Angels or Men are his Creatures, and the work of his hands;
upon which Relation, he has an absolute Right to govern and dispose of them as
he pleases; He may do what he will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what
do thou? Dan. 4.35. But there is no Sovereign Power in Man, but only what is
communicated from God. Indeed Men are so equal both by their Nature, and in
their Original; that there is nothing in any of them to found an Authority upon
over their Brethren. The larger Gifts of Mind and Fortune can give no
sufficient title to Sovereignty; indeed, great Parts and Wisdom do dispose one
for high Places and Government, but they do not actually entail it upon one, or
confer a just Right to the exercise of it. None can invade the Life or Fortunes
of another, although he be never so criminal or deserving to forfeit them,
without bringing the guilt of Murder or Rapine upon himself, unless he be
commissioned from Heaven, and have a Divine Patent for that Action. God alone
is the Lord of Life and Death, and none can assume or exercise this Power,
without a kind of Sacrilege upon God, unless he either by his permissive Will
in an ordinary course of things, or by his Immediate hand in a miraculous
proceeding instate him in that Eminency; and therefore the Apostle says, There
is no power ((...), that is Sovereign power) but of God, Romans 13.1. And in the
Book, that is styled by the Name of The Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 6. where that
Excellent Writer, speaking of Rulers and Magistrates, has these Words, ver. 3.
For Power is given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the highest. And then
afterward he calls them Ministers of God's Kingdom, and Prove. 10.16. By me
Princes rule and Nobles, even all Judges of the Earth, that is, they have a
Communicated Ray of Divine Authority upon them; as well as the Special Wisdom
of God to influence and direct them in their great Office, which also is
intimated in these words, the Subject of this Chapter being Wisdom. But the
first Explication is Fundamental, and gives the reason of the Second. And the
Prophet Daniel when he declares the strange Punishment of Nebuchadnezzar, how
that he was degraded from the Humane Nature, and the Spirit, and sense of a
Beast was put into him, sets forth this Account of the matter, That he might
thereby know that the Most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, Chap. 4.32. So that all that Power with which Princes are
invested, and shine in the World, and which tends so mightily to the benefit of
it, descends from above, and is a Beam of Majesty from the Supreme Governor of
Heaven, and Earth derived upon them. All that the People can pretend to, for
Sovereign Power, (they have none Inherent in them) is only in a Free State,
where there is no Precedent, Right, or Property to any, to Assign and Nominate
the governing Person. As for the Power it self, that proceeds from another
Original; Nay, as to the Individual Person, that is to sway the Government, the
Providence of God does overruled and determine, as the forementioned place of
Daniel does plainly manifest, He rules in the Kingdom of Men and gives it to
whomsoever he will. And may also be made farther appear from many other
Testimonies of Scripture. Ezra. 1.3. Jerem. 27.5, 6. Dan. 2.37.
He so concurs with the Will of Man as both to leave that to its natural
freedom, and also bring his own Council to pass according to the present
Exigence and Occasion of things; sometimes setting up a good Prince for the
Encouragement of Godliness, and to bring Honor and Repute to Virtue and
Religion; and sometimes permitting an ill Governor and a Tyrant to possess the
Throne, for a Trial of Constancy, and to reclaim the Vices of a long Peace and
Luxury. Thus then Power and Dominion being a Derivative thing from God, and a
communicated Ray of that Eternal Empire, whereby he governs all things both in
Heaven and Earth, and has the sole Right to do so, it being a part of God's own
Sovereignty invested in Man, which places him in a Seat of Eminency above
others, it plainly follows, that those may well enough be styled by the Name of
Gods, who have this Divine Authority committed to them.

The Second thing is to show the Manner and Platform of their Government, how
they ought to deport themselves in the Management of it: And that is, seeing
their Power is something from God, a Beam, and part of the Heavenly Majesty,
they ought so to behave themselves in all Cases as God himself would do, if he
should personally appear for that Action: They ought to disingage themselves
from all partial Affections and Interests, and follow the free Dictates of Mind
and Reason, as they are farther assisted by the Spirit of God (for the Holy
Spirit of God adapting himself to the different Necessities of Men, must needs
be supposed to be more plentifully present with those that are in the more
difficult Circumstances of a high Station) they ought, I say, to acquit
themselves from the Straitness of self and all private Suggestions, and
maintain a larger Sphere of Action, only look upon the Justice of things, and
the Expediency of them to the Public Good.

But to speak more particularly, and in express Instances:

First then, a good Governor upon this Divine Platform must be very careful,
and make it the main Scope of his Endeavors to promote the Welfare of those
that are under his Charge and Government. And this is only a Transcript from
the Heavenly Pattern, if we consider the several Methods of Divine Providence,
the Actings and Process of it ever since the beginning, we may plainly discern
this, That its perpetual Design was to advance the only Good of Mankind, viz.
To draw them off from their sinful practices, and establish virtue and the
right worship of God, where vice and idolatry did reign before. And that
Governor that would be like God, whose Power and Authority he is endued
withal, must have this end and project in all his Actions, to carry on the
public Good, and advance the Benefit of those that are committed to him. He
must have no particular Reserve of Self in any of his Proceedings; but move in
a larger Compass, and intend his whole purpose and endeavors to a general
Advantage; or rather, he may consult Self-Interest as much as he pleases, if he
determine Self aright, not to the sensual, as most men do; but to the rational
part of him, and then apply Interest only to those things that bring Benefit
and Advancement to that. It is a great Mistake, to think that the Good of the
People can at any time clash and be inconsistent with the Good of the Governor:
And that Ruler that entertains this Notion is certainly an ill Man, and sets up
the Desires of Sense, as the Rules of Action, in Opposition to the free Results
of Mind and Reason. Good is a general thing, and has no particular Confinement
in it; but is adapted and suitable to all Men. The same Good diffuses it self
through Prince and People; and if it be not for the Advantage of both, it is
but a false Notion, and no real Good. The true Interest of the Prince cannot be
any separate thing from that of the People: The Advancement of Virtue and the
true Religion, which is the only universal Good, is that alone which
establishes the Throne, and makes the Government facile and tenable. This Good
concerns Princes, as well as private Men; and if at any time they carry on
things that have not this Tendency in them, they manage a Project against
themselves; and it is some sensual Appetite, and mistaken Self that is the Cause
of it. This then ought to be a strong Motive to Princes to intend the public
Good, seeing by this means alone they can obtain and secure that which is truly
so to themselves; and they ought to design this in all their proceedings, if
they will imitate him who conferred their Power upon them. And as God Almighty
often carries on that which his infinite Wisdom discerns to be the Good of
Mankind, by Methods contrary to the Carnal Desires and Will of Man, as by
several kinds of Afflictions and the like: So a good Prince, when he meets with
an ill inclined People, that have not their Minds set upon Good, he ought to
make use of his Authority from Heaven; and even contrary to their Will and
Inclination, force them to the Observance of right things, such as he sees
expedient for them, although never so great Troubles attend the Enterprise.
This then is the First Divine Character of a good Governor, That he ought by
all means to carry on and endeavor the universal Good of the People under him.

A 2d. duty that belongs to Magistrates in Imitation of him, from whom their
Power comes, is an Universal Justice, both as it relates to God and Man. And
1st. as to that part of Justice that relates to God, we must endeavor with all
Diligence to maintain the great Respect and Honor that is due unto him. And
this God himself takes care to vindicate, Isai. 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my
Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to Graven
Images. And it is very observable in the whole Complex of the Prophets, that the
many Methods of Providence that have been made use of in the World, have all of
them tended to this, viz. To draw men off from Idolatry and Superstition, to
the Worship of the only true God; And that they should also worship him in
Spirit and in Truth. This is his Glory, that has always been the great Exercise
of his Wisdom, to keep up, and maintain in the World, viz. the true profession
of his Name, and the practice of Virtue that is consequent to it: And this is
indeed the Glory of God, and that alone which brings Honor to him, when Men by
their manner of Living express the Divine Perfections, and make them confessed
and believed in the World; when by their Conformity to the Laws of God, they
declare his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, in proposing such Heavenly Rules of
Action. When by their careful declining all Sin, both in Thought and Deed, and
the exact Holiness of their Lives, they plainly signify the Omniscience of
God, that he sees the most secret Designs of Man; together with the spotless
Purity of his Nature, That Holiness only becomes the Righteous Lord, and is
acceptable to him. And hence we often read in Scripture, Isa. 52.5. Ezekiel. 36,
20, 23.
That the Name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles through the Jews,
Romans 2.24. and that David gave great occasion to the Enemies of God to
blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. that is, seeing they pretended to be the only
Worshipers of the true God, and his own peculiar People, and yet lived after
the manner of the Heathen, and indulged themselves in such sinful Courses, it
might well be concluded by those Gentiles, that this great God whom they
worshipped, the Holy One of Israel (as he styles himself) was no such pure and
divine Being; but indeed one that delighted in Sin, and was an Approver of it,
in that he had chosen a Nation for himself that was so notoriously guilty of
such base Enormities. This then ought to be the serious Endeavor of a good
Magistrate, if he will imitate him, from whom he holds his Patent of Governing,
to secure and establish the true Religion, which is the only Advancement of
God's Glory. And that is the true Religion which was laid down, and asserted by
Christ and his Apostles, and which admits of no accessory things, as to its
Essentials, or humane Inventions in it. That which teaches the Word of God to
be Self-credible and Authentic upon intrinsic Arguments (the infinitely wise
Contrivance, and design of Goodness expressed in it, abundantly declaring its
Divine Original,) without the help of any humane Authority to establish or make
it so. That which accounts these Divine Writings the sole Rule of Faith, and
sufficient for Salvation, in the very Text and Canon of them, without any
Traditions of Men to complete and perfect them. That which only acquaints us
with one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and which directs
our Addresses to him alone, who is Omniscient; and therefore can only hear
Prayers, and know the Requests that are made before him: And not to the Souls
of Men departed, or any other Finite Being, which would bring upon us that high
Impeachment of St. Paul, denounced against the Heathens, Romans 1.25. (...).
who worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator; or besides the
Creator, as the Words may well be rendered, that is, jointly with him, who is
blessed for ever. That which not only obliges us to address to God alone in
Exclusion of all Compartners with him in Religious Worship, but also to worship
him in a pure Spiritual Worship, as an invisible Nature that cannot be objected
to humane Eyes, not framing to our selves any bodily Representment of him,
which is so expressly forbidden in the Law of Moses. Deuteronomy. 4.15. and which is so
impossible in the thing it self, To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness
will ye compare unto him? says Isa. to the Image-mongers of his days, chap.
40.18. That which puts men upon a careful Exercise of all Virtues, and working
out their Salvation in this present Opportunity of Life, without any expectance
of being delivered afterward, or having their State made better, or Happiness
obtained by the Prayers of others. That which makes an actual Obedience to
Lawful Magistrates an indispensible Duty, where their Commands are not opposite
to God's word, and that no Power upon Earth can absolve one from it; and
therefore by virtue of our Christian Profession we ought to give a ready
compliance in all things to those that are set over us, both in Church and
State, where what they enjoin is only in the nature of indifferent things, does
not clash with any Divine Precept of Scripture, or require a contrary
Deportment to it: And even then we must quietly submit to them in a Christian
Suffering without any violent resistance, or actual engagement against them. In
a word, that which was maintained by the best Christians, and Confessors in the
first Centuries, and times of Purity of the Church, and was delivered down as a
pattern both of Faith and Practice. This is the true Religion, and this a good
Magistrate ought with all diligence to maintain and establish in his Province
among those that are Subject to him, viz. To free their minds from all
Superstition and false Persuasions, and confirm them in the true Opinions of
things, and Doctrines of Holiness: And this is no more then he is obliged to in
the strictest Justice, to see that God Almighty have right of his Creatures
that due Worship and Observance that belongs to him, both from the excellency
of his Nature, and the inestimable benefits conferred upon us.

A Second part of Justice as it concerns Men, is an Impartial Exercise of it
toward all; for God is often declared in Scripture to be no Respecter of
Persons, Acts 10.34. and Deuteronomy. 10.17. He is expressed in these words, a Great
God, a Mighty and a terrible, which regards not Persons, and 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
There is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, and St.
Peter styles him that Father who without respect of Persons judges every Man
according to his work. 1 Epist. 1.17. which gives the full account of these
equal Proceedings, viz. his equal relation to all men; and which is more
plainly expressed by holy Job. 34.19. He accepts not the Persons of Princes nor
regards the Rich more than the Poor, for they are all the work of his hands.
Thus then those Governors that will follow the great example, and original of
their power, must observe an unbiased Justice, the same measures and equal
Distributions toward all; they must not suffer themselves to be perverted from
the true merit of things by any different regard to the Persons of Men. It is
Gods own solemn charge to Magistrates Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shall not respect the Person of the Poor, nor
honor the Person of the Mighty, but in Righteousness shall thou Judge thy
Neighbor. And Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but ye
shall hear the small as well as the great. Plato de Repub. 4.
Indeed there are several Cases that require some abatements from extreme
Justice and the Letter of the Law; for Laws being levelled against Crimes in
general, cannot so minutely consider the different Circumstances of things, and
Persons; and afford a reasonable allowance for them. And therefore it is often
requisite, that there should be some Relaxations made from the inflexible
rigor of Words, and Statutes. But then those that are the Rulers, and Managers
of this Power, must have a special care to distribute the same equity to all,
according to the same rule of Mercy; and not be more severe, or more favorable
to some then others. And as to the Impunity of some, although it may happen, that
great Malefactors upon some probable marks of a sincere Repentance, may offer a
fair inducement for Mercy and Pardon; yet there being so many things to be
considered in a true Repentance, as a perfect change of mind, and purpose, a
new heart within them, and that not such a one as is only the Impression of
their present Circumstance; but a constant temper of Spirit, that will manfully
stand out against the like Temptations for the time to come: I say, these
things being to be considered, which are not discernable to Humane Wisdom, it is
safer to omit these Instances of Pity, and leave them to God's Infallible
Judgment in the due Process of Law, lest otherwise they bring the Sins of
others upon themselves; and moreover occasion much mischief in the World, by
pardoning and affording farther opportunity to one, that will return to his
former Wickedness. And besides, this ought to be taken notice of in this
action, the Encouragement and Presumption that it gives to the like Offenses.
This then is another mark of a good Governor, one that copies out the Author
of his Power and Dominion to exercise an Impartial Justice, and use the same
measure of proceeding indifferently toward all.

But 4thly, Another Divine Character that he is to express, is meekness and
gentleness toward such Offenses as only concern himself, and his own
Particular. For although he is obliged to distribute these measures of Justice to
others, without any defect or abatement, yet if he will truly imitate the
Original of his Power, he ought to be patient and long suffering in respect of
personal abuses; to be inclinable to Mercy and Pardon, and always forgive as
often as the State of things and the reason of Government will permit it. God
thus proclaims himself, and our own experience will sufficiently convince us of
the truth of it. Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed
the Lord God merciful and Gracious, Long-Suffering and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
Thus Holy David expresles him. The Lord is full of Compassion and Mercy,
Long-Suffering and of great goodness, he will not always be chiding, and so on.
And the Prophet Joel declares him to be slow to anger and of great kindness,
and repents him of the evil. Cap. 2.13. And Nehemiah in the same words Cap.
9.17. Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
etc. This is the proper result of his Nature, and therefore this as all actions
proceeding from an inward form and principle, must needs do, affords him the
most affecting pleasure and satisfaction. Micah 7.18. He pardons Iniquity --
He retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. And St.
James the 2.13. Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Indeed God pardons none, but
upon the necessary qualification of a true Repentance; but he applies his
Long-Suffering to many Sins unrepented of, and passes them by without any
remarkable displeasure declared upon them; and perhaps seeing he has appointed
a day in the which he will Judge the World, he might defer the due punishment
of all Sin, till that dreadful day come, and inflict nothing upon it besides
its own inseparable evils, those which it carries in its own Bosom, unless
there were some important Reason to determine him otherwise. For our Sins do
not force him to any immediate revenge, they being not possibly able to disturb
him, or intermit his Repose and Happiness for the least moment. If we sin, what
do we against him? If our Transgressions be Multiplied, what do we unto him?
Our Wickedness may hurt a Man as we are. Job. 35.6.8. Now therefore in this
case to be more satisfied, or at least to think probably concerning the ways of
God, what Sins he will immediately punish, and what he will pass by, we must
consider God not only as a Separate Being from his Creatures, but as the Just,
and wise Governor of them, and observe what he is obliged to from this
Relation. And hence we may discern that sin not terminating upon God only, but
also reflecting upon men and deriving a certain Malignity among them: There are
several instances of it, which having a more spreading contagion in them,
cannot be connived at in any single Person without doing injury, and prejudice
to the whole, which is not competent with God's Government. And therefore all
open and bold wickedness, because this being permitted, does by degrees lessen,
and destroy the notions of the Divine Purity, and Holiness in the World; and so
more forceably invites Men to the same Practices, upon this ill Conclusion from
Impunity, that either God approves them, or is not greatly offended at them.
Malach. 2.17. Isay all open, and bold-wickedness, is commonly followed with
more remarkable Judgments upon it, especially in those that stand in a nearer
Relation to God, (as the Jews above the Heathens, and perhaps, the Ministers of
the Altar above other Christians.) And this whole thing is set down by David.
Psalm. 50. where after he had mentioned the many Enormities of that People that
were in Special Covenant with him. ver. 18. When thou saw a Thief, thou
consentedst unto him, and have been Partaker with the Adulterers. He adds,
These things have thou done, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such
an one as thy self; thou thoughtest by this Connivance and delay of Punishment,
that I was no more Holy nor Righteous than thou, but I will reprove thee and
set before thee, the things that thou have done. And perhaps Hypocrisy, when
Iniquity is concealed, and dissembled under a specious appearance, this not
affording such an example and influence in the World, is not upon this account
so obnoxious to God's Immediate Punishment; indeed this we may observe for the
truth of this notion, that in the whole complex of Scripture, Punishments are
not so frequently denounced upon this, as upon open Impieties. And I am apt to
believe that God never inflicts any open, and immediate Punishment upon Sin in
this World ( he allowing his Creatures all the enjoyments that can be, although
many of them choose them in an ill kind, and still patiently affording them
space of Repentance, most likely till their Disposition for it be quite
destroyed through Vicious Habits.) I say, I am apt to believe that God never
inflicts any open and Immediate Punishment upon Sin in this World; but when it
is necessary for the Public good, to reclaim others by such an Example from
the like Offenses. Now a good Prince that observes the pattern that God gives
him in this Respect, must not be over Critical to revenge Injuries, but always
signify a Disposition, that is apt to Pardon, and generously pass by all
personal Affronts and Reflections upon himself, unless only such as being of
that high Aggravation, takes away his necessary esteem among the People, and so
renders him incapable of promoting any good, or advantage to them. And this
Clemency expressed to less offenses, will be the most effectual means to prevent
and escape them for the time to come; it will be accounted such a base action
to abuse a Prince of this Heavenly Temper, that it must needs raise the
Resentment and Odium of all Men upon the Authors of it, they will fasten such a
Character of Shame and Disingenuity upon them, that the very Clemency of the
Prince, and the just occasion of Disgrace that it gives, will be a sufficient
Punishment to them. I say, this Gentle Temper in Princes begets the strongest
Love and Esteem of them in the minds of the People, which makes the best
security against all Injuries; and therefore this may be an Argument from
Policy, as well as Divinity to these mild Proceedings.

And in the Fifth place, that he may be more successful in his Government, both
as to the Advancement of Religion, and the right Worship of God, and also to
the promoting of good Morals and Honesty among his People, he must imitate the
Author of his Power in another Attribute, and that is his Holiness. Be ye holy
for I am holy, does especially belong to Governors, who have another Image and
Resemblance of God to express in the World than the rest of Men and Christians
have. He must be sure to give an Example in himself of those Virtues that he
should maintain and propagate. That of the Apostle, Show thy self a Pattern of
good Works, Titus 2.7. and also 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an Example of the
Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity,
together with 1 Pet. 5.3. Not as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being
Ensamples to the Flock; although spoken concerning Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, yet upon the same Reason belongs to all Rulers in general, of what kind
soever, whether their Province be Spiritual or Temporal. There are many Men
that cannot look into the inward Nature and Pulchritude of Virtue, and make
that the Influence of their Practice; but are wholly taken up with the
Externals of it, the Credit, or Disrepute that it is in from great Examples,
and so manage themselves accordingly. As also Ambition of great Places, or
perhaps the bare Desire of being better stated with their Governor, or in his
more special Respect and Favor puts abundance more into this Circumstance of
conforming to his Instance. And therefore it often happens that the whole City
is of the same Complexion with its Ruler, whether he incline to Vice or Virtue;
But alas, this is the Difference, the Desires of Body, which the greater number
of Men place their whole Satisfaction in, not being acquainted with Spiritual
Enjoyments, makes the Pattern on the worse side more spreading. I shall not
enlarge upon this Argument, only translate a passage of Tully in his third Book
de Legibus. 18.19. which as it has the Advantage of Sense above any thing I can
say from my self, so it carries more of Authority with it: As by the licentious
Life and Vices of Princes (says he) the whole City is commonly infected, so by
their Continence and better Morals, it is advanced to the same Virtues. That
great man, and our Friend Lucullus, when the Stateliness of his House at
Tusculum was with some Reflection objected to him, made this Answer which
satisfied many: That whereas his two Neighbors, the more honorable of them
being but a Knight, and the other only a Freeman, had very stately Mansions,
that Magnificence must needs be allowed to him, which was permitted to those so
much his Inferiors. But it seems Lucullus did not observe that he himself was
the Cause of their State, to whom if he had not been guilty of it, it would
have been neither lawful nor tolerable; for who would have endured them to have
enjoyed such pompous Houses? who would not rather have broken them down and
destroyed them, unless those who were most obliged to do so, had given their
Example and Authority for the having of them. For that is not so great an Evil
that Princes are vicious (although it be a great one) as that other is, that many
are drawn into an Imitation of them: For one may observe quite through the
Histories of all times, that howsoever qualified the Chief Men of the City
were, such was the City it self in a little while; and every Change of Manners
in Princes did induce the same in the People; by how much ill Princes do worse
deserve of their Country, not only that they follow Vice themselves, but
because they infuse it into their Subjects; and not only do harm that they are
corrupted, but that they corrupt others, as it were making Sin Authentic by
their practice of it. Thus Rulers are obliged to maintain good Works, even for
these necessary uses, that they may thus bring Virtue into Esteem, and Honor
among the People. Good Princes have a Reward, and share in all the Virtues of
those that are under them, by the Command and Influence of their own Piety: And
in respect of their after State, may ascribe that of the Prophet to themselves,
they advancing the same thing by their Example, viz. Those that turn many unto
Righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. And this
will enhaunce their Punishment if they be vicious; and so much the more as
Vice, or an ill Pattern, having the stronger Appetites of Body to advocate for
it, is more prevalent, and dilates farther. It is an easy effect of Vice to
derive it self in a large Compass upon those suitable Inclinations that are in
all men; but the propagation of Virtue is a more difficult thing, and requires
a more than ordinary Example for the Success of it; there being that violent
Opposition of Sense to move against, which is the prevailing Principle in most
Men; and which cannot be subdued, or kept under in any without intense Labor,
and incessant Striving, at least till a Habit have rendered the Business more
facile. But this should not deter a good Magistrate, that considers his
Heavenly Rule and Pattern from an Holy Instance; but rather the more easy and
influential Vice is, the more cautious should this make him of acting it before
his many Spectators, or giving it the advantage of his high Example: And the
more difficult Virtue is, or contrary to the Temper of most Men (if he will
satisfy his just Obligations to God and the People under him) the more
industriously ought he to assert it, and with more vigor endeavor to gain
Credit and Authority to it from the Uprightness of his own Actions. This indeed
requires Valor, as all other his due Proceedings do.

And therefore in the Sixth place, seeing that Magistrates are commissioned by
God, are his Deputies and Ministers of his Kingdom among Men, as much as
concerns the visible part of things, they ought to be very courageous and
resolute in the just Management of their high Province. It is God's own Command
and Counsel to them, You shall not be afraid of the Face of Man, for the
Judgment is the Lords, Deuteronomy. 1.17. That is, seeing they manage God's Cause and
Government in the World, and upon this account are obliged to the most
impartial Justice and Equity in all their Proceedings, they ought to be valiant
for the Truth even unto Death, and not suffer any Fears, or Apprehension of
Danger to draw them aside from an honest Sentence, or hinder the due Process of
righteous Judgment between Man and Man. Indeed a good Magistrate that uses the
same Rule and Measure of acting indifferently toward all, that determines his
whole Affections to the Merit of things, and not to any quality of Persons,
must needs by this equal Management, create to himself many Adversaries. There
is a lofty Opinion and Esteem of themselves that commonly possesses the minds
of rich Men. This is the proper Effect and Influence of Great Fortunes, unless
a true Christian Humility does rebate and qualify it: And therefore rich Men,
where this humble Temper of Religion is wanting, always presume upon an
Advantage above others, which they also would have attend them in places of
Judgment. And this is the reason that so many foul Causes are commenced and
managed by them, which gives us the Account of that of St. James, Cap. 2.6. Do
not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seats? And
therefore, when they find that severe Justice is preferred and takes place,
without any regard had to their Figure in the World, we must needs imagine them
passing angry with those honest Magistrates that dispense it: And therefore
there is need of Spirit and Resolution in a good Governor; a mind prepared to
meet with the greatest Dangers, that can manfully bear up against all the
Affronts and ill Treatment of offended Greatness; and that will never desert a
Righteous Action through any prospect of Terror or Threatening Circumstance
whatsoever; lest if otherwise, Justice and Judgment, God's own Cause in the
World, should suffer and be perverted by it.

But then Secondly, supposing there be such a formidable Appearance against him
upon this due performance of his Office, that the most resolute Fortitude and
Gallantry of mind seems not able to stand before it; this ought not in the
least to influence or terrify him from that true Judgment that necessarily
belongs to his high Station; but still he ought to determine boldly according
to the Justice of things, and support himself with a firm Confidence in God,
and his special Providence about him, that he will undoubtedly protect him in
the just management of that Work and Office which he has committed to him. It
is impossible that God should forsake or desert any whilst they are observing
his Special Commands to them. Common Justice does oblige the contrary; and we
should set a Mark of Baseness upon that Man that should be guilty of such a
Deportment. And then if God be for us, who can be against us? He that behaves
himself justly in his high Province and Government, although there be never so
strong a Combination upon this Account made against him, yet he may boldly say,
The Lord is on my side, or the Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear what man
can do unto me, Psalm. 118.6. Heb. 13.6. In God's Word will I rejoice, in the
Lord's Word will I comfort me; in God have I put my Trust, I will not be afraid
what man can do unto me, Psalm. 56.10, 11. As the righteous King David
triumphantly said, when his Enemies compassed him in on every side; and may be
used with the same assurance by all good Governors in their Times of Danger.
Indeed, God does not always effect their Deliverance in this World; he
sometimes steps from them, and as it were, leaves them alone, that they may so
fall a Sacrifice to the Malice and Violence of unthankful People; but this is
no Interruption of his Defense and Safeguard over them, he still affords them
sufficient Graces for their Circumstance and Trials; and when he has perfected
them through Sufferings, (which is his usual method with the best of Saints,
and by which indeed they are made so) he will certainly confer a surer Reward
upon them, and take them into his more immediate Custody in his Kingdom. And
this Desertion in the time of Trouble as to present things makes no Abatement
of Faith in a good Governor; he knows most assuredly, That it shall be well
with those that fear God at the last. Eccles. 8.12. And if God does not work
his Deliverance in this world from the hand of his Enemies, but lets him fall
by them, yet he is most fully satisfied, that he will effect this very thing in
his Death and Sufferings, and vindicate his Righteous Actions, and afford a
most plentiful recompense of them in the Region of Glory, and therefore he can
use those great words of Job, with the same holy Confidence and Resignation.
Cap. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

We come now to the last thing, viz. That these Gods and Children of the Most
High must die like Men, that is, although they be promoted to this high Station,
and stand in a great eminency above others. Yet it is only some external thing,
a difference of degree and order that distinguishes them from the rest of Men,
there is still the same Humane Nature with all the Infirmities and Attendants
of it, belonging to them, and therefore they are only poor Mortals subject to
the common Circumstance of Dying, and returning to Dust, as well as their
meanest Vassals. And this Consideration should secure the Humility of Great Men
and Princes, it should keep their thoughts within due compass, That they think
not of themselves above themselves, but that they think soberly that they are
only Men made up of the same perishing matter and brittle Ingredients with
others, and that they exercise their rule over Creatures of the same Nature and
Dignity, that they can pretend to; they have that original Nobility of a Humane
Soul and Reason equally with them, and may possibly far surpass them in those
great things, that only make difference of worth in us, viz. Holiness of Life
and Virtue, which alone gives the preferments and different Stations of another
World: And therefore those that are below them here, may be advanced much above
them in Bliss and Glory. These things ought to influence Princes, and invite
them to a gentle treatment of those that are under them; not to put on any
unnecessary State or Lordship toward them, but be of a free address, easy to
be entreated, attentive to their Petitions and Requests from them, patient of
their rudeness and simplicity, with whatsoever else may be the effect of
unpolished nature in them, and offer them all the measures of brotherly
kindness in all instances, as still being mindful of that near relation of
Brethren, and common equality that is between them, that they also must make
their Bed in the Grave, and sleep among the clods with them. And this very
prospect is enough certainly, to keep down all Pride and Loftiness of Man,
depress all the swelling resentment and overacted State of Worldly Glory, and
preserve the greatest Potentates on Earth, in a constant habit of Humility, and
low notion of themselves: Alas! What can it signify to walk always as it were
in Procession, to be attended with continual throngs of Guards, and Admirers
wheresoever they go, to have Trumpets always before them to sound out their
Greatness, and to imprint a just terror and sense of it upon the astonished
Multitude, to fit in a seat of Majesty, and dictate their Will to a whole
Nation? What can all this signify to found any lofty conceit upon, when one
reflects on himself, that he is still no more than a Man, and must be subject
to all the Fatalities and Circumstances of that poor Creature? And doubtless if
we could hear him speak that is lately gone from us to another Kingdom, who was
once instated in all this greatness, and now sees the better enjoyments of a
second World, and is a Possessor of them, he would confirm these very words to
us, and make them more affecting by his heavenly Eloquence. Indeed we may take
his word beforehand, he always entertained the same Opinion of this Worlds
greatness, and often spoke the same things whilst he was living, and to prove
the unfeigned sincerity of his words, he voluntarily retired from it.

A Second Influence that this should have upon Magistrates, viz. That they must
die like Men, is to make them Just and Honest in all their Proceedings. The
reason why Men manage such Self-designs, and Unrighteous Judgment in the World,
is because they do not advert to the business of dying, or else they remove the
evil day far from them; they find their bodies hail and vigorous, as having no
sensible Distemper in them, and so conclude, that they are out of all present
danger of Death, and have made a Covenant and an Agreement with the Grave (in
the Phrase of the Prophet, Isaiah 28.15.) for a long Season; if they should but
attend to the condition of Men, that some time or other Death will have the
Dominion over them, and then contract the distance, that this may happen
immediately after such an action in the very next succeeding moment. For Death
has a thousand ways to vanquish poor Man, and the stronger and more lusty the
Constitiuton is, the more liable is it to violent Distempers, and these if they
once begin in a Vigorous Body, the more they inflame the Blood and Spirits, and
the more they fortify Death against us: So that there is no presuming upon any
condition of body against the present Approaches of Death, nay, often Health it
self is the most effectual means of a sudden Dissolution; if Men had but this
Apprehension upon them, that they were then acting the last Scene of Life, as
indeed it may be for any thing they can tell, what demure Creatures would they
be, and how would they start from the very first motions and thoughts of Sin?
and I am confident with St. Chrysostom, that 'twas one Reason why God made the
Term of our Life unknown and uncertain to us, that so by this means we might
have the terror and influence of our last moment upon all our actions. This
then is another effect, that the necessity of dying should have upon us; to
make us Holy and Righteous in our whole Demeanor.

But Thirdly we may hence observe this Lesson of Comfort, That those who have
managed themselves well in this high Station, although they dye after the common
manner of Men, yet they leave a sure hope behind them, that even through the
Gates of Death they are entered into a better Life, and more perfect Happiness;
and so preclude all the reason of Immoderate grief for them. And I think this
Inference and great truth does exactly hit the case before us. There was not
one Character of a good Governor that I mentioned before, but was transcribed
from the just Original of all Power, by this great Person now with him in his
Heavenly Kingdom, and made the Measure of his Actions; and although I had not
the happiness of his Converse (for so it truly was to a wonderful degree) for
any long time, nor then when he was in his high Province, and so could not
observe from his actual management of things; yet I have heard such occasional
Sayings from him, that did so plainly discover the Immovable Temper and Habit
of his Soul, that I am very confident I do know how he did transact his Public
Affairs, and how he would always have done if he had been concerned in them to
the Worlds end. One might easily discern a great and generous Spirit in him
that moved always toward the proportionable Object of a public good. He often
manifested a strange disregard of self, or any private interest; indeed there
was nothing to give him any Temptation to this, he being by Temper as well as
Improvement of Mind, much above those Trifles that are called the goods of
Fortune; certainly none ever slighted them more, these little things could not
answer his large Capacity, and therefore he passed them by as inconsiderable,
and unworthy of his Thoughts, that indeed were designed for higher
entertainments. I remember I heard him once say that Judicious Truth, That none
but mean Spirits could be covetous, and he urged the Observation of his whole
Life for the proof of it, that he never saw it otherways. Now this being
inverted, he dis-respecting the things of the World to such a high degree, will
give us a sure Argument of the greatness of his mind. Indeed others might more
profusely throw them away, as many do upon some Lust or other; but then this is
no Slight or want of Value for the things themselves, that being always founded
upon a just Opinion of the meanness of them; it is rather a Trade and
Merchandise managed upon them, they having no Dis-esteem properly to them; but
only they are under the Dominion and Slavery of a more darling Inclination,
which they would by all means excite and gratify: And if that once chance to
fail, they may possibly appear as covetous and nigardly as any others. And now
we may well imagine how such a Spirit as this, that had no private Intrigues of
its own would behave it self in a public Station: How it would design a
General Advantage in the whole Compass of its Proceedings. I shall not give any
Instances of this kind; let his Enemies prove it, and produce the Example of
one Action that had not a public Respect in it, or was only a narrow Reserve
for his own particular.

He had a strange Apprehension to discern Good, not only present, but in the
remote Consequence of things, and the long effects of them: Whereas others
could not look so far. And this I am persuaded was one great Reason why so many
were dissatisfied with his Proceedings, and turned Adversaries to him, because
he understood better than they, and would have forced them into their own Good,
which they apprehended not. This is the only Account that can be given of those
loud Clamors against him, as one that was bringing in Popery and Arbitrary
Government: He wisely saw that such Measures were necessary to establish the
just Rights of the Throne, and the Church of England; which I do not question
but will appear to have been such in the Effects of Time, if Men already have
not their Eyesight sufficiently cleared up to discern them.

He had such an Uprightness of Mind, and Design in him, as would always
influence to an impartial Justice. Many might complain, that they were
disappointed of their Expectations when they were not rightly laid; but none
could ever urge with any Appearance, that they were injured by him. And although
no Man had more of Mercy and Kindness in his Disposition than he had where
there was a due Object for it: Yet he was very cautious of applying it to such
Malefactors, as had the legal Sentence of Blood-guiltiness upon them. He was
afraid of bringing Sin upon himself, and doing harm in the World, by giving
Liberty to an ill man to repeat his former Practices, who for any thing he
could tell, might still be the same, in Heart and Design; and only Fear and
present Circumstance might compel him to appear otherwise. And certainly it is
much safer to leave such persons in the due Process of Justice to God's Mercy;
which if they be sincere Converts, they will be sure to meet with, and if not,
Mankind will be thus delivered from a troublesome Member.

But as to the Doctrine of Forgiveness in respect of Self; he had well learned
this from his Heavenly Father, and carefully reduced it into his constant
Practice. And none had more Occasion for this Virtue than himself had, as
always standing in a high Station, and so being continually exposed to the Envy
and Emulation of great men, which perhaps is the best Account of all that
Enmity that he conversed withal. Whatsoever the Cause was (I am sure 'twas an
unreasonable one) many were those that rose up against him, and when their
Attempts failed them, and they had nothing else to do, but put on the Habit of
Repentance, and beg Pardon, they never missed of this from him, and a friendly
Reception into his Favor, although it often happened that their base
Dissimulation indisposed them for Mercy and Pardon in the Court of Heaven,
whither he always referred them for Doom and Judgment; affirming, that if they
seemed but penitent, and asked Forgiveness, he must not intermit the necessary
Duty of a Christian toward them: Let him that sees the Heart deal with them as
he pleases. Although by this means he gave them fresh Opportunities against him,
which many of them were not wanting to improve to the best Advantage; and which
being managed by so much Strength and Greatness, would have terminated in the
Ruin of any, but only such an one, whose Proceedings were laid upon such an
honest Groundwork. He was possessed of that Disposition, which our Savior
prescribes to all of us, Luke 17.4. That if our Brother trespass against us
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day, turn again to us, saying, I
repent, we must forgive him. And he fulfilled this to that degree, that he only
could do, that was always in a high Management, and met with such repeated
perfidiousness as he did. Indeed this must be allowed a wise man, and
Christianity obliges nothing to the contrary, that when one observes Injuries
to proceed from a base mind, which has not common Probity left in it, that he
receive not such persons into his Confidences, nor repose any Trust in them. If
he pass by the Offense without any Endeavors, or thoughts of Requital, or of
doing them any Prejudice upon that Occasion, he has done his Duty, all that can
be required from him. And he is the wifer Man if he does not renew a free
Converse with them, and assure their Favor by a mutual Friendship; and it
argues him the better Man, and of more Uprightness, that he does not fear them;
this Neglect of them even daring them to produce what they can against him, and
would not be resolved upon by an obnoxious person.

Yet notwithstanding this common Prudence, which I believe was less in him than
in other People, insomuch as his great Parts, and his upright Use of them, more
raised him above Suspicion, which is a sneaking Disposition of Mind, that only
belongs either to Men of low and Inferior Spirits; or to such as have the Sense
of Guilt upon them, and are liable in their Proceedings: I say, notwithstanding
this common Prudence to secure one against the dangerous opportunity of a false
Friend, pretending Reconcilement, he always expressed himself kindly, and with
due respect to all Men, howsoever deserving from him. And if he were an
Adversary to any ones better Circumstance or Advancement, I am confident, it
was rather upon the public account, that that should not suffer by the farther
Capacity of an ill Man, then from any self regard in the business. His Temper
was beneficent, one might see a Complacency, and pleasure in him when he
performed any obliging instance, which well argued, that Actions of that kind,
did derive from an inward Principle, and the very habit of his Mind. And I
refer to his many Friends that have been advantaged by him, to speak sincerely
their own Experiment, if he were not very discernably satisfied, when he
promoted them; or rather let those that have been guilty of so much baseness,
and after many Obligations, turned his Enemies, convinced the contrary, That he
delighted not in Beneficence. And as he was thus ready and propense to show
kindness, so he did not expect long thanks or any cringing observance upon the
account of it. Such unmanly Behavior was intolerable to him, although there
might have been this Reason for it. Nor was he an Usurer of his Favors, or
designed interest from them, his high Advancement, that he always stood in, as
well as his Temper, which perhaps had that fault in it, that it was but too
careless of his own profit, made him incapable of any thing so mean and sordid;
he was one of those third sort of Men mentioned by the Emperor Antoninus lib.
5.4. who exhibit favors, and then manage themselves with that indifferency
toward the Objects of them, as if they were not sensible that they had done
so. ((...)) Being like to the Vine, as he there compares them, who puts forth
her Clusters, and then after having produced her proper Fruits, requires
nothing else, or no recompense for it; but when one Vintage is over, then
begins again to make her self ready against the next Season for another.
Intimating hereby, that those who are truly beneficent, or that best sort of
Benefectors are contented with the reward of a good Action, and seek no
further; and when they have performed one friendly office, they rest not there,
but in a repeated Progress determine themselves to another. Which indeed the
thoughts and resentment of that inward pleasure that results from acts of
kindness, will almost forcibly carry them to; and besides, that derivative
Pleasure, that proceeds from seeing others pleased and satisfied by their
means, will very powerfully influence such Men whose better parts, and more
generous temper, has advanced them above the low thing of being envious. Which
Notion would have persuaded me that some great degree of Beneficence must needs
have been in him, whom I now speak of, if I had not observed the instance of it.

And as to matters of Religion, if we consider him as a private Man, he was
always just to his Creator, and gratefully reflected upon him whatsoever he
received from him; he was not for setting up the Idol of Self in Man, and
deifying the Humane Faculties, as some Sacrilegiously do; but he ever with a
due thankfulness ascribed all the Imperfect beginnings of good in our Nature,
to the Virtue and Influence of God's Spirit: That indeed we could in the use of
our magnified freedom oppose the gentle Inducements of Grace, and render them
ineffectual, as alas! we often do; this is properly within our own Power, but
that we could not perform any good action without the special assistance of
Heaven with us, freely entertained and complied withal. His Faith was firmly
grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus; those subtle Arguments of a sort of Men
that would take away the Godhead and Merits of their Savior, could make no
Impression upon him, although he was well acquainted with them all; he saw the
insufficiency of their Carnal Reasonings, as being quite contrary to the
express Word of God, and he humbly acquiesced in the plain Declarations of
Scripture concerning the work and notion of a Redeemer, and applied only to him
for Salvation. His Persuasions were far from the Roman Creed, to which he not
only often declared, but lived contrary, expecting acceptance with God by no
other means then only that of a good Conversation, through the alone Merits of
Christ Jesus. His Religion was no accidental thing, the first stamp upon him,
or the Complexion of his Country, which indeed is the Religion of most Men,
and all the account they can give of it; but he undertook the Study of
Controversies, and observed the Arguments of all Parties, that so from his own
free deliberate choice, he might be an Orthodox Christian after the best and
most approved Platform. And by this only Method of certainty he got above his
Education, and became a true Conformable Son of that Church, which is most
Apostolic; so that none ever entertained the Protestant Doctrines according to
the Church of England upon greater Judgment, and none was more able, or more
ready to defend them against all Opposers. And his Religion was not only
notional; but he conversed and lived under the influence of it, his attendance
upon God's public Service was constant and certain, I dare say in the happy
time of my knowledge of him he never missed that blessed opportunity, but when
his health made it necessary. And this he did perform not only as a Task and
constrained business, that he was under the Obligation of, but in full freedom
as his great delight and satisfaction, always going cheerfully to the House of
Prayer: And his Deportment there was very devout and serious, he was a great
Proficient in the Holy Scriptures, and such an attentive hearer of them, that
for the most part after Chapel he either taught me, or inculcated afresh some
good Observation. Indeed although he was acquainted with all the Parts of
Learning, to such an extent and degree, as one can scarce imagine in a Person
that was always under the necessary Disersion of a public employment either in
Peace or War. And this argued his extraordinary Capacity; that he could attain
to those high Improvements in horis subsicivis, in his Vacant Intervals from
his Public Affairs, which others could not do in their only Design, and the
whole business, and study of their Lives. He was a perfect Master of many
Languages both Ancient and Modern; to have observed his exquisite skill and
readiness in them, one would at first have been forced upon this thought, that
he had employed his main endeavors in words, and Phrases; which I am
persuaded, many have done with less proficiency; but then one would have seen
withal, that his many Tongues were not in him, as in most Men, that can lay
claim to them, without Sense and Notion; but were also attended with a large
acquired Wisdom, and could speak the best knowledge of the best Authors in each
of them: But like a Man of his Judgment, he never valued himself upon his
Languages, or put any further esteem on them, then only as they administered to
his better Understanding. I heard him once say, in our mention of Rabbinical
Learning, That a Babel of Words always occasioned a Babel in the Intellect, a
confused Apprehension of things, and that many Languages still came to Men in
the nature of a Curse, although through their own free choice and Labor, in that
the study of them, does so improperly exhaust time, without any respect to Mind
and Reason; and so deprives those that devote themselves that way, of more
substantial Acquirements.

But to return; I say, although he was well acquainted with all the parts of
Learning, yet besides, that which enabled him for his own Province, to be a
more accomplished Statesman, and to serve his King more effectually in that
difficult Station wherein he placed him. And indeed he was most exactly knowing
in the Histories and Policies of the whole World; and these things being laid
up in his comprehensive Memory, and digested by his better Judgment, it was
more satisfaction to consult him for this kind of Knowledge, than even the
Books themselves of that Design and Subject;

But I say, besides this Skill in Language, and this State-Learning, his
Principal Care and Improvement was in that which is the only Method of being
good and wise, the Holy Science of Divinity; and in this, as all the Students
of it, he made a parallel Progress, both as to Practice and Knowledge: For as
he had a true and becoming Notion of the most mysterious Instances of our Holy
Faith, so he was a very careful Observer of the Practical Parts of it; Those
Precepts of Virtue that were to influence Life and Morals: I must needs say,
that I could never discover any prevailing Habit or Inclination to the
contrary; but methought from the Alacrity and Constancy of his Actings, a mind
well tempered and conform to them. And in truth these things are a mutual Proof
of one another: His exquisite Skill in these Holy Mysteries is a sufficient
Argument of his Virtue, and that he had cleared and prepared his Understanding
for that Sacred Knowledge, by a good Life, which is the only means to attain to
any degree of it: The wonderful Wisdom of God in the Gospel is Foolishness to
the Greeks, not discerned or apprehended by vicious Livers. And as he was most
firmly persuaded of the Articles of the Christian Faith; and also had a
demonstrative certainty of the Truth and Excellency of the Holy Scriptures,
upon which Faith is founded; and in which he was very expert and ready, both as
to the Letter, and best Paraphrase of them; so he was very careful to maintain
the Honor and Respect that was due to them both. He could not endure any loose
Expressions of God and Christ, or any profane Treatment of the Holy Spirit; but
like one possessed of a true Apprehension and Reverence of the Blessed Trinity,
He was a great Despiser of such indecent Language, and of those trivial Spirits
that were guilty of it; nor would he suffer it to escape in Triumph without
some Reproof or Mark of dislike in any Person of what Quality soever. No Honor
of Men could advocate for that wicked Freedom, or make him neglect the Honor
of his Maker: He abhorred (to use his own Expression) that Impudence to the
blessed Deity. There was no such ornamental Discourse, as Swearing is now
styled by a degenerate Age, in his Company; the Influence of his Presence being
derived from his known Displeasure in those Cases, did effectually restrain
such Misdemeanors in all persons of his Converse. He was a most hearty Opposer
both of Atheism and Profaneness. I never heard any speak against Hobbes's
Doctrines with more Concern and Spirit than he used to do; and that not at
Random, but in proper Argument, as one that had well perused his pernicious
Writings, and thereby had gained that Zeal according to Knowledge and
Abhorrence of them.

And thus upon a certain Knowledge of a Deity, he easily discerned that a
necessary reverence was belonging to him, which he always maintained as sacred
and inviolable. And this excellent temper expressed it self toward all things
that were related to God, he ever most religiously asserted the sacred honor
of the Scriptures, and would not suffer them in the least to be reflected upon,
or any Jest or Drollery to be promoted from them; his Passion did never more
sensibly appear, then when it was so truly necessary, to vindicate those
inspired Writings. Neither can those mean Ingenioso's of our time, that jest
upon the Bible, urge that it was want of wit in him, that put him upon this
severity (indeed it is want of wit in them, and only irreligious boldness when
they can find nothing to say upon the many lawful Themes in extensive nature,
that makes them invade the heavenly Oracles) I say, they cannot urge that it
was want of Wit, that put him upon this severity, for he was as pleasant as
any, and would raise as much Mirth and Diversion from Innocent Subjects; but
'twas only a pious respect to the things of God, that thus influenced him, and
made him so concerned that his Name and his Word should not suffer any profane
usage. This he was in himself, and thus he behaved himself, let Fame represent
him as it will; which indeed he was very regardless of, his great Spirit
thought it below his concern, and looking after: Rather deferring the Reward of
his Piety till he came to another World, then receiving any part of it here, in
those empty things of popular praise, and the vain-Applauses of the Multitude.
Now such a private Man as this, How much be intended the good of the Crown, and
Episcopal Church. See his Acts of Parli. in Scotland. Parl. 2. Caroll. 2. Acts
1, 5, 6. par 2 Sess. 2. Acts 4, 5, 7. Par. 2. Sess. 3. Acts 9.17.
what may one expect from him, when he becomes public? Or rather what may one
not expect from him, that tends to the right establishment of the Christian
Faith, and the Peace, and Uniformity of the Professors of it? His utmost
endeavors must needs run this way, which indeed they did, as will appear from
a due reflection upon them, and had been more effectual to these ends, if blind
Zeal and Prejudice had not deprived Men of the free use of Reason, and hindered
all sober deliberation of things in our times: If the true Protestant Religion
(as it is now applied) which in its real self is so gentle and Peaceful, had
not almost quite abolished the true Temper and Charity of Christians among us.

And he had another Character of a good Governor, one that is to engage with
the Tumults of the People, and that is, Courage and Magnanimity which were his
in a high measure. He was not to be bafled, and daunted in any of his
Proceedings, how threatening soever the event of them. He made Truth and Justice
the groundwork of all his Actions, and then he was most resolute and steadfast
in them, no representation of Fear or Danger could by any means remove him from
them. His Arms and Motto did extremely befit him, Council was the bottom of his
Enterprises, and he had the Heart of a Lion to go through with them. I verily
believe that he would have suffered Martyrdom, not only upon the account of his
Religion; but even in a State Cause, where the good of the King and Government
was concerned, before he could have been prevailed upon to desert it. But this
I durst not affirm of any Man in respect of his sole Humane Valor, which alone
is not sufficient for such Trials. Nor should I have said it of him unless I
had often observed one eminent Virtue in him, which is indeed the Eternal, and
only support of Fortitude, and that is an assured trust in God, and belief in
Providence. He looked upon himself but as an underworker of things; and as he
was careful to do Justice, and so act under the special Influence and direction
of Providence: So he always in a quiet Resignation, most steadfastly depended
upon it for the Event and Issue. I must confess, I never took notice of any,
that was so firmly bottomed upon this Confidence. He would frequently say, God
rules the World, the People imagine but a vain thing; 'twas in the very Habit
of his Soul, that of Holy David. Psalm. 99.1.2. The Lord is King, be the People
never so impatient, he sits between the Cherubims, be the Earth never so
inquiet. He stilleth the raging of the Sea, the noise of his Waves, and the
madness of the People. Psalm. 65.7. And he was not only Courageous in respect of
the many Dangers and troublesome Encounters of Life; but he retained his wonted
valor when he was to engage with Death, and saw that advancing to him; this
was the effect of his most resolute Faith, which as it was the invincible
support of his Life in all the Varieties of a Mortal Condition, so he
undauntedly traveled through the Gates of Death into the unchangeable State of
Immortality in the strength of it. I saw his last Instances of Life, which had
no appearance of fear or apprehension in them, but were managed with that
unconcernedness and serenity of mind, as became one, that was firmly possessed
with the hopes of Heaven, and thought himself just then apassing into it. 'Twas
an expression of one of his last days, which I heard, before his case was
desperate, or looked upon to be above the power of Physic, that he had neither
hopes nor fears in him, he did not expect to live, nor was he afraid of Dying.
And this Courage in Death is a further Evidence of a good Life, that being the
time (as Plato observes) when Guilt and an ill Conscience discover themselves
in their full Vigor, which may have been stifled all along before, by the many
Enjoyments of Life, and the removal of the evil day far from them. And hence it
is that Vicious Men are most fearful, and under the greatest horror in this
Circumstance, as being then about to receive that sad Doom which their own mind
does suggest to them. And therefore those that are cheerful and unconcerned at
the approaches of Death, supposing they still enjoy the full use of
Understanding, and know the Scene that they are then acting, affords us a very
probable Presumption, that they are indeed good Men, and have no reason of
remorse in them.

And as for that necessary Virtue of a Christian, which may be urged upon
Rulers from the prospect of Mortality contained in these Words, That ye shall
dye like Men, viz. Humility; he was a famous example of it, certainly never any
that was so great, condescended more, or made himself so equal, and affable as
he did. 'Twas the peculiar Miracle and Instance of this Man, that having that
natural greatness of mind and understanding that he had, and these improved to
those high measures of acquired knowledge and learning; that he should still
maintain himself so courteous, a^^ be of so free and so easy a Converse.
(Extraordinary Endowments commonly raise Men to a slight and contempt of
others, and indeed upon this Argument he might have slighted almost the whole
World.) 'Twas therefore most certainly his goodness and Consideration that
influenced this Lowliness; and prevented that which would have been the natural
effect of great parts in a bad Man. And he was so far from becoming mean by
this deportment, that he raised his respect thereby and gained a new accession
of honor and reverence from it, which will always attend his memory to the
World's end. This is the best method, if pride would permit one to see things
truly to advance ones Name and Esteem among all Persons. All other tricks of
inconversable State to secure it, lose it: and only obtain an odious Reflection
and contempt in the room of it.

These things being so conspicuous, and to such a degree in our present Theme,
I have often persuaded my self, and I am confident, I do none of my Friends any
injury in it, that I never saw more of Christian good nature in any Person,
then in him; I mean a benign temper as it was farther improved by those Gospel
Virtues of Humility, Love, and Kindness implanted upon it.

Thus I have run through the Characters of a good Governor that I mentioned
before in this Discourse, and found them all concentered in this excellent
person, and indeed he was the great Object that lay before me and informed
every part in the composing of it. And I am far from having exhausted the
Subject, doubtless he had more rules of just Government, then any else, but
such a wise and good Man as himself was, could either think of, or would
propose for their direction.

But however, I must not neglect to mention one thing more, which has a
particular respect in it, and did not fall within the compass of my Text, that
relating to Governors in general, and that is the duty of a Subordinate
Magistrate to him, whose Commissioner he is. But this indeed is included in the
Character before mentioned. He that does Justice and is Faithful and Loyal to
his Creator, cannot be otherwise to his Sovereign; Sin, or Duty is expressed to
both of them in the same action. But however, I am not contented only to say of
the present Subject, that he paid a just observance and obedience to his
Prince, which every good Men certainly does, but that he had more of Duty and
Affection to him, than any other could parallel; and would have exposed himself
to more imminent danger in the procurement of his safety, and Welfare. This was
his constant Temper and Resolution to his lives end. Never man had a Heart so
full of Allegiance and Love to his Sovereign as he had, which both his Actions
and his Discourse did well express upon all Occasions. And as it is affirmed of
Love, that it overcomes all things, so I am sure he through the Strength of
this Affection would very readily have adventured himself upon any the most
difficult Enterprises for the Just Prerogatives of the Crown, and either have
overcome, or been content to suffer in them. This Interest he truly espoused
with his Life and Fortunes; and he was never transported to such Severity of
Speech (for his Disposition was not to dwell upon the worst side of things; or
to entertain himself and his Company with Censure, or invective Language:) I
say, he was never transported to such Severity of Speech, as when he met with
ill affected men to this honest Cause; and 'twas the necessary Virtue of a good
Man, and a good Subject to be so.

And now if any should unworthily surmise that all this I have here spoken
concerning him might only be a put on thing, an outward comportment, and not
the very expression of his mind, and temper; first they plainly discover a very
unchristian humor in fixing an ill sense upon things, which are capable of a
better: but then his very nature, which always manifested so much plainness and
freedom in it, and was so removed from Disguise or Covert will undoubtedly
convince the contrary to all that knew him. And besides what motive could he
have to put on another person, to be at the continual trouble of opposing his
own temper, and inclinations; and so deprive himself of the mighty pleasure of
free acting? I say what motive to this could he have, whose high exaltation had
placed him above the Reason of complying with any from fear, or favor; and so
obtained him a perfect liberty to move, and behave himself as he pleased? But
then lastly let such men consider what they suppose, How difficult it is, if
not wholly impossible to act a perpetual Hypocrite, or in a constant tenor to
appear otherwise then they really are. Perhaps one may counterfeit one single
Fit, or action pretty well, and deceive the spectator as to the Reality of it;
although it be very great odds but the want of a Right accent in the performing of
it, some impropriety or other will declare the imposture: but an habitual
thing, that is to be expressed in every particular instance of our actions, and
in the whole course of them, cannot so well, if possibly be dissembled; some
undue word or motion will now and then burst forth to discover the fallacy in
case it do not truly proceed from a constant habit of mind, and a Steady
disposition that is naturalized to it. and therefore when I observe actions to
proceed in a continual series, without any uncouth step, or contradiction in
them, I cannot but conclude, both in the exercise of Charity, and Judgment,
that what they manifest is the very spirit, and temper of such a Person.

Thus I have made a short Application of my Discourse, and must in all reason
beg Excuse for this mean Representation of so much Greatness; especially before
some in this Presence, who best knew him, and are best able to express him in
the same Style with his high Performances. I did what I have done merely to
please my self in dwelling a little, and entertaining my Thoughts upon such an
excellent Object; and that from the present View of so much Worth in him, I
might found an Argument of Eternal Comfort to all those that were related to
him, Not to be sorry as those without hope for those that die in the Lord. And
this we may conclude of that excellent Spirit departed from us, that he died in
this happy Circumstance, as being possessed of all those Virtues that are proper
and requisite both for a Christian and a Governor.

And now to add a word of Comfort as to the common Condition of Men, although
Death be here denounced as a threatening, yet it is the exceeding happiness and
advantage of a good Man. What a sad thing would it be to spend an Eternity in
this Life, although we should be always in our full Vigor, and never have any of
the Infirmities of Age or Desease upon us; to live in a continual Warfare,
always fighting against the ill Inclinations, and Lusts of Flesh, and the more
florid and vigorous we are, the more shall we experience these evils; to be
ever concerned in that Impertinent Employment of a Reasonable Soul to manage
and think of the trifling Objects of this World, things that are so unsuitable
to it; to be continually at the mercy of a dull Body, that is so often
indisposed, whether we shall freely meditate or no, and then when we are in a
fit posture of thinking, we must beg the favor of our outward Affairs, that
they would be quiet, and offer no disturbance, or of some Anxiety of Spirit,
that it would intermit a little, or of a degenerate habit of mind, that it
would suspend its wordly concernments, or else we shall use this great faculty
of thinking only upon vile and abject things, such as are most unworthy of it;
but never be able to raise it up to any suitable Contemplation. Now to be thus
eternally detained by these low Entertainments, and the ineptitude of Body from
any free converse with the great object of our Happiness, that Almighty Spirit
that made us; always to have our Felicities such an accidental thing, depending
upon so many hits and chances of Temper, that it seldom happens not to
recompense the thousandth part of our other Miseries, and when it does happen,
is in such a Poor, Muddy, and Imperfect manner; What a sad thing would it be,
to be for ever in this State and Circumstance, or indeed for any considerable
length of time? 'Twas certainly no Punishment upon Mankind, but rather an
Instance of Divine Love and Mercy to us, that God should contract our Days and
Abode in this World, from well nigh a Thousand Years, to Threescore and Ten, (a
sufficient time still in such dull Enjoyments) and if we had but the True Faith
and Hope of Christians in us, we should thank God for it. Little reason have we
therefore to lament for those that God has removed from such a World of
Troubles; but rather lament for our selves, that are still left in it, and want
those Improved Felicities that they are instated in to all Eternity.

To which, God Almighty in his due time bring us all, to a second Enjoyment and
happy Communion with our Pious Friends gone before us, to whom with his Blessed
Son, and his Eternal Spirit, three Persons and one God, be ascribed all Honor,
Thanksgiving, and Praise, for evermore.

FINIS.
In chartula hac vacua, Lector, qui possit, and cupiat, haec habeto, a
Typographo vel Errata, vel praetermissa.
Ad. page 6. (...). -- Zenoph. ed Steph. page 444. (...). Basil. Ad. page 12.
lin. 2. (...). Chrysostom. Item. Ad page 12. pro Plato de Repub. lege Plato
Polit. ed Serran. 294. (...). etc. Ad. page 17. pro de legibus 18, 19. lege 28,
29. Hinc (...). Dyon. Cas. Ed. Steph. p. 559. Idem. (...). Ad. page 24. St.
Chrysostom. Tom. 6. p. 694. Item. Tom. 7. p. 755. Ed. Savil. Item. Basil Ed.
Basil. p. 220. (...). Ad. page 37. Plato De Repub. Lib. 1. p. 3. 330. Ed.
Serran. (...), etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 15. for we read he. Page 29. lin. 21. for convinced read
convince. Page 38. lin. 23, 24. for I do none any injury in it, read I do none
any Injustice in it.


