

A Pillar of Gratitude HUMBLY DEDICATED To the GLORY of GOD, The HONOR Of His
MAJESTY, The RENOWN of this Present Legal, Loyal, Full, and Free PARLIAMENT
Upon Their Restoring the CHURCH of ENGLAND To the Primitive Government of
EPISCOPACY; And Re-investing Bishops Into Their Pristine Honor and Authority.

Anno 1661.

Aarons Rod. BLESSED and FLORID. Number. 17. 8.



Barren Fig Tree. CURSED and WITHERED Mat. ^1. 19.



(...). Luke 17. 14. Giving Thanks always for all things. Ephesians. 5. 20. Nemo
gratus malus: Nemo malus gratus.
Perditissimum censuerunt Veteres quem ingratum dixerunt.
London, Printed by J. M. for Andrew Crook at the Green-Dragon in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

To the Right Honorable and most Noble Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts and Lords, Barons and Peers, of the Parliament of England; Together
with the other honorable Gentlemen, Knights and Burgesses, of the House of
Commons.
THere shall need no other Apology for the erecting and thus dedicating this
PILLAR of GRATITUDE, than that, which all Justice and Ingenuity do make, for
the Archbishops and Bishops, with all the Orderly Clergy of the Church of
England; Who must cease to be Christians and Men, Religious and Rational, just
and ingenuous, if we should not be highly sensible, how much we are commanded,
by all the Laws of Gratitude to God and Man, to express, in some public and
solemn manner, the humble sense of our thankful Hearts, for that great Mercy,
signal Honor, and eminent Favor, which the good Providence of God, by the
Graciousness of the Kings Majesty, by the Nobleness of the House of Peers, and
by the Generosity of the present House of Commons, (yea, we hope, by the desire
and consent of all wise, sober, and just men, in this Church and Kingdom) has
restored, as the other dignified Clergy to their respective Dignities, so us,
the Archbishops and Bishops not only to the exercise of our Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, but also to the ancient Honor (when his Majesty shall please to
call us) of sitting, consulting, and voting in the House of Peers; Senatus, quo
Sol augustiorem in orb non vidit; as the most learned Bishop Andrews writes in
his Tortura Torti: A Court and Council, in its full and free Constitution, not
to be exceeded, hardly equalled in all the World; for number, and for grandeur;
for the conspicuity of its Wisdom; for the majesty of its Presence; and for the
Eminency, no less than Antiquity, of its Authority; Agreeable to that of
Fortescue, cited by Sir Edward Coke in his Institutes, l. 4. c. 1. Si
Antiquitatem spectes, est vetustissima; si Dignitatem, est honoratissima; si
Jurisdictionem, est capacissima.

Nor do We the Bishops (with all our Brethren of the Clergy) more congratulate
our own Reception, to our pristine station, after fifteen years absence, than
your LORDSHIPS safe Return, after twelve years Banishment, to the enjoyment of
your native Right, and hereditary Honor, of sitting in Parliament, as Barons
and Peers: And no less do we celebrate with joy the renewed privilege of the
freeborn Commons of England, to sit and suffragate, in their honorable House,
by their chosen Deputies, the Knights and Burgesses, after they had for many
years been baffled with Tumults, broken by Factions, bastinadoed with
Truncheons, and beaten with Swords; in order (forsooth) to preserve the Liberty
of the Subject, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Reformed Religion.

Above all (for in that one, all your Honors, all our civil Freedoms and
temporal Happinesses are included) we of the Clergy, beyond all men, have cause
anew to solemnize this Day, with (Faelix, faustumque) a peculiar joy and jubilee
to Gods glory, the Churches peace, and the Kingdoms prosperity, the happy
Return of his SACRED MAJESTY to his rightful Throne, as the Sun to his proper
Orb or Sphere, after the dreadful Overthrow of our late Phaetons; Who, having
set this English World on fire, and quenched the other two British Kingdoms of
Scotland and Ireland with their blood, ashes and ruins, had this only honor
for their Epitaph (Magnis excidere ausis) That they justly fell from most
audacious adventures, arrogant usurpations, and impudent impieties; smitten, at
length, as with the Conscience of their own enormious wickednesses, so with the
Thunder and Lightning, the terror and consternation of that divine vengeance,
which, when they least dreamed of, did wonderfully overtake them; after they
had a long time flattered themselves in Providence; and, by the delusion of
Successes, had blasphemed the most high, holy, and righteous God, as if he were
such an one as themselves; a lover of perfidy, perjury, and hypocrisy; Which
vengeance was also on the sudden executed upon them, as by the loyal Prayers
and pious Impatiences of all his Majesty's good Subjects, so chiefly by the
honest Policies and prudent Conduct of one wise and valiant General, who (as
Samson) caught those subtle Foxes, and tied them tail to tail; but without any
other firebrands, than themselves; taking the crafty in their own devices, and
pulling down the proud from their seats of scorn and Tyranny: (May his heroic
name be written in the Book of Life, as it is in that of worldly Honor, with an
indeleble Character; because he did not pervert to private ambition (as others
had foolishly and falsely done) the rare opportunity of doing Actions of
incomparable Loyalty to his Prince, and of Love to his Country.)

Those Scandals and Reproaches to all true Honor and Religion, those pests and
shame to all good Government, being once gone with Judas to their own places,
after they had filled the three Kingdoms with blood, barbarity, and confusion,
and the measure of their iniquity up to the brim, by a wanton superfluity of
folly and madness, wickedness and hypocrisy, at last this grand Theater of
Wisdom and Honor (the Parliament of England) was left free, for the joyful
Reception of its ancient Inhabitants, King, Lords, and Commons, there to sit
with Freedom and Honor; never again (we hope and pray) to be divided,
scattered, confounded and destroyed.

Whose Piety and Justice not satisfied with their own Return to this Throne of
Majesty, this sanctuary of Religion, this seat of Honor, this Citadel of all
legal and ingenuous Liberties, are pleased still to express a sense of
solitude, until they had completed (More majorum) after the ancient pattern of
English Parliaments, their honorable society with the Archbishops and Bishops
of England and Wales; That so in this, as in all other instances of true Honor,
they might not come short of the Piety and Prudence of their noble Ancestors;
who thought, that a Parliament of England, without Bishops, was as a City
without a Temple, or as a Temple without an Altar, or as an Altar without a
Sacrifice; or as all these without a duly consecrated Priest; or as he and they
too would be without the true Worship of the true God.

And thus have we lived to see, by merciful and miraculous Revolutions, a
plenary Restoration of the Majesty, Honor, Piety, and Liberty of this so
renowned Church and Kingdom; both in their grand Epitomes of Parliament and
Convocation; also in their greater latitudes, or diffusions, to all Estates and
degrees of Men, as to their just Concerns and Interests to which, in Law or
Religion, in Prudence or Conscience, they can pretend; Which are all bound up
in the Kings gracious, free, and royal Consent, ratifying the joint counsels
and humble desires of the Nobility, of the Clergy, and of the Commonalty,
unanimously represented to him; as by the Lords Temporal and Commons, so by the
Lords Spiritual or Bishops, now restored to their ancient Place and Honor in
the Parliament of England. (May this signal Mercy of God never be forgotten by
us; may this happy Union never be dissolved among us: may this great Blessing
never be forfeited by us.)

An high honor indeed, yet, withal, a very heavy burden, put upon us Bishops;
not only, as to the great Service and public Duty, which is on all hands
expected from us; And for that great account, which will be required of us,
according to the Talents, Advantages, and Opportunities given us, to serve God,
the King, and the Church: (to which nothing can sufficiently enable us, but the
same Grace and Favor, both divine and humane, which has thus prevented us:)
But also, as to that envy, which must necessarily by this eminency be
contracted, from all those evil men, who have evil eyes, and evil wills and
evil hearts, not only against Bishops and Episcopacy, but also against the
Peace and Prosperity of this Kingdom, no less than against the pristine Renown
and Flourishing of this Reformed Church of England; which was famous heretofore
in all the Christian World abroad, and no less reverenced at home, by People,
Peers, and sovereign Princes, while its Diocesan Bishops were dignified with
this public and Parliamentary honor; Which is not like that sad OTHER HOUSE,
a mushroom or gourd of Yesterday, springing out of O. P. and withering with R.
C. but it began with the first Originals of Parliaments; and for many hundred
of years continued, without any violent interruption, until these late
Antimonarchical and Antiepiscopal Chasms and Concussions, which shook Heaven
and Earth; yea, and Hell it self, to destroy both Kings and Bishops, the
Kingdom and Church of ENGLAND.

In which horrid conflicts of Innovation, Schism, Rebellion, and Confusion,
with our well reformed Church, our ancient Laws, our settled Religion, and our
excellent Government, the tail of the Dragon strove to cast down to the earth
many Stars of the highest Spheres, the greatest magnitude, and divinest
influence, in this Church and Kingdom: And among them the most reverend and
learned Bishops of this Church, even one and all, at one sweeping Stroke; who
(with their famous Predecessors) for many Centuries of years, had both sat in
Parliaments, as Peers, and presided in the Church as Prelates: that is, chief
Fathers, Stewards, and Overseers in Christ's Family, or the Household of Faith;
Principal Governors or Presidents in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Prime Members
in all Synods and Convocations: The main Cisterns and Conduits of holy Orders:
The grand Conservators of Ministerial Power and Ecclesiastical Authority; very
ample and able Defenders (under God and the King) of Religion, as Christian and
Reformed, in Truth and Faith, in Peace and Holiness, in good Government, decent
Order, and legal Uniformity.

By which public influences of their judicious Preaching, solid writing,
sober living, grave counselling, and prudent governing (set off with such
eminent Honors, fair Revenues, and due Authority, as they were by the
munificence of Princes legally vested in) the Bishops of ENGLAND have, by Gods
blessing, been in all Ages (according to the analogy and capacity of Times) as
the fairest, so the strongest Pillars in this Churches Fabric: Like the goodly
Cedar beams and costly stones which were laid in Solomon's Temple: like the
fruitfullest Figtrees, Vines and Olives, planted in the Garden of God;
flourishing and bearing fruits that were pleasing to God and good men; until
that wilde-fire came forth out of the thistles and brambles of the Wilderness,
which sought to devour them root and branch, and with them all things civil and
sacred.

Your valiant and noble Ancestors, not more honorable for their being Peers or
Members in Parliament, than for their being generous Sons of the Church of
ENGLAND, Patrons of Learning and true Religion, These were ever so impatient to
carry on, or conclude any public Counsels or Determinations that were not
sanguinary (Deo inconsulto) without first taking Counsel of God, by his
Priests, Prophets, and Seers, (as David and the best Kings of Judah were wont
to do, in all great concerns, Civil and Ecclesiastical, for War and Peace) that
They thought nothing could be prudent, which was not pious; nor likely to be
prosperous in the State, which did not correspond with the Church. They
esteemed the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Priests of the Lord, to be (as the
Ark was, and the Bearers of it, in the midst of the Camp) not only the center,
but the sanctuary and glory of both Court, City, and Country: That, as the Body
is without the Soul, so are public Counsels and Transactions in Christian
States and Kingdoms, without due regard to God, his Ministers, his Church, and
true Religion.

With whose holy will, mind, and counsels, no men can, in any reason, be
supposed to be better acquainted, or more sincerely conform to them, or more
readily communicative of them, than grave and learned Divines; and among them
those venerable Bishops and Fathers, to whom the Oracles of God, and Power
Evangelical, are specially committed, as to Gods chief Ambassadors, Christ's
eminent Deputies, the Clergies principal Trustees, and, in some sort, the whole
Churches general Representatives; whose learned Gifts and Endowments are
presumed to be most matured by Age, subdued by Experience, sanctified by Grace,
and entirely devoted to the Service of God, the Church, the King, and their
Country; upon whose respective Favors they wholly depend: To the Glory of the
one, and the Welfare of the other, they cannot, in prudence and conscience, be
less faithfully and constantly engaged, than any other men: And in whose
Interests (doubtless) they are much more to be believed, than any of those
Democratick spirits, or Pragmatick Sticklers, among the Clergy or Laity; who
being of less years, abilities, and experience, yea, and possibly less
contented, are apter to be either covetously, or ambitiously, or enviously
discomposed; and so more subject to toss to and fro; to move from one side to
the other, as those weary men do, who lie on hard beds: Easily, as we have
seen, revolting from Kings and Bishops to Presbyterian and Independent
Projects, to popular and Plebeian Adherencies; yea, to Papal Arts and Ends:
That by such Complacencies they may advance their own Estate or Reputation,
though with the ruin of Monarchy and Episcopacy; which are the great
Defensatives and Bulwarks against Sedition and Faction, against Anarchy and
Confusion.

How much the Tumultuary Mutinies of some impetuous malcontents against Kings
and Bishops have been to the detriment and dishonor both of this Church and
Kingdom, the recent memory of your, and our late Troubles and Miseries will
sufficiently tell your Lordships, and those other Gentlemen: As a just History
of their Tragical Counsels and Tyrannical effects, will for ever warn your
amazed and almost incredulous Posterity, when they shall see the different,
yea, destructive Fortunes of our Laws and Religion, of our Kings, Lords, and
Commons; of the sober Clergy, and all degrees of honest men in these three
Kingdoms, under an affected Novelty and Parity of Usurping Presbyters, with
some presumptuous People, (whose dominion in Church or State, neither your
Lordships, nor your Forefathers, ever knew in ENGLAND, nor can ever bear)
compared with that Paternal Government of learned, godly, and venerable
Bishops, counseled and assisted by their reverend Brethren of the Clergy; in a
way and form of Ecclesiastical Government, now happily restored by his Majesty;
as most conform to the Catholic Church; ever approved by our Parliaments,
established by all our ancient Laws, and duly subordinate to our Kings, as
Sovereign Lords; who are owned by us Bishops, and all the Orthodox Clergy of
ENGLAND, to be, under God, the only supreme Dispensers of all Juridical or
Executive Power in Church and State: No way subject either to the Papal Triple
Crown, or to the hundred Eyes of any Presbyterian Class, nor yet to the hundred
Hands of any Independent Junto.

By the Christian Care and Courage, Piety and Charity of which Bishops (next
after, and ever since the Apostles and Apostolic men) Christianity it self
was first planted in Britany, as in all other Countries; when the Crown of King
Lucius, above 1500. years ago (first of any King in all the World) did wear the
Cross, as the noblest Gem and highest Ornament of his Royal Diadem.

Accordingly we read of our British Bishops, present at ancient Councils; as
that of Arles in France, where Restitutus Bishop of London, and Eboracus Bishop
of Yorksate: So in the Council of Arminium, about the year 350. as Sulpicius
Severus and others tell us.

By a like Succession of holy Bishops, and their subordinate Clergy, was
Christian Religion, and its orderly Ministry, preserved in Wales, after many
barbarous Invasions and Persecutions had almost desolated those first planted
Churches of our Britany; as venerable Bede and Guildas the wise tell us. By
godly Bishops were the Saxons and Angles themselves at length converted, both
Kings and Subjects, to that Christian Faith, which, as Saul, they formerly
persecuted, and made such havoc of.

By grave Bishops, as good Physicians, was Christian Religion in its
Fundamentals of Faith and good Manners kept alive, to some degree of saving
health and holy Order, amidst the many distempers, corruptions, and deformities
of those dark times, which went before, and followed after the Norman Conquest,
by reason of the Roman Superstructures, Usurpations, and Apostacies.

By excellent Bishops were the Decays of this Church, and Deformity of Religion
(now above one hundred years past) duly repaired, and orderly reformed, from
those Romish Dregs of Superstition, which had spread upon the face of these
Western Churches, and sowred the Sanctity, as well as sullied the Serenity of
Christian purity and simplicity, both in Faith and Manners.

By worthy Bishops was our English Liturgy fitly composed, our Bibles well
translated, our Reformation soberly completed, our Religion by Law and due
Authority peaceably established; yea, and at last, all was sealed and confirmed
by many of those godly Bishops bonds and banishments, by their Bloods and
Martyrdoms.

By our English Bishops, how many rare Books have been written in all kinds of
good Learning, and especially in Divinity, Dogmatical, Polemical, and
Practical? How has the Orthodox Faith of the Reformed Church of ENGLAND (yea,
of the true Catholic Church) been, by our admirable Bishops, and other
Episcopal Divines, valiantly maintained, against all kinds of Heretical
Novelties, and Schismatical Machinations, both foreign and domestic? They
have neither feared Rome, nor flattered Geneva, nor courted Amsterdam; securing
this Church, at once, against all Papal Policies, Disciplinarian Devices, and
Popular Impostures.

How many great and good Works of pious Munificence, of durable Hospitality,
and useful Charity to Colleges, Cathedrals, and other Churches, to
Free-Schools, to Hospitals, and Almshouses, have by our English Bishops been
founded at their own Charges, and many more by their grave Counsels, and good
Examples? as our English Histories fully inform us.

By some of our learned Bishops (as Anselm, Bradwardine, and others) the Glory
of Gods Grace was notably maintained against the Pelagian pride and
presumption: So was the Liberty of this Church and Kingdom by the great head,
and greater heart, of Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and others, against the Papal
Arrogance.

By the loyal and resolute Bishop of Carlisle was the Sovereignty and Life of
Richard the second, King of ENGLAND, in open Parliament vindicated by
Scripture, Law, and Reason, against the potent Usurpation of Henry the fourth.
By a wise Bishop of Ely was that Counsel first given, which united the two
Roses, and composed our long Civil Wars. Lastly, by a worthy Bishop was that
foundation of Union laid in a Marriage with a Daughter of Henry the seventh,
which in time brought both Kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND under one Scepter
and Monarch, as they are at this day.

I do not mention these (few of many) instances of worthy and most deserving
Bishops of the Church of ENGLAND (for I omit Cranmer, Hooper, Ridley, Latimer,
Matthews, Whitguift, Bancroft, Jewel, Bilson, Andrews, King, both the Abbots,
Davenant, White, Morton, Babington, Carlton, Hall, and others) nor yet do I
reckon up the many late great Sufferers, with much Christian patience, courage,
and constancy (some of whom remain to this day) I say, I do not so mention
those former (as I might with a particular emphasis to each) nor yet these
later Bishops, as if I here meant to plead the merits of Bishops or Episcopacy,
either before God or Man; I know the best Bishops were sensible, that they did
but their Duty to God, their Kings, this Church, and their Country (of whom, as
of Parents, none can merit, few requite them;) Nor is it for me to blazon their
welknown worth by any pomp of words, when their greatest worth consisted in
their modesty and humility; as their greatest merit in their thinking they had
none, though their Works do at once praise them in the gates, and follow them
to Glory.

Only thus far I have, with equal truth and modesty (yea, and without any
offense, I hope) touched upon the wel-known Deserts of some of our English
Bishops; In the first place, to justify this Honor and Favor, which his
gracious Majesty, by the Advice of the House of Peers, and the generous Piety
of the House of Commons, has now done to us Bishops; and in US, to all the
Clergy; and in them, to this whole Church; and in this, to all Christendom; and
in that, to all the World: After the famous Examples of the first Christian
Emperors and Christian Senators of Rome, who assumed the chief Bishops of
Churches in the Roman World, into the Order and Honor of the Senators or Nobles
of the Empire, called Patricii; (whence Saint Patrick, Primate of IRELAND, had
his name, even from that Honor; as the most learned Lord Primate Ussher
observes in his Antiquitates Hibernicae;) That all men might see, what esteem
and love they then had for the Christian Religion; as, of all Religions, the
best, and most deserving of Mankind: Also, what regard they had for the prime
Preachers and Professors of it; Among whom, none were thought more worthy of
double honor, than those that ruled well, and labored also in the Word and
Doctrine; as all true Bishops ought to do, yea, all of them have so done, and
ever will, as God enables them: There being nothing so desirable in the Office
of a Bishop, as the goodness of the Work; which seeks not our own things, but
the things of Jesus Christ, and the public Welfare of the Church, over which
God does set them; that they may at once save their own Souls, and the Souls of
them that hear them.

Furthermore, my design, in this brief Commemoration of excellent and deserving
Bishops in the Church of ENGLAND, is, to make it appear to his Majesty, to your
Honors, and to all the English World (if there needed further demonstrations
than our late Miseries) How partial, how oppressive, how destructive to all
good Learning, and generous Piety, in Churchmen especially (many of whom, in
former times, were Sons of noble and illustrious Families;) How injurious also
to God and Man, to Church and State, to Kings and Subjects, to true Religion
and sober Reformation, those Popular Projects are, have been, and ever will be;
which, with tumultuating Partiality, Plebeian Sordidness, and Mechanic
Importunity, shall seek to deprive the public Wisdom and Counsels of this
Nation, of the light and influence of those greater Stars, or the guidance and
defense of those good Angels, such as our English Bishops have been, and ever
ought to be, and, I hope, ever will be: Whose fatal Thrusting, by head and
shoulders, out of the House of Peers, and more, out of the House of God, this
Church, was followed with such Stygian Darkness, Hellish Horror, and barbarous
Confusion, as cast out both Commons, Lords, and Kings, from their Places, Seats
and Thrones; supplying their and the Bishops places with such Associates in the
House of Lords, as were worse than any solitude.

For, in stead of Kingly Majesty sitting on the Throne, attended with ancient
and honorable Peers, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, they brought into the
Capitol, or sacred Senate of this British Empire, many, that were not the Sons
of noble blood, nor yet men of noble Education, or liberal Endowments; but I^ms
and Ohims, Vultures and Harpies, Satyrs and unclean Beasts; who, how ever so
impudently wicked, as to be ashamed of no sin (no not of Sacrilege, Perjury,
Rebellion, and Regicide) yet were infinitely discountenanced, and blushed to
see themselves in that august, high, and honorable place; just as Owls and Bats
got into an Eagles nest; some of them being such pieces of mean Birth, of
mechanic Breeding, and of monstrous Insolency, as your selves and your
forefathers might, without any unjust brow, have disdained (as Job speaks) to
have set them with the Dogs of your Flocks: So that the bringing in of Bishops
again into your House of Parliament, is, as it were, a new Consecrating of it,
after it had been so lewdly polluted, and horridly profaned, by those Abaddons
and Apollyons.

This Mercy of God, this Favor of his Majesty, this Nobleness of the Peers, and
this Generosity of the House of Commons, to the Bishops of ENGLAND, yea, to
this Church and State, is the more welcome, remarkable, and miraculous, because
they come as a glorious Light after a most dismal Darkness; as the great Calm
followed the Storm that Christ rebuked; as a fair Port, or firm Land, after
much tossing, tempest, and shipwreck; as a gracious Rain after long Drought; as
the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land: This Honor, after Debasement, is as
King Pharaohs Preferments bestowed on Joseph, or Evil-Merodack's lifting up the
Head of Jehojakin, after the squallor of their Prisons: As the fair Robes,
which the Angel commanded should be put upon Joshua the High Priest, after his
filthy garments were taken off; Or as King Nebuchadnezzar advancing Daniel from
the Lions Den, and the other three Confessors, from the fiery Furnace, to be
Governors of Provinces.

For, although all Estates and Degrees of worthy Men have suffered much in our
late Tumults and Tragedies, yet none more than the loyal and conformable
Clergy; and among them the reverend Bishops most of all; being stripped at once
of their Estates and Honors, of all supports and encouragements (except those
of a good Cause, and a good Conscience:) These, as the highest branches of
stately Trees, when felled; or as the tops of lofty Towers, when overthrown (
lapsu graviore cadunt) not only fall first themselves to the ground, but with
the greater stroke and bruise to others: whose sufferings were their greatest
afflictions. Your Lordships, and the other Gentlemen, know too well, that the
Exclusion of the Bishops, or the State Ecclesiastical, (if I may, in respect of
their peculiar Function, their relation to, and representation of the whole
Clergy, as chief Fathers in the Church, so style them stilo veteri, as Sir
Edward Coke and other great Lawyers do, without the offense of any Presbyterian
Critics:) The Exclusion, I say, of them from all Parliamentary, yea, and all
Synodical Councels, was not only their utter undoing; but the first sad
Presage or direful Omen of those after-subversions and confusions, which made
havoc of all those ancient Laws and Constitutions, by which no less the
Coronets of our Nobility, and the Crowns of our Kings, than the Mitres of our
Bishops, were settled.

This gap once made by Tumultuating Importunities, Popular Threatenings, and
Petitionary Terrors, much God knows against the Choice and Genius of his late
Majesty of blessed memory, no less than against the sense of the wisest and
soberest, the most and best Persons of both Houses, and in the whole Kingdom.
Good God! what Iliades of Miseries, what Storms of Violence, what Deluges of
Mischief, what Oceans of Confusion, followed in Church and State? The Tongues
and Pens of some popular Ministers, who were wantonly wicked and zealously
cruel, being once let loose against their Church Governors the Bishops, how
were all things soon set on fire, even with the fire of Hell? which burned to
the very foundations of Church and Kingdom; being like Tophet, or those
everlasting burnings, which nothing but a miraculous shower of divine Mercy
could thus allay, or quench.

As no man did, said, wrote, and suffered more in the behalf of Bishops and
this Church, than the best of Kings; or with more Christian, Heroic, and
Martyrly Courage: So (next that Royal Martyr) were these godly Confessors, the
Bishops, and other worthy Clergymen, who a long time stood in the breach, till
there was no remedy; but Sin and Judgment brake in upon them, and all Estates
as a mighty Torrent; In which many of them lost more then all they had: for the
contagion of their calamities reached even to their Children, Friends, and
Acquaintance; the envy and fury of their Enemies seeking to exhaust all their
Relations, lest there should be any to relieve them with any thing but
empty-handed pity.

I knew some Bishops, and those of the first three (whom I cannot mention
without Honor, nor remember their Enemies Cruelty without Horror) who were in
their old age reduced to live (in great part) as the Clergy did in Primitive
Persecutions (ex Donis and Oblationibus) by Alms and charitable Contributions:
So did the incomparable Lord Primate of Armagh, Bishop Ussher, and the most
accomplished Bishop Brownrig: Nor was the excellently learned and very aged
Bishop of Durham (Doctor Morton) far from being an Object of mere Charity: I am
sure, equal shame and grief (mixed with just indignation) affects me, when I
read, expressed in his own words, the churlish, Cainish, and contemptuous
Carriage of some men to the late venerable Bishop of Nor^^ch, Doctor Hall;
whose admired eloquence and meekness was capable, like Orpheus his Harp, to
have charmed all wild Beasts, except (bipedes Lupos) two-legged Wolves. I need
not add to this Catalogue the acurate Doctor Prideaux, late Bishop of Worcester
(verus librorum helluo) who having first, by indefatigable studies, digested
his excellent Library into his Mind, was after forced again to devour all his
Books with his Teeth; turning them, by a miraculous Faith and Patience, into
Bread for himself and his Children, to whom he left no Legacy, but pious
Poverty, Gods Blessing, and a Fathers Prayers, as appears in his last Will and
Testament.

Blessed God! Who will not learn, yea, covet to want, as well as to abound,
from these great Examples? which are capable to render Indigence it self
venerable, Poverty desirable, and Affliction lovely? Since God never takes the
good things of this World from so good men, but as an indulgent Father he
intends to give them better; Physic for a time, in stead of Food; as he did to
Job: at last he repairs them with Pearls for Pebbles, and with eternal
Treasures for temporary trash.

How justly these Afflictions befell very worthy Bishops, and other excellent
Ministers, then flourishing to a great number in the Church of ENGLAND, as from
the Hand of God, their own Humility and Charity, their Patience and Silence
commands me, neither to doubt nor dispute: It befits us all, to give glory to
God, to take shame to our selves, to say, it is of the Lords mercy that we are
not utterly consumed, that there is yet a Remnant that has escaped.

But how unjustly, as to the Hand of Man, all these burdens of disgrace and
indigence were cast upon such venerable Persons in their old age and infirmity,
I leave to the sober and equanimous World to judge; when much evil was, for
many years, inflicted upon them all, and no malicious evil of fact was ever
proved against one of ten of them: They were all condemned, but never tried;
deprived of their Ecclesiastical Rights in Law, but not according to any known
Law of God or Man: Their great offense was, that they did not think themselves
wiser than the Laws of the Land, and Canons of the Church; That they would not
divide what God had joined together, Religion and Loyalty, to fear God, and
honor the King; That they chose suffering rather than sinning; That they were
not willing to have themselves, with all the Clergy and the Gentry, the
Nobility and the Majesty of the Kings of ENGLAND, forced to truckle under the
Iron Bedstead of Presbytery; or to tremble under the Wooden Ferula of Ruling
Lay Elders, either Dependents or Independents; whose insolency was more
intolerable, than that of an handmaid which was become heir to her Mistress:
The unpardonable sin of those Reverend Fathers was, that they chose rather to
obey God and the King, according to known Laws, than to flatter or humor any
Popular Faction, how potent or prevalent soever; still esteeming true piety and
virtue, in the midst of adversity, to be more amiable, than the most prosperous
Impiety, or triumphant Hypocrisy: As the three innocent persons were less hurt
by the Fire, than those who cast them into the Furnace; these were consumed,
the other not singed.

As no doubt those great Sufferers, the Bishops of this Church, willingly
forgave their Persecutors, and committed their Cause to Gods Pleading, having
no other care but this, not to suffer as evil doers, or as busy bodies, or as
perturbers of Church or State: So they now greatly rejoice in their past
afflictions; not only for the good which they and others may have gained by
them, and for the gracious end which the LORD has ( as we hope) now put to
them; but also for those great and glorious Advantages, which their former,
many, long, and sore calamities do now give, to the present conspicuity of his
Majesty's goodness, to the splendour of your Lordships noble favors, and to the
generosity of the House of Commons: Thus, by a most magnificent and illustrious
Opportunity, to express His Munificence and Your Kindness to the dejected
Bishops, to the oppressed Clergy, and to the almost desolated Church of
ENGLAND, suitable to, and in some respect far exceeding, the pristine Examples
of his Majesty's Royal, your Lordships and other Gentlemen's loyal and religious
Ancestors; who were so far from casting the Bishops, or chief Pilots of the
Church, overboard, that they never thought themselves safer from shipwreck,
than when they were embarked in the same Ship with Saint Paul and his pious
Companions.

Your Lordships and the other worthy Gentlemen well know (as I touched) that
Bishops in England have ever been contemporary with Parliaments time out of
mind, as they have been in all Christian Empires and Kingdoms, Germany,
France, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Hungary, and others, present and assistant in
all their Diets and National Conventions: So that our former Kings (according
to their Coronation Oaths) and Parliaments (according to Law) did constantly
indeed preserve Bishops in those ancient places and privileges, Immunities and
Honors, where they found them: But You, the present Lords and Commons
(concurrent with his Majesty's Goodness) have the singular Glory and Happiness
to restore them to those ancient Dignities, which they never forfeited, and so
were never before deprived of; till their legal and deserved Honor was become
their Sin and Crime; till their good Manors made them guilty; and their
Revenues were counted their Delinquency: lastly, till their having of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was ground enough to divest them of all Authority,
and the Church of all Order and Government. It is the singular Honor of this
complete Parliament, which sits, as it began, with all that fullness of
Authority and Liberty (which is the life and soul, the crown and glory of such
august Assemblies) to repair those breaches which were made by the free Votes
(as it seems) of but a few Lords and Commons, compared to the integral numbers
of either House; and that in very tumultuating, broken, and boisterous Times:
whose imperious and impetuous Fury would not be satiated or stayed, till they
had destroyed in new ways of Judicature (without any former president or future
parallel, we hope) first a prime Counselor of State, next the chief Bishop of
this Church, and lastly the best of Kings in the World: So fatal and unhappy it
is for men, either to neglect Gods ends, or to vary from his means, to use the
Devils engines for Gods edifice; doing real evil, that imaginary good may come
thereby.

Indeed, the blessed God has in the midst of his Judgments remembered Mercy:
HE, HE, has commanded the Whales, which had devoured our Jonah's (the Bishops,
and other dignified Clergy of England, with all their Cathedral Churches,
Honors, and Revenues) to cast them up again upon dry Land: HE, HE, has sent
his good Angels, even the King, and his faithful Forerunner (who are in this
respect as Angels or Messengers of God) to stop those Lions mouths, who thought
they had us all alive between their Teeth; breaking our bones, that they might
more securely eat our flesh.

He, he, has stirred up the Heart of our gracious Sovereign, with this loyal
Parliament (as he did the Hearts of Cyrus and Darius, Kings of the East) to
turn the Captivity of the Church, of the Clergy, and of the Bishops of England;
to make our latter end better than our beginning, no less for inward Graces
(which we hope and pray) than for outward Mercies; as he did to holy and
patient Job.

Indeed the Mercy of God is so miraculous, and the Favor of King and Parliament
is so remarkable to us, That many of those ambiguous friends to the Church of
England, to Bishops, and to Episcopacy, who formerly stood, as Jobs miserable
Comforters, afar off, amazed to see, that (amidst Christians, and Protestants,
and zealous Pretenders to Reformation) such eminent Learning, such powerful
Eloquence, such venerable Years, such admirable Piety, such oracular Prudence,
such splendid Virtues, such useful Abilities, and such deserved Honors, as were
to be seen in the late Learned and Reformed Bishops and Clergy of ENGLAND,
should be forced to embrace the Dunghill, to be trampled upon, terrified,
scorned, and cast out, as the offscouring of all things, by men some of them
viler than the earth; who certainly would not have used Christ and his Apostles
much better, had they appeared among them, such as indeed they were, Bishops or
chief Pastors and Shepherds of the Churches: Even those dubious Spectators of
the late Trials and cruel Mockings, put upon the Bishops and Clergy of ENGLAND,
do now, many of them, turn their Amazement of Horror to an Ecstasy and Jubilee
of Joy; while they see what a Wonderful Change God has made, commanding dry
bones to live, giving beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness for the garment
of Heaviness; rebuking at once the Raging of the Sea, and the madness of the
People; which nothing but Omnipotent Goodness can tame, or set bounds unto, as
he has now done among us.

Many of those wary Christians, and superpolitick Professors, who heretosore
were afraid, lest, by their compassionate and kind Aspect, they should adopt
the unjust Calamities of godly Bishops, and other Worthy Churchmen; These
(now) begin to look serenely, and without sqinting, on the Episcopal Dignity;
they speak reverently of, and kindly to, the venerable Bishops, and the other
industrious Episcopal Clergy; They behave themselves with filial Respects to
their Mother the Church of ENGLAND, speaking comfortably to her, and telling
her, That her Warfare is accomplished; assuring us Bishops, and all other
Worthy Ministers of the Church, That our Troubles are finished, if our Hearts
be refined, our Lusts mortified, our Passions conquered, and our Lives amended;
That the former Terrors, Afllictions, and sad Desolations, shall be requited
with double Honor, if we all unanimously return with double Diligence to do our
Duties to God and Man; That those vast Ruins, which Schism, Sacrilege,
Rebellion, and other crying sins have made, shall be abundantly repaired, by
the Justice, Piety, and Munificence of the King, the Parliament, and People of
ENGLAND; who have lived to see all the Vizars and Masks of Angels of Light, now
quite taken off from the Faces of those Satan's; who, under the clamors of
violent Nonconformity, and under the colors of illegal, unreasonable, and
deforming Reformations, are found the greatest Adversaries to Law and Justice,
to true Reason and sober Religion, to necessary Order and good Government,
which are the solid Foundations and only Pillars of public Peace, of sober
and lasting Reformation.

God himself (I say) has at last pleaded, by the seasonable Intervention of
the King and Parliament, the Cause of this Church, against all its cruel
Calumniators and causless Adversaries, whose late sacrilegious Depredations,
dreadful Oppressions, and endless Vastations, sprang first from the root of
scrupulous, or sullen, or scandalous Nonconformity to the Laws: At length they
all nestled themselves under the popular Shadow, or in the spreading Branches
of an Anti-episcopal, novel, illegal and Headless Presbytery: At last they
brought forth those bitter fruits and sour Grapes, which set all our teeth on
edge, by the Anarchy and Confusion, the Waste and Ruin, of this Church and
Kingdom.

This Royal Munificence and Favor of his present Majesty is, by the former
Insolences and Calamities that befell this Church and Clergy, as by so many
black foils and dark shadows, the more set off, to be (as indeed it is) so
great, so unwonted, so wonderful, so kingly, so christian, so divine, so
proportionable (in this point) for gratitude and munificence, to Gods
extraordinary Providence, often preserving, and at last restoring his Majesty to
his Kingdoms; That no instance in any Age or History can parallel it, nor can
any thing be said worthy of it, but this: It is an act of magnificent Piety,
worthy of such a King and the Son of such a Father; The Father chose to lose
all his Crowns, Estate, and Life, rather than rob God and the Church: The Son,
when God had restored all to him, as to our lawful Caesar, takes care to restore
all to God that is his and his Churches.

Give me leave to take a more leasurely and exact view of his Majesty's Bounty
and Justice to the Church and Clergy of ENGLAND; For its Dimensions, like those
of the Pyramids and Colosses (which were among the Wonders of the World) merit
more than a transient Aspect.

When his Majesty's own Royal Estate, by long Usurpation and Banishment, had
been wholly detained from him, and much exhausted; when he was now under the
necessity of many and great Expenses, public and private, for the Payment of
his Royal Navy, and for the Disbanding of his Armies (now His, by a most happy
Revolt, and loyal Apostasy;) When He had Power, as He pleased, to recruit his
Estate, and to restore the Majesty of his Kingdoms; When not more his own, than
his Friends Exigencies pressed him (as sharp hunger does mighty Eagles, or
Lions, to fall upon any prey that comes next to hand;) When there wanted not
some back Friends to the Church of ENGLAND, who wrapping up Sacrilege (like
Goliah's Sword in the linen cloth) in the soft covering and show of Loyalty,
were ready enough to make a Royal Present to his Majesty of John Baptists Head
in a Silver Charger, persuading him to fill his Exchequer by robbing the Church.

When his Martyred Father and Family, his own Person and the Crown of ENGLAND,
had suffered so much, upon no account more, than that of their Christian Piety
and Justice, Courage and Constancy, to defend, as nursing Fathers, the Church
and Clergy of ENGLAND, in their just Rights, Endowments and Enjoyments: When
there was indeed such a grateful Compensation due to his Majesty and the Crown
of ENGLAND, as was almost capable to Christen even Sacrilege it self, and to
wash, to some degree of Whiteness, that Borborites, or Blackmore, about which
some have spent so much labor in vain.

Yet then, even then, after so many merits of the Royal Family, both active and
passive, toward the Church and Clergy of ENGLAND, amidst such streights and
exigents of his Person, Family, Relations, Crowns and Kingdoms; How has his
Majesty, by a most Princely Piety, abhorred to make necessity any plea or
excuse for Sacrilege? He had rather still hunger (with David and his Men) than
take the Shewbread of Gods House, without the Priests consent and free gift:
He chose rather still to want, than to be supplied out of Gods Exchequer, or
the Churches Treasury, by any sacrilegious Rapine, or other sine Projects of
the Devil; which more than once did offer to his Majesty a Sacrifice out of
their Rapine, and a burnt-offering out of their Church-Robbery, even a Present
of five hundred thousand Pounds, to confirm the late illegal Sales of Church
Lands for ninety nine Years; and yet (that you may see what good Bargains they
had) the Purchasers mean while to pay the old Rents to the Bishops and Clergy:
But his Majesty abhorred to taste of any fruit which came from so evil, bitter,
and accursed a root as Sacrilege.

Thus, thus, has his Majesty, of his own pious and Princely Disposition
(conform to his Fathers Christian Resolution, and encouraged by your Lordships
and other noble Persons high Comprobation of his so just and holy Restitutions
to God and the Church) kept his Person and Conscience, his Name and Family, his
Crown and Kingdom, unspotted from this great offense, from this giantly and
impudent sin of Sacrilege, which at once fights against God and Man; against
the Charity of the dead, and the Equity of the living; robbing God and Man,
while it pretends to reform Religion; just as those Cheats, who pick Men's
Pockets, or cut Men's Purses, while they smile in their Faces.

To the Wonder of the Christian World, and to his Majesty's eternal Honor (as a
Son worthy, in this glory, of such a glorious Father) do we owe the plenary
Restitution, full Collation, and free Fruition of the Churches Dignities,
Honors, and Revenues, which are seldom retrograde, when once alienated by any
way from the Church, (Vestigia nulla retrorsum:) It is a rare sight to see
Restitution made, but as welcome certainly to God, good Angels, and good Men, as
the Return of a true Penitent, such as Zacheus, whose Repentance was evidenced
by his Restitution of what he had unjustly gotten.

To his Royal Bounty (next under God) we Bishops are obliged for our
Spiritualties and Temporalties; That we are, at the Honorable Motion and Desire
of the Houses of Parliament, admitted again to put on the Robes of Bishops
ancient Honors; and enabled to sit (when his Majesty pleases to summon us) in
that place, which is the Palace of Wisdom, the Source and Center of all our
Laws and Civil Justice: That we may there appear among your Lordships, not
pilled and stripped of our Churches remaining Patrimonies; not confined to
arbitrary Pensions and uncertain Stipends; which Eleemosynary Dependances are
weak and narrow foundations of Episcopal Honor, yea, and of any Ministerial
Dignity or Authority; (nothing being more uncomely and inconsistent, than
teaching and begging, than craving and reproving; as the Cynick Philosophers
were wont to make themselves ridiculously severe, and supercilious Beggars.)
But we are restored ( in solidum and ex ass) to the full and free Possession
of the Churches ancient Patrimony, and Inheritance, which is Gods Portion: And
this in a way so far from any Simonaical Compact, that the very thought of so
sordid a way of Merchandising, I am confident, never presumed to knock at the
Door of his Majesty's Royal Breast or Heart.

Thus, thus, has our great and gracious King (as those famous Eastern
Emperors) not only commanded to rebuild the Temple of the Lord, but to restore
the Vessels, and what else belonged to the Sanctuary; Thus has our David
redeemed out of the jaw of the Lion and paw of the Bear that Kid and Lamb which
they had ravished from Christ's Fold, from this Church, yea, from Christ
himself, the great Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls; to whom we owe our selves
and all that we have; to whose Service and Honor no grateful Consecrations and
pious Retributions can be too much, or can seem so to any men, but to Judasses,
covetous traitors, and ungrateful wretches. Doubtless so great a justice and so
generous a charity cannot go unrewarded of God, as it will be eternally admired
by all good men and true Christians: The showing so great mercy to the poor
Church and Clergy of ENGLAND, which is indeed done to Christ, will be a means
to cover many insirmities, and to lengthen (we hope and pray) the Tranquillity
of the King and his Kingdoms: Nor can any loyal Subjects let that King want
what is necessary for the public Peace, and comely for his Majesty, who has
so large an heart and so liberal hand toward God and his Church.

We have (Right Honorable and Worthy Senators) nothing so much to say in this
Essay of Gratitude to God, to the Kings Majesty, and to Your Selves, as to be
abruptly silent, and to stand still a while filled with admiration and
astonishment: What King or Emperor since Constantine the Great, and Charles
the Great (I mean the last, who laid down his Life for the Liberties of his
Church and Kingdoms) ever did the like act of Honor, Piety, Charity, Justice,
and Munisicence to the Bishops, to the Clergy, to the whole Church, and (if I
may so say) to God himself! to whom nothing can be given but of his own
Munificence; as David modestly and truly expresses his and the Princes
liberality to the Temple. Thus to redeem the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and
whole Nation, from that ugly sin and shame of sacrilege, wherewith some cruel
and covetous men, by their violent illegal and unreasonable courses, had sought
to engage, yea, and for ever to damn (as much as in them lay) you and your
posterity: Other Kings and Princes of this Renowned Kingdom, as also many
pious Lords and Gentlemen, have consecrated many things to God and his Church;
but his present Majesty has at once restored all; thereby showing himself to
be both Charles le bon, and le grand; A great and good Christian King.

If I; or We (for I still presume to set forth the grateful and similary sense
of my Reverend Fathers and Brethren the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Worthy
Clergymen) if, I say, We may with your patience speak any more, or indeed were
able to say any thing suitable to this so rare, so religious, and so
transcendent a subject, his Majesty's free and speedy restoring to the Bishops
and other Churchmen their ancient Honors, Dignities, and Revenues, by your
Lordships advice and assent, with the Honorable House of Commons, It must be
in the words of the Psalmist, Quid retribuemus Domino? Yea, Dominis? What shall
We, the Bishops and Clergy of ENGLAND, return to the LORD our God; and to our
Lord the King; and to your Lordships, and to the Gentry of England, or the
House of the Commons now assembled in Parliament?

Give me leave to tell your Lordships, and those other Gentlemen, not what we
would say, but what we would do; I am sure we should do, yea, and we resolve to
do, if we may be assisted with Gods graces, and favored with your Christian
Prayers.

1. First, As to God, We do wholly devote our selves, and all the advantages we
have by his renewed mercies, to advance his Glory, and the Honor of our
Blessed Savior, in the faithful discharge of our duties to the Service of this
Church, by preaching, praying, writing, living, and governing (our selves we
mean, no less than others) so as becomes Primitive and Apostolic Bishops; so
as is on all hands highly deserved of us, and justly expected from us,
according to our places and abilities.

As it will be easier for us at the great day of account to have wanted these
honorable Privileges than to have abused them; so we had much rather not
enjoy them at all, than not have hearts to use them aright, as prime Professors
and Patterns of Christianity; that is, Followers of Jesus Christ and his
blessed Apostles, in all Piety, Prudence, Sanctity, Charity, Sincerity. It
argued some greatness of mind in some of our Bishops, for these many years to
have lived contentedly without these temporal and secular advantages, not to
have sunk and desponded under so long and importune adversities; but it will be
more of Christian Magnanimity to enjoy them wisely and worthily, to overcome
the temptation of prosperity, to use them not to pride and luxury, but to
humble and holy industry; to discreet hospitality, to cheerful charity; to the
good of the Church, and to Gods glory; who has promised to honor those that
honor him, and to add all these things to those that first seek his Kingdom
and the righteousness thereof: Doubtless nothing will be wanting to us, if we
be not wanting to God, his Church, our selves and our Brethren of the Clergy,
who are sober men, void of depraved opinions, and debauched practices.

Secondly, In reference to his gracious Majesty our resolutions are, That none
of his Subjects shall more imitate, and (if your Lordships give us leave)
cheerfully emulate your and their Loyalty, Love and Fidelity to his Majesty's
safety, peace, and happiness temporal and eternal, than we his Bishops, who of
all men may least be traitors to his Honor, Conscience, or Soul; who having
dealt so bountifully with us, cannot but expect from us those honest and
faithful things which are most worthy of his Munificence and our Integrity; So
as may most conduce to his Majesty's welfare and the public peace. The first
we should basely betray, together with our own Souls, if we should cease daily
to pray for his Majesty's happiness; if we should fail to set forth the whole
truth of God to him and his Subjects; Lastly, if we should serve, sooth, or
silently flatter any known sin in our selves, or any others whatsoever; and
least of all in those, whose sins must needs be as most conspicuous and
exemplary, so most contagious and dangerous.

The second (of public peace) we shall best serve and secure by well and
wisely ordering (as Spiritual Captains and Colonels of the Ecclesiastical
Militia) that Army of Ministers, or great company of Preachers in England and
Wales, which cannot be less then ten thousand men effective; whose number is
great, and their influence with their activity much greater, being mustred and
in spiritual arms at least once every week; where getting upon the higher
ground, and being as in Christ's stead, they cannot but have a very great stroke
on men's (and more on women's) ears, hearts, and purses: These had need be well
disciplined and governed under Christ, and his Majesty, according to Gods Word,
the Laws of this Kingdom, and the Constitutions of this Church; which must be
their and all our rules, by which they and we must serve God and the King; as
with truth and holiness, so with decency, order, and uniformity: Neither
excentrick nor erratick from our proper Spheres, nor yet defective or deformed
in them: The managing of which great Concern being by his Majesty and the Laws
chiefly committed to us Bishops, it will be most our sin and shame to be
wanting in our duty; If any man blame us for doing what is lawful and just, yea
necessary for the public peace, they must withal blame the Laws, and by a most
egregious folly think themselves wiser than the public wisdom, the Laws and
Laws-makers; in which their own consent is included, and from which no man may
lightly be a Renegado.

Thirdly, As to your Nobleness, no men shall more study your Lordships true
honor and eternal happiness, the only sufficient requital of your meritorious
love and favor to us * who have accepted, yea restored us Bishops to be
Partakers of your honor, Auditors of your wisdom, and Spectators of your
noblest Conversation, in that place where every one studies to put on the best
appearance; We and our Successors must for ever be faithful Counselors,
Friends and Servants to your Lordships and your Noble Posterity; who possibly
will bear from our age, place and quality, with greater patience, civility, and
acceptance, than from other Ministers, those discreet monitions, seasonable
intimations, and wholesome counsels, which may be sometimes most necessary for
you and them: It will always best become us rather to offend you by telling you
the truth in a decent manner, than to betray you to those sinful infirmities or
passions which are your greatest enemies, next to your flatterers.

No men shall be more ashamed than we, to see our selves sit in Parliament
(that is, in the Congregation of Princes, or mortal Gods) if we should not
behave our selves in all respects answerable to your Illustrious Society, and
to your great merits toward us: As we are below the Objects of your Lordships
Envy, so we will study to be above (that is, not to deserve, and so not to
fear) your anger; Nor shall you either love virtue, or your own souls, or your
God and Savior, if you either hate or despise us, who intend (by Gods help) to
perfect that in our selves and all others (as far as our good counsel, example,
and lawful authority will extend) which some men have so long, so lowdly, and
so in vain pretended to in point of true Reformation both private and public;
Not in fine fancies, superficial formalities, and popular vaporings, but in
solidly great, and really good actions, in which the power of godliness does
consist; being offended at no men's sinful deformities and defects, either
personal or political, more than our own: What is wanting in any of us as to
high blood and extraction, as to Civil Grandeur and Estate, shall (by Gods
help) be made up in that modest wisdom, sober learning, hearty loyalty, and
unfeigned Religion, which may most counterpoise your other accomplishments, by
which we confess your Lordships much overweigh us: Indeed nothing can buoy up
Episcopacy, or recover the true honor of the Church of ENGLAND to a fixation,
so much as the primitive great and good examples of Bishops and the Episcopal
Clergy; as the excellently Learned and Pious Doctor Hammond now dying declared
his judgment; when leaving the world and all his justly deserved preferments on
earth, he left us a most rare and imitable example of very great abilities set
forth with greater industry, and most set off with greatest humility.

If we can but live above those diminutions, which set us below our selves, our
holy calling, his Majesty's favor, and your honorable Society, we shall be
nothing concerned in those other petty and plebeian objections, which the pride
or envy of some mechanic spirits are prone to make against our persons or
profession, since our Originals (blessed be God) were as honest and unspotted
as any men's, though not so noble and illustrious; Our education has been
studious and ingenious, though not so ample and conspicuous; Our conversation
though more obscure and in the shade, yet not vain, not vicious, nor (it may
be) so sunburned and tanned as others: We have from our youth been devoted and
trained up to Gods glory, to His Majesty's and the Churches service, by such
pious, frugal, and learned retirements, as most redeemed us from those luxuries
and superfluities to which others are exposed: We humbly and willingly own,
contrary to the vapor of that great Orator, ( Omnia nostra incrementa ( non
nobis, sed) Deo, Regi, Senatui debemus;) All our advancements, not to our
selves (as he said) but to Gods mercy, the Kings bounty, your Lordships and our
Countries favor.

Indeed our single persons, families, relations, reputations, estates or
merits, are too small and narrow a Basis or bottom upon which to erect and
settle this great Pyramide, Pillar, or Obelisk of public or Parliamentary
Honor; which in all true proportions is to be founded upon his Majesty's and
your just zeal, for Gods glory, for the honor of our Savior, for this
Churches welfare, and for the ancient dignity of Episcopacy: As our private
comfort can only be fixed, so this public honor must chiefly be ascribed to
and placed upon the latitude of his Majesty's wisdom, and the sanctity of your
virtues; upon the account of the love you have to true Religion, and the esteem
you bear to good Learning; also upon your care of this Churches flourishing,
together with this Kingdoms peace: To these great and good ends we are
willingly made public Servants; to these some of us have sacrificed all our
former happy tranquillity and sweet retiredness, rather than be wanting to that
duty which was not calmly required, but importunely exacted from us; when more
than once seriously deprecating the burden of this employment, we were
absolutely commanded to obedience, rather than seem to withdraw our shoulders
from the burden; which no man will envy, but he whose ignorant ambition least
understands it, and is least capable, as of the sacred duty, so of the
necessary policy and reason of Episcopacy in England.

It is most certain that we cannot be without a King (as the Cappadocians
pleaded to the Romans when they offered them their popular liberty) in
England, and not be very miserable; which we have lately felt: Nor can our
Kings want wise Counselors of State, any more than Pilots can their Card or
Compass; Nor can these well want the counsel and assistance of learned and
religious Churchmen, grave and reverend Bishops, any more than the Mariners
Compass can be without the Magnetic Needle or Director; and this upon a double
reason: First, worthy Bishops are the fittest persons, not only to repress the
falsity, scandal, and immorality of Ministers evil doctrines and lives, (which
are as stinking carrion or dead horses in the high way, the poison and
abhorrence of all passengers; publicae pestes Ecclesiae and Reipublicae, the
most infecting and killing plagues to Church and Country:) But also they serve
to restrain and bridle the vulgar petulancy and popular rudeness of some
factions Preachers tongues; which are sometimes, as the hearts and censors of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, full of strange fire; or as Sheba's trumpet founding
faction and sedition; then most of all when they would seem most zealous in
their Sermons and Prayers; infusing poison into wine, the better to diffuse the
venom of I know not what novell and fanciful Inventions of their own; festring
those scratches which they first make, and then would seem to lick them whole;
sometimes venoming even sound parts by their very fasting spittle: So over-
clamouring for truth and holiness, (which all good Bishops and Presbyters
desire more soberly than themselves,) that they are deaf to peace and order, to
obedience and subjection, to law and government, which none but fools or knaves
will oppose: Certainly no men are so sit to encounter the fraud and folly of
these deceitful workers, and to confute the popular Sophistry of these crafty
and crazy Ministers, as grave, learned, wise, and godly Bishops, who, past the
froth of juvenile fancies and popular flashes, know what best besits solid
preaching, sober praying, holy living, and discreet governing.

Besides this, pious and prudent Bishops are of all men living the fittest
persons gently to attemper with Christian wisdom, meekness and moderation,
those vehemencies, rigors, animosities and severities, to which the height of
men's over-boyling passions and rougher spirits are prone to raise the secular
policies, counsels and resolutions of those who are most exalted with worldly
honors, and leavened with opulent Estates: Many times great Princes, and
Persons of Eminent Honors do not more want than welcome those calm counsels
and gentle mitigations which Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons
seasonably and wisely suggest to them; as David did the prudent and humble
intercession of Abigail, when she gently disarmed him, and all his angry
Soldiers, diverting them from that exorbitant and cruel revenge to which a
military fierceness and just disdain of Nabal's Ingratitude and Indignity had
transported him and them: Or as Theodosius the Emperor did kindly and
thankfully entertain the religious and resolute, but respective reproofs of St
Ambrose, Bishop of Millain, whom he reverenced as a Father, and highly
commended for that his freedom and fidelity to him; which he said best became
the Bishops or Prelates of the Church of Christ, who are so to fear God, as not
to flatter any man.

The great work of your Lordships Honor and Wisdom (with the Honorable House
of Commons) properly is, to see, Ne Leges Angliae temere mutentur: Ne Coronae
Majestas minuatur: Ne virtuti desit honoris praemium: That the good old Laws,
Customs, and Constitutions of England be not lightly changed: That the Majesty
of the King and Kingdom be not diminished; (for in uno Caesare res est publica,
we can have no Common weal, but common woe, if we have not a King clothed with
that sacred and inviolable Majesty which is necessary for the public welfare
and safety:) Lastly, It is among your Lordships and the Parliaments noblest
cares and designs, That no deserving virtue or ingenuous faculty, which serves
the public welfare, should despair of public rewards; and least of all,
learned Piety, or the most noble and sacred Study of Divinity, which is as the
Sun or the greater light, the author of that day, which shines on our Souls, to
show us the way to heaven and eternity; whereas all other arts and sciences are
but as the Moon and Stars to guide us in the momentary affairs of this world,
which is but the twilight state of a Christian: Lest while the judicious
Lawyers honest skill and commendable practice in our Common or Civil Laws; or
while the discreet valor of good Soldiers; or the wholesome study of Physic;
or mere riches by any honest trade accumulated; while, I say, any, or all these
are admitted, not only to knock at the door, but also to enter into the porch,
yea and to repose themselves in the Temple of Honor, only the Learning and
Religion of the Clergy, the desert and industry of Divines, who are the great
Studiers and Interpreters of Gods Law, the faithful dispensers of heavenly
things; these, I say, should, to the shame and reproach of this Church and
Kingdom, be excluded from all temporal rewards and Honorary Encouragements:
After the method of the Apostate Julians envy and mockery, who said, the
rewards of the world to come might serve their turns, when he took from the
Christian Orthodox Bishops and Clergy those large donations, immunities and
dignities which Constantine the great and other godly Emperors had endowed
them and the Church of Christ withal.

The Justice and Nobleness of this Parliament has sufficiently showed to all
the world how far your Honors are from the Schism and Sacrilege of either
depriving this Church and Kingdom of Bishops, (which it enjoyed in all ages
since it was Christian;) or of denying Bishops those Honors which the piety of
your Progenitors was more ambitious to confer on them, than they were to
receive them: The modest humility of ancient Bishops (when most worthy) thought
themselves (as we have cause to do) less worthy of such high honor, walking
(as Ammianus Marcellian tells us) with grave steps, modest looks, and mortified
behavior: But the generous piety of this, as other Christian Nations, thought,
that they then honored God and their Savior Jesus Christ, when (as Cornelius
to St Peter) they expressed their high respect and honor to the Bishops of the
Church as to spiritual Fathers; whose paternal benediction and peace in Christ's
Name as they often desired with great devotion and respect, so they ever judged
Episcopal Presidency and Authority to be most suitable to the plethorick and
sturdy temper of the people of England, whose high spirits abhor all
levelling, and are as impatient to be governed by their equals or inferiors,
as water is to be kept within its own bounds.

And even now the wisdom of your Lordships and the Honorable House of Commons,
concurrent with his Majesty's goodness in the restitution of Episcopacy and
Bishops to their pristine honor and Jurisdiction, must not in any reason be
looked upon by us, or any wise men, as any partiality of favor to so few, and
to so inconsiderable persons as we are; No, doubtless your great and public
designs are in order to promote Gods glory; to advance his Majesty's service,
and to secure most effectually the peace of Church and State, by adorning them
with such Bishops, and these with such authority as is most consonant to our
ancient Laws and Constitutions, to Catholic and Primitive Patterns, to the
Apostolic, that is Christ's, Institution; and to the Word of God who is the God
of Order; Besides, most agreeable to the true Principles and those necessary
proportions which must be observed in all political order, and public
government, for superiority and subordination; all which are only to be
perfectly seen, used and enjoyed in this Episcopal Eminency or Autoritative
Presidency.

That so the Church of ENGLAND may still enjoy (as it has, by Gods blessing,
equal with any Church in any age since the Apostles days) Its Ignatiusses, Its
Polycarps, Its Polycratesses, Its Irenaeusses, Its Cyprians, Its Ambroses, Its
Austins, Its Chrysostomes, Its Epiphaniusses, Its Basils, Its Gregory's; That
is, an holy succession of Evangelical Bishops of the same spirits and
proportions with those elder and our later ones, for learning, piety, prudence,
eloquence, industry, courage and constancy in the true faith of Jesus Christ:
That neither the Romanists on one side may quarrel with, nor the Schismatics
on the other side invade and prostrate the honor of the Church of ENGLAND,
upon the often (but in vain) objected account of Schismatical interrupting or
intercluding the Apostolic succession of Bishops; and therein varying, in
point of Episcopacy, from it self as much as from all ancient and Catholic
Churches: to the infinite scandal of all good Christians and learned men, both
at home and abroad; Many of whom do doubt, (and upon greater grounds than most
of those vulgar scruples with which many please themselves to sight against,
and scratch at least, the Church of England) of the real validity of all
Ministerial power and Ecclesiastical Authority; and so of all mysterious
dispensations, and sacramental Consecrations where Bishops are wanting, not by
unavoidable necessity, which is its own Apology, but by a Presbyterian
petulancy, Schismatical Envy, and Democratical Insolency; which is so ambitious
to ordain and rule in common, that it giddily runs upon the rocks of Anarchy
and Confusion.

Although we and all the soberly learned world must highly commend his
Majesty's Piety and Wisdom, together with this Parliaments, for their restoring
Catholic Episcopacy, and in that the great support of this Churches and
Kingdoms peace: And although we do justly esteem the honor and favor by God
and man herein conferred on us; yet we so much prefer the public good before
any personal enjoyments or private interests, as freely to declare to your
Lordships and all the English world, That we are so little devoted to the mere
Honor or Profit of our places, and see so little cause to be greatly delighted
in this burden full of business, envy and importunity, That if any men of
other Principles, or any other Forms of Church Government, according to their
several new models and inventions, (which as Childrens Babies are almost as
soon broken and defaced as they are made and adorned,) be able to do this
Church and Kingdom better service than the Episcopal Order, Presidency, and
Authority with which we are now invested; Or if the wisdom of his Majesty and
his two Houses of Parliament by any good experience have ever found them (and
accordingly should judge them) more proper to attain His Majesty's and Your
great designs for Gods glory, and the common good, in Gods Name let these new
Masters and their new Models take our places, and share our Bishoprics once
again among them: Let them by some new and better experiments of their art and
office expiate the former prodigies of their rude actions and desperate essays,
which had almost destroyed all that was sacred and civil among us: Let not our
personal and private Concerns be put into the Balance against the public
interest; We willingly recede, we disrobe, we degrade our selves, we will (as
far as we can by the ancient Canons of the Church) submit to those new
Presbyterian and Independent Projects and Projectors, if his Majesty upon due
advice with his Parliament shall discern them to have a better Call from God
and man, better skill or will to do Gods work, and the Kings service in
reference to the public welfare; if there be any thing in them more conform to
Gods Word, to principles of right reason, to perfect rules of Polity, to the
necessary grounds of Government, to the harmony of good order, to the universal
practice of the Church of Christ, to the ancient Laws of this Kingdom, or to
the temper and constitution of the English people: All which are highly and
justly prejudiced against any novelty, and wholly conformed to Episcopal
Antiquity; Unanimously confirming his Majesty's and this Parliaments Wisdom, in
re-establishing of that to which no new form is to be compared, much less
preferred.

Your Lordships and all the English world have already tried for some years
(full sore against the wills of the most and best men) what the rigid
Presbyterian or Aerian designs are; what the plebeian practices of some
Ministers and people are; You have found and felt of what metal those new
Masters and their Lay Elders are; who, as Acephalists or Polycephalists,
headless or many-headed creatures affect to rule all, first without Bishops,
next without Kings, at length without Parliaments, at last without people, by a
mere stratocracy of Military Myrmydons or Mamelukes; when indeed they are in
all their forms and figures found not more unfit for government, than most
unwelcome (under that notion) to the Commons, Gentry, and Nobility of England;
besides, most unsafe for this or any Monarchy, and wholly inconsistent with
this Churches National Unity; which (as St Jerome observes) will soon run into
as many Schisms as there are Parishes and Preachers; Out of the spawne of
Schism fedition will soon rise; and out of those eggs such Crocodiles will
grow, as will swallow up Kings and Kingdoms.

Not that any men more highly esteem sober Presbyters or good Ministers, yea
and other Church Officers, such as the Law has appointed, in a due
subordination to and orderly conjunction with Bishops, than we do; We shall
ever advise with them as with friends, tender them as sons, and love them as
brethren: But we cannot allow, nor can either the King or people of England
bear that malipertness of Antiepiscopal Presbytery which has of late, like
Reuben, by a most inordinate lust, ascended to its Fathers bed, and against all
Law, usurped all Episcopal Authority in Ordination, Censures, and
Jurisdictions; Whose strength, we see, was soon powered out like water, not to
be gathered up; exposing, as it self to contempt, so the whole Church to
confusion.

Antiepiscopal or Headless Presbytery had indeed at first such a great belly or
tympany in some men's high pretensions and rare expectations, as if it would
bring forth (...), Magnum Jovis incrementum, some prodigy of piety; ( Jam nova
progenies coelo demittitur alto) some rare and heavenly offspring was coming;
No less than Christ's Kingdom, Throne, Scepter and Discipline was voted,
resolved and expected: It was further attended, when it drew near the time of
its travel and all our pains, with a strange and new Nurse-keeper, the Solemn
League and Covenant, sent for so many hundred miles out of Scotland; which
brought with it such swaddling clothes as were thought fitter for that lusty
babe than all the sacred bands of Baptism and Confirmation; (which Leaguer
bands certainly could bind no man that is in his wits beyond or against his
duty to God, the King, this Church, and his Country, any more than the green
withes could bind Sampson to his hurt.)

For fear of miscarrying in the birth (for its Dam had hard labor) it had the
help of a Man-midwife, who looked like a Mohammedan, a military and armed hand;
a means never used (God knows) in the true Church of Christ, or in the Concerns
of his Kingdom, which is not of this world, nor after its gladiatory methods;
the Gospel being first planted by Fishermen, and watered by the blood of its
prime Preachers and Professors: Yet after all this Parado Presbytery proved a
kind of untimely birth, a most unblest abortive; and although it was not
still-born, but cried aloud for a while with a strong and terrible voice, yet
it was by a merciful providence (as Monsters commonly are) short-lived, sucking
blood instead of milk for its infant nourishment: Neither the English soil, nor
air, nor geny was for this upstart, pert and presumptuous Presbytery, which
instead of the venerable gray head of primitive and paternal Episcopacy, had
got a new long tail of popular ruling Lay Elders; but it soon gave up the
Ghost, and being never Christened, for it naturally abhorred Creed, Ten
Commandments, and Lords Prayer, it was over-laid (as was thought) and almost
smothered to death by its Puny Independency; that is, the nurse was oppressed
by its nursling, by a sat as new and unheard of as it self was in England.

This stripling also (even Independency) was another by-blow of
Church Government, a new but illegitimate brood, begotten between fancy and
faction, schism and rebellion, seeking to reduce Church Government from its (
toga virilis) manly, magistratick, and politic Constitution, besitting
well-grown, great and National Churches, to its hanging sleeves or swaddling
clouts again.

But these two spurious Progenies, having neither lawful father nor honest
mother, neither the advice of a National Synod, nor any Royal Assent, and so
neither Civil nor Ecclesiastical Authority to naturalize or enfranchise them,
while they were both eagerly conspiring and fiercely struggling against Legal
and Catholic Episcopacy, they made a shift to strangle each other; both
pretending to be the eldest son, the very Esau, the only and primitive
Church Government, of Christ's Institution, his entire Scepter and Discipline,
neither of them was by wise men believed to be so, since both could not be so:
And to be sure, neither the one nor the other was ever known or used in this or
any true Church of Christ for fifteen hundred years after Christ, unless all
the Histories and Examples of the Church have conspired to deceive us and
themselves, which none but Jews and Turks can imagine.

The first of these ( Presbytery) had a redder face, rougher hands, longer
nails, and a fiercer voice, like Esau: The second of Independency, (that is
Church-Democracy, or common peoples Ecclesiastical Polity, first pretending to
crown Christ as a King, and then really to mock and crucify him, parting his
garments among them, breaking his bones, and nayling him to the cross of
popular Dependence, as the root of all Ministerial Authority and Maintenance,
which is indeed but a dry tree and dead trunk:) This, I say, was at first
smoother skinn'd and softer voiced, like Jacob; but it soon supplanted by
notable disguises and vulgar insinuations its elder brother and its angry rival
Presbytery.

At last ( Post varios casus, post tot discrimina rerum) after several risques
and hazards run by Church and State, the Divine Justice and Mercy to this
Church and Kingdom decided the controversy between these dividers and
destroyers, opening a door for the happy return of ancient Monarchy to its just
Supremacy in Church and State; also of venerable Episcopacy to its pristine
Office and Ecclesiastical Authority, loyally subordinate to the Crown of the
King, according to Law, and religiously servient to the Church of Christ,
according to his holy Gospel.

In which ancient and excellent Government if any thing be found, in the
decurrence of time, or degeneracy of men and manners, inconvenient to the
public welfare, either as to its constitution or execution, we humbly crave of
his Majesty's goodness and this Parliaments wisdom, that both we and it may be
so reformed and regulated in all points, not by Tumults and Armies, but
Parliamentary Counsels, as may be most conform to Scriptural rules, primitive
ends and uses, so far as the present times and manners of men will best bear;
which concession is sufficient to appease the gripes and wamblings of any, who
either could take, or would keep their Covanant with any show of good
conscience, that is, guided by Reason, Law, and Scriptures, the speediest and
easiest way of reforming Government lying in good Governors: For we are not so
straight-laced in point of Episcopacy, as to think it may not admit prudent
regulations and variations; yet so as the main spiritual power and
Ecclesiastical Order be preserved and improved, according to the primitive
pattern and Catholic custom of the Church, which is sacred, and ought to be
inviolable, unless insuperable impediments give a temporary dispensation;
rather submitting to providence than changing the principle, or subverting the
order, so divinely constituted, so universally established, and so highly
blessed.

But if a right Evangelical Episcopacy, such as for the main ever has been in
the Church of Christ, and now is according to Law re-established in ENGLAND,
such as we are most ambitious to adorn and exercise; if this be found (as no
doubt it will) most consonant to right reason, to all rules and grounds of true
polity; to the just proportions of good Order and measures of Government; yea,
to the ancient models and methods of Church Government, which are set forth by
God himself in the Old Testament among the Jewish Priesthood, and by our Lord
Jesus Christ in the New Testament among his 12 Apostles, with the 70 Disciples;
and these followed as divine patterns or originals by the Catholic Church ever
since the Apostles days, as all Fathers, Councils, and Histories of the Church
do evidently assure us: O let not (we beseech you) this ancient, fruitful,
goodly and venerable Cedar of Episcopacy be blasted or baffled, or blown down
by the profane breath of some popular Preachers, or by the fury of giddy, heady
and ignorant people; Let not its ample boughs be broken, its useful bark be
pilled, or its far extended roots be extirpated by the petulancy and rudeness
of any unruly and insolent spirits, since in its leaves, shadow, and fruits,
there has been and still is so great a blessing for this Church and Kingdom;
as is evident in these necessary Offices.

First, for holy Ordination, or conferring of due and undoubtedly complete
Ministerial power, such as is derived from Christ sent by his Father; and from
the Apostles sent by Christ. Secondly, for Confirmation or solemn benediction
of the Cathecumens, who in their Infancy were baptized; that when come to years
of discretion, and well instructed in Christian Principles, they may seriously
reflect upon, personally own, and solemnly assume upon their consciences the
keeping of their Baptismal Vow, that only sacred Covenant, which is sufficient
for any honest Christian. Thirdly, for the due examination, detection,
reprehension, and suppression of Errors, Hereses, and Schisms in the Church of
Christ. Fourthly, for the autoritative reproof and reformation of Immorality,
Idleness, Faction, and Disorder among the Clergy and other Christians. Fifthly,
for the encouraging and preserving of truth, peace, holiness, and order among
all under their care and inspection: All which good works are to be done by
such Ecclesiastical Monitions and Censures, as are by Christ, by the Church,
and by the Kings Authority committed to them, as Bishops or Church-Magistrates,
furnished with spiritual, Ecclesiastical and Legal Power. Lastly, for the
giving more eminent, remarkable, and autoritative examples in all Christian
graces and virtues, proportionable to their places, estates, and dignities; for
the encouragement of piety, and discountenancing of profaneness: The weight and
emphasis of examples consisting most in the eminency of the person, and dignity
of his place, which make them as Dominical Letters, or Capital Figures, of
greater note, name and influence.

These so peculiar duties, proper offices and uses of Bishops (as Churchmen)
may very well seem, I dare not say below your Lordships eminent dignity, (since
Gods glory and Christ's honor are stamped upon the Ministers of the Church,
but) less suitable to your many secular Employments; And I am sure they are
(for the most part) much above most Laymens abilities; as they were ever
judged by the Church of Christ above the ordinary capacities of mere
Presbyters, or inferior Ministers, who have indeed the same (...), Ministerial
or Liturgical power and authority as to doctrine, consecration, devotion,
parochial inspection and direction, derived to them by and from the respective
Bishops: But not the same (...), political, ordinative and presidential power
in point of the Churches National Polity, or more public Government; which St
Jerome requires, and ownes as ( exors and necessaria potestas Episcoporum) as a
principal and eminent power necessary for the Church of Christ, and specially
residing in Bishops.

Indeed in the beginning or infancy of Churches (as many learned men have
observed) the powers or offices of Deacon, Presbyter, Bishop, and Apostle might
(possibly) be resident in, and exercised by one man, where there was but an
handful or little flock of two or three gathered together in Christ's name; But
when Beleivers and Congregations, and so their Pastors multiplied, then there
was a necessity of polity, order and wisdom to distinguish and rank these
offices and Officers into several politic distributions, or helps of
Government; some to be the flocks, others to be the Pastors; some to be only as
Presbyters, praying, preaching, baptizing, consecrating and blessing the
people; others as Presidents or Bishops ruling over the many Presbyters and
people too within their inspection; others as Deacons servient to Bishops,
Presbyters and people: And all this to keep such an orderly unity, as may best
avoid Schismatical Confusions in the Church of Christ; which ought to be as an
Army with Banners, where are the Ensigns of Office and Authority, the
directives of orderly motion, the centers of union, and the securers of the
common safety, by wise commands and ready obedience.

Nor may the sameness of the Names, or of Naturals, Morals, or Religion, as to
faith, gifts and graces; nor the community of some Christian Privileges,
duties, or offices of charity, these may not be pleaded against the primitive
distinction of Eminent Honor and Authority among the Clergy, any more than all
priority and superiority may be denied among men in respect of Civil
Magistracy, who are of the same Nature, Parentage, City, Trade and Country; or
among Soldiers of the same Army; or Scholars of the same College and
University.

To be sure that over-seeing, presidential and gubernative power, which shall
authoritatively look to the Eutaxie, good order and unity of the Church, such
as was in the prime and secondary Apostles; the first as Oeconomical, the
second as Metropolitical, or Diocesan Bishops; such as was committed to Timothy
and Titus, and exercised by them, not only as Evangelists or Preachers, but as
Presidents and Prelates; this power cannot be either regularly, or prudently,
or safely in England committed to any hands, but to those venerable Clergymen
whom his Majesty and the Laws shall think fit to constitute as Governors over
others, and from whom they may have an account of all: Nor can it be in better
or safer hands than those of learned, wise, grave and godly Bishops, assisted
by such sober Presbyters, or Ministers, as his Majesty and the Laws shall
either appoint, or permit them to call to their counsel and assistance in their
Ordinations, or in their exercise of Ecclesiastical Censures and Jurisdiction;
Not by way of a Consistorian negative, which is to alter and unhinge the whole
Government, turning wine into water, and making way for all factions to breed
even in the Nest of Church Government; but by such public presence and
venerable conspicuity of many learned and wise Counselors, as may best avoid
any mistakes or errors, and most contribute, by their being witnesses of all
transactions, to that authority which is necessary to convince men of sin, and
to convert them from the error of their ways, when they see themselves
condemned by the censure, not of one only, but of many worthy and impartial men.

An Help, Ornament, and Honor in Church Government which really for our own
part, we earnestly desire, and ambitiously embrace, as that ((...) which
Ignatius, Cyprian, and others so magnify, that Fraternal Consess, and
Ecclesiastical Council, which may not only be witnesses of our public actions,
but assistants in all such public dispatches, as are not safely committed to
any one man, nor can discreetly be managed by him without contracting too much
envy, anger and odium upon him; which sense, we believe, is common with all our
Worthy Brethren.

Indeed no wise Bishop can affect an arbitrary power, or an absolute and sole
Dominion; Nor are we willing to be thus either exposed to others calumnies, or
betrayed to our selves; because we know our selves to be but men, and subject
to the same infirmities with other sinful Mortals: Nor can we be so happy as
when we are both compassed, encouraged, and supported with our aged, learned,
and reverend Brethren of the Clergy, who may be every way as able and deserving
as our selves.

Thus sortified and assisted, we may, by Gods help, be capable (without too
great burden) to discharge the proper duties and offices of Bishops, both in
and out of Parliaments; which is to see, ( Ne quid detrimenti patiatur Religio,
Ecclesia, vera Reformatio, etc.) That our Religion, as Christian, as well
Reformed, and as by Law duly established, suffer no detriment, diminution, or
debauchery; no Apostasy, Schism, or Division in Doctrine, Discipline, or
Devotion, in Sanctity, Solemnity, or Uniformity, either by profaneness,
petulancy, or faction: What his Majesty, your Lordships, and other Gentlemen of
other civil Employments cannot so well observe to be amiss in Church or
Churchmen, we the Bishops, as public Watchmen, and Overseers, may best
inform you of; what we cannot am^nd by reason of the luxuriancy or obstinacy of
some refractory spirits, your eminent authority may command and curb according
to Law, in which the public wisdom and power, safety and honor do concenter.

In the last place, as to the great merits of the Honorable House of Commons,
and in them of all the ingenuous Gentry, with all the Religious and Loyal
People of England toward us the Bishops of this Church; We shall choose rather
to dye, or to be again degraded by the folly and fury of Schismatical envy and
malice, than not to make good by our actions their good esteem of us, or to
forfeit by any fault of ours their ready suffrages for us; We shall never think
any thing added to us by this great favor and honor showed us, if we do not
find in them mighty spurs and goads to provoke us more to our duties of sound
preaching, sober praying, discreet governing, and holy living; which are the
solid honors of all good Bishops, and true Ministers; As they are the debts
also which we indispensibly owe to God, to this Church, and to the least Member
of it: What may possibly be wanting in the frequency, number and tale of our
Sermons, by reason of our age and infirmity, shall be made up in their weight;
and when we shall not be able to preach at all, we will study to live over the
best of our Sermons, and to preach by our examples, when we cannot by our words.

God forbid we should suddenly forget those late horrid and long
conflagrations, out of which the good hand of God, by the Kings favor, and
this Parliaments assistance, has snatched us, and this whole Church; yea, God
forbid, that we the Bishops and all the Clergy of ENGLAND should not come out
of this fiery furnace more purged and prepared for our Masters Service; yea,
God forbid, that after such a deluge, and deliverance as this, we should so
forget God, or our selves, as to be drunk with that wine of Consolation and cup
of Salvation, which our Merciful God, our Gracious King, your Noble Lordships,
and our Loving Countrymen, the Commons of ENGLAND, have now put into our hands.

We are very sensible how great stimulations are put upon us as Christians,
Ministers and Bishops, to all Piety, Industry, Prudence, Virtue and true
honor; which we know do not consist in being either so eager for small
circumstances, and outward Ceremonies of Religion, as to be remiss in its
necessary Morals and Substantials; (as if one should put on fine clothes, while
he starves his body;) Nor yet in being so zealous for the Essentials only of
faith and duties, as rudely to neglect those reverential solemnities and decent
circumstantials, which preserve (as the bark or rind does the Tree) the
Churches good order, peace, and unity.

We profess to all the world, that we own God alone in his holy Word (which we
call the Scriptures) to be the sole Institutor of his own necessary Worship and
indispensable Service; who alone knows what will best please him, and profit
us: We think (as we are taught by the Church of England) that nothing is
necessary and essential, moral or mysterious, as any means to obtain, confer,
or increase grace, or to please God, which himself has not in his Word
prescribed, either by special mandate or general direction, and necessary
consequence.

Yet we believe also (as all Learned men at home and abroad do agree) That the
indulgence of God has left free to the prudence and authority of every
National Church, Christian Polity, and Community, the particular appointing,
ordering and regulating of all those general and common circumstances, which
are in nature or civility necessary, as time, place, method, manner, measure,
vesture and gesture, (all which are as unseparable from all public actions
under the Sun, as our skins are from our bodies) according as shall seem to the
supreme wisdom and authority of that Church, most for its public decency and
solemnity, for good order and edification; Of all which in their particular
instances and usages, every private Christian is Judge and Arbitrator in his
closet-worship; Also every chief Governor in his family, where, when, how, for
matter, method and manner, also for measure of reading, praying, praising, etc.
when sitting, standing or kneeling; whether in sordid or decent habits,
becoming his presence and the sanctity of the duty; And no less, without all
peradventure, are they left to every chief Magistrate or Ruler in Church and
State, within his respective Dominions, for the public peace, order, decency,
uniformity, and solemnity of Religion, of which those are the proper Chusers,
Determiners, and Judges, to whom the power is given by God, either private or
public; That Religion may not enterfeere with the Civil Government, but
conform to it in these things, as it is protected by it in the main.

Provided always, that no such particular rite, limited circumstance, or
Ecclesiastical ceremony thus chosen, be otherwise imposed upon men's judgments
and consciences, either in opinion or use, then as indeed it is in its nature,
and Gods indulgence; that is, mutable, when good occasion, or the chief end of
things requires a change of them by lawful authority, so as to be still free,
as to the judgment of such as use them, and as to the practice of all other
Churches who have not assumed the use of them: Not that any such external rite
or ceremony of humane appointment can in it self be any necessary, solid,
substantial, and integral part of divine Worship; or as any means instituted
for grace, to which a precept and promise divine is necessary: This efficacy no
humane or Ecclesiastical Authority can create or give; Nor does the Church of
England pretend to any such power or use in them; although it may lawfully
regulate all circumstances, and discreetly use decent ceremonies as such, yea,
and enjoin them both as exercises of Sovereign Authority, and as experiments of
Subjects due obedience; not upon any false and superstitious grounds, but such
as are true and religious, consonant to the nature of things, and the
indulgence of God in them.

Nor has the Church of England ever otherwise esteemed, or imposed those
things of particular circumstances, rites and ceremonies, which have been so
long as chips and shavings, the casie fuel of so much flame and contention;
but has often declared its judgment of them, to be according to Gods truth; its
choice and injunction of them to be according to that liberty and authority
which God has given to it, as to every National Church within its polity and
precinct, so to use and impose them on its own members, without prejudging
other Churches their like liberty; Not at all as things pleasing of themselves
or displeasing to God: He must needs be an infant in understanding, who fancies
God is scared with white, or pleased with black garments in his public
worship; that the historick sign of the Cross adds to or diminishes ought
from Baptism; or that the Divine Majesty is offended at our kneeling, or better
pleased with our sitting or standing before him in an act of so holy a
celebration, and humble veneration, as that is of the Lords Supper: But all
these and the like are allowed as lawful experiments, either of Christian
prudence and discretion in the choice, or of obedience and subjection in the
use of them; agreeably to the lawful commands of our superiors in Church and
State, wisely directing and limiting us in them, to avoid those factions which
easily arise from the least open variety or difference in Religion, when once
it comes to be affected, and is made a badge of parties or sides among the
people.

The duty of Magistrates or Christian Princes, as well as Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Governors, on all hands, is, in public solemnities of Religion
to take care, that all things be so done in uniformity, order, and decency, as
is necessary for public peace, and as they think best becomes the sanctity of
true Religion, the Majesty also of that God whom we ought to worship and serve
with all reverence, and with the beauty of holiness, both outward and inward,
without any imposing upon the judgment, beyond the nature and indifferency of
such things; or upon the practice farther than the God of order, decency, and
peace, has permitted.

As we and all this Church have seen and felt upon the account of these things
the outrageous zeal and precipitancy of some men, who first pretending much to
boggle at and to be grievously scandalized with a few such things of outward
rite, individuared circumstance, and prescribed ceremony (to which conformity
was by Law, that is, by the public wisdom and authority required in the Church
of England) have in the pursuit and sequel of their actions, or passions
rather, evidently declared themselves to be enemies even to all order and
polity, as well as to Liturgy and Episcopacy; and to be friends to nothing but
their own private fortunes, novel fancies, and partial factions, guided by no
known Law of God or man; and offended with nothing so much, as not to see
themselves in that place and power, which may force all men to conform to their
own posts, lusts and designs; which themselves followed not by the true
footsteps and sent of Law and Justice, Reason and Religion, but by the sensible
view and successes of providence, as they variously sprang up, and appeared
either for good or evil: Which sort of deformed and deforming Non-conformists
we leave to be punished, not only by their own evil manners, but also by the
just abhorrencies of God and all good men, to whom their folly and fury is now
sufficiently manifest.

So we are neither ignorant nor insensible of other men's continued
dis-satisfactions in these things, who, under the old title of Nonconformity
(formerly much modester indeed, than of later times, being not only civil to
settled Episcopacy, and devout in the use of the Liturgy, but abhorring all
Separation from the Church of England,) have heretofore, and still do earnestly
plead their own and other men's weak minds, and scrupulous or tender
consciences, as very jealous (forsooth) of sinning there (in the use of some
Rites and Ceremonies) where the public wisdom and piety of this Church and
State, grounded on many learned Judgments, and the majority of united suffrages
according to their consciences, sees no sin, ownes no sin; yea, and openly
declares against any sin, both in the Churches Injunctions and Intentions.

Mean time while these milder Non-conformists tell us they dare not obey lawful
authority in things thus dubious to their private dimness; yet both they and
others dare (even doubtingly) disobey an undoubted lawful authority, merely
upon such private doubts and scruples, in so small and clear matters; rather
suspecting a whole Reformed Church, and all the spirits of the Prophets in
their majority and representation, of error and mistakes, even to sin and
superstition, than their own private, and possibly prejudiced, yea and
sactiously interessed opinions.

All which specious coverings and pleadings of Conscience, as weak and tender
in point of conformity to things so often and fully declared to be indifferent in
their nature, and only limited in their honest and decent use: however they may
deserve Christian charity, compassion, and tenderness from us, as to some men's
good meanings and harmless conversations; yet they are (now at last) found too
narrow to palliate or hide those dreadful disorders, and cruel designs, which
some men's counsels and actions have of late years been guilty of, if either
Gods or Man's Laws may be judges, which do command only passive obedience, and
in that, such a conformity to Christ's example, as where they cannot actively
obey, there patiently and silently to suffer.

Indeed Nonconformity in some calmer times, and in some men's softer tempers,
seemed to have something in it, that was an object of Christian pity, and
discreet charity, while it modestly (and we hope sincerely) pleaded tenderness
of Conscience, that is a fear of sinning, because of doubting; and this many
times more in respect of lothness to offend others, then out of any great
scrupulosity in themselves, as to the nature and use of those things, or their
own liberty, or the public authority; while Nonconformity dissented without
Separation, Schism and Sedition, yea without tumult and rebellion, with some
show also of Learning and Loyalty, Meekness and Moderation; while it professed
patience, and with humility to bear that cross which its own weakness or
tenderness, more than any unjust rigor of the law, had laid upon it, using no
other Arms offensive or defensive, than those of Primitive Christians, Prayers
and tears: To these sober Non-conformists, both our Princes, since the
Reformation, and our best Bishops have showed as much moderation and tenderness
as was consistent with the public peace and safety: Nor have we thoughts of
less candor and Christian Gentleness to them.

But since rude, nay rebellious Nonconformity has in this last Twenty years
appeared as completely armed ( capape) as Goliath of Gath, in buffe coats, clad
back and breast with iron and steel, openly defying the whole Church of ENGLAND,
for its excellent Liturgy, and ancient Episcopacy, as well as for its few
innocent Rites and Ceremonies, which were stated, enjoined, and used by so many
holy and learned men in this Church, without any sin, superstition, or scruple;
since it has (now at last) factiously breathed out fire and brimstone in the
face of this whole Reformed Church, against all Godly Bishops, and gracious
Princes, yea against all Monarchy at last, as well as Episcopacy established by
Law; since it has (like Jehu) furiously and openly marched with an high hand
into ENGLAND, under the banner of a novel Exotic and Illegal Covenant, yea and
still menaceth the English and all the Christian world, if it could get power,
and keep it answerable to its vast and insatiable ambition; since it has been
laden with the Sacrilegious spoils and ruins of so many goodly Churches and
worthy Churchmen; since it is besmeared with the blood and gore of its Brethren
and Fathers (that I say not, of its Kings:) In earnest this pittiless and
pitiful Nonconformity, which pretends to be so tender conscienced as to the
gnats of a few circumstances, (regulated only for order and decency by the
public wisdom, and lawful authority) and as to one or two ancient ceremonies
used in the pure primitive and persecuted times, without any notion or thought
of superstition, merely as apt emblems, memorative figures, or historical
tokens of what is most true and necessary to be believed; or as particularly
acts and humble expressions of some general duty, and devotional reverence to
God, which is in its nature, and in the worship of God most lawful, as
uncovering the head, bowing the knee and body, undoubtedly are; and yet (on the
other side) since this so soft-souled, tender-sensed, and narrow-guled
Nonconformity, was so wide throated, as to swallow down great Camels without
chewing, sins of prodigious magnitudes; since it has showed it self so heavy
and harsh handed, so violent and fierce spirited, so severe and impatient, not
to be precisely obeyed by others, when it had once usurped a power; Truly it is
justly become a very effroiable phantosme, as dreadful and dangerous a Spectre
to all wise Kings, to all Loyal Subjects, and to all sober Christians, as that
which appeared to Brutus before the Pharsalian field.

If Nonconformity ever had heretofore any tolerably good Cause, as to its well
meaning, and might have gone to Heaven, meekly riding on an Ass, as Christ did
to Jerusalem; yet it is now quite marred and deformed by the ill managing of it,
in those violent and intolerable methods of tumultuary and armed proceedings,
contrary to the Laws of God and Man; which would make even Christianity it self
not only unwelcome, but most unlawful, namely to bring it in by fraud and
force, or to present it to Sovereign Kings and Kingdoms on the Swords point,
as the Spaniards do Baptism to the poor West-Indians with their poyniards in
one hand, and water on the other.

For although Nonconformity (which is still made the Ball of difference and
badge of dissension, even among those who agree in Doctrine and Morals, yea in
Devotionals and Politicals, in Liturgy and Episcopacy, for the main) sometime
affected the voice of a Lamb, when it durst not roar as a Lion, yet we see it
has the teeth, tail, and sting of a Dragon; it seemed indeed at first to
appear in sheeps clothing, but it has too much of the ravening wolf in it; So
ill it becomes warlike or Martial Nonconformity, which has showed such horns
and hoofs wherewith it has sorely pushed, goared, and wounded this Church and
Kingdom, now to boast of its dove like innocence, or to pretend to great
tenderness or nicity of conscience, and to demand any unsafe and illegal
Liberty; when the English and Christian world sees, that all the beasts in
Daniels visions, were not more fell, haughty, cruel, insolent and outrageous,
then that rustical Nonconformity has been to all sorts of sober Christians
dissenting from it, from the King that sat on the Throne, to the meanest
Subject that ground at the Mill; who is there that did not flatter its folly,
but has felt its imperious rigor! Nor did it ever exercise that tenderness to
others consciences, which it so clamourously importuned for it self.

How much better then were it for the popular patrons of, and pleaders for such
factious, seditious, and unsafe Nonconformity, (who still resolve to be great
but weak sticklers against any sober and legal conformity in the Church of
ENGLAND) How much more (I say) becoming of them were it, now at last to humble
themselves before God, the King, and the Laws; to deprecate the just jealousy
and heavy displeasure of God and man which some of that Sect have deserved and
suffered; to expiate their former menaces and later extravagances by some
public recantation and ingenuous repentance, which may undeceive the poor
people, who have been so long scared and deluded with I know not what
bugg-bears of their own and other men's fancies.

How much better were it for men of Learning and Conscience to make a narrower
search into their own stale scruples and vulgar misapprehensions; to compare
the Churches honest declarations and injunctions with their sinister
suspicions, and probable delusions; to dread (as much as they pretend to do any
other men's positive) their own negative superstition, which tends to
Disobedience, and ends in Rebellion, against lawful authority; making by a
great fatuity or arrogance, those things sin which God has not made so, who is
a God of Order, a friend to decency, and no enemy either to ceremony,
uniformity or conformity, consistent with truth and holiness; but has left all
free to the wisdom, choice, and authority of every Church, agreeable to the
general tenor of his word. Lastly, how much more becoming them were it, to give
God the Glory of his justice, which has thus at last discovered, defeated, and
confuted, even by their own practices, their wild and wicked principles, yea,
and punished the violent and inordinate practices of some railing and ranting
Non-conformists; from whose inordinate fury, if God had not at last by a
wonderful providence redeemed this Church and Kingdom, we had been as Sodom and
Gomorah, a continued Akeldama, or field of Blood, Tyranny, Anarchy, and
Oppression, under either Presbyterian Dictators, who would set up a petty
Bishop in every Parish, and bind them up in the bundles or fagots of their
Classes, that so united, they might be better redeemed from their own
infirmities, and other men's contempt; or under Independant-Tryers, who set the
people above the Priest; or under self and all confounding Phanaticks, who do
all things both irrationally, and ex tempore, or rashly.

But God has pleaded the Cause of the Church of ENGLAND, as to the soundness
of its Faith and Doctrine; as to the Sanctity of its Morals; as to the
Solemnity of its Devotionals, and as to the unblamable decency of its rituals,
and innocence of its Ceremonials so stated, enjoined, and used as they were in
the Church of England; not according to every man's fancy and humor, but
according to the judgment of the Law, which best sets forth the public mind
and meaning of this Reformed Church, which has ever so declared publicly
against, and so effectually cleared it self of, and absolved all its Members
from all Error, Profaneness and Superstition (justly challenging, and modestly
using the Liberty, Prudence, and Authority, which God has given it, for order,
peace, and edification, not for oppression, destruction and confusion, and this
only over its own polity or communion) that in earnest it is now a great shame
for men of Piety and Learning, still to vex, as Peninnah did Hannah, and
agitate the Church of ENGLAND, with the repetition of their needless Cavils,
and endless Objections, which have been an hundred times fully answered, and
wherein themselves being satisfied, they might with more ease and peace
satisfy those whom they keep still raw and scrupulous by their own
irresolutions.

After all is said, designed, and done by us, that can become good men, sober
Christians, and worthy Bishops, in point of Reason and Religion, Conscience and
Subjection, Charity and Discretion, as to things of this nature, which have of
themselves so little to say for or against them, being but relatively good or
evil, as the end is to which, and the authority by which they are enjoined; yet
we know our selves to be still severely warned and sharply alarmed by our own
and the Churches enemies (on all sides) to be as most sincerely pious, and
constantly prudent in the main matters of Religion; so to do all things, as
with good Conscience, Courage and Authority, so with all Christian candor and
paternal charity to all men; especially toward such (for Christ's sake) as are
truly conscientious in all Moralities, and in some lesser matters peaceably
scrupulous and honestly unsatisfied; yet are willing to be informed, and for
the main are conformed to the example of Christ, whose Kingdom consists not in
meat and drink, not in petty opinions and mutable shadows; but in
righteousness, peace and holiness: Other things of Form and Ceremony we do not
weigh by any private fancies for or against them; but by public authority
commanding, Gods Word permitting, and the Churches peace requiring them.

As to the point of tender Consciences so much pleaded, we shall esteem none
truly tender conscienced, who live in any open sin or immorality; or who
approve and defend any prosaneness or impiety in ordinary speech, much more in
preaching and praying; or who deny the authority of the Word of God; or who
despise the practice and custom of the Universal Church; Or who refuse the
obedience due to Civil Magistracy; or who oppose the liberty and authority of
this particular Church to regulate and govern its own polity agreeable to Gods
Word, and the practice of all other Churches.

Our care shall be, as not to spend much precious time in things that do not
edify, nor to add the weight of substance to feathers, which are but
ornaments; so nor to expose Religion rude and bare, naked and ridiculous to the
world, much less to sacrifice the public peace, honor and wisdom to private
petulancy and pertinacy: Yet still we shall make a great difference between the
weak and the willful, the superstitious and supercilious, the scrupulous and
scornful doubters and dissenters; between the humble Professors and constant
Practisers of true Religion in the main of Morals and Fiducials, and the
turbulent Praters or pragmatick agitators, who love to swim against the stream
of Authority, against right Reason, and true Religion, established Laws, and
good Order, settled Government and due Subjection: We shall first endeavor with
meekness of wisdom to satisfy all sober and good men, next we shall do as the
Law commands against the malipert and obstinate wranglers, who make no
conscience to deny common Principles, to swallow absurdities, and reconcile
contradictions between their own liberties challenged to themselves, and their
rigid severities imposed by them upon others: There is no reason for them to
complain, if the same measure be measured to them, which they have meted to
others, every way their equals, and in many their betters: Nor shall they ever
have so much cause to cry out of what they suffer, as of what they have done.

We are not averse from any discrect indulgence which his Majesty and the Law
shall see sit to grant to some persons for some time till better instructed,
and brought off from their prejudices; we shall not envy, or grudge, or deny
any honest man those dispensations and forbearances, so far as our Charity to
private Christians may not be prejudicial to the Churches peace and public
good; to which we and all men owe the greatest charity; and which may not under
any flourishes of zealous praying and preaching, or under any pretensions of
private conscience, be either undermined or overthrown, what ever colors of
Nonconformity or thorough Reformation men carry before them.

We know there are many envious eyes upon us, and bitter tongues sharpened
against us; some quarrel that we are no better (though themselves be not very
good); others are grieved that we are not worse: This impotent malice of
unreasonable or uncharitable men is best silenced and confuted by our just and
gentle demeanor toward all: And although we are not to be encouraged or
overawed with the weak words of men, yet our care shall be, that nothing be
spoken of us bad, but it shall be false: The rough tongues of our enemies shall
be but as siles and whetstones to our Virtues, as their rude hands have been
the touchstone of our patience: This is the worst and only revenge we intend to
take of all our causeless Adversaries, either to persuade and win them to
sobriety, or to overcome and disarm them, by our being or doing better then
they deserve or desire.

The injuries and indignities cast upon some of us heretofore, and all of us
now by the pride, improbity, or petulancy of any, shall but give greater
fervor to our industry, prayers, and charity. The former rigors used by some
Tyrants, Tryers, and Inquisitors, against Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy,
shall not carry us beyond the sober bounds of Gods and man's Law, nor beyond
that Law of Christian charity which is the bond of perfection, and which
commands us to let our Christian moderation be known to all men, and our love
even to our enemies. We will not less encourage true piety, sanctity, and
sincerity, because of the scandal and cruelty of some men's hypocrisy; We have
not so learned Christ, in whose holy footsteps we shall endeavor to tread, as
the surest evidence that we succeed in his Ministry, and exercise his Authority.

Those Ministers or people whose hearts most misgive them, as fearing the
return of hard measure from Bishops, because of the great evil they have, as
Pseudo-Presbyters and Apostates, done or designed against all Bishops, and the
whole Church of England; We cannot better Answer for their security, than as
Joseph did to his Brethren, when he was now advanced, and it was in the power
of his hand to hurt them, (as their own jealous souls justly told them,) when
he replied, (to their astonishment) I am Joseph, whom ye sold into Egypt; Be
not afraid, I fear God, etc. Thereby implying, That he could not meditate or
act any revenge, (but that of Love) against his brethren, who professed to own
and serve the same God, and whose mercy had now turned their intended mischief
into good: Let our greatest enemies heretofore, now repent of the evil they
have done and designed against this Church and Kingdom, no less than against
Bishops; let them show their repentance by living so as becomes good
Christians, and good Subjects. As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of
their head fall to the ground by our means.

We meditate the good of all men, and most of those that have been our deluded,
yea, their own, enemies, and who will now be our friends and their own on any
reasonable terms: As good Physicians we shall have special care of those who
most need our help and cure: As Fathers we shall readily embrace those penitent
prodigal Sons which return to us.

We know that nothing will sooner end all unkind, unjust, and uncomfortable
quarrels, than the holy and unblamable lives of Us Bishops, which, as the
presence of Christ and the shadows of the Apostles, will either cast out the
evil spirits that yet remain in some men, after all the miracles of Gods
providence, or else more torment them: Our Virtues and Graces shall be the
only Revengers, as they will be the sharpest Satyrs and severest reproaches,
yea, and the most assured Victors of men's evil speeches and insolent carriages.

In this holy integrity, while we justify his Majesty's Wisdom, with Your
Honors Counsels and comprobation, we shall have none to fear or flatter; whose
evil designs under any popular and threed-bare quarrels against all Episcopacy,
Liturgy, and Ceremonies, are to overthrow both Law and Gospel, Church and
State, bringing all into Anarchy and confusion: We shall indeed highly urge
conformity, especially in our selves and all true Ministers; Conformity, I say,
first to the Word of God, to the Examples of Jesus Christ, and his holy
Apostles, with all true Saints; Next, to those Canons and Laws of the Church
and State which bind Us and them most to loyalty and duty. Lastly, We shall so
far urge an external conformity in circumstantials and Ceremonies as shall be
required of them and Us by Law, in order to preserve decency, reverence,
uniformity, and solemnity in holy Duties; also peace and unity in Church and
State; as free, God knows, from Superstition, or Will Worship, or unlawful
humane Inventions, as some other men's affected words and modes, ceremonies and
forms are in their eyes, hands, speeches and gesticulations.

When His Majesty, Your Lordships, and the Worthy Gentlemen of the House of
Commons, together with all the sober English World, shall see Us Bishops
demeaning our selves as they would have Us, and as you have deserved of Us, in
the way of great and good examples, proportionable to our pious and venerable
Predecessors before and since the Reformation; no doubt Your Lordships and all
Worthy Persons will be as far from repenting of Your restoring Bishops to their
government and jurisdiction, also to their ancient honor and capacity of
Sitting in the House of Peers, and therein of restoring this Church and
Christian Kingdom to their pristine honor, peace, and safety, (by Gods
blessing,) as some others are from rejoicing or not repining at Gods mercy, the
Kings benignity, this Parliaments generosity and piety, as well as policy and
discretion, in preferring the gray head of primitive and venerable Episcopacy
before the beardless striplings of Presbytery and Independency; with which new
wines if any weak heads in England be still so in love, as to choose them before
the old wine, which is better, certainly they will have this happiness in their
unlucky error, as to have no learned and honest man to be their rival.

If any things have seemingly or really been amiss in any of our Predecessors,
or our selves, through humane frailty or passion, (which easily besets the best
of men in this life,) as our desire is not to deny or dissemble them, so truly
they cannot now with any modesty be remembered or objected by these Adversaries
against Us, or any Bishops heretofore, since the covetousness, ambition, pride,
tyranny, cruelty, and implacableness of some Anti-Episcopal and Anarchical
spirits have been so excessively insolent and outrageous; even to a wantonness
of wickedness, and to all manner of injastice, far beyond the worst actions of
the worst of Bishops, in the worst of times since the Reformation.

But whatever has really been amiss, our caution shall be to avoid or amend
all faults, as much as Your charity and Nobleness has this day covered and
forgot both their infirmities and any of our failings: What was eminent (as
much was in many of them, and commendable in most of them) our endeavor shall
be to imitate, where we despair to exceed; That while Your Lordships or others
behold us either in the Parliament, or the Pulpit, or the Press, or the
Consistory, you may not have much cause to deplore the absence of our famous
Predecessors, whom you cannot but love and admire (as we do) for their piety,
learning, industry, and charity. In sum, we shall strive that neither Bishops
nor Episcopacy shall be any burden, but a great blessing (as it has been) to
this Church and Kingdom, to King and Subjects, to the good and bad, to
encourage the former, and to restrain and amend the latter.

Which happy effects will easily be attained,

First, If we may be guided and circumscribed by good Laws and Canons; beyond
or short of which no Presbyter or Bishop may go, no not in any exemplary
ceremony, or affected novelty, to a super-conformity.

Secondly, If we may be defended in doing our duties by his Majesty's just
power, without cramping or benumming the sinnews of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
by needless prohibitions.

Thirdly, If we may be still assisted and adorned with your Lordships and the
other Gentlemen's love and favor.

Fourthly, If we may be duly fortified by the desired counsel and meet
assistance of our aged, learned, and reverend brethren of the Clergy.

Lastly, If we may be daily commended (as the Church-Liturgy has appointed,
and for which passages it is so unwelcome to many, who love Church Lands better
than they do the best Church men or Bishops, more devoted to prey upon them
than for them) to the mavelous workings of Gods grace, by the prayers of all
good Christians, which we do not more want than passionately and humbly desire;
That since we (the Bishops of this Church) are again brought to this high
mountain, and thus transfigured, our faces may so shine in good words and
works, that your Lordships and all this Church of England may glorify our
Father which is in heaven; That we may abhor that Soloecism of ( Honor sublimis
and vita deformis) Lordly Titles and Peasantly actions.

And since there is no greater sign of a thankful heart for mercies, which our
selves have received, than a charitable sense of our Brethrens miseries; that
in the day of our Exaltation as Bishops, to Estates and Honors, we may not
forget the depressions and afflictions of others; Give leave to as many of us
as are thus compassionate to present our supplication to your Honors (the two
Houses of Parliament) and by your mediation to his Majesty; A great one indeed
it is, and therefore worthy of so great an address to persons of large hearts
and hands who are ready to answer great desires, and to effect great designs.

It is in the behalf of many of our poor Brethren, the Clergy of England and
Wales, That there may be some effectual means used worthy of the Wisdom, Piety,
and Charity of His Majesty, and His Two Houses of Parliament to relieve the
meanness, tenuity, and incompetency of their scandalous livings, which makes
many of them as more needing, so less capable of Discipline: Objects also of
vulgar contempt, depressing their spirits, starving their studies, discouraging
them in their duties, betraying them to sordidness of living, exposing them to
many temptations; and lastly subjecting them to all popular servilities,
complacencies, and dependancies, which are the nests and breasts, the seminaries
and nurseries of all faction.

There is no way to redeem them, their Ministry, and this Reformed Church, from
these burdens and chains, that enter into the very souls of many, at first
ingenious Scholars, and hopeful Ministers, but by making small livings somewhat
competent; His Majesty has set a great example in this kind, commanding
augmentations to be allowed out of his own and the Churches impropriations. But
this bounty comes short of at least 3000 livings, which still remain in
ENGLAND and WALES, as Flats or shallows in the Sea; upon which, when the
necessities of many young men and hopeful Scholars once drive them, they seldom
ever get off, without shipwreck of Morals or Intellectualls; However, it is
such a stop and hinderance to the proficiency of their studies, also to the
authority and efficacy of their Ministry, that they seldom or never make a
Prosperous voyage, ever conflicting with difficulties, and many times conquered
by them, not only to a meanness, but an immorality of living.

It is a work worthy of His Majesty's greatness and your goodness, to apply (in
Gods good time) some meet help to this crying Malady, which first began by the
Popes unhappy alienating of Tithes from the Incumbents or Rectors, and annexing
them as Impropriations to Religious Houses: The Remedies commended by wise men,
are; First, by uniting some small Livings that are near adjacent: Secondly, by
abolishing some injurious Customs, where wonted and overawed compositions
deprive the Incumbents of the true value of what is their due: Thirdly, by
laying some Moderate Tax on dwelling Houses in Market Towns and Cities, or in
populous and trading Parishes, as 6 d. or 9 d. or 12 d. in the pound, according
to the just value of their rents, so as no house should be charged, which is
rented under Forty shillings a year, nor any that paies tithes for lands in
Ferme or in the owners hand.

These helps may relieve some, but because the Malady reaches far beyond these
proportions, nothing can be so effectual as (when the Nation shall have peace
and plenty) the raising of some public stock of money, in order to complete
this great and good work, by a public and Parliamentary bounty, or a National
charity; by which bank or stock rightly managed and improved, a good foundation
may be laid for the buying in (not of all Impropriations, which is too great a
work to be compassed, but) such a portion of them, as may in most places make
the Living or Vicaridge competent, that is 60 l. or 80 l. or 100 l. per annum,
according as the dearness or cheapness of places does advise; Nor may it seem
heavy to raise some Tax or Pay for Christ's Soldiers (his Ministers) when so
many Millions have been spent upon other Soldiers.

If some such easy Tax or Subsidy, as shall seem most proportionable in the
wisdom of His Majesty, and the two Houses of Parliament, were given to God and
the Church for this excellent end, to be raised in four years, and the matter
publicly recommended by King, Lords and Commons, besides the profit of the
public Contribution or Levy (in which our selves as Bishops would be exemplary
according to our abilities) if it were well improved and employed, no doubt
many private persons living and dying, would liberally give to so noble and
pious a work: Some Noblemen and Gentlemen would, after His Majesty's example,
for ever endow small Livings with some such portion out of their
Impropriations; especially if they could do it without charge, by reason of the
Statute of Mortmaine, which might, as to this intent and use, be for a time
repealed.

But your piety and wisdom will best understand what ways are most proper to
attain so great and good ends, as would follow this excellent design of
augmenting small Livings, and small Ministers too; so much tending not only to
the relief of many honest and able Ministers, to make and keep them such, but
also to Gods glory, and to the good of peoples Souls, to the advancement of
Learning, and of the dignity of the Ministry to His Majesty's honor, to your
Lordships great renown, and to the lasting peace both of this Church and
Kingdom.

For we have found by our late experiences (wherein half a dozen pragmatick,
and for the most part but poorer Preachers in a County, became the greatest
Bontefeus or Incendiaries) That settled plenty, at least honest competency
binds Ministers most to the peace and good behavior; That the more the Clergy
owe their maintenance to the Law, the more observant they are to pay their
obedience to the Laws, less pragmatick and less popular, as not so much
depending on the people; and so less studious in any sinister way to please
them rather than their superiors.

That the sharp necessities and poverty of some Ministers daily provokes them
(if they be men of any quick parts and unmortified passions) to great
inquietudes, hoping by public commotions to mend their private condition; Then
they quarrel most sharply with the Churches evil Constitutions (as they call
it,) when their own, as to their livelihood is not very good; then they inveigh
bitterly against innocent Ceremonies, and all settled Orders of the Church, when
their substance or subsistence is most unsettled, or too small for their minds
and necessities; every thing then is a burden to them, when they feel the
galling burden of poverty; and they easily run to Arms and Rebellion, who
already find that armed man upon them, having much to get and little to lose in
any Troubles: The want of oyling or greasing makes their wheels drive heavily,
or with a very querulous and ungrateful noise, and at last to take fire, yea,
and by popular arts to diffuse their sparks with their Prayers, and their
discontents with their Doctrines, and their abuses with their uses among the
common people; who like tinder or gunpowder are very prone to kindle against
their Governors; beleiving no men so fit to govern Church and State as
themselves and their Minister; though but a poor Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer;
having such narrow minds, as they are not able to comprehend or extend their
thoughts to the Latitudes of public Order and Government; which are as
necessary as those which they so much dote upon in their persons, families, and
Parishes, nor will they learn, but by their own and others woes how much peace
with a little, and a good conscience to boot, is to be preferred before much
goods ill gotten by sequestration and plunder, though sanctified by preaching
and praying.

It is certain no men are more careless of conforming to the Laws, or more
prodigal of the public peace, then those Ministers and people who find
themselves in short pasture; and therefore venture to break the sacred hedge,
and civil bounds which Gods and Man's Laws have set; especially where they think
the Fence is lowest and weakest; (as it seems to be in Ecclesiastical Cannons
and Constitutions; not seconded with Executive power;) Against these an over
scrupulous and restive spirit, or a sturdie and bayardly conscience, seting its
breast or hinder part, hopes to carry all before it; that it may by popular
extravagancie or partial adherence, advance either its uneasy estate, or its
small reputation to a faction, side, and party.

Let there be fitting provender for the oxen which tread out the Corn, and then
we may justly exact labor from them, and exercise the goad of just discipline
on their neglect. If once the Livings of the Clergy were truly Livings, or
convenient livelyhoods, we could with more prudent severity look that their
labonr and lives should be exactly good; not that poverty is a dispensation to
impiety; but good men are not easily found to accept of those small and
scandalous Livings out of which those sorry or scandalous Ministers are
ejected, who are not so good and able as we could wish, and yet better perhaps
than none at all; And although the small Living may be too good for them, yet
not good enough for a better man; since the most learned piety is sensible of
all humane necessities, Virtue it self will be cold, and Grace it self hungry
and thirsty; nor can any man of reason expect to have Religion live like a
Camelion in this world.

Having thus presented with all due respects this one Christian request to your
Honors, in the behalf of many poor Ministers, yea, and of the souls of many
poor people, nay, in the Name of your and our Savior, (whose work the poorest
Minister of the Gospel (if able and honest) does perform, and so for Christ's
sake is worthy of his wages,) and leaving it as a matter of great and public
importance to your pious and wise consideration in due time, I cannot conclude
better than as I began, (that so I may complete the circle of our grateful and
just acknowledgments) with that eternal veneration, praise, honor and thank,
which from my self, and all my Reverend Brethren the Bishops, and all the sober
Clergy, are duly and humbly returned, first, to the most blessed God, whose
judgments are unsearchable, and whose mercies are everlasting: Next, To His
most Gracoius Majesty, for His munisicent and matchless goodness to the
Bishops, Clergy, and Church of ENGLAND: Lastly, To Your most Noble Selves the
Lords and Commons of this present Parliament, who have thus taken away the sin,
reproach, and scandal of Sacrilege, Schism, and Confusion, which were by some
unhappy men brought upon this sometime so famous Kingdom, and flourishing
Church of ENGLAND.

For whose vindication and comfort, as the Author was not wanting in her
greatest agonies and blackest afflictions publicly to compassionate her sighs
and tears, so he thought it his duty (upon a public more than private sense)
seriously to rejoice, and heartily to congratulate with her in this happy
restoration, which he has often prayed for, and now lived to see; because he is
persuaded in his conscience (if rightly managed with piety and charity) that it
highly tends to Gods glory, to the honor of our blessed Savior, to the
asserting of our true Religion as Christian and Reformed, to the establishment
of the public peace in Church and State; and lastly, to that just and
ingenious compensation of good for long endured evil, which is highly deserved
and justly expected by this Church of England, from all its genuine Children;
not only because it was once well reformed and most flourishing, but also
because it has been so grievously, and as to man, most unjustly afflicted and
deformed.

For (without doubt) the pious Intentions, and prudent Constitutions of the
Church of England were such, That nothing was, or now is wanting in it, to make
a good Christian perfect to salvation, if he be not wanting in himself, and to
the grace of God offered to him in the Ministry of this Church; Every saving
truth being maintained by Her; Nothing added to or diminished from the word of
God as saving or necessary; Every holy, Duty, every divine Institution, every
sacred Mystery, every necessary part of Gods Worship, every moral Virtue, every
Christian Grace, every usefully-good Work, is either celebrated, or enjoined,
or taught or recommended to every Christian, both in private and public,
according to their station; Nor may any Christian justly blame the Church for
any defect; but rather their own hearts for want of humility, devotion and
gratitude to God and men: There is holy sap and sweetness in all its Liturgical
appointments, if men were not surfeited with their own fancies, prejudices and
pride; All things being set forth by the Church without the least tincture of
any known Error in Doctrine, or Superstition in the substance of Religious
Duties and Devotion; The outward Form also, or public Reverence and Solemnity
of Duties, is no other than what (without question) is left by God to the
Liberty, Prudence and Authority of every Church and Christian Polity as most
consonant. First, To the Civility and Custom of the Nation: Secondly, To that
outward Veneration which is accordingly due to the Divine Majesty: Thirdly, To
the public Solemnity and Decency of holy Duties in the Church: Fourthly, To
the ancient Use and Custom of the primitive and best Churches: Fifthly, No
where forbidden by Gods word, or by any rule of right Reason: Sixthly, But
chosen, used and imposed by this Church, within its own Precincts and Polity
only, under no other Notion, than that which is lawful and true. 1. In the
nature of things circumstantial, as still necessary in their general adherency
to all outward Actions of need: 2dly. Yet as free and indifferent still in
their nature, although cast by authority in to meet Regulations, as instances
of our outward obedience in them to man for the Lords sake, while they continue
so appointed: 3dly. Lawful in the divine Permission, Commission, and clear
Approbation of the Churches Liberty and Authority in such things for public
order and decency. 4thly. In the necessity of such visible Order, Decency and
Uniformity, fixed by Supreme Wisdom and Authority, as most conducing to the
Churches outward peace; to avoid Faction, Schisms, Sedition, Fury, Confusion,
fires that easily kindle from small sparks, if left to vulgar spirits. 5thly.
And lastly, all this pious and prudent Polity of the Church of England,
managed by such apt Overseers, and proper Governors, as this and all ancient
Churches ever used from the Apostles days* under the Titles of Bishops,
Presidents and Fathers; who are (according to our Law) chosen by the Clergy,
approved by the Church, confirmed by the King, as Supreme Governor; enabled by
Learning, Matured by Experience, Sanctified by Grace, Consecrated by Prayer,
Devoted by Diligence, Assisted by their Brethren of the Clergy, Regulated by
settled Laws and Canons, to do their duty; so as God, their Consciences, and all
good men require of them in order to those great and eternal ends of saving
their own and others souls; besides the temporary blessings of the Churches
unity and harmony, as in Faith and Love, so in Orderliness and Decency, without
which all Religion runs to Irreverence, Faction and Confusion.

The angry, eager, and obstinate Quarrels (then) which some waspish men have
long maintained, and still do, against some mutable words and Phrases in the
Liturgy, or against some little Rites, and innocent, yet few, Ceremonies, used
by the Church of England, are, I fear, much more deserved by, and due to, their
own distempered hearts; and should in all justice now be turned against the
factions, proud and pertinacious humors and opinions of those men, who had
rather quite ruin such an Ancient, Famous, Reformed, and sometime Flourishing
Church, than rightly understand Her words and meaning, or give Her leave to
interpret them; or than deny themselves in those petty Points of Reputation,
Opinion and Prejudice, to which they may be popularly advanced, as beyond a
convenient retreat, so beyond that humility, diseretion, meekness,
peaceableness, modesty and charity, which best becomes those Presbyters and
people, who are afraid to contest with their Princes, their Bishops, and their
Countries united Wisdom and Authority, lest they be found fighters against the
God of order and peace; who ought not to take courage from the Kings patience,
or turn his Indulgence into wantonness: Nor have they any cause to be angry
that they are not thought wiser than this whole Church and State; or because
they are not made Dictators to all Convocations, Parliaments and Kings: Nor
should they be so ashamed to come at last from fighting and domineering, to
petitioning and deprecating; or from sinning against God and man, to return to
their duty, to repent and recant the evils, the errors and excesses of their
ways; which God has wonderfully convinced and confuted by his former blessings
on this Church, and his present blasting of their new Projects; which have
froth in their head, and blood in their bottom; as the water of those men, who
labor with the stone and Strangury, and have their wounds from within.

What now remains, but the Authors particular craving, and Your Lordships, with
the other Gentlemen's, vouchsafing pardon for the great presumption of such an
Orator? who, conscious to his many defects, has adventured by this grateful
Excess, to put Your Lordships and them, upon the Exercise of Your and Their
Noble Patience; thereby to give the world a further great experiment of that
Gentleness and Candor, which adds Luster to all Your other Honorable and
Heroic Virtues; of which no men are more witnesses, than the Bishops and
Clergy of the Church of England; not only as wondering Spectators, but as
thankful Enjoyers.

FINIS.

