THE Whole Duty OF A Communicant: BEING Rules and Directions for a worthy
receiving the most Holy SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S Supper.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN GAVDEN, Late Lord BISHOP OF EXETER.

He being dead yet speaks. The second Edition with Additions out of the
Reverend Prelates original Copies.

LONDON, Printed by E. R. for L. C. and Hen. Rodes next door to the Bare
Tavern, near Bride-lane in Fleet Street. 1685.

depiction of angels THE ANGELS ADMIRE THE DIVINE GOODNESS


TO THE Truly Honorable THE LADY RICH.
Most honored. Lady,
THE Confidence of your Nobleness and Piety makes the least intimation of your
Desires to have upon me the force of Commands, being assured that your Piety
and Judgment directs you to what is good, and your Nobleness and Ingenuity will
favorably interpret what a mind truly honoring you, does intend to answer
your desires. Such is this small Tract, occasioned by a motion your Ladyship
once made, of having some Preparatory Form, written with such brevity, yet
fullness and perspicuity (three rare qualities in one Subject) as might neither
dull nor confound, nor yet leave unsatisfied a Mind studious to inform its
Judgment, and devoutly to prepare its Affections, so often as it receives the
Holy Sacrament and great Mystery of the Lords Suppee.

These Notions do not presume, nor pretend to have attained such a
Compleatness, as may either satisfy your Ladyship's desires, or add any thing
to your Knowledge, which is fitter to judge of the consent of these with your
own, than needs any information by them; such they are, and their Author seeks
to appear, as may rather deserve the censure of Devout, than Curious; in an
Argument of so mysterious a Depth, good Affections are rather to be raised and
inflamed than Subtilties searched and disputed; what I come short in Depth of
Knowledge, I endeavor to supply in belief of the Truth, in love to the
Goodness, in thanks for the Benefit, in admiration of the Mercy and Dignation,
the less I reach to its height, the more I retire to my own Heart, which I can
sufficiently prepare by Humility, for the receiving of that, whose divine
Excellency, though I cannot comprehend, yet the Benefit and Happiness by it I
may obtain. It will be easy for your Ladyship at your leisure to add or amend,
what my defects or haste have failed in or omitted: Nor do I present this as a
Copy to be imitated, so much as enlarged and corrected by you; it is enough for
my design, if either I do or receive good, the one may show how willing I am,
the other may make me* abler than I am, to express that willingness and pious
Ambition I have to appear worthy the honor and esteem of,

Madam Your Ladyship's humble Servant, J. Gauden

THE WHOLE DUTY OF A Communicant OF THE SACRAMENT IN GENERAL.
THE ever Blessed Testator (as the Author to the Hebrews does fitly call him:
Heb. 9. 16.) has left us two Sacraments only, as generally and necessary to
Salvation, Baptism, the Sacrament of Initiation, and the Lords Super, the
Sacrament of Confirmation; the first admits us into Christ's visible Body the
Church, the second feeds and strengthens in the same, and this happy
opportunity being offered me of coming to the most holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, I will join with the Church in the celebration of this great Mystery
and endeavor to put in practice that duty which the Command of God and just
reason requires, in preparing my self for that great Solemnity and Angelical
Feast.

I.
Which is by setting apart some hours three or four several days before
Receiving: withdrawing my thoughts from worldly and temporary business, and
placing them upon serious and devout Meditations, of my souls good and eternal
happiness, being fully persuaded of its Immortal Estate after this short life,
and the happiness of that state only to consist in the vision and fruition of
God the chiefest good, and only satisfactory to an Intellectual and Eternal
Being: among all other means appointed to men by the wisdom and goodness of God
for the attaining that happy state, this of the blessed Sacrament is one of the
most eminent for Comfort and Efficacy.

II.
A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible Grace, a holy Seal ordained of
God, to strengthen our Faith in his promises in Jesus Christ, for the free
remission of our sins: which God therefore annexed to his word to confirm us by
representing the sufferings of Chirst to our sight and tasting, as the Gospel
preaches it to our ears, and it is called the Lords Supper, because Christ
ordained it at his last Supper, Math. 26. 26. Wherein to fulfill the Law he eat
the Paschal Lamb; and to show the determination and change of the Levitical Law
and Priesthood, he ordained for this new Covenant of Grace, a new Sacrament and
seal thereof, that it succeeding the Passover might declare him to be the Lamb
of Go^ which takes away the sins of the world: John 1. 19. to show and
represent his death until his coming again: to leave his Church a Badg of
distinction from Infidels, and a parting token and pledge of his great love,
assuring the faithful of his continual care of them.

III.
The visible signs are bread and wine, the thing signified is the participation
of the Body and Blood of Christ, the benefits of whose Death and Passion being
apprehended by Faith accrue to us, as, our mystical Union with Christ, our
Incorporation into him, our reconciliation with God, and the nourishment of our
most precious souls to eternal life, John 6. 54. Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at tht last day;
and this Sacrament if we do receive truly and faithfully, God has promised to
accept us and to give us all those benefits in this, which he was ready to
bestow in the Sacrament of our Baptism, had we not forfeited them by our
transgressions, and the renewing of our Covenant at this time is very
necessary. That we may rightly understand the mercies promised on God's part,
and the Duty on our own, seeing this is a matter of so high Concernment it
imports every Christian,

First, To Consider the End for which it was Instituted. Secondly, The Author
by whom it was Instituted. Thirdly, The outward Means suitable to that end.
Fourthly, The mystical Union by which they effectually attain and convey to us
that end and benefit which is propounded. Fifthly. How we ought to Prepare our
selves. Sixthly, How to Receive it worthily. And Lastly, How to Live well a
righteous, godly and sober Life after Receiving this most holy Sacrament.
First, The End for which it was Instituted.
I.
For its End which in every action is the first in the intention of the agent,
and that has proportion and influence into all the means used for attaining
it, this I conceive to be a Divine, spiritual, and supernatural end, even the
highest God has, or man can propound to himself; namely, the glory of God in
the eternal life and happiness of my body and soul, which consists in my union
with, and fruition of, God in heaven for ever, which is effected by the Spirit
and grace of God through the merits of Jesus Christ, drawing my soul through
faith in the Son of God made Man, to himself, who by the evil of sin, both
original depravation and actual Commissions am removed at an infinite distance
from the love of God the fountain of happiness, and placed in a state of Guilt,
liable to the justice and wrath of God, and by consequence to eternal misery
and Damnation.

II.
A State, not more miserable in it self, than unavoidable by me, unless the
free grace and immense goodness of the Almighty which brings sinners to
repentance, had prevented both my desert and desire, by an eternal purpose of
offering pardon, life, and salvation to sinful mankind, which good pleasure and
purpose in himself God has clearly revealed according to the diverse
dispensations of his wisdom and providence, even from the first promise of
Christ, made to the first sinners, to the personal coming of the Son of God
into the World, to bear the Name and Office of the Savior of Sinners, and
has* fully accomplished and* clearly revealed unto Mankind this undeniable
truth* of the eternal purpose of God to give pardon, life, and salvation
through faith in Jesus Christ his only Son, who became Man, and died for the
sins of the World, and so satisfied the Justice of God for them, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.

III.
That great saying, and most comfortable Truth, Preached by Christ, witnessed
by the Apostles, Dictated by the Spirit of God, written by the Evangelists,
Confirmed by many Miracles, delivered by the Church by constant Tradition, and
believed on in all ages, this God requires me to believe as a certain and
infallible truth in it self, and by faith it becomes to me saving and
comfortable. It brings my soul to see by the law its own sinful and desperate
estate, it calls me off from my self and all Creatures, and assures me of
immortal happiness for ever, by adhering and relying upon Christ, and that free
grace of God in him, and through him bestowed upon my soul.

IV.
This faith and trust in the free Grace through Jesus Christ, as it is first
wrought by the word of God and his holy Spirit in my soul, which is the
beginning of this spiritual and eternal life; so that it may be further
nourished and strengthened to a farther degree of comfort and assurance, God
has out of a wonderful Indulgence to our weakness and difficulty of believing,
annexed to his word these holy Sacraments, as visible and most manifest Seals
of this Covenant of Grace and Mercy, that the soul might in no sort doubt of
it, nor be discouraged at the sight of it is own sin and unworthiness, when it
sees the love of God and its pardon confirmed and assured to it, by all its
senses, and his Savior the great worker and teacher of this salvation, by
these sensible means lively set forth in his death and sufferings, and himself
with all his merits personally offered and conveyed to its self in
particulars.

V.
This then is the End to which this holy Sacrament, as other means of grace is
especially directed, that it may be to the souls spiritual life of such
efficacy, as Food is to the Temporal life of our Bodies, a means to maintain
life, to increase strength and inward comfort, to enable holy actions and
cheerful obedience, to assure our hopes and affiance in the great truth of God,
for the pardon of sins, and bestowing the Son of God Jesus Christ our great
Redeemer, who is the Fountain and conveigher of life, through these Conduits of
the outward means to the penitent and believing soul.

Secondly, The Author by whom it was Instituted,
I.
Was the Lord Jesus Christ the Savior of the World? who being the Lord of
power, and the Jesus of Mercy, is both able and wiling to make this holy
Ordinance the means of that Mercy and Grace which he promises to us, which
means are effectual to this supernatural end, not by any proportion of innate
virtue, or Physical efficacy of themselves, as food has to our temporal life
by the common rule and ordination of Providence, but by a Spiritual, Divine,
and most Mysterious appointment, Instituted by our God and Savior himself,
whose Authority only could Institute, and whose power only can make effectual
his Institution, by uniting earthly sensible, so small and unproportionable
means to so heavenly spiritual and excellent an End.

II.
So that in this great mystery, though reason assures us in the general assent,
that the Omnipotency of God can make effectual whatever means he pleases in
his wisdom to ordain, to an end though never so unproportionable; yet for the
particular demonstrating of the matter of efficiency, whereby such means do
certainly convey to us so great an end and benefit, Reason is quite dazzled and
blind, having no ground to fasten upon, but devolving all the work of this holy
mystery to faith, which relies upon the truth, power, and love of the
Institutor Jesus Christ, who while he was yet on Earth by a Corporal and
Natural presence conversing with men, but chiefly with his choice and Domestic
Company the Twelve Apostles, a little before his death, Instituted this Sacred
Mystery, after his last Supper which he made with them.

III.
By the evidence of this Sacrament, exhibiting himself to them and all beliving
souls, in such an extraordinary and eminent degree of comfort and personal
assurance, as might greatly establish their faith and hearts, in the near and
dismal Times of his sufferings shortly ensuing, and after his Ascension, might
be a continual memorial and Seal of the Covenant of Grace established in the
death of Christ, a support of the faith of Belivers, and a lively token and
pledge of his spiritual presence with his Church, during his bodily absence,
till his second coming, as also a badge of the profession of the Christian
Religion and that mutual love and charity of Believers, who are all united by*
faith to one and the same Savior, of whom they are all partakers in this one
Sacrament, as well of the invisible Grace, as the outward and visible signs the
bread and wine.

Thirdly, The outward Means suitable to this end.
I.
The choice of which familiar signs made by our Savior for the outward means,
discovered a wonderful wisdom and no less love and condescension to his Church,
while he made choice of such things for the Representation of his greatest
Grace and our comfort, as best sitting this sta^e of Senses and Infirmity, such
as for the Community may be had of all Nations and in all Countries, either by
native Commodities as in most, or by cheap and easy Commerce with others, whose
abundance may spare, though where the proper species of bread and wine cannot
be had, those means of nourishment which are proportionable may be used, so
that no Nation or man may think himself excluded, from the use and comfort of
this Sacrament of the Lords Super.

II.
For their necessity, such as no man in an ordinary way of living can dispense
with the want of them, and live long healthfully, implying that Food is not
more necessary, for sustaining this present life and strength of the body, than
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is for the supporting the life and
well-being of the soul to all eternity.

III.
For their plainness and simplicity, it is such as may take off Christians
minds from placing Piety and the Mysteries of Grace and Religion in any
external pomp and vanity, which does but dazzle the eyes and amaze the senses
and detain vulgar and common minds by the outward glory of the senses Objects,
from that inward retiring of the Spirit and Soul to its proper and comfortable
Objects, which are Spiritual; Invisible, and Intellectual, and far remote from
the Senses, and abstracted from them. So that Christians cannot easily be so
grossly and stupidly sensual as to imagine any efficacy in these small and
simple elements of themselves, no more than in Wax or Parchment, which not of
their proper virtue, but only of the will of the conveigher have power to
convey an estate to the Receiver of them.

IV.
For their proportionable suitableness and familiar correspondency of Virtues
and Efficiency; first, the bread and wine being apt to nourish the body by
common ordination of Providence; the body and blood of Christ, fit to nourish
the soul by special ordination of Grace. Secondly, the bread and wine at a
distance will not feed us, but must be personally applied, by taking, eating,
drinking, and digesting; The body and blood of Christ, looked on only by
knowledge and Historical speculation, will not profit the soul, except by a
lively Faith, which is the hand, mouth, and stomach of the soul, it accepts and
takes hold on Christ, and applies his merits to it self for Salvation.

V.
The Bread after it passes much violence of the Mill, hand, and fire, is made
wholesome for Food, and the Wine after it has endured the torture of the Press
is prepared for drink; the body and blood of Christ, not whole, entire and
unsufferable, but Crucified and Broken in his Passion, when he did undergo the
burden of the sins of the world, and was under the pressure of the Justice of
God, and Sacrificed for the redemption of mankind, under this consideration is
received by the believing

Soul, for its life and comfort: looking on all these sufferings of Christ, not
as his own demerits, whose innocence was without spot or blemish, but as the
satisfaction of the Justice, and appeasing the wrath of God for the sins of
them that shall believe in his name; which work of reconciling Heaven and
Earth, God and Man, as Christ willingly undertook, so he fully performed, and
is fully performed, and is by God accepted in full discharge, whose mercy to
man designed his only Son for this great End.

VI.
For the facility of the performance, both in respect of cost and labor: the
Indulgence of Christ seeking to render Christian services to God and the
Offices of the Gospel as easy and as cheap as might be, that neither the cost
nor the pains might deter any from the frequent partaking of these Mysteries,
the comforts of which are the free gift of God, and cost us nothing but
acceptance; for the evidence and perceptibleness of them falling under the
perception of four several fenses, by whose joy^t testimony of their proper
Objects, our minds and reason, naturally gains the certainty, and infallibility
of natural truths, whose Testimonies now by Christ's institution are raised
higher to give evidence and witness to Faith of the truth and certainty of its
Objects.

VII.
The Body and Blood of Christ broken and shed in his death and sufferings,
which by these sensible signs are clearly represented, and the merits and
efficacy of his death as truly perceived, and as really conveyed by faith to
the soul and person of a Believer, for life and happiness, as the nutritive
power and virtue of the Bread and Wine is perceived, approved and applied by
the Senses to the Body, that as by one sense of Hearing, faith is begun, so by
the other four Senses in this Sacrament, it might daily be increased and
strengthened, there being not a greater Physical certainty given into our common
Sense and Reason by our senses of the Truth of the bread and wine which the
body receives, then there is a Theological and Sacramental certainty given into
Faith (depending upon the Authority, truth and power of the Institutor) of a
real and most effectual perception of the body and blood of Christ for the
nourishment of our souls and bodies to eternal life, that as our souls are here
helped by the senses of the Body, and its food in the way of a natural and
momentary life, so the body may at last be saved by the souls perception of its
Spiritual Food to Glory and Immortal life.

Fourthly, The Mystical Union by which they effectually attain and convey to us
that end and benefit which is propounded.
I.
For the Sacramental Union of the outward signs, which are the proper Objects
of our senses, to the body and blood of Christ, which are the proper Objects of
our Faith, this I conceive to be not by any Physical or natural Union as the
Fruit to the Tree, or the effect to its proportionate Cause, nor yet by any
Miraculous working of Omnipotency, in changing the substance of these Elements,
into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood, which makes the Judgment of
Faith contradict the Judgment of the Senses, which the will of God has
appointed by the Law of Nature, to give a true Testimony of their proper
Objects, rightly disposed, and withal do witness these to be indeed true bread
and wine, and the same for Substance after Consecration as they were before,
though wonderfully different from their use; neither is faith ever commanded by
any Divine will, to deny or contradict the truth of Senses, for the substance
and nature of things. Though it raises us far above them, and bids us look
infinite beyond them, in a Divine and Supernatural relation and use annexed to
them.

II.
Nor may Omnipotency, (the common retreat and subterfuge) be so far extended by
Human fancy and imagination to maintain them, as to imply a necessary
contradiction in the Will of God, about one and the same subject (which Will is
but one and regular, setting bounds to Omnipotency agreeable to it self) which
cannot be avoided here, if we say that God's Will is in the way of nature, that
the Senses judge truly of their Objects, which They do here, and tell us
jointly that they are bread and wine; and yet his Will is at the same, and
about the same thing, that Faith should contradict the Senses Testimonny, and
believe truly that they are not bread and wine, but substantially flesh and
blood, besides innumerable monstrous and most absurd Consequences and
Contradictions which follow that Opinion, which all do infinitely perplex and
torture the minds of Christians: If the Opinion, were granted, and all these
absurdities swallowed by a wide and enormous Faith, yet were there no advantage
of Efficacy or Comfort gained to the Receiver by a gross and Carnal Eating and
Drinking the body and blood of Christ.

III.
If those which Crucified him had done so, or they who then believed in him,
when he was slain, yet would they not any way have furthered their souls good,
and life, which can no more be fed with carnal and sensible Objects, than the
body with light and truth, which are of a Spiritual nature, nor does this first
violent act of faith which they require of a Receiver, in believing the
essential change of the Bread, and Wine, into the body and Blood of Christ make
a worthy Receiver, except his Soul by a further act of Faith, apply the virtue
and merits of Christ's Death and Passion; which is done effectually, (without
the thought of Transubstantiation) by that Faith which we say is necessary for
a worthy Receiver, which does as clearly perceive, and as really receive its
proper Objects, the Truth and Merits of Christ's Death and Sufferings, (to
which no distance of place or time, can be any impediment) as the Sense does
its sensible Objects, which requires a fit time and distance for perception.

IV.
As for the Sacramental words given in the name of the Body and Blood of
Christ, to the consecrated Bread and Wine; I believe them to be most true in
the sense and meaning of our Savior; which sense I do not only guess at, or
implicitly believe; but easily and plainly gather and understand by the like
expressions, both of our Savior himself, and the style and phrase of the whole
Scripture; which never make such substantial predications of one thing to be
another, by way of transmutation of one into the other; but by allusion,
relation, similitude, proportion, designation of use, and Sacramental Union, or
application; no more than the Paschal Lamb, which was a Type and Sacrament of
Christ and his Sufferings was the very substance of Christ, or that Rock, on
which St. Paul affirms it was Christ, or that Christ is to be thought a natural
door, way, vine, light, etc. all which he affirms to be himself, by a like
manner of speech; or more nearer, the Cup to be the New Testament etc. So that
Reason, Religion, and the Rule of Faith, the Holy Scriptures, teach Christians
to give ( commodam interpretationem) a fit and agreeable interpretation.

V.
Nor can we have a truer interpreter of Christ's meaning than himself, who
tells us, that the Flesh profits nothing, (that is, in that carnal and gross
acceptance,) but his words are spiritual, and must have a spiritual sense,
which is suitable to the Nature and Capacity of the Soul; the dignity of
Chiristan Religion and the sacred Mystery, the Propriety of the object of Faith
and the style and tenor of God's Word, which never enjoins us any carnal
thing, horrible or inhumane: For though the Letter may sound so, yet the Figure
in the words does relieve our Faith, and accommodate a fit and true meaning to
such words and expressions; nothing being more usual than for the Spirit of God
to set forth Spiritual things and duties by corporal notions.

VI.
So that as the Bread and Wine, by their natural qualities and virtues, are fit
to represent the spiritual efficacy of the Body and Blood of Christ, yet by a
natural power, are no whit able to impart to a Communicant the Body and Blood
of Christ, with the benefits of them to the Soul: so that our blessed Savior
has made choice of them for the First, and has given to them a Sacramental
Virtue, and a supernatural efficacy for the Second, which they truly do as
Remembrancers, as Signs and Seals really conveying to the believing and
prepared Soul, by the concurrent Spirit and Power of the Institutor Jesus
Christ, that which in their nature they do fitly represent.

VII.
Which is all that I conceive, I need believe of, or expect from, this
Sacrament, which is appointed only to strengthen and confirm that Faith in us
by which we believe in Christ crucified, for Life and Salvation; which Faith
grounded on the Word, and wrought by the Spirit, is first confirmed and sealed
by Baptism, and may be true and sufficient to save a Christian, who never lives
to come to the Supper of the Lord; nor has any thought or use of
Transubstantiation in this, no more than of the substantial change of the Water
in Baptism into the Blood of Christ, which was never yet dreamed of: yet our
Savior tells us, Joh. the 6th. Except a man eat his Flesh, and drink his
Blood, he cannot have Eternal Life; which many have, who never eat of the most
holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, yet dye believers, and by Faith, have eaten
and drank the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually; yet really without which
they could not be saved.

VIII.
Neither to secure children of Salvation, in case they dye before years of
discretion, need we resume the ancient, but erroneous practice of the Church
now long since abolished by all sides, viz. to put the Eucharistical Bread and
Wine into the mouths of Infants; which Error sprang from the gross and
corporeal interpretation of our Savior's words; not considering that every
Believer either in the internal disposition, which is secretly wrought by the
Spirits sanctifying Power, in Baptism, according to the capacity of the
Subject; or in the real exercise and actuating of his Faith which comes by
Hearing in his riper years, must necessarily, and does effectually and really
Eat and Drink the Body and Blood of Christ to Salvation, though they never come
to receive in the Holy Supper; so that it is but one Christ, his Body and
Blood, the same Crucified Savior which is received in both Sacraments, and but
one Faith for the kind, that lays hold and feeds on Christ, in them all, only
it receives degrees and addition of strength in this of the Supper, the Word
beginning the Life of Faith, and by it the Believer into Christ; the other
maintaining and increasing it to a further strength and assurance.

IX.
We deny not a true and real presence and perception of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Sacrament, which reality even they of the other gross Opinion do not
imagine is to Sense, but to Faith; which perceives its Objects as really
according to the manner of Faiths perception, as the senses do theirs after
their manner. I believe therefore, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
there are both objects presented to, and received by, a Worthy Receiver; first
the Bread and Wine in their own nature and substances distinct, do remain as
well as their accidents, which are the true objects of our sense; and fit signs
to represent by them, the inward Grace.

X.
Also there are the spiritual, invisible and credible, yet most true and really
present objects of Faith; the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, Christ Jesus
himself, whom by Faith I consider as suffering for my sins, and cast my Soul,
by the Mercy offered me, by the merits of his Death: these two materials of the
Sacrament are so united, that it may truly be said (not in a Gross and
Physical, but Divine and Sacramental sense) the Bread and Wine are the Body and
Blood of Christ, and Christ's Body and Blood are Bread and Wine; Joh. 6. Meat
indeed, and Drink indeed, not by transmutation of Nature, but by a similitude
of virtues, and proportionableness of effects, by a Sacramental Union and
Relation depending upon the Truth, Authority and Divine Power of the
Institutor, Jesus Christ.

XI.
Whose appointment of these Elements to such an use or end, and uniting them in
this near Relation to his Body and Blood by the solemn Consecration of them,
makes up the firm and true Being of a Sacrament, Which requires a Truth and
Reality, both of the signs and symbols, and that which is by them represented
and signified; also a Truth and Certainty of relation and connection one with
another: so that I receive, not only Panem Domini, the Bread of the Lord; but
also Panem Dominum, my Lord Jesus Christ, the true Bread of Life Eternal to my
Soul and Body; this latter as truly and really as the former, together with all
the benefits which flow from Christ.

XII.
On the other side, whosoever unpreparedly and irreverently, and so un vorthily
receives the one, contracts a guilt of Damnation for neglect, indignity and
irreverence offered to the other; that is, the Body and Blood of Christ, which
Faith only discerns and receives in this great Mystery, and whosoever violates and
contemns the Seal and authentic Letters of the King, becomes guilty of
indignity and offense to the Authority and Majesty, which is not only
restrained to his Person; but also in separably anexed to any sign or token by
which he is pleased to manifest his Royal Will and pleasure, thus rightly
informed, as I hope in the nature of this Sacrament, what it is in it self,
what it may be to me, of how Divine a Mystery and dignity it is in it self to
my Soul, either of Comsort and Salvation in a worthy receiving, or of Guilt and
Damnation in an unworthy receiving of it,

Fifthly, How we ought to propare our selves.
I.
Which is by laying my hand upon my heart, and feeling how the pulse of my Soul
beats; whether does it move as quick now I am thinking of my Maker, as it does
when my thoughts are upon the World, that which God and my Conscience requires
of me, is that I consider my self, the state and condition of my Soul for what
is past, of my will and affections for the present, of my purpose and
intentions for the future; to all which it is necessary that I have a regard;
and by a self-examining, see what fitness there is in me, answerable to these
holy mysteries, and the Grace of God by these offered to me, and most
effectually conveyed, except the unpreparedness, and indisposition of my heart
do frustrate and put an obstacle.

II.
In the contemplation of my self I may not, nor can avoid, the sight of that
which makes me unworthy of God and my self; that is, my sin, and that evil both
of my inclinations, to which I am conscious, I know by long and miserable
Experience that in me dwells no Good of my self, but a Proness to sin at the
best, oftentimes a violence and power of sin, which makes me not only passive,
as in Temptations; but active in the will to do and delight in sin: this my
Conscience witnesses with so much truth, in so many unhappy instances and with
so many just aggravations, that nothing appears to me more numerous, more
unreasonable, more to be abhorred than my sins, nor more miserable than my self.

III.
I know by an inward and undeniable Dictate; that since I have my Being from,
and dependence upon, a higher and better Being than my self, it is most just I
should be at his Will and disposing, whose power is not greater above me, than
his goodness is abundant toward me, and his wisdom perfect in giving laws to
me for the ordering my Being according to his Will and Word, the perfect rule
of holiness, and the only, and certain way to happiness; that nothing can be
more injurious, injust, ungrateful, than for a Creature to offend against the
will of its Creator who as he is the highest and happiest Good; so on the
contrary, sin in me must needs be the lowest Evil, and sink me to the deepest
Misery, by setting me at an Eternal distance from the Love and Favor of God
(which is Life it self) as an object of his hatred and Eternal displeasure.

IV.
So that when I look upon the deformity of my heart and life, comparing them
with the Beauty of Reason and Religion, wherein the Image of God infinitely
appears in Holiness and goodness; I have cause to admire that infinite
Patience, which has so long witheld the hands of Justice from punishing and
damning a Creature, doing and deserving so much; and to deplore my own depraved
and damnable Estate, over whom sin so far prevails and exercises its
Tyranny, that neither my thoughts, words nor actions, natural, civil nor
religious, do escape the brand or blemish of it: so that it is not only
ignorance, forgetfulness or suddenness, that gives sin advantage against me in
many Vanities, Passions and Omissions; but a Predominancy and high Hand,
wherewith oftentimes I am led away Captive to sin with such violence, that
neither the force of Reason, nor better Resolutions and Purposes are sufficient
to rescue my Soul from the Speculation and Practice of that which should not be
thought, much less done with the least delight and pleasure, since it is
displeasing to God.

V.
So that I see not only a habitude and propensity to any sin, which is often
restrained through want of matter or occasion to make it flame into action; but
an Empire and rule of some whose power excites by innate disposition, and
comfirm'd by custom, seems to have made an utter conquest of me; and does
compel me against all my Knowledge, Prayers, and Vows to exchange my Souls
happiness in the Love of God and Christ in Heaven for a moment of earthly
content, for a sensual imaginary pleasure which when the dream of this Life is
past and vanished, and by that immutable Law of mortality, I am compelled to
leave the World and all things in it; will betray me to endless and
irrecoverable misery. In the mean time, it estranges my heart from that care,
intention, and delight, which I ought to have in holy duties, and conversation
with God and his Holy Spirit. It robs and deprives my Soul of all that joy,
peace, hope and assiance I might have in the service, love and favor of God,
detaining my mind in such degrees of ignorance, as may render my sin less
odious to me, and make me less sensible of my misery, and want of Mercy;
hardening and consirming my will against those Pious and Good motions by which
the Spirit of God oftentimes attempts to soften it to an ingenuous submission
to God and his Will, disordering my affections, and diverting them from those
right Objects, which Reason and Religion propound, and my own Conscience cannot
but approve.

VI.
Which makes my sin out of measure sinful and dangerous, so that in the shame
and confusion which this sight of it self casts upon my Soul, I have enough to
do, to see and weigh my own unworthiness, and fill my Conscience with that fear
of the Wrath of God, and horror of Eternal Judgment, which I confess, might
justly punish all my sins with despair; and it, as the greatest of all sins,
with Damnation: And beyond these thoughts I could no^, I durst not go in this
gulf of sin, and the apprehensions of my misery, should I sink, not daring to
send up the least thought to Heaven for a better Estate, nor apply my self to
the means of any Use or Happiness.

VII.
If I did not see by a Divine and Glorious Light of Truth, a Hand of Mercy, and
means of recovery and Salvation stretched out to me and assuring me by the
unerring and undeceiveable veracity of God, and the infallibility of his
Promises; that his Thoughts are thoughts of Mercy and Pardon to sinful Mankind,
that he has graciously found a way of satisfying his Justice and taking off
the Guilt and Punishment of our sins from our Souls by the sufferings of Jesus
Christ, God and Man transferring the Guilt and punishment of our sins to him,
and imputing the Merits of his Righteousness to us, upon condition we believe
on him and cast our Souls, how sinful soever they be, into the Arms of his
Mercy, and by the serious apprehension of this infinite Love and Goodness, be
won from the Love of sin to Repentance and Amendment of Life. Upon this Truth
and Grace, revealed by God to his Church, and my Soul in particular, I lay hold
and cast my self, with all the Guilt and Burden of my sins, what aggravations
soever for number or quality they admit, being assured that they are infinitely
less than the Mercies of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ. This wonderful Truth
of God, which I dare not, I cannot deny, this Mercy which above all things I
need, adds new Mercy to my dead and languishing Soul, this represents God to me
in the face of Jesus Christ, as the highest Good, most to be desired, loved and
admired.

VIII.
This shows me my sin in the true colors of ingratitude, vileness end
unworthiness against that Mercy, which offers Pardon for my sin against a
Savior who has died for me. This stirs up a hatred and resolution against
sin, out of a principal love and apprehension of a wonderful desert, and
obligation of love and unspeakable Kindness to me: that as I have the greatest
cause that can be to be humbled, in the sight of my sin and self; so that the
surest ground that can be, whereon to settle my Faith and Comfort, is the Truth
and Mercy of God, which by the Word, Spirit, and Son of God, is assured to me;
that although by my sin I have highly displeased and dishonored God Almighty;
yet by my trust and believing in his Truth, and Promises of Pardon and
Salvation through Jesus Christ, I shall greatly please and honor him, giving
him the Glory of his Grace and Mercy, by sealling to his Truth, which to
question, or deny, or not to believe, is to make all my other sins
unpardonable, and add a sin of a higher nature than any I have yet committed;
that is, unbelief, or giving God the lie, and its inseparable companion
impenitency.

IX.
Won therefore, and melted by this great, certain, and preventive Kindness and
Love of God, which in no sort I could deserve; yet cannot deny or doubt of, I
grow daily to see more clearly, and embrace more firmly, affectionately the
Goodness of God to my Soul; and from thence to a more tender sense, and greater
detestation of sin; not so much now daring to sin, as not willing to sin;
denying the motions and occasions to sin, not so much out of fear of
punishment, as a love to please, and an extreme secret shame of returning evil
to such wonderful Goodness; abhorring sin, not so much for the evil which
follows it, as for the evil which is in it, and deformity and vileness of it,
which I see by the glymps of that Beauty and Loveliness, which I discover in
Holiness and Virtue, the Image of God, the highest Ornament and Happiness of
the Creature.

X.
Thus in some degrees freed from the Fear and Love of my sin, Holy desires and
good affections (as followers of the Sun's Accession in the Spring) begin to
arise in my heart; and though they suffer a great allay by the Earth of the
Body, in which the Soul is planted; yet they assure me that the Spirit of God
has moved upon that Chaos (the deadness and barrenness of my Soul,) and by a
secret, but most effectual influence has made me a New Creature, by ingrafting
me into the Tree of Life, Jesus Christ; and washing me in that pure Fountain of
his Blood which was shed for the Remission of my sins. Thus now, I desire
nothing more than daily to attain a fuller Sight and Capacity of this admired
Mercy: that as my knowledge in the Greatness and Truth of it increases; so my
Faith in the applying of it may be strengthened, my Affections in the thankful
return of my self may be enflamed; my Charity and Virtue toward others may be
excited, glad to have occasions really to express my Love, Pity and Forgiveness
of others, that grateful Sense I have of God's Love to me in Christ.

XI.
And that the whole course of my Life may be so ordered, as becomes one who is
united to the Son of God not only by the Community of the humane Nature, but by
the efficacy of the same Holy Spirit, and raised to the hopes of the same Glory
and Happiness; that now nothing is more acceptable to me, than to meditate of
this great Mystery of man's Salvation; nothing more delightful, than the
thoughts of God reconciled to me in Jesus Christ; nothing more welcome, than the
use of those means, by which God does further confirm and assure this Mercy and
Truth to my Soul, whose many failings, though they often shake my confidence
and obscure my comfort; yet the sight of the Promises, and the seals of the
Sacrament annexed to them, in which I behold Jesus Christ crucified, does again
establish my heart, and assure me that the All-powerful Love and Grace of God
will not be overcome by the sin and wickedness of man; but will effectually
repair the breaches of my daily infirmities and satisfy the doubtings of my
misguided Conscience, and further assure me of the pardon of my sins, and
interest in his love and favor, by the renewed use of his sacred Ordinances.

XII.
To which he calls and invites me, both by the outward overture of fit
occasions, and inward incitation of good and earnest desires, to partake of
them as the pledges and conduits, of my greatest comfort and happiness; which
happiness I esteem and seek after, not only in a freedom from the punishment,
and misery of my sin, but from the power of, and the pleasure that seems to be
in, sin; nor do I count it a less degree of Grace and Mercy which enables me to
serve and love him, than that which saves me from Hell Torments, nor do I come
to the Sacrament, only to quit the score of my sins, but to get strength and
grace against them, to deny, mortify and overcome them, which above all things
that the World accounts, will I most abhor, and desire to avoid, and am most
grieved if I do not, I make new and reinforced vows and resolutions, between
God and my Soul, against my sinful self, which although I have often failed to
keep, as I intended, yet I am not quite overcome, while I truly desire, pray,
and endeavor to get the victory, and am never more displeased, than when I
fail of it.

XIII.
Thus having tried and renewed my repentance by my sighs, sorrow and
humiliation for sin, my serious purpose, and earnest prayer against sin, my
faith by my love of God, dependence upon him, submission to him, desire to
please him, arising out of an apprehension and persuasion of his love to my
Soul, my love to God and my Savior, by my hatred of sin, fear to, and grief
for, offending, by my love of his Servants, delight in his word, zeal for his
truth and glory, an earnest desire and steadfast hope to enjoy him, and by my
particular appetite, and desires to this holy Sacrament, as a special means of
communion with my God and Savior, and pertaking of his Grace. My charity and
love to others, by my care and endeavor, by all means to further their Souls
good, by my affectionate prays for them, though they have deserved ill of me,
by my tenderness of giving offense, my slowness to take offense, by my grief
when any arise, by my proneness and joy in reconciling; and though I find all
these graces in me, but in weak and small degrees, with mixture of much
infirmity and many imperfections, nay a contrary power daily opposing and with
much impatience, striving to break the Cords of pious and solemn resolutions,
(I am, as well becomes me,) humbled and emptied of all opinions of my self.

XIV.
Yet am I not discouraged from coming, since what did most deter me in it self
from coming to Christ, my sin and unworthiness, is by the operation of faith
made as the greatest incitement to provoke me to come, being one, whose great
wants, and unworthiness will afford a fit subject, whereon to magnify the
Riches of that free Grace and infinite mercy which becomes the majesty of God,
and may answer the merits of our Savior, from whom, as a principle of a new
life, I expect all the grace, comfort, strength, and happiness which I want,
and to whom I give the glory of all that I enjoy, who as the head derives to
every part of his body the Church, life, motion, health, and whatever is in his
own fullness and perfection, whose love and compassion to my Soul to all
Eternity will be too little to comprehend and magnify.

XV.
Which that I may more fully discover, I have a more lively assurance of, be
more thankfully affected, and live more worthy of it. I repeat again this
sacred memorial, and seal of his love and mercy, having first sought by
frequent, earnest and humble prayer, and in some measure obtained the
assistance of his holy Spirit, which by its preparatory Grace stirs up earnest
and hungring desires to receive, renew its habitual graces planted in my heart,
Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, love of God, charity to others, and thankfulness
by actuating a new; before I receive assistance in receving by Sacred, devout
and pertinent Meditations, seals and testifies to my Conscience my acceptance
and efficacy of receiving, by increase of holiness in my heart, and care of
better obedience in my life after the surest evidence, and truest I can have or
expect, of my worthy receiving.

XVI.
Having thus faithfully discharged my Duty and Conscience in the way of
preparation to the Sacrament, though still conscious to, and humbled in, the
consideration of my own unworthiness, in any proportion to the great good I aim
at, yet I will not deprive my self of so ne^r and inestimable a comfort, by
refraining, nor dare l so far distrust the mercy of God and dignation of my
Savior, who propounds not my personal worthiness, (in a strict sense,) as the
object of my comfort, and hopes in coming, but his gracious acceptance, and
merciful indulgence, such indeed as becomes the infinite goodness and honor of
the Christians God and Savior.

XVII.
The same holy frame and devout temper of Spirit I labor to continue in my
receiving, carrying my Faith by the visible Representations before me, and
given to me, to behold its invisible, but most credible object Jesus Christ
crucified, and dying for my sins whose love and merits I consider with as great
an obligation of love, thankfulness and obedience, upon me, as if he had laid
down his life for me alone: these meditations raise me to thankfulness, to
admiration to exaltation of the love of God my Savior above all.

XVIII.
Finally, so I endeavor to receive this blessed Sacrament, as if each
opportunity were my last, as if I were to appear before God in Judgment, that
in the power of that grace I there receive, I may live the remainder of my
short life, virtuously, and holily, in the hope of its reward, and perfection
in Heaven, I may die willingly and cheerfully in the Merit and Righteousness of
it, I may attain to the Resurrection of the just, appear justified before God
at the last and great day, and obtain the Consummation of all in that glorious
estate of Immortality with God and Christ in Heaven.

XIX
The Duty of examining my self is by precept clearly enjoining me by the Spirit
of God; let a Man therefore examine himself and so let him eat of that* Bread,
and Drink of that Cup, 1. Cor. 11. Chap 28. verse, which alone were enough to
exact my performance, but since all the commands of God who is the most perfect
reason to rational Creatures are most reasonable, though often times ignorance or
blindness does not, or will not, discover it, to the equity of this injunction
my own reason must needs subscribe; for knowing that every thing is received
according to the capacity and disposition of the recipient, and that a worldly,
sensual and mere humane mind is unapt to receive things intellectual, Spiritual
and Divine, and perceive objects, the Soul receiving no more of its objects,
what ever they be, than it does by intention and design apply himself to them.

XX.
It must needs be that unpreparedness through ignorance or inconsideration, of
what I do, cannot but frustrate my Soul of the good end of any action, and most
of all in so sacred and solemn a one as this is, which concerns my Souls good
in so high a nature, and the negligent performance of it must needs render me
guilty of a great sin of profaneness, and irreverence toward the Majesty, of
ingratitude toward the mercy of my God and Savior, whose ordinance this is,
and with whom in it I have to do; besides I am conscious to my self, that
although for the habits of grace and general purpose of my heart, I may be, or
strive to be, at no time utterly indisposed, to the service of God in holy
duties, as they are presented to me in private or public occasions, yet I see,
not without some degree of sorrow and humiliation, that through the variety and
distraction of secular affairs, and the cares that attend them, the commotions
and suddenness of passions and irregular affections, the common but then of
humane and corporal infirmities, the multitude and vanity of sensual objects
and desires, sin daily prevails upon me, and my mind is much taken off from
that constant regard and delight which I would and ought to have of God and his
commands, and becomes indisposed to holy duties.

XXI.
By all which my faith and hope in God my Savior is much weakened, and
undermined, while my understanding grows dim and clouded, in the knowledge of
them, my memory is blotted and defaced in its notions and impressions of them,
my will is declined and wraped from its conformity with them, and my desires
are cool and indifferent to them, as objects of a pure and remote nature, of a
sublimer speculation and pleasure, than these which are present and fall under
the senses, to which our Souls have a daily nearer and more easy access, so
that my Conscience tells me by the light of nature, that it is necessary for me
to recollect my Soul, by a special and renewed preparation when ever I approach
these holy and extraordinary duties, to recover the lost and forgotten notions
to clear that dimness, which the light of knowledge has contracted, to rectify
the swervings and obliquities of my will, to compose the levity and
extravagancies of my thoughts, to reinflame the coolness and deadness of my
affections, to reinforce my vows and resolutions against sin; in a word, by
unfeigned repentance and renewed sorrow by a serious meditation of God my
Savior, my self and the means of Communion between us, by frequent and servent
prayer, to settle and reestablish my faith and hope in the mercies of God, and
merits of Christ, to wind up and raise my Soul judiciously, to see seriously,
to intend earnestly, to desire succesfully, to obtain the hope and comfort of
my Eternal happiness, which is that great and highest end to which this as all
other holy actions are by Divine ordination appointed.

XXII.
This then being the present state of my Soul in this vale of mortality, both
of its self by an innate burden, always sinking and declining toward the
Creature, and besides wanting not many temptations which daily seek to quench,
depress and indispose it from aspiring to Heaven, and a supernatural end and
happiness, it is necessary for me, before I use these means which may advance
me toward that end, to take a survey of my heart, by examining both the
register of my Conscience for sins past, and the present state and disposition
of my will, as, also my after purpose, and intentions how they stand inclined
to good or evil, to God or the Creature, to things of this life or that to
come, that so I may recover what I have lost, renew what I am decayed in,
repent what I have offended in, and reform what I have failed in, obtaining
what grace and power I want, and daily advance to what high measure and ability
I can, till I attain the end of all my prayers and endeavor the glory of God
in the salvation of my Soul.

XXIII.
I examine my understanding, what thoughts and conceptions I have of this holy
Sacrament, for if in this I am either grossly ignorant or damnably erroneous, I
must necessarily miscarry in my receiving, and fail of my duty and its end, nor
will the goodness of my Intentions or Devoutness of my affection, which cannot
be lively and hearty, but flashy and languishing, true and sound knowledge
being the fuel which feeds the flame of good and constant affections; those I
say countervail so gross defects in my Judgment, but as in physic, misapplying
in the use, must needs follow mistaking in the doctrine and nature of it,
although I do not aim or presume to attain a full and exact comprehension of
this great mystery in the manner of its being and working, which is most
secret, divine and spiritual in the cloud and dimness of mortality, this
knowledge then of this great mystery I conceive, necessary to be had, and I
hope to be true and agreeable to the nature of the thing and the Will of God
revealed concerning it.

Rules and directions to a weeks preparation.
I.
When thou hear the warning read in the Church by the Minister, consider and
contemplate with thy self, that God Almighty has sent forth his servant to bid
thee to this great Supper, where not his fat Oxen are killed, but his only
beloved Son and thy dear Savior (who was crucified on the Cross, for thine and
for the sins of the whole World) is offered to thee to feed upon in thine heart
with faith and thanksgiving; therefore to fit and prepare thy self for this
royal Feast, thou must put on the Wedding Garment, and cast off those filthy
rags thy sins from thee, and desire of God that he would remove them as far
from thee as the East is from the West, and to remember them no more.

II.
Thus by a serious and narrow search into thy heart, thou may become a
worthy receiver, and eat and drink this spiritual Food with comfort, to the
benefit and improvement of thy immortal Soul, but if on the contrary, thou
receive it unworthily, thou eatest and drinkest thy own damnation, not
discerning the Lords Body; therefore examine thy heart, and search and try thy
ways and turn unto the Lord. How can thou tell but this is the acceptable
time, of working out thy own Salvation? therefore work now while it is day, for
the night comes wherein no man can work; use all possible means and endeavors
to receive the same worthily, and endeavor to purge thy Conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God, and so will I conclude this Section in the
words of St. Paul, Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of that Bread
and drink of that Cup.

Morning Devotions.
MOnday morning and the rest of the week, when you first awake, lift up your
Eyes to God and say,

I lift up mine Eyes to the Hills, from whence comes my help:

Open thou mine Eyes O Lord, that I may see the wonders of thy Law.

My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: Early in the morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee and will look up.

At your up-Rising.
In the name of God the Father, who Created me, God the Son who Redeemed me,
and God the Holy Ghost who Sanctifies me, Amen.

I arise from my Bed of rest to praise and glorify him, the Preserver of all
the World. He of his infinite mercy and goodness, Bless and keep me this day
and for ever, Amen.

I laid me down, and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord has sustained me.

Then kneel down and say this Prayer.
Prevent me O Lord in all my doings, with thy most gracious favor, and further
me with thy continual help, that in all my works begun, continued and ended in
thee, I may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain Everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior, Amen

O Lord my heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God who have safely
brought me to the beginning of this day; defend me in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day I fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of
danger, but that all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always
that which is righteous in thy sight through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

O God who art the author of peace and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom
stands my eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom: defend me thy
humble Servant in all assaults of my Enemies, that I surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ my Lord, Amen.

Almighty God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, who know my necessity before I
ask, and my ignorance in asking, I beseech thee to have compassion upon my
infirmities and those things which for my unworthiness I dare not, and for my
blindness I cannot ask, vouchsafe to give me for the worthiness of thy Son
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Son's name; I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine Ears to me that have
made now my Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which I have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy Glory,
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen

O Almighty God, behold me a wretched Sinner here prostrate before thee, do
with me as seems best in thine own Eyes; only give me a penitent and a patient
Spirit to expect thee, and make this my service acceptable to thee while I
live, and my Soul ready for thee when I die. Amen.

Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with me and remain with me, this day and for evermore. Amen.

Read the Psalms appointed for the Morning Service, and the First and Second
Lesson.

Devotions for the Evening for every day in the week.
Evening Ejaculations.
O Lord let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the Incence.

And the lifting up of my hands as an evening Sacrifice.

My trust and hope has been in thee all the day long, and under the Shadow of
thy Wings shall be my Refuge day and night for ever.

Lighten mine eyes O Lord, that I sleep not in death.

Almighty God who have made the day for labou^ and the night for rest, let thy
Sons blood cleanse me from this days Guilt that I may sleep in thy peace, and
rise again refreshed and preserved by thy favor, through Jesus Christ my
Crucified Savior. Amen.

O Eternal God who have preserved me this day from many sins and dangers, for
which I humbly magnify thy Holy Name, for thy Grace and goodness toward me,
beseeching thee to forgive me all the Errors of this day, whereof my Conscience
does, or may accuse me, and grant that those things which by my frailty I have
committed, may be by the help of thy Spirit more carefully avoided; that I may
ever walk in thy favor, and under thy Protection; and now rest and lie down in
thy peace, and at last come to thy heavenly Kingdom: through the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ. Amen.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good Councels and all just works do
proceed; give unto me thy Servant that peace which the world cannot give, that
my whole heart may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also that by thee I
being defended from the fear of my Enemies, I may pass my time in rest and
quietness through the merits of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

Lighten my darkness, I beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend me
from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son my
only Lord and Savior;

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The peace of God, which passes all understanding keep my heart and mind in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ my Lord: and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be with me
this Night and all the days of my life, at the hour of my death, and at the day
of Judgment. Amen.

When you lie down say.
I will lay down my head in peace, and take my rest; for thou only O Lord
make me to dwell in safety.

Into thy hands I commit my Soul and Body keep me for thy mercy sake.

Amen.
On Monday morning and every day in the Week, use these Ejaculations.
Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou
regardest him? Thou made him lower than the Angels, to crown him with glory
and worship.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my Mother conceived me.

Thou shall purge me with Hyssop and I shall be clean; thou shall wash me and I
shall be whiter than Snow.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and establish me with thy free spirit.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be now and
evermore, acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

A preparatory Meditation upon the most Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
I.
O who will give to my head Water, and to my eyes a fountain of Tears, that I
may weep day and night for my sins and ingratitude toward God my Creator!
Consider (O my Soul,) the multitude of Gods benefits bestowed upon thee, and be
thou confounded and ashamed of all thy iniquities; consider who thy Creator is
and who thou art; how he has behaved himself toward thee, and what ungrateful
returns thou have made in requital to him. Thou have made me O Lord when I was
not, and that according to thy own Image, and from the very instant of my being
have been my God, my Father, and my Deliverer, and with the benefits of thy
providence, have preserved my life even till this present moment.

II.
But because these things, O Heavenly Father, cost thee nothing, to bind me
more fast to thee, thou have given me a present which cost thee dear, thou
did come down from Heaven to seck me, in all those ways in which I had lost
my self, by thy captivity thou have loosed my bonds, and by delivering thy self
into the hands of sinners, thou have delivered me from the power of the Devil,
and by taking upon thee the form of a sinner, thou have destroyed my sin, these
things thou did to allure and bind me unto thee, and to strengthen my hope,
to make me detest and abhor sin, by beholding what thou have done and suffered,
to over throw the Kingdom of sin; O how can I without tears call to
remembrance, how often times thou might justly have bereaved me of my life:
how many thousand Souls now peradventure burn in Hell, who have less sinned
than I, and yet I burn not there; how then can I be so ungrateful, as not to
prize the large extent of that mercy which cannot be comprehended.

Monday morning a Preparatory Prayer to the Holy Sacrament.
O Almighty Lord God, thou have called me to thine holy Table, and have set out
a part of consecrated Bread and Wine for me; I acknowledge my Ignorance, that I
must be instructed by such means as thou in thy bounty have appointed for me
and I acknowledge thy divine goodness, that thou vouchsafest me to be taught,
by those (...) of Grace, whereby I may come to that of (...). I do hear thy
word, and thy dear Son is (...) my ^^r; I receive this Sacrament (...)ffered
unto my eye, in the testimony of these two witnesses, this truth is established
in my heart, that my Savior suffered death for my sins.

II.
As it has pleased thee thus to offer me thy favor, so I beseech thee give me
that grace whereby I may walk worthy of it. Am I thus invited to the heavenly
Banquet, to the Table of the King of Kings; O let me not go without my wedding
Garment, last the Bridegroom of this Feast say unto me, how come thou in
hither, without thy richest vestments, which are suitable to this great
solemnity? thou have now commanded me to examine my self, and let me now try
and examine my heart and be acquainted with it, whereby I may find out all my
spiritual wants and necessities, and look how I stand in thy sight, by making a
severe scrutiny into my self. The Jews would not eat with unwashed hands, dare
I eat with an unwashed heart? they would not drink, but their Vessels must be
purified, and dare I now drink and my soul not purified? before the passover
they sanctified themselves, and before this Sacrament, shall not I now prepare
my self? I desire to do it, Lord help my desire, lest eating and drinking
unworthily, I eat and drink my own damnation.

A Prayer before examination.
O Holy Jesus, who art a merciful embracer of true penitents, but yet a
consuming fire to obstinate offenders, I am now preparing my self to come to
thy holy Table, unfeignedly confessing my own unworthiness committed against
thy divine Majesty, I have sinned against thee many ways, and that since I last
received this most holy Sacrament; I have not known thee in thy word, beheld
thee in thy works, apprehended thee in thy Son, served thee in the Spirit,
applied thee by Faith, f^^r^d thee for thy Justice, nor admired thee as I ought
for thy great mercies. I have not frequented thine House, heard thy word, laid
it up in my heart, nor practiced it in my life as I ought to do (...) even I,
by the lusts of my eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, have
dishonored thy great and glorious name, and when thou have forgiven me ten
thousand Talents, I would not forgive my Brother a hundred Pence.

II.
As one deep calls upon another the depth of misery upon the depth of mercy,
what shall I say unto thee O thou Preserver of all men, much more what shall I
do to inherit eternal life! I will arise and go unto God my Father, and say
unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son, but thou have said that he which hides his
sins shall not prosper, but he which confesses them shall obtain mercy I
confess and am truly sorrowful I have sinned, Lord do pardon and forgive me all
my sins, and grant that in the whole course of my life hereafter, I may live to
the honor of thy great name, and to the comfort and salvation of my own Soul.

III.
O Lord give unto me now a broken heart, a contrite spirit, a sorrowful soul,
and a mind hungring and thirsting after Jesus Christ and his righteousness;
give me I beseech thee grace to know thee the only true God the Creator and
preserver of all mankind; O give me grace now to feel the burden of all my
sins, and that thou will speak peace unto my soul, and say unto it, thou art my
salvation; O let me be eased of this lump of sin, by washing it away with the
Blood of thy dear Son; I do believe, Lord help my unbelief; I am sorry for my
sins, make me to be heartily and unfeignedly sorrowful, I promise to live
nearer to thee than ever I have done, give me power to perform my promise. I
forgive all that have wronged me, even as thou for Christ's sake have forgiven
me; let this forgiveness of mine be without d^ssimulation, and Lord grant that
I may humble my self under the sense of my ignorance, and dullness and weakness,
and wickedness, and spiritual deadness of heart, and having emptied my self of
my self, I may receive of thy fullness, and grace for grace, in whose name I put
up these my imperfect prayers.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done, on earth, as it is in Heaven, give us this day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our trepasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Amen.
Still upon your knees say.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid, cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy
holy Spirit, that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy
name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Some heads of self examination by the X. Commandments to be expressed on your
knees.

God speak those words and said, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none
other Gods but me.

Lord have mercy upon me and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the first Commandment, If I have not absolutely denied
Gods being or in a gross manner renounced him by Apostasy; yet, Have I not been
angry with the Almighty, murmuring and complaining against him, in an adversity
or trouble which he has been pleased to lay upon me, as though he were not
both just and merciful?

Have I had such a confidence and trust in God, as I ought to have had,
together with such a strength and consolation, as ordinarily a lively
confidence brings with it?

Have I not put all my confidence in the world, and on the things which belong
to it, fearing man who can only kill the body, more than God who can cast both
Soul and Body into everlasting torments?

Have I not denied my Maker, by refusing to wait on him in his holy ordinances;
or if I have been there, have I not been guilty of irreverence and cold
devotion?

Lord have mercy upon me and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

II. Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing which is in Heaven above or in the Earth beneath, or in the water under
the Earth* thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands, in them that love me and keep my Commandments.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the II. Commandment.

Though I have not set up a graven Image nor fallen down to worship any; yet,

Have I not been troubled with the Fool in my heart, in laying up treasures
which a(...) liable to Corruption, and idolizing the vain pomps and vanities of
this wicked world, by covetousness which is I do latry?

If I have abhorred Idols, have I not been guilty of Sacrilege, robbing of God
in his Tithes and Offerings, not extending my charity to the poor as I ought to
do, but fixing my mind more on the Creature then on the Creator?

Have I not made a God of my belly by luxuriousness, indulging my self with
carnal delights and sensual appetites, and have been hurried away by every wind
of Doctrine?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the III. Commandment.

If I have not blasphemously profaned Gods n^m^* yet,

Have I not taken his holy name in my mouth with much irreverence, and
jestingly and scoffingly abused his holy ordinances?

Have I not taken many false Oaths and Protestations, and have been guilty of
too frequent and customary swearing, cursing by the dreadful name of God, which
is only to be mentioned for blessing and adoration.

Have I been careful to keep those lawful Oaths I have taken, as my Baptismal
vow, or any other Oath, which was administered lawfully to me without being
guilty of the breach of them?

Have I not neglected to call upon that name whereby alone I must receive
salvation, and have turned the grace of God into wantonness to the destruction
of my own Soul?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this commandment.

IV. Commandment.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy
God; in it thou shall do no manner of work thou, and thy Son and thy Daughter,
thy Man servant, and thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger that is
within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the IV. Commandment.

If I have not actually ossiciated on that day my worldly calling or
employment; yet,

Did I spend my time in the House of God, as I ought to do, to praise him for
all his mercies bestowed upon me?

Have not I omitted Prayers and Sermons and followed my own idle imaginations,
not caring at all for the Church, but being weary of the Lords day, like those
in Amos 8. 5. who ask when will the Sabbath be gone that we may set forth Wheat?

Have I not invented ways to draw others from the service and worship of God,
by vain sports and idle discourses not remembering to praise God on this day for
the Creation and joyful Resurrection?

Have I at home instructed my Family as I ought to do, but on the contrary have
neglected those duties of prayers reading and meditation?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

V. Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the V. Commandment.

If I have not grossly abused my parents by cursing or swearing at them, yet,

Have I not spoken meanly and lightly of my superiors, and instead of obeying
them, have made it my study to oppose and contradict them?

Have I not been undutiful to them, in several respects, as not harkening to
their Counsel, not taking their reprooss with meekness and humility, but have
despised and mocked them, refusing to practice their exhortations, not
remembering the words of the wise Man. Pro. 30. 17. The eye that mocke^h his
Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Reavens of the valleys shall pick
it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it,

Have not I wished my Parents death out of greediness of gaining their
possessions, when rich, and have I not when they were poor, been so unnatural
as to turn my back upon their necessities?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

VI. Commandment
Thou shall do no Murder.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the VI. Commandment. If I have not actually committed
Murder; yet,

Have I not drawn many to intemperance, and other vices, which cause diseases
or bring death, or have I not made strife among men, by which means they have
engaged themselves in quarrelling, and in the encounter come off maimed or
killed?

Have I not out of malice and revenge strove to shorten many ones life; or have
I not taken a delight to grind the face of the poor making them work of
necessity for that which can never maintain their Families?

Have I not been guilty of much intemperance in eating and drinking, and have I
not been guilty of the death of several by not relieving their necessities in
due time?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

VII. Commandment.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the VII. Commandment.

If I have not actually committed Adultery or Fornication; yet,

Have I not pleased my sancy with loose and wanton imaginations, and suffered
unchaste thoughts so long to dwell in my heart, till by the corrupt bent of its
concupiscence, have grown into unruly lusts which war against the Soul?

Have not my eyes betrayed my heart secretly to lust, and sinfully to enjoy
that which was unlawful, and have I not made use of those provocations which
lead to chambering and wantonness?

Have not I used my self to filthy and obscene talking; to all manner of
effeminacy and unchaste behavior, forgetting those threatenings which are
pronounced in Scripture, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment.

VIII. Commandment.
Thou shall not steal.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination. by the VIII. Commandment.

If I have not been guilty of robbery and burglary, yet,

Have I not been guilty of theft by negligence and prodiga^ity, wasting both
the Estates of my self and others by contracting of debts, without taking care
to pay* them?

Have I not broke my promises in not paying for what I agreed for, and have I
not kept back the wages of the servant and the hireling, forgetting the strict
command in this matter, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Thou shall not oppress an hired
servant that is poor and needy, at his day thou shall give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor and sets his heart
upon it, lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee?

Have I not been guilty of pilferring and filching, cogging and lying,
couzening and deceiving, and have I not been guilty of defrauding and
circumventing in buying, selling, and lending to the loss of the borrower?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this commandment.

IX. Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Self examination by the IX. Commandment.

If I have not been guilty of perjury against my neighbor; yet,

Have I not blasted their reputation, by railing, whispering, and encouraging
others, in slandering them, and have I not harbored uncharitable thoughts, and
spread abroad false reports which have been the product of lying, envy, malice,
and great unworthiness?

Have I not been injurious, churlish and proud, froward and peevish in
conversation, using bitter and reproachful language, and have not I rejoiced
when any evil and mischief has befaln them?

Have I not strove to betray into ruin many innocent persons, by laying traps
and snares for them; and have I not accused any falsely of that which they were
never guilty of?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this Commandment,

X. Commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing
that is his.

Lord have mercy upon me, and write all these thy Laws in my heart I beseech
thee.

Self examination by the X. Commandment.

If I have not been guilty of covetousness in a very gross manner; yet,

Have I not had an evil eye, and a greedy mind in coveting that which could not
lawfully be purchased, and have I not envyed many, so as to grieve at their
prosperity and rejoice in their losses?

Have I been content with my present estate and condition in this world, how
mean soever, without roaring after the exterior consolations of the Creature
abroad, which is the only way to loose contentment in my self at home?

Have I not with too much vigor pursued after the riches, honors and
pleasures of the world, and have neglected that one thing necessary, the
working out my own salvation with with fear and trembling?

Lord have mercy upon me, and pardon the breach of this and all thy
Commandments; I beseech thee.

A Prayer for pardon and remission of sins.
O Most mighty God and creator of all things, when I think with my self how
grievously I have offended thy divine Majesty with my sins, I wonder at my own
folly; when I consider what a loving and bountiful Father I have forsaken, I
accurse my ingratitude; when I behold how I am fallen from such a noble liberty,
into such a miserable bondage, I condemn my self for my unworthiness in sinning
against thee, and without thy tender mercy and compassion can expect nothing
but Hell and Damnation.

II.
O whether can I fly, but thy justice will find me out, and make my Conscience
display the emblem of guilt in my face? but when I consider the words of the
Kingly Prophet that thy mercies are over all thy works, then do I feel afresh
and pleasant air of hope to refresh and strengthen again my weak and sorrowful
soul, wherefore then should I despair the tender mercies of my God, but
endeavor to get such a trust in him as I may never be ashamed, neither to
confess his name, nor manfully to fight under his banner, (who is the Captain
of my salvation,) against Sin, the Flesh, the World and the Devil; thou have
promised O Lord, that thou would not the death of a Sinner, but rather that
he should turn from his wickhedness and live.

III.
O Lord I beseech thee turn my heart, that I may sin no more against thee, so
will not iniquity be my ruin; and grant that I may repent me of all my sins
before I come to that holy Table, to taste of thy precious body and blood, and
to receive it with the eye of faith and thanksgiving, alas I am unworthy to
lift up my eyes toward thee, or to call thee Father, but thou art a Father
indeed, O look upon me then with thy Fatherly eyes of compassion, for thy sight
raises the dead, and can raise me which am dead in trespasses and sin, when I
went wandering a far off from thee, thou did vouchsafe to look down from
Heaven upon me, and did open the eyes of my understanding, that I may see my
self to be vile, wretched and naked, and to take a full view how full fraught I
was with sins.

IV.
And now O Lord thou come to receive me again* O fetter me with thy chains
that I may never run away from thee; and grant that nothing may ever be able to
separate me from thee, hearken therefore unto me I beseech thee O merciful
Father, aad cleanse my heart thoroughly, by the inspiration of thy holy word
that I may receive Jesus Christ with all the benefits of his death and pasion,
as a true token and pledge that he suffered for my sins, and rose again from
the d^ad for my justification, and now sits at the right hand of God the
Father making intercession for me, to whom be all honor, power and glory,
adoration and subjection from this time forth and for ever more Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Meditations for Monday Evening on the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper
Showing the necessity of receiving of it.
I.
OUR Blessed Savior the wise Physician, having felt the Pulses of our
weaknesses, ordained this must Holy and Divine Sacrament: and for this purpose
has he instituted the same in form of food, that the very form wherein he did
institute it, might declare unto us the effect it works, and withal the
great necessity our Souls have of it.

II.
O most wonderful Sacrament, what shall I say of thee? thou art the life of my
Soul, and a Medicine to heal all my Wounds; What Tongue is able to express the
Excellency of this most blessed Sacrament which thou O Lord, invitest me to,
who am a vile and miserable Sinner, when I consider who thou art, and what I
am, how rich and excellent the benefits are which thou preparest for me; and
how little I am disposed to receive them, my Soul is in trouble, and I tremble
to draw near to thy glorious Majesty.

III.
Thou art O Lord, without quantity great, without quality good, without measure
wise, and without time Everlasting the Stars are dimn'd in thy presence, the
Pillars of Heaven quake before thee, the highest of the Seraphins do gather in
their Wings, and account themselves as it were little Flies when thou art
present. How then dare so vile a Creature as I am approach unto thy holy Table,
if St. John Baptist whom thou filledst with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers
womb, thought himself not worthy to stoop down and unloose the Lachet of thy
Shoos. Shall I who am laden with Sins, dare to present my self to that holy
Banquet, where Angels wait as Ministering Spirits, sent out for the good of
those who are to receive the earnest of Salvation. Shall I with lascivious Eyes
full of wanton looks, behold that Lamb without spot or blemish with my polluted
looks and lying Tongue, shall I touch the bread of Angels? or shall I lodge the
King of Kings in a heart filled with foul concupiscence?

IV.
I am in a strait, O Lord, on both sides, for if I absent my self from this
Holy Table, I am disobedient to my Savior, who commands me to set forth his
death till he shall come again; I keep at a distance from the Fountain of Life;
I renounce the seals of the Covenant, and the pledges of thy love: and if I
come to it unworthily, I am afraid I may Eat and Drink my own Damnation, and
draw upon my self thy heavy Judgments, if thou Lord should mark iniquities O
Lord who shall stand but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared, mercies and forgiveness are from the Lord our God; for we have rebelled
against him. But where sin has abounded thy grace has much more abounded, O
Lord my whole trust is in thee, as by thy goodness thou give me thy blessing,
so by thy wisdom thou will instruct me how to receive them to Salvation.

A Prayer for Monday Evening on the Holy Sacrament.
O Lord, I take the boldness to approach unto thee, O receive me according to
thy tender mercy; Banish from my mind all those Earthly and Carnal thoughts
which disturb my Devotion, affect my Senses with a Pious veneration. Give unto
me such Humility and Repentance, such fear and reverence, as so high a Mystery
does require, I come not O Lord to excuse, but accuse my self, I trust not O
Lord in my own Righteousness neither have I any merits to be puffed up with, nor
do I extol my self with the proud Pharisec.

II.
But O Lord I come to thee, as the poor Publican with Eyes cast down, as being
ashamed of my own unworthiness, and laying my hand on my breast saying Lord be
merciful to me a Sinner, I come to thee with poor Bartemeus that I may receive
my sight, who am blind and lame, I come as naked to thee, the Father of
Compassion, as hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, to thee, O Lord, who
art the bread of Life and the fountain of living Water, springing up from the
Wells of eternal Salvation.

III.
Thou did O Lord accept of Mary Magdalens tears, the faith of the Thief on
the Cross, the Repentance of St. Peter, and the Prayers of the poor Publican;
accept now of this my humiliation, confirm my pardon, seal my Redemption,
cleanse me from all my pollutions, support my weakness, and cover my nakedness,
O send me not away empty, lest I faint by the way, but satisfy my Soul with
the food of thy heavenly banquet, that thereby it may receive nourishment unto
eternal life.

IV.
Grant O Lord, that I may receive thee, with pure lips and a penitent heart,
that thou dwelling in my heart by Faith, I may find my self strenghned,
comforted, and my heart inflamed with the love of thee, then shall I prostrate
my self before thee, and acknowledge in the Assembly of thy Saints, that it is
thou alone who have comforted me, and that there is no Salvation in any besides
thee.

V.
As thou preparest a Table in the midst of mine Enemies, and fillest up my Cup,
and do anoint and wash thy poor Guests; pour upon me I beseech thee, thy most
fragrant oil, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head, that I may
have part with thee, make me not only partaker of the Seals of thy Covenant,
and of the pledges of thy love, but also that I may receive thy self, with all
the benefits of thy death and passion, let my preparation which I now make be
sincere, and without lukewarmness that I may become a worthy receiver at thy
holy Table; Our Father, etc.

Meditations for Tuesday Morning on the Holy Sacrament.
THe true knowledge of the will of God is the gracious manifestation of his
goodness. He is good in the Graciousness of his Promises, and upright in the
truth of his performances; and this Grace and Truth which is the Habitation of
his Throne, is the Refuge of the Sinner, and the Sanctuary of the Penitent.

II.
And where, O my Soul, can thou better taste the goodness of the Lord, then
in this blessed Eucharist, the sacred Feast of the Lords Goodness? And as his
Goodness does invite thee, so let his uprightness encourage thee; for that
faithful is he who has promised, faithful to give according to his promise;
healing for thy wounds, strengthening for thy weakness, comfort for thy sorrow,
and will give that which is the Compendium of all Spiritual good things; peace
of Conscience and joy in the holy Ghost.

III.
Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul? And why art thou so cast down within me? Is
it because thou have broken the Covenant of thy God, even the Covenant of
Reconciliation, Sealed thee by the Sacrament, and that thus by thy Sin thou art
at enmity with thy Maker? Be it so, yet will not the Lord, who is good, be as
gracious to his enemies, as he requires us to be to ours? It is his own Law,
Exodus 23. 4. If thou meet thine Enemies Ox, or his Ass going astray thou shall
surely bring it back to him again; now God meets us Sinners, and all Sinners,
as such are his Enemies; he meets us straying like the Beast without
understanding; and what? will he not bring us again unto himself, the sole
proprietary, by that first right of Creation, and that more firm right of
Redemption.

IV.
Read his Commission, Luke 4. 18. He comes to preach the Gospel to the poor, to
heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, to recover
sight to the blind, and to set at liberty, them that are bruised, to this, to
all this is he Sealed of the Father, John 6. 27. and that he will do it, he
seals unto us in this holy Sacrament, make have my Soul and approach to the
Throne of Grace in this blessed Ordinance, let my accusing Conscience tell me,
I am a Sinner, and therefore not worthy the knowledge of God, or the quicknings
of his Grace, not worthy a Communion with Christ, a participation of his
fullness; yet to this shall my afflicted Soul reply, in the returns of Faith
that God even teaches Sinners in the way, so they be humble and penitent
Sinners; and from hence know I, that the Lord teaches Sinners, even from hence
that he is both good and upright.

V.
Thus then does God give Grace to the humble; to the humble not so properly
said to be humbled; for humbled we may be, when pressed down under the weight of
punishment, but humble we cannot be less laid low in the sense of Sin, without
this sense of Sin, we shall be as far from being humble, as from having Grace:
but, oh the languishings of my Soul under the weight of my Sin! My Sins are
gone over my head; and are become a sore burden too heavy for me to bear; too
heavy not only in their punishment and their wrath, but even in their pollution
and guilt.

VI.
If so, yet though humbled, be not rejected, O my Soul, but rather comfort, O
comfort thy self in this holy Sacrament of thy Jesus, through faith in the
promises of his Grace, for that by how much the more thou art humbled for thy
sin, by so much the more do those promises of Grace and Glory belong to thee in
the Gospel, which are peculiarly made of God in Christ, and by Christ conveyed
unto us in this Sacrament.

VII.
And all those who thus come unto Christ, in this holy Ordinance, they shall
find rest to their Souls, and though we cannot keep the Covenant and
Testimonies of our God in an Angelical purity yet may we do it in an
Evangelical sincerity; though not in a full perfection; yet in a sincere
endeavor of holy obedience, that Mercy and Truth being met together,
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; even in him my blessed Mediator,
will I trust, which has wrought out my everlasting Salvation.

Tuesday Morning, a Solliloquy on the blessed Sacrament.
I.
O Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, grant me thy peace, and
take not thy holy Spirit from me, grant that I may run the ways of thy
Commandments, and keep them with my whole heart; that being now called to thy
holy Table I may become a worthy receiver of thy precious body and blood, which
was offered up for me and for the Sins of the whole World.

II.
O Lord God, who art the wise disposer of all things both spiritual and
temporal, who live in that light unto which no mortal eye can appro^ch, and
yet humble^ thy self so far, as to behold me, and all other thy unworthy
Servants; more especially thou have engaged thy self by promise, to draw nigh
unto* to dwell with, and to be in the midst of thy poor people, when in
sincerity of heart they shall appear before thee.

III.
I therefore the unworthiest of all thy Servants, sinful dust and ashes, a worm
and no man do here in all humility prostrate my self before thee; desirous to
have my thoughts and meditations fixed upon thine omnipresence, which beholdest
me and all that is within me, even the intentions and disposition of my heart
in coming to thy holy Table; as also with a confidence of thy gracious
presence, that thou art with me to assist and enable me, in the performance of
this thy holy Ordinance, that I may become a worthy receiver of thy precious
Body and Blood.

IV.
Lord, I confess I am unworthy to come before thee, to draw nigh unto thee, or
to receive any favor from thee, and that because of the rebellion of my
nature, I have just cause to cry out with the Leper I am unclean, I am unclean.
unclean by Original Corruption, which like a Leprosy has overspread all the
powers and faculties of my Soul, unclean by those numberless number of actual
trangressions, which throughout the whole course of my life I have committed
against thee.

V.
I come unto thee, O God, at this time disclaiming my own righteousness, and
abhorring my self for all my former wickedness, and only in the name, for the
merits, and through the mediation of my dear Redeemer Christ Jesus the
righteous: Am I bold yet to implore thy mercy, to seek thy face, to sue out a
pardon from the guilt of my iniquity, to desire thee to be reconciled, and to
be well pleased with me, O Lord do thou forget my sins, but let me remember
them; do thou cast them behind thy back but let me have them always before my
face; I must confess, O Lord, that thou may glorify thy self in my
confusion, and I must needs acknowledge that in the severest of thy
dispensations thou art righteous; but let my God rather glorify himself in the
remission of my sins, in the converting of my nature, and salvation of my soul.

VI.
O thou father of mercy, have mercy upon me, and let all my iniquities be cast
into the Sea, even into the red Sea, of my Saviors blood, that so they may
never rise up in judgment against me, O thou God of all Grace, send down thy
Spirit of Grace into my heart to sanctify it to thy service; humble me for my
sins past, and establish me against sin for the time to come, let me every day
grow in grace, that the house of Saul may grow weaker and weaker, and the house
of David stronger and stronger.

VII.
O put thy fear into my heart, that* I may never depart from thee, and do thou
never leave me, that so I may walk on from strength to strength in this valley
of Tears, until I appear before thee, O God; give me a sanctified use of all
thy dispensations toward me, that sickness and health, crosses and mercies,
may serve as so many steps in that Ladder that may carry me to Heaven, mind me
of my latter end; and teach me so to live, that I may not fear to die, that
when I die I may be sure to live; in the mean time, O Lord, assist my weakness,
and strengthen my faith, that I may receive with comfort that heavenly Feast
which thou have prepared for me and all that believe and call upon thy holy
name, in whose blessed name and word, I conclude my weak and imperfect prayers
saying, Our Father, etc.

Meditations for Tuesday Evening on the holy Sacrament.
I.
BY means of this divine food, the Soul is united to Christ, and receives that
strength and vigor which continually sets it forward in its spiritual
ascension. Who can give worthy thanks for so great a benefit? Who will not be
altogether resolved into Tears, when he sees Almighty God united to him? the
more we go about to consider the excellency and virtues of this Sovereign
Mystery, the more do we want words to express it, and the more does our
understanding fail us.

II.
What pleasant sweetness, and delightful Savours of a good life, does the Soul
of the just man feel, when he receives this divine Sacrament, there is no other
sound heard at that time but the music of the heart, which are vehement
bursting out of holy desires, and yielding of thanks all tending to the praise
of the ever blessed institutor; there the devout Soul through the virtue of
this most holy and blessed Sacrament, is altogether renewed, and replenished
with joy unspeakable, and fully satisfied with those good things, which the
richness of his mercy has found out, and does bestow upon all true penitents.

III.
Such are thy gifts, O sweet Savior, such are the works and delights of thy
love, which thou art wont to communicate to thy friends, by the means of this
divine Sacrament: and this thou do to the end that we being filled with these
heavenly delights, should despise all vain and transitory pleasures. Now what
glory can be greater then this? What gift more precious? What benefit of more
value, or what greater token of love; let all the works of nature keep silence;
let all the works of grace give place; for this is a work exceeding all works;
and a singular grace above all graces; it is the burning Coal from the holy
Altar to enkindle the fire of the love of God in us; the means whereby to
receive grace; the pledge of everlasting felicity; and the treasure of a
Christian Life.

IV.
Our blessed Redeemer of the World intending to restore man unto his former
dignity, and to raise him up by grace as he had fallen by sin; did ordain and
leave, as his last Legacy, this most divine Sacrament of his Body, and Blood,
whereby man might recover his lost Estate and be made partaker of the divine
nature; we have it expressed in his own words, Joh. 6. 56. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

Now when the time drew near that Christ should be betrayed, and delivered up
to death, he communeth with his disciples after this manner, Luke 22. 15. I
have an earnest desire to eat the Passover with you before I suffer; having so
said, he took Bread and blessed it, in like manner he took the Cup in
Consecrating the Elements of Bread and Wine, his Prayers ascended to Heaven,
but his benefits remain with his Church here on Earth; the visible Elements
declare two things, the one that he was to offer up himself an oblation for the
redemption of the whole world; the other that he would become unto the
faithful, by his means, a divine sustenance for their Souls.

V.
Consider what great care our Savior has showed toward us, in instituting
this Sacrament; seeing nothing could be given more excellent, more dear; when
he loved his, which were in the World, he loved them unto the end, he has
given us of his own Bread, and of his own Cup; nay he has given us his own
Body as Bread, his own Blood as Wine for the nourishment of our Souls; had he
bestowed this so great a gift on Saints and Angels it had not been so
wonderful; but bestowing it on poor Sinners was love unspeakable! O what shall
we render unto the Lord, for all the benefits we have received at his hands,
let us meditate on his Love, and pursue that holy resolution with the Prophet
David, to take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

VI.
Who is there now, that will neglect coming to this holy Table; nay neglect
their own Salvation when they may purchase it at so easy a rate, O Lord, if to
obtain this benefit, thou had ordained hard Fasts, long Pilgrimages, shedding
of Blood, and other sharp usages; all these labors and afflictions ought
worthily to have been suffered, to taste even but once thy sacred Body: but, O
Love unheard of, that had rather make the entrance easy and delectable, that
I might the oftener receive this great benefit. O Adam, how much better is the
condition of thy posterity, than thine own was, which is now brought to pass by
the means of our loving and liberal Jesus? thou were driven out of Paradise;
and that thou should not return thither to eat of the Tree of Life and live,
one of the Cherubims armed with a fiery Sword was set by the righteous God to
keep it.

VII.
We thy Children living in the Paradise of the holy Church are not only driven
away by an Angel, with a fiery Sword, but are invited of the Lord of Angels by
the fire of his Love, to taste often the fruit of the Tree of Life; yea to
receive him, who has given all strength to it, and that gives us a blessed
and everlasting life, for so he inviting us has promised; he which eats of
this Bread shall live for ever, Joh. 6. 58.

A Solliloquy for Tuesday Evening.
I.
O thou only begotten Son of Almighty God, great and wonderful are the
benefits, O Lord, which I have received of thee, thou have raised me from the
mire and dust of the Earth, and have created my Soul of nothing after thine own
Image and likeness, and have made it eapable of thy glory; thou have given me
understanding, memory, will, free choice, with all my other Members, and
Senses, to the end that with them I might know thee, and love thee: thou have
preserved me even while I was yet in my Mothers womb, thou have patiently born
with me a long time, after so many sins committed even until this present hour,
where as others having less offended then I, are now per adventure tormented in
Hell fire.

II.
Besides all this, it was thy pleasure to become man, and to be conversant
among men for my sake: and for me, to be afflicted, punished, troubled, and
covered all over with a bloody sweat, to be taken, bound, buffeted, and spit
upon, to be despised, blasphemed, reviled, and apparelled in mockery, with
white and red garments: for my sake thou wast conten^ed to be torn with whips,
crowned with thorns, sm^tten with a reed, and to have thine eyes covered with a
Veil, to be condemned to death, and to be led to the place of Execution with
that heavy cross upon thy shoulders, whereon thy blessed hands and feet were
nailed, thou wast crucified between two Thieves and reputed amongst the wicked,
thou had Vinegar and Gall given thee to drink, and in the end put to a most
shameful and cruel death.

III.
In this manner, O Lord, with so many intolerable troubles, pains, and agonies
have thou redeemed me: but I a most vile and wretched sinner have showed my
self unthankful for all these benefits, and have so often by my sins crucified
thee afresh; that without hearty contrition, humiliation, and repentance I can
expect nothing but thy wrath and damnation, I have loved vanity more then
truth, and have esteemed the Creature more than the Creator, it is high time; O
Lord, that I should now begin to weep and bewail for those heinous sins I have
committed against thee.

IV.
This sorrow and grief for my sins is the thing which thou have so long looked
for at my hands, even from the time thou first gave me life, thou have often
called me, and I have like the deaf adder stopped my (...)* and would not
hearken to thee: thou have given me a long time to repent me of my sins, and I
have consumed it in pride and vanity, the more I have been chastised and
cherished by thee, the more has mine heart been hardened: showing my self
unthankful toward the one, and rebellious toward the other: But yet for all
this, O Lord, since thou have suffered for my sake so many things, and have
commanded me never to despair nor mistrust thy goodness: I therefore refer my
self wholly to thy mercy, and do beseech thee, to grant me grace to amend my
life, that from henceforth I may serve and please thee, in holiness and newness
of Life, and continually remain in thy grace and favor, world without end,

Amen.
Meditations on Wenesday morning on the most holy Sacrament.
COnsider after this what troubles our Savior suffered in that doleful night;
when the Soldiers had him in Custody, mocked, and laughed him to scorn, Luke
22. 63. and used as a means to pass away their drowsiness, to scoff, and jest
at the Lord of Majesty. Consider, O my Soul, how thy sweet Savior is set here
as a mark, to receive all the strokes and buffets, their malice could invent. O
cruel! and unquiet night! in which, O sweet Savior, thou tookest no rest, nor
thy adversaries any repose, but accounted it even a pastime and recreation to
vex and torment thee.

II.
The night was ordained for this end, that all creatures should therein take
their rest: and that the Senses and Members that are wearied with toils and
labors of the day might be refreshed and relieved: but these wicked men use it
now as a fit time to torment all thy Members and Senses; striking thy Body,
afflicting thy Soul, binding thy Hands, buffeting thy Cheeks, and spitting in
thy Face: that at such time as all Members should be at rest, all thy Members
were in great pain and anguish.

III.
Now let us Consider the denial of Saint Peter, who was so familiar a friend of
our Saviors, that he chose him to see the glory of his transfiguration: yet
not once but three several times, even in the very presence of his Lord and
Master swears and for swears that he knows him not. O Peter is he that
stands by thee so wicked a man, that thou account'st it so vile a shame, only
to have known him? Consider that this is a Condemnation of him by thee, before
he is Condemned by the High Priests: since by this denial, thou giv'st the
whole World to understand, that he is such a man, that even (...)self do
(...) great reproach and dishonor to thee, ever to have known him.

IV.
Our Savior hearing this denial, turned back and beheld Peter, and cast his
eyes on the lost sheep with a look full of virtue, mystery and signification,
Peter understood right well the voice and language of that look: and although
the Crowing of the Cock was not able to awake his Spirits, yet was this able as
indeed it did; for the eyes of our Savior, do not only speak but also work, as
it plainly appears by the tears of Saint Peter, which though they gushed from
the eyes of Peter, yet did they much more proceed from the look and eyes of
Christ.

V.
Wherefore when thou art at any time awaked out of thy sinful life, and do
with grief and sorrow call thy sins to remembrance, wherein thou have offended
Almighty God, think with thy self, that the merciful eyes of Christ looks upon
thee: the Cock had already crowed, but Peter remembered not himself, because our
Savior had not as yet looked on him, but when Christ looked upon him, then he
remembered himself, and repented, and bewailed his offenses; for the eyes of
Christ do open ours, and awake such as are asleep. Lord, let my eyes then be
for ever open, that I may behold those heavenly gifts which thou have prepared
for all those who love and fear thee.

VI.
O then receive me a poor sinner at thy holy Table this most holy Medicine
cures all the wounds of Sin: this quickening flesh overcomes all mortal sin:
this is the most holy Seal of divine Promises, which we may show before Gods
Judgment Seat; having this pledge we may glory, and be secure of eternal Life:
if Christ's Body and Blood be exhibited unto us, assuredly all other benefits by
that most holy Body, and most blessed Blood are prepared for us; how then can
he that has given us greater things deny us the less? He that has given his
Son to us, how shall he not give all other things with him? Romans 8. 32. Let the
Spouse therefore be glad and rejoice for the time is at hand when she shall be
called to the Marriage Supper? Rev. 19. 7. Let her put on precious apparel, let
her put on her Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12. That she be not found naked; this
Garment is the Bridegrooms righteousness, which we put on in our baptism; but
our righteousness is so far from being a Weding Garment, that it is nothing but
filthy rags, O let us endeavor to cast them of, and not bring them with us to
this great Solemnity.

A Litany of Confession of Sins to Almighty God before the holy Sacrament.
O Lord, I have committed many grievous sins against thee: I have not piously
frequented thy house with that filial fear, and holy reverence which becomes
thy Child, but have too often sinfully absented it; so that mine attendance
upon thee in thy Service of the day has been formal, my Devotion hypocritical,
and my Expectation of a blessing deceitful.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

All the faculties of my Soul, all the Members of my Body, which thou have
given me for thy Service, and ought to have been instruments of holiness, I
have daily made weapons of iniquity; mine understanding, which should daily
have delighted in thee, and thy law, has been daily busied in the search of
sin: mine affections, which I should have wholly fixed upon thee, the highest,
holiest, and most happy object, in whom is alsufficiency, have been foolishly
and falsely bestowed on the emptiness, and vanity of the Creature; in which I
have found nothing else but shortness, and uncertainty, falsehood and flattery,
weariness and misery.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not wisely, nor timely considered that the grace of repentance is thy
heavenly Gift, and ought to be early begged of thee by Prayers and Tears; but
have sinfully imagined it in mine own power to repent when I would; when I have
been neither sure of time to ask it, of hope to obtain it, grace to receive it,
or of mercy to enjoy it.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not only turned thy grace into wantonness, but even thy choicest of thy
gifts bestowed on me into wickedness, by being spiritually proud of my
endowments so that while I have pharisaically seemed in mine own eyes to be
much better than others, I have in thy ^ight been far worse, and have thereby
lost the blessed presence of thy holy Spirit, who resists the proud and
give grace to the humble

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not daily and duly (as I ought) examined my Soul by each particular of
thy Commandments, that so my Conscience might be thoroughly convinced of my
sins, and I thereby (with holy fear) might heartily bewail them, utterly
forsake them, perfectly hate them, and (together with thy Justice) condemn my
self for them; but have only looked on them with a carnal eye, as common
spectacles of man's misery, and proper objects of thy Mercy: from whence it is,
that I have not died unto sin daily (as I ought) that this my sorrowing for sin
has been but superficial, my hope of thy pardon deceitful, and even my very
mortification to sin, exceeding sinful.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have readily remembered that there is no condemnation to those which are in
Christ Jesus; but sinfully forgotten that it is to those only which walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: thus have I wretchedly put of the
punishment of sin, from the guilt of it, and am thereby become guilty of thy
double punishment; that for the committing of evil, and this for denying thee
(in Christ) to be the rewarder only of good.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have willingly believed, that it is the blood of God which cleanses me from
all iniquity; and that if I believe in thee, although I were dead yet shall I
live, and that if I live, and believe in thee, I shall never die: but I have
wilfully forgotten, that by my daily sinning, I have daily trampled on thy
precious blood, and am therefore dead while I live; and may therefore justly
fear, that (without mercy) I must live in endless torments when I am dead.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sometimes promised the general amendment of my own evil ways, by my
thorough Mortification to Sin, and Sanctification to Righteousness, in my more
frequent watchings, fastings, Prayings, holy strivings against my corruptions,
and holy hungrings for thy heavenly graces; but all these, to my Souls grief,
were soon forgotten by me, and my sinful affections instead of drawing nearer
to thee, alienated every day more and more from thee.

Lord be merciful to be a sinner.

I have missed many happy opportunities of going to thy holy Table, under the
false pretenses of unfitness to receive, want of Charity to forgive, and of
Faith to believe; whereas these sinful wants (which have all proceeded from my
want of grace) ought much rather to have been graciously repaired with earnest
prayers, and truly repented of with daily tears.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not so freely, and so fully forgiven, and forgotten those injuries
which man has offered unto me; as I ought to have done, but have too often
come unto thy holy Table with reproach in my mouth, and malice in my heart:
Thus, O Lord, have I had sinfully to do with malice, that stood in so grea need
of mercy; and by refusing to forgive my brother upon Earth, may justly fear to
be denied forgiveness by thee in heaven.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

From these my sinful inconsiderations, undue preparations, ungracious
absentings, and more ungodly frequentings of thy blessed Table, have proceeded
these my declinings in grace; and decayings in goodness; so that without thy
rich mercy unto me in Christ (whose precious blood thou have spilt for me) and
by this thy blessed Seal confirmed unto me I may justly fear I have received
unworthily, and thereby eaten and drank unto my self mine own damnation.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

A Prayer (after Confession of sins) to Almighty God.
I.
ALmighty God, I have sinned and I desire to repent: I am heavy laden with the
burden of my sins, and can find none on earth to relieve me; to thee
therefore, O thou father of mercies, and God of all consolations, who invitest
weary Souls to come unto thee, and easiest them when they are come; do I apply
my self for mercy and forgiveness. O thou blessed fountain of eternal good, who
have freely given me thine only Son to dye for me, and in him thy self to be
for ever reconciled to me; who desire not the death of me* a miserable
sinner, but rather that I should repent and live, have mercy upon me, O thou
blessed Shepherd of my Soul, who aimest to seek and to save those that were
lost, that find all whom thou seek, and loses none of those whom thou
have found; have mercy upon me. O thou sacred and for ever blessed spirit, who
visitest and cherishest the drooping Souls of thine Elect, assist and comfort
me; Lord save me or I perish, Lord help me or I faint. Lord seek me or I am
lost for ever.

II.
With all humility of soul I humbly acknowledge, that I have too long sinfully
depended on the vain shadows and deceitful shows of mine own imperfect
holiness; and have too sinfully neglected the improvements of thy heavenly
graces, whereby I have too long deluded my own Soul with hopes of my heavenly
assurance; and have then thought my self to be spiritually rich, when in thy
sight I have been wretchedly poor, sinfully blind, wilfully naked distressedly
miserable.

III.
Lord open thou mine eyes by thy precious Eye Salve of thy Sacred Word, that I
may clearly see the sadness of my mine own condition, in these my sad mistakes,
by this the great deceit of my own deluding heart; enrich my poverty with the
gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit, cover my nakedness with the precious robes
of Christ's righteousness, swallow up this my great misery, in thine endless
mercy; of carnal, make me spiritual, increase thy graces daily in me, and for
thy mercy sake remove all vain pretenses of a false assurance from me; give me
that sincerity of heart in thy service, that constant holiness, and gracious
perseverance, that makes my Calling and Election sure.

IV.
O thou glorious and for ever blessed Spirit who eternally enjoyest blessedness
in the sweetness and fullness of thy self, and yet most graciously communicatest
happiness to us thy sinful Creatures, that we might thereby spiritually know
thee, love thee, (...)e thee, and eternally enjoy thee; vouchsafe me, I humbly
beseech thee, the blessed p(...)e of thy holy Spirit, that I may thereby become
(...)iritual, that I may no longer live af(...) destruction but daily m(...)ds
of the flesh by the S(...) may thereby joyfully attain unto (...).

V.
Suffer me not, O Lord, any longer to delude my self with the shows and shadows
of devotion; but so guide me by the blessed motions of thy holy Spirit, that I
may dye truly and daily unto sin, and live hourly unto righteousness. Lord thou
see all my desires, and my groanings are not hid from thee; O! grant me this
mercy, and take from me what thou will; even life it self without thee is
bitterness unto me; unglew my heart from the World, and fix it wholly upon thee
and thy service; that so I may spiritually rejoice in thee, be graciously
accepted of thee, and ever blessed with thee.

Amen.
Meditations for Wednesday Evening, a preparation to the Holy Sacrament.
I.
AFter all these injuries. Consider what Scourgings and Whipping our Savior
suffered at the Pillar, for when the Judge perceived, that he was not able to
pacify the furious rage of those his most cruel Enemies, he determined to
punish our Savior with such a severe kind of punishment, as might suffice to
satisfy the malicious outrage of such cruel hearts, that they being content
therewith, should cease, and seek no more after his death.

II.
This was one of the greatest, and most wonderful fights that was seen in the
World, who would ever have thought, that lashes should have been laid on the
shoulders of the Almighty? the Prophet David says, the place of thy habitation
(O Lord) is most High, and that there shall no evil approach near thy
Tabernacle, if the Blessed Angels, filled the Air with high lauds and praises,
upon the day of his Nativity, when as yet they had only seen him in swaddling
clothes, and in the Manger where he was laid, what did they think, when they
see him so maliciously and cruelly handled.

III.
Whither, O Son of God, whither has thy humility descended? Whither has thy
charity, pity, love and compassion extended? For I have done wickedly, and thou
art punished; I have committed the offense, and thou art chastened with
revenge, the tree carried me to unlawful desire, and perfect charity led thee
to the tree of thy Cross, teach me. O Lord, to mortify my worldly affections,
and all vices, that reign in this mortal body, O pour into my wounds the Oil of
thy goodness, that I may come with that health unto thy holy Table, as becomes
a worthy receiver. Let nothing be sweet, I pray thee unto me without thee, let
all other things be vile and of no account, but troublesome unto me, which is
contrary to thy good will and pleasure, let tears be my bread day and night,
let thy law be better unto me, than millions of gold and silver, and let it be
delightful unto me, to walk in the ways of thy Commandments unto the end.

IV.
As there is no greater incentive of divine wrath than sin, so there is not any
greater obstructive of devout Prayer, in removing that wrath, than impenitence;
impenitence clogs, yea clips the wing of devotion, so that it cannot mount
aloft, it cannot reach the throne of grace, and of this David himself gives us
his profession, from his experience, saying, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity
in my heart, the Lord will not hear me; look how far our lives are from Gods
precepts, to obey them; so far are Gods Ears from harkening to our Prayers,
(says Tertul.) the person then must be excepted before the petition; and so a
sincere penitent, is the best suppliant; for that our Lord Jesus Christ being
the Priest that offers, and the Altar that sanctifies all our services, there
can be no acceptance, without his mediation; and sure I am, he will not be our
Advocate, unless he be our Lord, he will not be our Priest, unless he be our
King; he will not present God our Prayers, unless we present him our persons;
and whom faith and repentance consecrates through the Spirit, him grace and
mercy accepts through Christ.

V.
In this Blessed Sacrament; here we have an unmovable Center to rest on; God
our portion, Christ our fullness, an object larger than the Heavens. Oh that
our Faith were now suitable to its object! the firmness of our trust, to the
fullness of our God, our Jesus! had the Widow of Sarepta prepared more Vessels,
she had received more Oil; and that we receive less, in the supplies of grace,
and bounties of love, from God and Christ; it is because we are straightned in
our Faith, not God or Christ straightned in his bounty; we less capable to
receive, not he less willing or able to give; the Widows vessels are all
filled, and here each humble Soul shall be replenished, according to the
measure of their capacity.

VI.
Not according to the riches of Christ's fullness; who, as the Sea can fill the
vessels, though never so large; and therefore where the measure is but little,
there the vessels are but small. Enlarge we then the thirsting desires of our
Soul, that the Fountain of Christ's fullness, here set open in this Ordinance
may satisfy and fill them; here behold the promises of life sealed, here feel
the riches of grace Communicated, and here see the earnest of Salvation and
Glory Confirmed, O then let us hasten to these wells of Salvation, for in them
we shall find eternal life* while we are here we shall find rest to our Bodies
and Souls, but in the life to come joy everlasting.

A Prayer for Wednesday Evening preparatory to the Holy Sacrament.
I.
To thee, O thou blessed Center of my Soul, mine inward and mine outward
Consolation, my blessed quietness, and richest rest; with all humility of Soul
and prostration of Spirit, do I apply my self for mercy and forgiveness; Lord
pardon (in the Blood of Christ) all my offenses; and for the time to come,
withdraw my heart from worldly vanities, and fix it wholly upon thee and thy
Kingdom; that so I may sincerely love thee, joyfully delight in thee, and be
both now and ever happy with thee.

II.
O God most Holy, O Lord most Righteous, O Father most Merciful, who in thy
tender bowels of compassion toward me, have freely given me thine only Son to
perform that in mercy for me, which thou in justice requirest of me; look not
upon me, I meekly beseech thee, as I am in my self, in my frailties of sinful
nature, but graciously behold me in the beauties and perfections of thy blessed
Son; Lord give me that holy hungring and thirstings after thee, that my
longings may be earnest for thee, let thy holy Table be delightful to me, and
sweeter than all outward enjoyments, that I may truly love it, and joyfully
possess thy Heavenly comforts by it.

III.
Almighty God who so perfectly hate sin, that thou have most severely
punished it in thine only and beloved Son, whom thou freely gave, not only to
dye for sin, but also to condemn it, and to call sinners to repentance for it:
have mercy upon me, I humbly beseech thee, thy vile, sinful, and most unworthy
servant: Who have not only foolishly, and sinfully imagined that thou would
cherish that in me, which thou have so sharply punished in my Savior, but also
wickedly divided thee in thine own essence, and there by my self from thee in
the loosing of thy gracious presence: have pity upon me, and release me from
these misty fogs of sin and ignorance, and lead me by thy blessed light of
grace to those thy blessed paths, which lead to glory.

IV:
Lord I have sinned, and I desire to repent; I tremble at the greatness of my
sin, and humbly beg thy pardon for it in the richness of thy mercy; O let thy
sweet saving, and preventing grace, make this my humiliation, effectual unto
me: O let me no longer vainly think the guilt only of sin to be mine, and the
punishment my Saviors; but let me faithfully believe, that until by thy
grace, I am made truly conformable to him, I have no part nor portion in him;
but am yet in my sins, and thereby liable to thy sorest punishments. Lord, give
me a saving Faith to believe in him a sanctified life to be a true follower of
him, and a Blessed death to live for ever with him.

Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Morning, on the Holy Sacrament.
AFfliction is the proper object of Compassion, misery the proper object of
mercy: and therefore we read how Pilate, willing to release Jesus, he brings
him forth having his back surrowed with the Whips, his Head harrowed with the
Thorns, and his derisive purple stained, yea, drencht with blood; and presents
him thus ghastly a spectacle to the Jews, with an Ecce homo behold the man
supposing so sad a sight would have moved malice to mercy, and envy it self to
Compassion, now what Pilate did to the Jews, with Christ, Christ in a fit
resemblance and apt allusion does with the penitent to his Father; he brings
him forth in the Court of Conscience, having his heart wounded with sorrow, his
Spirit broken in Contrition, and his Soul fainting in Languishments of
repentance, and presents him so sad a spectacle to the Father with an Ecce
homo, behold the max.

II.
Behold the man, once so lofty in his pride, now so lowly in his penitence;
once so hardened in his rebellion, now so humbled in his contrition; once so
obstinate a Sinner, now so pitiful a Penitent, and oh! whilst this man of
sorrows mourns in affliction, how does the Father of mercies melt in
Compassion? when the wounded sinner is presented by the wounded Son, and the
penitents tears cry aloud with the Mediators Blood, how must the Fathers
compassion needs melt into sins remission.

III.
This affliction and pain, is either that of the penitent sinner, or that of
the devout Saint, that of the penitent sinner, who having withdrawn himself
from the World, and retired into the secret closet of his conscience, how does
he with Hezekiah, even overturn the Annals of his life in the bitterness of his
Soul? and after a strict survey, having faithfully observed the sins which he
has committed, and the several circumstances by which they are aggravated, he
then sums them up into a Catalogue, which is no sooner in his eye, but sorrow
is in his heart, endeavoring to blot our those letters of guilt with his tears
of repentance, through faith in the Blood of Christ.

IV.
And whilst he sets his sins in order before him, oh how does a secret
affrightment chill his blood, and make his heart to tremble, in apprehension of
their loathsome filth and dreadful curse! yea, in beholding himself under the
heavy sentence of the Laws condemnation, oh how, is he wholly encompassed with
terror, and amazement! when he looks within him, oh the terrors of an accusing
conscience, and a killing guilt! when he looks without him, oh the horror of a
deserved death, and a tormenting Hell! when he looks above him, oh the dread of
an offended Majesty, and an avenging Judge! oh whither then shall this poor
penitent fly for succor? where, oh where, shall his affrighted, and afflicted
soul seek for shelter? where, but at the Cross of his Redeemer.

V.
And when Christ, so full of pity, so full of love, when he beholds the humble
suppliant, and sincere penitent, in the lowest depths of his humiliation,
pouring out his complaint at the foot of his Cross; when he hears his mournful
sighs, his painful groans, the earnest messengers of his asslicted soul, it is
then as impossible for Christ, to forget the passions of sorrow which he
suffered, as not to compassionate this poor penitent for whom he suffered; he
who stopped not his ears at the Jews blasphemies, will certainly not stop his
ear at the penitents complaints, he that turned not away his face from his
enemies buffetings, will not turn away his Eyes from the suppliants tears,
though the Devil has bereaved the sinner of his purity, yet can he not deprive
his Savior of his pity, Christ does not, Christ cannot so remember the sins
that man has committed, that he forgets the soul which himself has purchased;
his eye, and nothing else indeed can do it, but his eye of mercy, that looks
through the guilt of sin, to behold the sorrow of the sinner, and that
affliction moves his compassion.

VI.
The sorrow of affliction, and pain in the penitent becomes destructive of sin,
through the power of faith in the blood of Christ; for that, God will be
sanctified in all them that come nigh unto him; and therefore he being a
consuming fire in the fury of his vengeance; when we humble our selves before
him, tho with the deepest of afflictions, unless it be by faith in Jesus
Christ, as the Mediator, God will be a just Judge to condemn, rather than a
merciful Father to forgive, for it is not our tears without Christ's blood, not
our sorrows without his sufferings, not our affliction without his passion,
that can quench the fire of Gods wrath, satisfy the severity of Gods Justice,
and move the tenderness of his mercy, when therefore acted by love, and
strengthened by faith, we pour out our complaints unto our God, in a sincere
repentance, our affliction and pain shall become the proper object of his divine
mercy.

A Prayer for Thursday Morning preparatory to the Holy Sacrament.
O Lord who weeled for me, as a Lamb to the slaughter: and as a sheep before
the shearer is dumb, so thou opened'st not thy mouth, thou did good to thy
Enemies, and pray'dst earnestly for thy persecutors, O plant in my heart
gentleness, patience and meekness, that I may not be transported with the
violent passion of anger, disordered by peevishness, or thoughts of revenge,
but patiently bear all crosses, and with charity may return blessing for
cursing, keeping peace with all men, and loving my Neighbor as my self, and
thee more than my self, and more than all the World, I may at last come into
the regions of peace and Eternal Charity where thou live, who love all men
and would have none to perish but all men to be saved through thee, O most
merciful Savior and Redeemer.

II.
O thou who sits between the Cherubims, and whose throne is in the highest
Heavens, purge me from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit that I may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy Name all the days of my
life. For thou art gracious and full of Compassion, and give meat unto them
that fear thee, and drink from the wells of Eternal Salvation, thou preparest a
table for us, and anointest our heads with thy heavenly Unction, and our Cup
runs over, let thy precious blood which was shed for me, and the water which
gushed from thy side, wash me clean, that I may with a pure heart, and a clean
soul come to Eat of that best Sacrifice, the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the World.

III.
O Lord in the wonders of this holy Sacrament thou give thy self to be the
food of our souls in the faith of thy word, in the blessings and graces of thy
holy spirit; perform that in me thy unworthy Servant, which thou have prepared
and effected in thy Son* enkindle in my heart a bright devotion, Extinguish all
the fires of Hell, pardon all my sins, and fill me with thy holy spirit, that
by obedience and love, I may adore and honor thee all the days of my life.

IV.
Thou have opened unto me the fountains of thy mercy, and have invited all
penitent sinners to come and receive pardon, the oppressed to be eased, and the
sorrowful to be comforted, admit me O Lord to this great Celebration of thy
loving kindness, that I may be comforted in all my griefs; healed of all the
wounds of my Soul, and the bruises of my Spirit, and finish my Journey through
this valley of Tears, unto my portion of thy Heavenly Kingdom,

Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament.
O Lord, thou not only art good and gracious, but thou will also be so
acknowledged, so declared; yea, as such worshipped and adored; that thy name
then be not dishonored, let me though a sinner be accepted; pardon mine
iniquity, that it may not be said, thou ever rejectedst a poor penitent, and
thereby loose the glory of thy name, whose name is merciful, Exodus 34. 5, 6. a
merciful clemency is a royal virtue, and honorable in every Sovereign Majesty;
thou then, O Lord, who art the King of Glory Psalm 24. 7, 8. make this thy Holy
Sacrament to be the Broad-Seal to my pardon, and this for thy Names sake, even
for thy mercy sake.

II.
I plead not, Lord, my merits, who am less than the least of thy mercies, and
as I look not upon my merit, do thou not look upon my demerit; as I do not view
my worthiness, do not thou view my unworthiness; but be merciful unto my sin;
of which, I cannot say as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? no, it is great,
for that it is against thee so great a God, and so good to me; great, for that
my place, my office, my calling is great; the Sun, the higher it is, the less
it seems, but my sins, the higher I am, the greater they are, even in thine,
and others eyes.

III.
My knowledge of thee, and thy ways is great, I knew thy will, and did it not;
my conscience checked me, and yet I obeyed not, thy Spirit moved me, and yet I
yielded not; the number of my sins is numberless, those I know and confess, are
few in comparison of what are unknown and hidden from me. Wherefore, O Lord!
hide not thy great mercy from me, who hide not my great sins from thee; and the
greater is the guilt of my sin, the greater shall be the glory of thy mercy to
pardon it; let it be the glory of thy mercy then to pass by my offenses, so
shall the greatness of my sins make the glory of thy mercies more conspicuous,
for that where sin has abounded, there grace does much more abound* Romans 5. 20.

IV.
And thus, though I went against mine own knowledge in sinning* yet do not thou
Lord, go against thine own nature in punishing, who have promised, if we
believe and repent, 1 Cor. 10. 12. thou will forgive; and now, as my sins teach
them that stand to take heed least they fall, so let thy pardon of my sins,
teach them that are fallen, upon their repentance, not to doubt of thy mercy
and so giveness; which mercy and forgiveness do thou seal unto my Soul, and to
each humble penitent, through Jesus Christ, in a return of peace unto our
consciences by this Blessed Sacrament.

A Prayer for Thursday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament.
O Most blessed Fountain of Eternal love! who have tender bowels of
Compassions, and multitudes of rich mercies, for all those sinful Souls that
cry to thee for mercy and forgiveness; forgive the sinful failings, wilful
Errors, and most dangerous mistakes, of my wretched life past; and grant me
that true repentance for the time to come, which may truly convert me unto thee.

II.
Lord, where Sin has abounded* there let thy grace abound much more; Let my
degrees of Sin, be truly answered with my degrees of sorrow; my measure of
pollution, with my measure of Sanctification. Lord hear my Prayer, and let my
cry come unto thee, for thy Names sake, for thy promise sake, for thy blessed
Son Christ Jesus sake,

Amen.
III.
O most sacred and for ever blessed being, who have therefore Commanded me to
be holy, that I might be happy; look not upon me I meekly beseech thee, as I am
in my self, in the deceitfulness of mine own heart, falsehood of mine own ways;
but in the Righteousness of Christ, in whom alone thou can not but be well
pleased. Lord open my sinful Eyes, that I may see the folly of my great
mistakes; unvail the faces of my close Corruptions, that I may thereby see the
foulness and deformity of Sin, and apprehend the greatness of thy wrath against
it; that so I may truly and timely repent, and gain thy gracious pardon for it.

IV.
Search me thoroughly, O Lord, and try me; that none of those false ways of
wickedness may hereafter be found in me; that so my heart may be clean, my
Conscience pure, my Conversation upright, my life Holy, and my death happy, be
merciful to me thy frail and sinful Creature, who have daily been so far from
abstaining from the least appearance of it, that I have daily ran with
greediness into it, and hourly studied vain Excuses for it.

V.
Grant dear Lord, for thy mercy sake, that these my daily diminutions of Sin,
may now daily increase in me the Augmentations of sorrow; that so I may truly
and heartily bewail mine offenses, thou may*st graciously forgive them, and (
by thy grace assisting) I may perfectly abhor them: grant this dear Father for
thy mercy sake in ham who dyed for Sin, and had no Sin in him.

Amen.
Meditations for Friday Morning on the Holy Sacrament.
HIs Guards are strong, his Fence is sure, whose Salvation is Christ, which
Salvation is Communicated to us in the promises of grace, exhibited in the
Ministry of the word, and more plentifully conveyed, yea more effectually
confirmed in the Ministration of the Sacraments. Now to spoil us of the
treasure, to rob us of the comfort of this Salvation, is Satan's grand design
in his temptations unto sin, and his suggestions of distrust; for by these he
labors to withdraw us from our God, and deprive us of Communion with Christ,
who is our love and our life.

II.
But when the bird is mounted on the wing, it is safe from the Fowlers net; and
the soul raised in Communion with Christ is preserved from Satan's snare: and
if through infirmity the soul flag and fall to the Earth, and so become
entangled in carnal and worldly affections; yet keeping the eye fixed upon
Christ, looking to him in his ordinances to receive the quickening power of his
grace; though corrupt affections may entangle, yet shall they not inthral the
soul; which becomes restored by the Power of Christ's Spirit, a Spirit of life
and liberty, a Spirit of grace and holiness, delivering from the Power of
Satan, and from the Dominion of sin.

III.
Who art thou then, O thou afflicted soul, who in thy spiritual desertions
walk in darkness clouded with sorrows? oh in the greatest dejections lift up
thine eyes unto the Lord, that when the rising Sun appears thou may see his
refreshing light; and how ever now by reason of thy present anguish, thou can
not serve God in alacrity of performance, yet do it in sincerity of obedience;
and this, this will be a cranny to convey some beams of light, even in the
lowest dungeon of thy spiritual distress.

IV.
Psalm. 27. 14. Wait upon the Lord, having the eye of faith still toward him;
and so shall comforts be redoubled, in a life recovered; and thy difficulties
of obtaining, shall the more sweeten thy delights of enjoying, even of enjoying
God and Christ in the refreshing comforts of the Spirit, conveyed and Confirmed
in his Blessed Sacrament, in which Blessed Sacrament especially, let thine eyes
be still toward the Lord, in his merits, in his grace, in his benefits, in his
love; let him have thy fixed heart, and thine intent eye, yea, let him have thy
whole man, for to this end it is, that he here gives thee his whole self.

A Prayer for Friday Morning of consession of sins to God before the Holy
Sacrament.
O Most holy Lord God, I thy unworthy servant do here prostrate my self before
thee, in all humility, acknowledging and confessing my manifold sins and
wickedness; my whole life has abounded with actual transgressions, against
every one of thy Commandments. I have O Lord lived in contempt of thy
providence, committing Idolatry with thy Creatures, taking thy glorious name in
vain, profaning thy most holy Sabbath. I have not regarded my superiors, as I
ought to do, I have envied my brethren, defiled my soul with unchaste desires,
labored to be rich by unlawful means. I have slandered my Neighbor, and have
coveted after his wealth. I have heard thy word O Lord, but have not believed
it. I have known thy word, but have not practiced it, I have come into thy
house without reverence, and approached to thy holy Table without repentance, I
have practiced many sins without remorse, and when I read thy sacred
Scriptures, it is not sweet to me as the Honey Comb, but my delight is more in
ungodliness, profaneness and atheism.

II.
I have by gluttony and drunkenness pampered my body, I am guilty of pride in
my apparel, I am negligent in my calling, by mispending my time, I have used
vain discourses at my Table, and have sinned out of measure against all those
means of grace which thou have been pleased to afford me from time to time I
have wandering eyes, wanton lusts, and ambitious mind, and covetous desires,
which have no bounds nor limits. I have lascivious ears, unsavory speeches, and
censorious reproaches [ Here name thy particular sins.] I am still adding sin
unto sin, and transgression unto transgression,* and am altogether unfaithful
in my life, and forgetful of my death, and of the day of Judgment.

III.
My abusing of thy mercies, and despising of thy judgments, is testified
against me, yet O Lord, I am not ashamed, nor confess my self guilty, but still
run on in a course of sinning against the motions of thy holy Spirit, and the
checks of my own conscience; and have refused thy calls, and my own purposes
and vows of amendment, O what shall I say, or how shall I open my mouth, O thou
that art the preserver of all men! I know that the wages of sin is death, but
thy gift O God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord; O enter not into
judgment with thy servant O Lord for in thy sight is no flesh righteous. Be
merciful O Lord, be merciful unto my sins for they are great, out of thy
abundant mercy forgive me all that is past, and be gracious unto me in
preventing sins to come.

IV.
Correct me O Lord, but with mercy, not in thy Judgment, for then shall I be
consumed and brought to nothing, destroy in me O Lord the cursed works of the
Devil, increase in me daily the gifts of thy Spirit, fit me for that calling in
which thou have, or wilt place me, and make me to refer the strength of my
body* the gifts of my mind, and whatsoever grace thou have already or wilt
hereafter bestow upon me, to the glory of thy holy name and the eternal
salvation of my own Soul; and Lord grant that the remainder of the time which I
shall live in this present evil World, that my conversation may be in Heaven,
and that whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do else, I may hear always
this voice sounding in my ears; arise you dead and come to judgment: many other
things, O Lord, I have to beg that my ignorance knows not how to ask, or my
forgetfulness does not remember, but accept O Lord, this my humble confession
unto thee at this time, and whatever else thou know needful for me, supply
it with the merits of thy dear Son, my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer after Confession.
O Almighty God whose nature and property is always to have mercy and to
forgive, receive these my humble petitions made unto thee at this time, and
though I be tied and bound by the chains of my sins, yet let the pittifulness
of thy great mercy loose them, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for Faith.
O Almighty God, whose nature is above our reach, and whose secret operations
no humane reason can conceive* give me that faith without which no man can know
thee, and without which no soul can please thee, Lord I believe, but to believe
unto righteousness, O God, increase my Faith Concerning the great Sacrament of
thy precious body and blood, I believe that in the same night that thou O Lord
Jesus wast betrayed thou did give to thy Disciples Bread and Wine, which thou
did call thy Body and Blood, with a charge to eat and drink, and do the same
in remembrance of thee; for as thou wast upon thy departure, thou would
leave them and me a sign of thy Body, a figure of thy Blood, and a memorial o^
thy bitter Death and bloody Passion, lest I should forget thee, who wast ready
to lay down thy life for me, who am the worst and vilest of sinners.

II.
Therefore I take these Elements of Bread and Wine, for holy signs of thy Body
and Blood, believing, that though they remain after the Consecration, in their
substance both Bread and Wine, yet they are more than common Bread and Wine,
being made by prayer and thy holy word, the figures of thy Flesh and Blood;
which in the action and use of the Sacrament are really and effectually taken
by the faithful: So though I feel and taste Bread and Wine, yet by the eye of
Faith I eat thy Body and Drink thy Blood, in remembrance that thou did die
for me, and for all mankind.

III.
O then let the operation of thy blessed Spirit apply to my Soul, the merits of
thy Death and Passion; and O Lord I beseech thee, let me love and die in this
faith, and never be ashamed to confess thy holy name, who has suffered such an
ignominious Death for my redemption; O let my Soul live, and it shall praise
thee, and magnify thy all glorious name; thou have said that he that eats
thy Flesh and drinks thy Blood has eternal life, and thou will raise him up
at the last day; O Lord, I beseech thee confirm my faith, and grant that it
fail not, either concerning this or any other point of holy mysteries, for
thine alone sake my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Meditations for Friday Evening on the Holy Sacrament.
GOD alone, who is the author of our life, is likewise the object of our trust,
as being the Fountain and fullness of all our comfort and strength, all our
grace and holiness, all our glory and happiness. Wherefore, O my God, I trust
in thee, as a Creator to sustain me, as a Lord to govern me, as a guide to
direct me, as a rock to defend me, and as a Father to succor me; all which
relations thou have taken upon thee, in a merciful regard to my weakness and
wants, that thou might the more manifestly declare thy goodness and love;
which goodness and love, now seal unto my Soul, by a Communion with thee in the
Lord Jesus.

II.
And the best way to strengthen our trust in God is by renewing our
resignation, and when can we more seasonably do it than at our receiving the
Blessed Sacrament? in which we have exhibited the fullness of Christ's merits, as
the propitiatory Sacrament, and atonement for our Souls, by whom we have access
unto the Father, to receive a blessing of pardon and peace, of life and
salvation from him, do we then with all humble devotion make this sincere
resignation at the Table of the Lord, even offer and present unto God from our
hearts, as we profess with our tongues, offer and present our selves, our Souls
and Bodies, as a reasonable, Holy, and lively sacrifice unto him, casting our
selves upon him, in the mercy and truth of his promise, in the wisdom and power
of his providence.

III.
And upon this total resignation, he seals us this assurance, that he will
exercise those his properties, employ those his attributes for our comfort and
protection, for our support and salvation; and this, beyond what our wits can
design, our wishes can desire, or our thoughts can conceive; and let not any
penitent, though a languishing Soul, be discouraged from this Holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, there to renew his resignation and strengthen his trust.

IV.
And here this treasury is open; in this Blessed Sacrament, come and receive of
this mercy of thy God, dispensed by the bountiful hand of thy Jesus, who with
that mercy gives his merits, his benefits, his spirit, his whole fullness even
himself, wherefore rouse up thy Soul to receive the bounty of thy God, and of
thy Savior; with an humble; a thankful, and a devout heart; not forgetting the
price Christ gave for thee to redeem thee from the slavery of Sin, and Satan.

A Prayer for Friday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament.
BLessed for ever be thy holy Name, O thou God of Infinite Compassions, who art
both truth and holiness it self in thine Essence, and therefore strictly
requirest truth and sincerely in the hearts of thy Children, and holiness and
righteousness in their lives and Conversation; look not upon those sinful
failings of my Corrupt heart; but graciou^ly behold me in the righteousness of
Christ: forgive me my many sinful Compl^ances with nature, abberations from
grace, and deviations from goodness, which have caused these my sinful Errors;
which might thereby deprive me of present grace and hopes of future Blessedness.

II.
Lord, suffer me not any longer thus wretchedly to delude mine own Soul, but
make me truly such as thou would have me to be, a zealous and sincere
Christian; that so my Spirit which (for those my Sins) thou have much broken by
afflictions, may much more abundantly rejoice in thee by heavenly Consolations.
Lord accept of these my sinful desires, and let my loss of tears repair my loss
of truth; and loss of time in thy service, assist my weakness, accept my
willingness: forgive my sinfulness, cherish the blessed motions of thy holy
Spirit daily in me, and for thy mercy sake, remove the danger of my own
Corruption from me.

III.
O Lord, to thy glory and my own deserved shame, I willingly confess that I am
most impure and sinful, even in the very best of all my holy performances; I
therefore humbly beg of thee, that as thou have graciously afforded me the
light of thy sacred word, to discover me unto my self, so thou will also give
unto me, the Sword of thy holy Spirit, to deliver me from my self: deliver me
from the evil man (O Lord) even from the close Corruptions, and secret
Abominations of mine own evil and Corrupt heart. Lord pardon and pass by the
many secret and unknown Errors of my sinful life past, and graciously prevent
the failings of that to Come.

IV.
Make me truly and sincerely holy, and to embrace it, neither for fear of
punishment, nor hope of reward; but purely for thy sake, who art holiness it
self: O let me never think my self holy enough, but press still forward in thy
holy Race, until at last I have attained unto that full measure of holiness;
which (by thy gracious Acceptance of it in Christ) will End in Endless
happiness, Bless these my holy desires with happy performances; for his sake
whose perfect Righteousness, thou both graciously acceptest for me, and
willingly imputest to me.

Amen.
Meditations for Saturday Morning on the Holy Sacrament.
NOw to keep the Soul in an even temper, we must observe these following
directions; first, for the best ordering our lives, as to the safety and peace
of our Souls; be the more servent, the more importunate in your Prayers, when
your lusts are most eager and vehement in their desires, for this we have St.
Paul's example for our imitation, when he proportions the vehemence of his
devotion to the violence of his temptation; and by how much the messenger of
Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Does the more furiously reiterate his buffetings, the more
zealously does he renew his Prayers; and at length he receives this comfortable
answer, to his sorrowful complaint, my grace is sufficient for thee; sufficient
to cure thy wound, and to pardon thy guilt; sufficient to strengthen thy
weakness, and to perfect thy deliverance.

II.
Secondly, entertain we no parley no treaty with our lusts have no commerce or
company with them; silence their suggestions, or if they will needs be
suggesting, give them not the ear, lest they make that the passage to the
heart, we betray our selves to sin, whenever we treat with our lusts;
conference with them, is the way to be ensnared by them, we must fly sin as a
Serpent; not let in the head, lest it draw in its body; not yield to the first
motion, lest we be engaged in its full Commission.

III.
Thirdly, set we up the law of spirit and life in our hearts; Romans 8. 2. and by
how much the law of sin will be stirring in our thoughts, by so much the more
let this royal law of Christ's Spirit, and life bear sway in our souls, and to
that end, especially now in the solemnity of the Blessed Eucharist, renew we
our purposes, our vows, our Covenants; renew we our self denial, our total
resignation, thereby to obtain a further quickening in grace, a further
strengthening of the inward Man, and all by a nearer Communion of Christ in his
fullness, thus this Holy Sacrament shall seal unto our hearts the comfort of
this assurance, that he will never leave us nor forsake us.

IV.
Let us offer up to God, the Sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit;
which sorrow of contrition, must be like that of one Mourning for the dead, a
funeral sorrow, the deepest of Mournings; like that of one Mourning for her
only Son, the saddest of Funerals, and for our sins deep humiliation is (...)
necessary, whereby we confess the gu^lt of our sins, bewail the bitterness of
distress, deprecating Gods wrath, and imploring his mercy, for a full, and free
pardon of our sins.

A Prayer for Saturday Morning on the Holy Sacrament.
O Thou blessed Fountain of Eternal sweetness, who art infinitely sweeter to my
weary soul, than all earthly enjoyments, in whose presence is the fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore! forgive the follies
and infirmities of me thy sinful servant, who have foolishly preferred these
transitory drops of insufficient joys, which have been wearisome and
burdensome unto me, to those thy rivers of Eternal pleasures, in which thy
Blessed Saints do sweetly bathe their happy Souls, where everlasting j^y is on
their heads, and thine Eternal comforts in their hearts.

II.
Lord open mine eyes now at last, that I may clearly see the vanity of the
Creature, and the fullness, sweetness, and all sufficiency of Christ; withdraw
mine affections from the World, and fix them wholly upon thee and thy Kingdom:
Lord sanctify my heart, to believe that there is no true sweetness but in
goodness; and that there can be no true goodness in that pleasure, which is not
subordinate to this sweetness, which alone is in thee my Lord and Savior, the
comfort of all Earthly Comforts, and Heavenly Consolations.

III.
Almighty God, when I look upon thee out of Christ, as thou art in thy self, I
can there see nothing else, but destruction to my body, and amazement to my
soul: in thine essence, light inaccessible, unto which no mortal eye can
approach; in thine attributes terror unutterable, from which no Creature can
escape; thy wisdom trying my corrupt heart, and searching my sinful veins; thy
Justice most severe fearful in the pronunciation, dreadful in the Execution;
thy truth admitting no alteration, no judgment pronounced by thee, but most
precisely fulfilled: yet such, O Lord, has the folly of my false heart been,
that I have sinfully depended on thy mercy, in Christ, without either faith to
receive thee, hope to enjoy thee, or love to delight in thee.

IV.
Lord, whither will thou suffer me to stray from thee? How long, Lord, will thou leave me in this sleep of sin? Lord, seek me thy stray sheep, or I am lost
for ever; open my sinful eyes, that I sleep not in death; make me wisely to
remember that then only there is mercy with thee, when thou art truly feared,
grant therefore dear Father for thy mercy sake, that I may no longer dally with
my precious soul, by this my security in sin; but sorely upon thy mercy, as to
have a filial fear of thy justice; and from security in sin, good Lord deliver
me.

Amen.
Meditations for Saturday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament.
O Thou great Creator of Heaven and Earth, I am ashamed of my self, to see in
what a posture I am in at this present, I am cast down, when I look into my
self, and make enquiry into my own unworthiness, I cannot but behold my own
vileness and baseness; but thou O Lord do receive sinners, else how dare I
approach to thy Holy Table, thou art he that say come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and that the whole have no need of a Physician but
they that are sick; O Lord I am weary and heavy laden and come unto thee for
ease and refreshment; I am sick of sin, be thou my Physician and my Medicine; I
am wounded hungry and weak, be thou my sovereign balsome, nourishment and
strength; I am sorrowful, poor and foolish, be thou my comfort, enrich me and
enlighten me; I am fall of dross, unclean and dead, do thou refine me purify
me, and quicken me with thy Heavenly grace unto salvation.

II.
O that I were now with an humble heart at the Holy Table of my Lord, there are
all mercies conveyed and sealed, all graces are confirmed and exercised, there
repentance is employed and quickened, faith is actuated and strengthened,
devotion and charity enflamed and kindled, peace and concord is established;
there is the universal medicine for all our diseases, and an ark of safety
against all dangers; there, O my Soul thou may by the eye of faith behold
thy crucified Lord and Savior, shedding his most precious Blood upon the Cross
for thy sins, and burning with an unspeakable desire of thy salvation. There
thou may look upon him whom thy sins have pierced, and on him whom thou do
still crucify afresh by thy sins daily and hourly. In the sufferings of thy
Savior; O my soul, thou may see as in a glass thy own vileness and
deformities, thy Saviors being mocked, scorned and contemned, discovers thy
evil speaking, lying and slandering; his blessed Face being besmeared with
spittle, remembers thee of all thy unclean lusts and filthy communications;
that blessed Mouth which was guilty of no deceit, was embittered with gall and
vinegar, which should mind thee of thy luxury and drunkenness, his being
scourged, of thy stubbornness and disobedience.

III.
O my soul, do thou not wonder, that the King of glory, should wear a Crown
of thorns, and for his Majestical Robes, a little linen for to cover his
nakedness, and thou to be guilty of pride and vain glory, and affected with the
pomps and vanities of this wicked World? The Crown of Thorns which was platred
on his Head, with that rage and indignation, should put thee in mind of the
immoderate cares of the World, with the sharp and piercing vexations issuing
thence, which eat up the consolation of the heart, and all true sincere
devotion of the spirit; O let scorns (...)r thy sake be my glory, and injuries
and affronts my Crown; lift up I pray thee upon thy Cross my miserable Soul,
which lies grovelling on the ground, out of this vale of misery; O that thou
would purge and thoroughly heal me with thy most precious Blood; let thy
wounds be a salve for my sinful soul, and by thy stripes let her be healed of
all her distempers; let all thy pains grief and sorrows, captivity humiliation
and cross, deliver me from Hell, and purchase for me those joys and pleasures
at thy right hand for ever, and thy Death my life for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for Charity.
O Eternal God thou have said that without charity we are nothing, give me, O
Lord, I beseech thee that Christian love and perfect charity, that I may love
thee O Lord my God, with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and
with all my strength, doing always in sincerity that which is pleasing in thy
sight, not returning evil for evil, or ra^ling for railing, but loving my
Neighbor as my self, and being ready at all times to assist him in time of
need, administering to him according to his several necessities; that at the
last and great day, I may give an account of my Steward ship with joy and not
with grief; grant this O Lord, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Saturday Evening on the most Holy Sacrament.
O Almighty God, I beseech thee to seal unto me the pardon of all my sins, and
to grant all those petitions, which I have asked in thy Sons name, and let me
now consider how transitory are all things, how wicked is the World, how impure
is the flesh, and how my self am deceitful; grant that so I loose my affections
from all such unworthy objects here below, and then let me know, how Eternal is
thy nature, how permanent is thy glory, and how infinite is thy love, bring me,
O bring me to morrow to thy royal feast with the badge of love; and with the
wedding garment, so shall I be a welcome guest, unto thee, that eating thy
flesh and drinking thy Blood, I shall for ever dwell in thee my glorious
Creator, and thou in me thy blessed Creature.

Our Father, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, with the
sweet and comfortable fellowship of God's Holy and Blessed Spirit, bless,
preserve, conserve and keep me this night, and all the days of my life, at the
hour of death, and in the day of Judgment.

Amen.
Sixthly, how to receive it worthily.
The Morning thou art to receive after thy usual devotions, breath forth this
Meditation.

Sundays Meditation.
WIsdom has killed her beasts, mingled her wine, and furnished her table; Man's
folly wrought his fall by a bit, and wisdom repairs it by a feast; a fruit did
corrupt us, and flesh and blood do preserve us, a Lamb is slain for the Goat,
the just for the unjust; the Son of God for the Children of Men; and is this
day offered as meat for the life of many? I will go to that feast, to eat of
that bread, and drink of that wine which is mingled for me, the fruit of the
vine with the blood of Gods Lamb; O then good Lord, let me be found in that
purity, thou desire in them, that approach thine Altar; wash thou my feet and
cleanse my heart, that I may be clean, and have part with thee for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday Morning before thou go to Church.
O Lord prepare my heart to Prayer.

O Most glorious Lord God, behold a miserable and wretched sinner is now
approaching to thy most holy Table, to feast my soul upon thy precious Body and
Blood, at the primitive eating, thou said, the day that thou eat est* thou
shall surely dye, but here in the day which I eat I shall surely live. Joh. 6.
O Lord, I esteem my self unworthy of the least crum that falls from thy Table;
must the Childrens bread be given unto dogs, must such a vile wretch as I sit
at thy Holy Table, who am laden with sin and over pressed with iniquity? But I
come O Lord to ease my self of sin, and to cast off the burden of iniquity, and
to bury them all at the foot of thy Cross; I come O Lord to be purged thoroughly
from my iniquity, and to be sorry for my sins, which are without number, but
not more than my dear Saviors blood can expiate!

II.
O thou brightest Morning Star, arise now with healing in thy wings, and say
unto my soul I am thy salvation; O do thou now arise and let thy Enemies be
scattered, which are my lusts and vile affections, and let them that hate thee
flee before thee which is the Devil, envy, hatred, malice and all
uncharitableness, make clean my heart O my Redeemer, and pull down every strong
hold and bulwark, which opposes thy heavenly will, and make me a fit guest at
thy Holy Table, to receive thee with a pure heart, and strengthen me that I may
have such a lively faith to pass through the vale, and confidently look into
the holy of holies, this I beg for thy alone sake, my only Savior and
Redeemer. Amen.

When thou art at Church before divine service begins; upon thy knees use these
ejaculations.

1. This is the day which the Lord has made, I will be joyful and glad in it,
2. He has redeemed my soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling. 3. Thou shall prepare a Table before me against them that trouble me;
thou have anointed my head with Oil, my Cup shall be full. 4. But surely thy
loving kindness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life, and I shall
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. 5. I will wash my hands in innocence O
Lord, and so will I go to thine Altar. 6. That I may show the voice of
thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. 7. Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place were thine honor dwells. 8. O shut
not up my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the Blood thirsty. 9. My foot
stand th right, I will prase the Lord in the great congregation.
A Meditation to be used at the Lords Table, when there are many Communicants.
O What a Heavenly sight is this, to behold such an Assembly of Christians
meeting with one accord, at this great mystery! how joyful a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity, and to worship the Almighty in Spirit, and
in Truth! I feel my heart is more raised, and my devotion kindled by their
zeal, and all lukew armness is passed away, my spirits are refresht and have
taken new life by seeing such an appearance in the House of God.

II.
This is the perfection of Religion, to seek Gods Face while he may be found,
and to call upon him while he is near, which none of us can do too often, to
have him in remembrance, who so often remembered us; here we receive spiritual
things, and taste and see how good the Lord is, which food, O Lord, I beseech
thee let me never want, but give it me as my daily bread, for Jesus Christ his
sake my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Dear Savior, how excellent is thy goodness and loving kindness to me and to
all thy Creatures* thou art pleased O Lord, to vouchsafe me this opportunity in
the waiting upon thee in thy solemn Ordinance, where thou do communicate unto
me thy precious Body and Blood, and do give me that interest in thee and
peace which the World cannot give, nor none can take away; this is that
treasure which moths cannot corrupt nor thieves break through and steal.

II.
O then, where my treasure is let my heart be there also; away fond World and
all the vanities thereof, for the God of holiness has touched my heart, I do
now purpose to return from my evil ways, and as long as I live to renew those
purposes daily; O then dear Lord fit me I beseech thee for thy self, that I may
receive with that joy and spiritual comfort this thy body that was broken and
thy precious Blood which was shed for me, whereby I may partake of all the
benefits of thy bitter Death and Passion, and become one with thee, in
receiving all that either my soul does need or desire, for thy alone sake my
only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
When the Minister is saying the Offertory, use this Meditation at thy offering
thy Alms.
O Almighty God, what I offer is but what thou lentest me here for a time, and
what I now give to my poor Brethren, thou have promised to repay it, but I have
received more at thy all-merciful hands, than my heart and tongue can ever
express; O that I could have given ten thousand Talents, instead of this poor
mite, my charity thou have no need of, but for as much as I have done it to my
poor Brethren (whose souls thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood,)
thou ownest it to be done to thy self; O what can I give thee O Lord, or render
unto thee for all the Earthly comforts and benefits I have received from thee:
I can give thee nothing but what is thy own, and no Earthly thing can bear
proportion with thy Majesty; therefore in all humility I resign my soul up into
thy hands, who art my faithful Creator, and who sent thy Son to save me a lost
sinner, to whom be all praise honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Then say after the Minister, the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church
militant here on Earth, and be very attentive to the exhortation which follows,
beginning with these words. Dearly beloved in the Lord.

Then hearken diligently to the invitation, and when the Minister expresses
these words, draw near with faith, and take this Holy Sacramint, then use these
Ejaculations.

1. I am unworthy O Lord, to appear before thee. 2. But thou art able to save
them to the uttermost that come unto thee, and does live for ever to make
intercession with God the Father for us. 3. No Man comes unto thee except the
Father draw him, and thou will raise him up at the last day. 4. O have
compassion upon my penitent soul, who draws near to thy throne of grace, that I
may obtain mercy and find grace to help me in time of need.
Then join with all your heart with the Minister in the general consession,
absolution, and sentences, lifting up your heart unto the Lord, blessing and
praising his holy name in these Ejaculations.

1. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. 2. It is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man. 3. The Lord is
my strength and my song, and is become my salvation. 4. I shall not dye but
live, and declare the works of the Lord. 5. This is the gate of the Lord, the
righteous shall enter into it. 6. Thou art my God and I will thank thee, thou
art my God and I will praise thee. 7. I will lift up my heart and my hands unto
thee, O thou that dwell in the Heavens. 8. My help stands in the name of
the Lord which has made Heaven and Earth. 9. The Lord has done great things
for me, whereof I rejoice. 10. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with
all the company of Heaven, I will laud and glorify thy glorious name, evermore
praising thee, saying holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are
full of thy glory, Glory be to thee O Lord most high. Amen.
Then join with the Minister in the address which begins thus: We do not
presume to come to this thy Holy Table, O merciful Lord, etc.

At the time of the Consecration, fix your eye upon the Elements, and at the
actions of the Ministers in ordering the Bread and Wine, we ought joyfully and
thankfully to meditate after this manner.
O Who can but admire and wonder, that the Son of God should become food to the
Souls of Men, and to humble himself so low as to be represented by bread, which
is the poor man's food, though necessary for the rich, it is the staff of our
life, and signifies that body of thine, which thou gave for the life of the
World; thou have by thy holy Mystery made this Bread and Wine spiritual food,
as well as temporal: O Lord, I beseech thee let the operation of it be such as
to strengthen my soul, that it may withstand all Temptations whatsoever, and
evermore serve thee in spirit and in truth.

Amen.
When the Minister breaks the Bread, and pours out the Wine, use these
Meditations.
O Holy Jesus thy Blessed Body was torn with Nails upon the Cross, and thy
precious Blood was inhumanely spilt by the Crucifiers; but I an unworthy
Wretch, by my manifold sins have occasioned more torments to thee; they
Crucified thee but once, but I crucify thee daily, they Crucified thee because
they knew thee not, but I have known thee, what thou art in thy self, the Lord
of glory, and what thou art to me, a most tender and Merciful Father, and yet I
have still continued to Crucify thee afresh: O do thou work in me, first a
great sorrow for my sins past, and then a great hatred, and a firm resolution
against them for the time to come.

When the Minister receives in both kinds himself, say

1. Thou that hear Prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come. 2. Blessed is
the Man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee, he shall dwell in thy
Court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy Holy Temple. 3. Thou
shall guide me with thy council, and after that receive me with glory. 4. The
Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend thee.
5. Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen the out of Sion. 6. The
Lord remember all thy offerings, and accept this thy Sacrifice. 7. Grant thee
thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind; the Lord perform all thy petions,
which thou have made at this time, both for thy self, for us, and for all
persons. 8. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, World without end
Amen.
When the Minister is drawing near thee with the Elements, say.
I adore thee, O must righteous Redeemer, that thou art pleased to convey unto
my soul thy precious Body and Blood, with all the benefits of thy Death and
Passion; I am not worthy O Lord to receive thee, but let thy Holy and Blessed
Spirit, with all his purities, prepare for thee a lodging in my Soul, where
thou may unite me to thy self for ever.

Amen.
Ejaculations before the Bread.
This is that Bread which came down from Heaven, whosoever eats shall never
hunger* Thou dealest thy bread to those which hunger after righteousness; O
feed my fainting soul with this bread of life.

O strengthen my heart and hand by a lively faith, and open my mouth with
fervent desires, that I may eat, not for bodily sustenance, but for spiritual
relief, and the refreshment of my soul.

O let my soul feel the spiritual efficacy of thy grace, that I may not eat
unworthily, or to my condemnation. O Lord, I beseech thee enable and direct me
by thy holy and blessed spirit, to receive it worthily.

Amen.
When the Minister gives the holy bread say softly with him.
The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for me, preserve my body and
soul unto everlasting life.

Here take the bread with reverence then proceed, I take and eat this* in
remembrance that Christ died for me and will feed on him in my heart with faith
and thanksgiving. Then answer audibly.

Amen.
After the bread say.
I give thee hearty thanks, O Lord most Holy, that thou have refreshed my soul
at this time, by my feeding upon thy Body which was broken for me; If I had
lived innocently and had kept all thy Commandments, yet could I have had no
proportion of merit, to so transcendent a mercy; but since I have so loved sin,
and added transgression to transgression, thy mercy is so glorious and
infinite, that I stand amazed at the consideration of its immensity; O let me
not throw off* this Wedding Garment, or stain it with pollution of deadly sin,
but let me be wholly united to thee, being transformed, according to thy holy
will and life, who live and reignest for ever.

Amen.
Or this.
O Blessed Jesus, sanctify this bread to me, that it may be to my Soul the
staff of strength whereby I may vanquish and overcome all the assaulis of the
Devil, the World and the Flesh, and continue thy faithful Soldier and Servant
to my life's end.

Amen.
Ejaculations before the Cup.
1. The Lord himself is the portion of my Inheritance and of my Cup, thou shall
maintain my lot. 2. The lot is fallen unto me, in a fair ground, yea I have a
goodly heritage. 3. I have set God always before me, for he is on my right
hand, therefore I shall not fall. 4. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea
our God is merciful. 5. What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the
benefits he has done unto me? 6. I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the name of the Lord. 7. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the
living.
When thou receivest the Cup say after the Minister softly.
The Blood of my Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for me, preserve my body and
soul unto everlasting life; I drink this in remembrance that Christ's Blood was
shed for me, and am thankful.

Amen.
After the Cup, say.
O how delightful is this Cup to me Blessed Jesus, which was so heavy to thee,
it was thy Agonies and Bloody sweat, thy bitter Death and Passion, which
afforded me this Cup of cheerfulness; thou did find it bitter, when thou wast
appeasing an angry Father, but thou have sweetened it by a reconciliation, and
have wrought out my Redemption and Salvation.

Or this.
I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee, O Lord most Holy, that thou have
at this time so refreshed my soul, and filled me with holy desires; O let thy
tender mercy always keep me in this happy temper, that I may never err nor
stray from thy Commandments* but keep firm that Covenant, which thou have
sealed with thy most precious Blood for my redemption, and direct me O Lord,
and guide me so here, that I may be a fit member for thy Heavenly Kingdom
hereafter.

Amen.
Whilst others are Communicating say..
I.
Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name. What
greater gift O Lord, could thou bestow upon me, than to give me thy Body for
meat, thy Blood for drink, and to lay down thy life for the price of my
redemption? What greater mercy than that thou should now enter into me, and
dwell with me, as thou have promised?

II.
I yield thee humble and hearty thanks most Merciful Father, and desire to
magnify thy name for ever, for the Holy Death and bitter Passion of thy Son,
and that great Redemption thou have wrought for me in him, and have heaped upon
me, from time to time thy unspeakable favors and loving kindnesses in feeding
me at this time, with the spiritual food of the Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus
Christ, my only Lord and Savior. Amen

III.
O Eternal God, who vouchsafest to send thine only begotten Son into the World
for my redemption, and to deliver him up even unto death; in remembrance
whereof, until his second coming, he has commanded me to eat his Body, and
drink his Blood, to the end, (by Faith) I should be united and knit unto his
Body, and being washed from all my sins, lead a new life, vouchsafe I humbly
beseech thee for his sake, to indue me with thy Holy Spirit unto my lives end.

Amen.
IV.
O Almighty God, grant I may cast away all the works of darkness, and walk in
the true light of thy Holy Gospel: Vouchsafe me O Lord, an unfeigned desire in
being a partaker of this thy Holy institution, and that I may lead my life
according to thy Heavenly will in all things, keeping my body undefiled, as a
fit receptacle for so Heavenly Food, that my soul may enjoy the benefit of the
Mystery thereof by Faith according to thy Heavenly providence, through Jesus
Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for all the Communicants that are present.
O Let us now all magnify the name of the Lord, from the rising of the Sun to
the setting of the same. Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, and
are fed, though it be but with the Crumbs that fall from thy Table. We have all
now tasted and seen how gracious the Lord is; for he has heard our Prayers and
gran^ed our requests, and redeemed us from the slavery of sin and death. O that
we might never depart from thee, but be unwearied in thy service; let not our
stedfastness which is now fixed, pass away as the Morning Cloud, or our
Devotions fly away as a shadow which has no continuance; but arm us, O good
Lord, against all manner of sin, that we may all say with the Kingly Prophet, I
have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments. Direct
and guide us O Lord with thy Holy Spirit, thy All seeing eye, and thy Heavenly
hand, that though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we may
fear no evil, for thou art with us.

Amen.
Meditations out of the Psalms.
O praise the Lord with me, and let us Magnify his name together.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fears.

O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him do lack nothing.

The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers:

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that are of a contrite heart: and will save
such as be of an humble Spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
all.

He has not dealt with us after our sin, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

For he knows whereof we are made, he remembers we are but dust.

The Lord delivers the souls of his servants; and all they that put their
trust in him shall not be destitute.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

A Concluding Prayer.
I Thank thee, O thou great Creator, that thou have at this time given me such
a supply of thy Grace whereby I may come to thy Eternal Glory, thou have now
entertained me at thy Holy Table, and received me with that fatherly affection,
by speaking peace unto my conscience, and saying to my soul thou art my
salvation; O what reward can I return for these unspeakable mercies! I will
rejoice and be exceeding glad, admire and celebrate the love of my Savior, O
ye Almighty powers it is my duty to extol him, to whom you pay all these
praises; let me for ever Magnify thy Holy Name O Lord, and thy praises for
ever shall be in my Mouth; for thou only art Holy, and it is thy peace alone
which passes all understanding. O let it keep my heart and mind in the
knowledge and love of thee, and of thy Son Jesus Christ my only Lord and
Savior, and let thy favor and blessing O merciful Father, with thy Son my
only Savior, and the Holy Ghost my only sanctifier, remain with we always.

Amen.
A Prayer at home the same day.
O Thou Fountain of everlasting happiness, strike my soul with an Holy
admiration of thy Divine goodness; thou have of thine infinite Pity and
Compassion to me a poor wretched Sinner, received me into the bosom of thy
Mercy, and art reconciled unto me by the Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ; thou
have issued forth a free and full pardon unto me of all my sins and
transgressions, from that great office of Mercy thou have opened to thy Church
and People; and I have now again renewed my Covenant of Love and Allegiance
unto thee my God, and an^ again consecrated unto thee in the Holy Blood of the
Lord Jesus: O let the Holy sense of this thy great goodness and loving kindness
rest for ever upon my Soul, and oblige my heart for ever unto thee; and I
beseech thee that thou w^lt never leave me, nor forsake me, but let me walk in
the light of thy countenance to my lives end. Amen.

Lastly how to live well a righteous godly and sober life after receiving this
most Holy Sacrament.

Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honors me: and to him
that orders his conversation aright will I show the Salvation of God.

I.
And the better to attain these directions, let us follow what the Kingly
Prophet lays down to eschew evil, and do good: seek peace and ensue it, which
is the banishing from the Soul all kind of Vices, and adorning it with Virtues,
and this is by becoming a new creature, destroying of the image of old earthly
Adam and reforming it with the Image of the new Adam, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

II.
By this means we attain to that supernatural end for which we were created:
(which is to see Almighty God in his own glory and excellency) which that we
may all do, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. As soon as you awake in the Morning
give the first fruits of thy reason to the Divine Majesty, let your memory,
understanding, will and heart, discharge their duties, let your tongue and
mouth, hands and arms, contribute in offering up this Morning Sacrifice to thy
great Creator.

Which thou may do in this manner.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Most Powerful Lord God, which sit upon the Cherubims, and stretchest out
the Heavens like a Curtain. I adore thee my God from the center of my Nothing,
with all the Creatures of the Universe; and come unto thee upon the bended
knees of my heart, humbly beseeching thee in thy mercy to look upon me, and
fully to remit unto me all my sins and transgressions whatsoever, and give me
unfeigned repentance and newness of life for the time to come: as thou have now
awakened my body from sleep, so I beseech thee, awake my soul from sin and
carnal security: as thou have caused the light of the day to shine upon my
bodily eyes, so (good Lord) cause the light of thy Word and Holy Spirit to
illuminate my heart, and give me grace to walk in all holy obedience before thy
face this day; teach me to fear thee continually wheresoever I am, to neglect
all things in regard of thee, to love thee, and my Brethren for thy s(...)ke;
let whatsoever I do this day be pleasing in thy sight, who art my alone
Creator, let not any temptations this day delude me, (but O Lord my God) be
thou ever near me, with me, and about me, to protect, preserve, and defend me
from this time forth, and all the days of my life, now and for evermore. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Noon.
O Eternal God every hour of the day will I lift up my heart unto thee, stop
not thine ear, O Lord, but hear me, and that right soon, let me not nourish the
disease of sloth in my blood, but spend my life as the clouds execute their
offices, to be still in motion; quench and kill, O Lord, in me the weed of
Covetousness, and let me not be over careful for my self, but pitiful and
merciful to those that want. Keep my hands clean from touching riches unlawful,
last with Ahab and Jezabel, I commit Murder, and shed Naboth's blood, to wring
from him his Vineyard, or with Achan, be stoned to death for taking goods that
are to me forbidden; give me grace to be content with what portion thou have
allowed me, and to remember that this is no continuing City, but I must seek
one to come, in which Heavenly Kingdom of thine, thou art my portion for ever,
which God grant me for his Mercy sake. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Almighty God, the only keeper of Israel, who neither slumbrest nor sleep,
behold me thy servant who by reason of my sin, and the corruption of my nature,
am wholly subject to sloth, and am now even ready to ease and rest my self upon
my Bed: I know not whether thou will this very night make my Bed in the dark,
and the hour of my visitation be this present Evening, my years are but a span
long, my age is nothing unto thee, my days pass like a Weavers shuttle, and my
life is brought to an end as it were a tale that is told, this hour may be my
last hour, and my next sleep my last and long sleep; therefore I beseech thee
let me every Evening seriously ponder and meditate, and though my eyes sleep,
yet let my soul continually watch to attend thy coming; keep me this night both
in body and soul from all mine enemies both visible and invisible now and for
evermore. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

