To the Honorable The COMMONS of England Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Captain GEORGE ST. LO his Proceedings against Me, for my Fidelity to my KING
and my COUNTRY; Together with the mast Material Consequences of them, whilst I
was Store keeper of His Majesty's Dock-Yard near Plymouth, under him, and Acted
in that Employment.
ON the 16th. of April 1695, Captain George St. Lo came to reside at Plymouth
as Commissioner of his Majesty's Navy for that Port, and within a Fortnight
after, a Store-Ship arrived there from Deptford for Our Yard; whilst she was
Unlading, Captain St. Lo came to the Storehouse sometimes to view the Stores,
and found great fault with them, particularly the Hammacocs, Cordage and
Shovels; For the Hammacocs he swore, (as the Master Attendant, Master
Shipwright, Clerk of the Survey and I were attending him up and down the
Storehouse) they were the very same that Captain Willshaw and He had lately
refused to receive into Deptford Stores upon a Survey of them, therefore Mr.
Hosier was a Knave, and deserved to be Turned out of his Employment for
Receiving them; then Captain St. Lo ordered me to send up a Complaint of tbose
Stores to the Navy-Board; I told him, 'twas more proper for him to Represent
this Matter to the Navy-Board than my self, and that I would advise Mr. Hosier
how much he was Displeased with him for sending Us the worst Stores he could
pick out; Which I thought was the Utmost he could expect from me; Yet because
he Urged me extremely for five or six Weeks together to Comply with his
aforesaid Commands, I consulted my Brother Officers thereon (it being more
their Duty than mine to inspect the Quality of the Stores that were from time
to time received by me) but after they had considered this Matter, they told
me, 'twas not Our Business to make any Complaint of the Stores that were sent
Us from another Yard, and that they would not Concern themselves in any such
Thing; I could not possibly comply with Capt. St. Lo his Commands any further,
however, he took Occasion from thence to six a Prejudice against me, and in
such a time of Action 'twas very easy for him to improve it.

At Midsummer 1695, Captain St. Lo removed from Plymouth to the New Dock-Yard
to live, and some of the Officers at Michaelmas, (their Business being wholly
Removed thither) then Captain St. Lo gave me Verbal Orders at Plymouth, to
Remove all the Stores form thence to the New Dock-Yard, I answered him, that
the Removal of the King's Stores was an Important Concern, and did require Our
serious Considerations before We undertook it; he said positively, all the
Stores should be Removed, so I desired his Warrant to Remove such Stores only
as he foresaw would be absolutely Necessary to carry on the Service for the
present; Upon which, Captain St. Lo fell into Violent Passion, and I did not
say any thing more to increase it, but the next Morning early, I went to the
New Dock-Yard to wait on him at his House, and acquainted him that I was much
Concerned at his Passion with me last Night, and hoped he would now be pleased
to hear me patiently what I had to offer to him concerning his Commands to me
for Removing the Stores from Plymouth to the New Dock-Yard. Capt. St. Lo said,
he would not hear me, and swore by his Maker, the Stores should be Removed. He
went from me down Stairs into his Kitchen, I followed him, and after I
perceived his Passion was somewhat over, I said to him, Lord, Sir, what, do you
design to Ruin me, that you expect such Impossibilities from me? Pray do you
consider, Sir, that I and my Sureties have given Bond of 1500 l. to the
Navy-Board, to pass a Fair Account of all the Stores committed to my Charge,
whenever their Honors please to require it of me, and that my Warrant directs
me to Observe their Instructions in my Management of the Store-keepers
Employment. Whereto Captain St. Lo replied, that his Commands should not be
prejudicial to me; For he would engage, that if I wanted in some particular
Stores to answer my Balance, they would be more than made up by the Overflows
of others; Captain St. Lo his Argument indeed did not alter my Opinion, which
made him afterward Reprimand me very often for not Removing the Stores, (and
most commonly before Company) insomuch, that I hardly took any Comfort of my
Life. But to Illustrate this Point beyond Exception, (it being the most
Considerable Part of my Subject) I shall insert the Copy of a Complaint from
Capt. St. Lo against me to the Navy-Board, with their Order to me thereon, and
my Answer to it.

Copy of Captain St. Lo his Complaint against Me to the Navy-Board, Dated the
18th. of February 1695.
I have received your Letters of the 14th and 15th of February, and those
Papers which Respect the Store-keeper are Delivered to him; But I should be
glad if you would write to him to hasten his Living at the Dock, and to hasten
the Stores hither which are under his Charge; which would remove several
Obstructions which do now Obviate Us in dispatch of fitting out the Ships.

Copy of an Order from the Navy-Board to Me, Dated the 21st of February 1695.
Understanding you are not yet Removed to the House prepared for you at the New
Yard in Hammoaze, as also, that you continue several Stores in the Old
Storehouses, which now the Officers and Business is removed to the said Yard,
is very inconvenient to the Service; We do hereby direct and require you to
Remove all his Majesty's Stores to the said New Yard with all the Expedition
that may be; As also, to settle your self in the House provided you in the said
Yard as soon as possible, that so his Majesty's Service may not suffer through
any Neglect of yours in that Affair.

Copy of my Letter to the Navy-Board, Dated the 25th. of February 1695.
This Mornining at the New Yard in Hammoaze, I received your H^^^urs Order of
the 21st Instant, directing me to Remove his Majesty's Stores thither, and to
settle my self in the House provided for me with all the Expedition that may
be, which I shall Obey to the utmost of my Power, and humbly acquaint your
Honors that, as to my own Habitation (though not yet fitted) I would have long
since Removed to it, but that I preferred his Majesty's Interest before my own
Ease and Advantage; For at this time, not any part of the Storehouse is
Covered, nor the Window-shutters fixed, and I know not how the Stores can be
Removed without considerable Damage both by the Weather and Embezlement. A good
quantity of Canvas, Cables, Cordage, and other Stroes, (which will take up much
Room) are now a coming to Us from Deptford, I wish sufficient Care was taken to
lodge them in when they Arrive; And I cannot apprehend, how Our other Stores
can well be Removed (as the Case stands) till they are properly secured. The
Tallow, Deals, Pitch and Tarr, also the Masts, Timber, and all the other
Out-Stores (excepting the Anchors) are already Removed, and I hope, no
Inconvenience attends the Service through my Neglect. Our Issues of late have
been extraordinary great, and with submission I affirm, that my Lodging at
Plymouth, and Quickening the Tradesmen there, has been somewhat Instrumental to
the timely supplying our Demands of Stores which We were Necessitated for.
Every Day, or every other Day at least, (as Business offers) I am at the Dock,
and at Night, constantly I, and my Instruments, write till 8 or 9 a Clock to
keep up my Accounts, which I cannot do at the Dock; For no Convenience for my
Office is yet made. Besides, every Morning and Evening (both before and after
the common Working hours) I, or my Chief Instrument, is obliged to attend the
Sail-makers at the Storehouse in Plymouth to see all things safe, they having
for some time wrought by Candlelight to dispatch theer Work, so that I foresee
great Difficulties for the present in managing my Employment, however, I am
confident of Undergoing them all to your Honors satisfaction, and (If
possible) to the good liking of all Others that I am concerned with.

My plain Answer to Captain St. Lo his Positive and Concise Complaint, gave the
Navy-Board full satisfacti^^^, which incensed him the more against Me; And
(...) must not omit to observe, that I waited upon (...) St. Lo with two or
three of my Brother Officers, (...)sider what I ought to do upon the Navy-Board
(...) Me, pursuant to his Request; But the (...) Demeanor, seemed to
Exasperate (...) the next time he Complained of me, it should (...); I told
him, I would not (...) to do so by me, but desired to kno(...) the Canvas,
Colors, and (...) If I brought them to the Dock as he would (...), he
answered, I need not make such a difficulty of the Matter, but keep them at my
own House till the Store house could Receive them: A very severe Task for me to
perform, and (tho I could not convince him of its Danger, and Unreasonableness)
would have been extremely Detrimental to my King and my Country; which, made me
choose rather to continue under his Displeasure for the present, then Betray my
Trust, or Disobey my Instructions.

In March 1695, a Man of War from the West Indies put into Plymouth Sound, the
Boatswain of her came ashore with a Demand from his Captain for a Vyol, and
some other Stores; Captain St. Lo himself brought me the Demand, and ordered me
to deliver them to him immediately, so I obeyed his Commands; But when I came
to the Clerk of the Survey for his Warrant to Vouch my Delivery of them, he
refused to grant it me, and said, he did not care what the Commissioner ordered
me, for he must do his Business Methodically, according to his Instructions
from the Surveyor of the Navy; At length, upon the Master-Attendant his
Request, and my own Promise not to do any such irregular thing for the future,
I got the Clerk of the Survey his Warrant accordingly; And being thus enjoined
not to Obey Captain St. Lo his preposterous Commands, I forewarned my
Instruments from delivering any more Stores to the Men of War without an Order
from the Officers of the Yard; which coming to Captain St. Lo his hearing, he
said publicly, all the Officers were Knaves, and joined together to Cheat the
King.

On the 21st of March 1695, I went to the Royal Citadel at Plymouth, to speak
with Captain St. Lo at Mr. Hooks the Deputy-Governour's House (who was also
Store-keeper of the Ordnance) where was Colonel Freeke. Captain Julian, Mr.
Stuckley the Postmaster, and some other Gentlemen of Note; The
Deputy-Goveruour was so kind, as to desire me to sit down and take a Glass of
Wine; but before I could well look about me, Captain St. Lo asked me why I did
not Remove all the Stores to the Dock; I answered him, that there was a Lighter
now at the Storehouse a Loading, and We made what haste We could to Remove the
Stores, considering the Storehouse at the Dock was not yet fitted to Receive
them; he told me, I had best Remove them all, or else he would Complain of me
to the Admiralty; I said, I hoped not to give him any Occasion for it. Then the
Deputy Governor told Captain St. Lo, Truly if he was in Mr. Gaselee his Place,
he would not Remove any of the Stores to the Dock till the Storehouse there
was Fitted to place them properly in; Whereupon Captain St. Lo was angry with
me for not being yet Removed to my House at the Dock; I answered, that the
Painters were now at Work in it, and I could not Remove my Goods without
Damaging them, but I would Remove to my House next Week; Whereto Captain St. Lo
replied, What a Devilish Noise you make of your Goods; I warrant you, a Man may
carry them all on his Back; I answered, that I did not come to distarb him and
his good Company, only desired to speak two or three words with him by himself;
My Business was, to take his Consent to go to Exon for a Day or two; Which I
readily had, and did hope, that when I came to live at the Dock, all
Misunderstandings between Us would afterward have ceased.

I went to live at my House in the New-Dock-Yard the 2d of April 1696, in which
Month, and in June next ensuing, We there unloded 3 Vessels with Stores from
Deptford, among them was a good Quantity of Oars; and as they was brought
Ashore, Captain St. Lo his Coxswain came to me, and desired he might pick out a
Gang for his Masters Pinnace, Which I bid him Take, So he set his Men to choose
out the Oars, and went his way; About an hour or two after, one of Captain St.
Lo his Watermen came to me again, and told me his Coxswain had sent him to me
to change an Oar, it being broke, and belonged to the Gang they had just before
taken out, I bid him tell the Coxswain, that before I changed his Oar, I would
have a Warrant for the Oars, Pinnace, Sails, and other things which he had for
some time promised me to get; And that I knew 'twas his Negligence, and not the
Commissioner his Pleasure, that I had not a Warrant immediately, for such (...)
as I delivered to him. The Coxswain I may believe, made the most he could of my
Message to him, And the next time I saw Captain St. Lo he was angry with me,
and said he could not have any thing he wanted from the Storehouse, without
the Trouble of a Warrant, but yet the other Officers and my self had; I desired
him not to impute any such Fault to my Disrespect toward himself, for that I
never refused to deliver any thing to his Coxswain or Groom, till I saw they
took Stores out of the Storehouse, and never told him nor his Clerk any thing
of them. But when ever Captain St. Lo spoke to me of any thing that he thought
a Fault, either h^^ Passion or his Prejudice was so very prevalent, that he
took no notice of what I said, but expected I should obey his Arbitrary
Commands in all things; let their Consequences be never so fatal to my Country
or my self.

I am next to insert the Copy of another Complaint against me to the
Navy-Board, and to William Bridgeman Esquire. Secretary to the Admiralty, Dated
26th of June, 1696. With my Answer to the several Crimes charged on me therein,
viz.

The Complaint.
Last Night our Store-keeper brought three Cart Loads of old Timber to the
Dock, which had lain for some time in the Storehouse at Plymouth, and two
Loads of it being carried to his House for the Fire, as the third Load was
coming up I met with it, ordered him to lay it down in the Yard, that the
Master Ship-wright might Survey it, and Judge of its Quality; but
notwithstanding this, I no sooner turned my back, but it was carried away. The
next time I saw him, I asked his reason for doing it, he told me that it was
his Perquisite; and I believe there moght be a greater quantity than what I
saw, some of it I am sure, was fit to be used on his Majesty's Service for
Posts and the like; and if such Perquisites be allowed, I am sure it is a
Disservice to his Majesty, For the worst of it would have made good Fuel for
heating the Pitch-Kettle, and burning Plank, We being forced to buy for that
Service sometimes.

Once being at Plymouth, I met with a considerable quantity of the Kings Junck
at that place, into which after I had enquired, I was told it was issued out of
his Majesty's Stores to make Twice-laid Stuff, But it was without my knowledge;
And I believe if it had been met with, it had been a good Serizure. It is my
Belief and Opinion, that neither that nor Canvas ought to be issued out of the
Yard without my knowledge.

The Answer.
Captain St. Lo upon his meeting the third Turn of Wood, ordered the Carter to
call me to him; and being in the Yard with two or three of the Officers, when
the Carter came to tell me thereof, I quickly left them; and in going to wait
on Captain St. Lo, I met the Carter standing still by his Cart, and asked him
where the Commissioner was, he told me at my back Yard a looking upon the Wood;
then I ordered him to carry the third Turn thither that he might see it; Bue
when I came home, Captain St. Lo was gone, so I went instantly to seek him, and
found him at his own House with Captain Beaumont, Commander of the Mountague,
and Mr. Eastwood his own Clerk, I told Captain St. Lo, I desired to know his
Pleasure with me, Whereupon he was angry with me before them for taking the
Wood, and said it might serve for many Uses in the Yard, which Opinion I
endeavored to remove, but he laying his Commands upon me, for bringing all the
Wood back into the Yard, for the Master Ship-wright to Survey it, and (after
all my Persuasions) persisting therein, I parted from him with intention of
obeying them; But it being then half an hour past 7 a Clock, I found the Carter
was gone home; And the next Day was Fast Day, and no body Worked. These reasons
I acquainted Captain St. Lo with on the Fast Day, (several hours before he made
his Cmplaint) and that very Morning by 9 a Clock, the Master Ship-wright and
Clerk of the Survey came to my House to Survey the Wood, and their Report of it
to Captain St. Lo himself and me too was that they had Surveyed it according to
his Order, and that 'twas such Old rotten Wreck Wood, as it would not serve for
any use in the Yard, and that it was worth but three shillings of their Money,
and not above five shillings of any other bodies, it having lain so long in the
Water; Their Report of the Wood made me conclude, that I had not committed any
Fault at all; I desired Captain St. Lo over and over, not to ma^^ any Complaint
against me, and did tell him I confess chat I had been at a great Trouble, and
some Charge, in Removing all his Majesty's from Plymouth to the Dock, and
because the Wreck-Wood hnd lain 7 or 8 Years under the Stores, and was not
Charged on me in any of our Surveys, (it being none of the Kings) I further
said, that it did belong to me by Virtue of my Warrant, as a Perquisite for
Fuel only.

I did indeed, as the Service required, By Order and Warrants from the Master,
Attendant, and Clerk of the Survey only, Issue Canvas to make Sails, and Junck
to make twice laid Stuff, Pursuant to my Instructions from the Navy-Board,
which was carried out of the Yard from time to time to be wrought up, according
to the Practice of all the other Yards, and particuldrly Plymouth Yard, before
I went thither; But had Captain St. Lo given me any Directions for altering my
Methods in such Cases, or acquainted me with his Dislike thereof, I should have
Complied with them, or at least endervoured to have given him due satisfaction
therein.

I still believe that Captain St. Lo his constant Intermedling with me and my
Business on such Vicious Terms, was utterly inconsistent with the Justice and
Freedom of the present Government, Whose Laws, having (to my knowledge) never
Disobeyed, I doubt not, but (by the Justice of your Honorable House) they will
Entitle me to the Rights and Privileges of an English Man, Though they have
been Invaded, and taken away, by Captain St. Lo, and Mr. Bridgeman, which
Charge it behooves me to prove directly upon them both. For, that I may thereby
Discover to what ill Purposes, their Power, their Wit, and their Subtilty, have
been made Use of, in Carrying on their Persecution of me; and to make it
appear, that Captain St Lo had not taken an Antipathy against me alone; I shall
give a hint of his many Strange Complaints against the Other Yard-Officers,
during my time and since.

Upon the Faith of a Christian I affirm, that Captain St. Lo his several
Accusations against me, are Mere Inventions and Contrivances, only. I did Order
Three Turns of Old Wood to be Carried to my House for the Fire, But not in a
Surreptious manner, and he wronged me very much, in Suggesting any Disobedience
to his Command, of laying the third Lead of Wood down in the Yard, by ordering
it to be Carried to my House, when his Back was turned; For he had not then
seen me since his meeting with it coming up thither, neither did I know his
Pleasure therein, till all the Wood was really laid down at my House, (as my
Answer to this very Accusation does particularly Explain) It Is true indeed, I
did tell him that the Old Rotten Wreck Wood was my Perquisite, Which in his
Opinion and Mr. Bridgeman's, was a most unpardonable Fault, Nevertheless, if I
cannot sufficiently prove it to the Public, that my Claim was Just and Legal,
I Will publicly own my self a Fool (for their Satisfaction) and Thank Captain
St. Lo for his great Care and Pains, in giving me this pressing Occasion to
Publish my Folly; But to give some ground for my Presumption, that I may not be
in the Wrong, of all the Complaints that ever Captain St. Lo made against the
Dock-Officers under him, and pretended to make them out, he was never known
upon Examination to be in the Right: And further, surely the Inditing of this
Complaint was a Fancy more pleasing to him than ordinary, that he could stay at
home from Morning till Iwening, to Contrive me Trouble, And wilfully Neglect
the Serving Almighty God in Public, with Fasting and Prayer, in Disobedience
to the positive Order of the Day; As may partly be proved by a Proclamation of
their Excellencies the Lords Justices for a General Fast, Dated the 23d of May,
1696. However, that nothing may be wanting in me to do Captain St. Lo Right, I
must own I have been told, he was so Generous in the Postscript of his
Complaint against me to Mr. Bridgeman, as to leave the Matter wholly to his
Discretion, whether to take any Notice of it or not. No Gentleman hitherto,
would side with Captain St. Lo in his Erroneous Notions against me; but
purposely Directing this last Complaint of me to Mr. Bridgeman in particular,
he joined with him very readily in it, without knowing any thing of my Defense,
though altogether a Stranger to me; But his Remissness in Public Business, has
since Evidently appeared to my Country's Loss, (as may be seen in the Votes of
your Honorable House, Dated in 96 or 97. By whose timely Assistance, I was
immediately ordered to be Dismissed my Stock-keepers Employment, without the
Navy-Boards Concurrence, (who were my Masters) and on the 2d of July, 1696. he
sent his Friend Captain St. Lo a Letter, for no other Business but only to
advise him of (...) quick Success of his Complaint against me, which so
Elevated Captain St. Lo, that several of his Friends and Relations were
troubled at it, particularly Mr. John Addis, discoursed him in these words.
Sir, I am come from Plymouth, and if you was but there, to hear how the
Government cry out upon you, for what you have done to Mr. Gaselee, you would
be ashamed of your self. Captain St Lo Answered, I do not care what any body
says of me, for I am Resolved not to see the King Cheated by the Officers of
the Navy, (...) my self Disrespected. Then Mr. Addis told him, if you continue
this Temper Sir, People will be afraid to speak to you in a little time, And,
that no one bore him a greater Respect than my self; withal, I am much
concerred that your Reputation should suffer in Changeing Mr. Gaselee with such
odd Accusations as you did; Therefore I desire you Sir, by all Means,
immediately to acquaint: Mr. Bridgeman, that you did not th^nk to have Mr.
Gaselee turned off his Employment upon your Complaint, but only Reprimanded;
And to desire of Mr. Bridgeman, that Mr. Gaselee might be Restored to it again:
These Arguments of Mr. Addis's so touched Captain St Lo. that he thereupon came
to himself, and wrote to Mr. Bridgeman, just as Mr. Addis had Dictated to him.
But that Letter Mr. Bridgeman never answered, Whose Remarkable Silence, and
Former Forwardness (to do me wrong) moved Captain St. Lo to Write several
Letters afterward in my Favor, both to the said Mr. Bridgeman, and the
Navy-Board. And now I should be very Ungrateful, if I did not Acknowledge that
the Navy-Board, Sir Edward Gregory, and Captain Greenhill (the Commissioners of
his Majesty's Yards for Chatham and Portsmouth) have since done me very many
kindnesses; But for Mr. Bridgeman, his unalterable Prejudice against me, has
cunningly caused me much more Mischief, than all my Friends have been able to
do me Good.

I have mentioned all the Favors that ever Captain St. Lo conferred upon me,
and they indeed (notwithstanding his repeated Injuries to me, and the very
great Scandals Occasioned me by them) would still have required my heartiest
Acknowledgments, had he not Retracted them in a very short time; Which is
another Point ought to be Demonstrated. Captain St. Lo his Writing thus for me
and against me, did consequently cause some Reflections upon me. And to Salve
them, 'twas expected, I should confess my self Guilty of some Faults, (which
God knows) I never thought of. An Expedient I could not in Conscience yield to,
Wherefore I did not only undergo the Grievous Effects of his further
Displeasure, but was industriously Characterized by him to my Superiors, for
an obstinate Fool, As if his Taking away my Livelihood, had been too small a
Punishment for me, and his single Evidence of my want of Wit, could justify
him in acting unjustly by me. And after in his taking away of my Good Name too,
Whereas others have since taken me for a Good Natured Fool. Moreover, to
aggravate my Misfortune, I continued under Captain St Lo his Command 3 Months
after I was ordered to be Dismissed my Employment, to hear my self daily
Charged with False, and Imaginary Faults, out of a Politic Design, to
Countenance Captain St. Lo his Artificial Complaint against me to Mr.
Bridgeman, and their Underhand Transactions concerning it. I Will cite but
another Instance, to prove how unadvisedly Captain St. Lo acted in his Station
(with Respect to the Publick's Interest) wherein I was particularly Concerned,
and beg Pardon for my Tediousness. About the latter end of July, 1696. Captain
St. Lo made a Contract with Mr. John Neele a Merchant of Plymouth, to serve a
quantity of Masts into the Kings Stores there; and before the Contract was
Entered, or any Officer saw it, he signified his Anger at a distance, For our
not having yet been at Plymouth to receive those Masts, and the Clark of the
Survey came to my Office to acquaint me therewith; presently after I met
Captain St. Lo, and told him I did not understand his Pleasure about Receiving
the Masts on Mr. Neale 's his Contract at Plymouth, for all the Kings Stores
were removed from thence; Whereupon Captain St. Lo pulled off his Hat very low
to me, and bare-headed in the open Yard before Captain Bridge, and Boat-swain
Brown told me, what must he come and ask leave how he should make a Contract,
I answered him, No Sir, and that I thought an Officer might ask him a Question,
relating to the Duty of his Employment, and the Kings Interest, without any
Offense; he did me follow the Contract, and that was all the Satisfaction I
could get of him.

In a word, to Sum up the Premises, I not only endeavored all I could for
fourteen Months together, to carry on my Business to Captain St. Lo his
Satisfaction, (without Betraying my Trust, or Divulging his Errors) but on all
Occasions, gave him the Respect that was due to a Superior Officer; Yet after
my going through a constant Fatigue of Business at the Admiralty Office, at
Plymouth, and at the New Dock-Yard from the 18th of March, 1688. the 1st of
October, 1696. (besides serving above 8 years and a half in thr Navy as a Clerk
in Deptford Yard) I palpably lost my Store-keepers Employment most
Ignominously, to Gratify the said Captain St. Lo his Temper, and Mr.
Bridgeman's Interest; Who, (that they might bring over some Great Persons to a
real Belief, of my being no more than deservedly punished) have been my most
Inveterate Enemies ever since I came away from Plymouth, and will not in the
least pity my Case. But for my Comfort, till the former of those two Gentlemen
can prove, Mr. Elias Wasse, Mr. Richard Lea, Mr. Robert Waters, Mr. John
Addis, and Mr. Tempell Holmes, to be Notorious Knaves, and me an Obstinate
Fool, as well as Represent Us so; I shall have some reason humbly to hope, that
the Honorable the Representatives of our Country, will not only believe them
to be very honest Men, but me also a Persevering Christian. And to prove
Captain St. Lo his singular Hand at drawing up of Complainsts against others
besides me, the several Originals of those beforementioned, and a great many
more, (not so proper for me to insist upon) may beseen at the Admiralty
Officenear Whitehall, or at the Navy-Office in Crutched Friars, London.

Aboard his Majesty's Ship the Warspight in Chatham Harbor, this 7th of
January, 16^8. Robert Gaselee.


