A Description of the Unregenerate and the truly Christian Temper or State;

IN A SERMON PREACHED before the University of Cambridge, ON COMMENCEMENT
SUNDAY In the Forenoon, June 30. 1700.

By JOHN GASKARTH D. D. Sometimes Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, now Vicar of
Alhallows Barking, London.

(...). Greg. Nyss. Orat. Catechet. 40.

(...). Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 3. c. 12.

(...). Heb. 12.14.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the UNIVERSITY PRESS, for Edmund Jeffery, Bookseller in
Cambridge, 1700.

Ephesians. II. 1. And you has he quickened who were dead in in trespasses, and
sins.


THE Apostle applies this as a general Doctrine not only to the Gentiles, but
even to the best of those Educated under the Mosaic Discipline, himself, and
his other Fellow-Apostles (ver. 3.) which he likewise declares, Tit. 3.3. The
word Quickened here is not in the original Greek, but the parallel place ( Col.
2.13.) plainly proves that our Author had it now in his mind likewise, and that
it is well supplied by our Translators. Indeed we find it expressly set down
nearer hand, even in a continued Sentence with the Text, and as it were a
Repetition of it, ver. 5. So that we may be sure of our English rendering of
these words. And as on the one part they belong to all, whether in a mere State
of Nature, or under the Legal Dispensation, or those that rest in a formal
profession of the Gospel only, not being enlivened by the Grace and Spirit that
Christ purchased; or as they denote on the other that smaller number of true
Christians, who from a sinful course of Life according to the corrupt desires
of Flesh, are recovered by the Spirit of holiness (Romans 1.4.) the great
Life-giving Gospel-principle into a Virtuous Demeanor, the proper Exercises of
our reasonable kind, Justice, Godliness, Temperance, Humility, in their most
exalted Christian degree, as the Text has this Latitude, or Comprehension in it.

I shall first explain both these Phrases, Dead in sins, and enlivened, or
quickened, which divide the two Worlds of Mankind, the Ungodly, and the
Righteous; pretenders only, and true Believers; and then proceed on proper
Heads of discourse from them.

First then, dead in sins, or through their effect, cannot here refer to this
Animal Life, though Death often in this sense, a shorter period of this
Animal-Life, than our natural Frame would otherwise arrive at, is the
consequence of a course of Sin; but dead in this place must have another
relation to a higher Life and Nature in us, which Sin destroys. And that is
indeed a Spiritual Sensation, a just Perception, and relish of the Soul as to
its proper Objects, while it exercises its Faculties more separately from Body,
that portion of Matter with which it is vitally conjoined, not in pursuance of
sensual Propensions, or under the influence of these, but retaining its
Liberty, or Dominion over them, with the true Apprehensions at first given it,
and by this means choosing, or determining it self to right Moral Instances, it
becomes more capable of the displays of Grace, and is more freely acted by
them. This is the true Life of Man; when his Reasonable part lives in him, he
judges, and tastes by his Mind alone and his best Faculties, and then enjoys the
plentiful effusions and beams of the Spirit; and so in His Light sees Light,
that is, knows things with the fullest evidence, even in the demonstration of
this blessed Agent, as I may so speak. This true Life is destroyed by Sin, or
Men are dead to it through the habits thereof, while the Mind thus descends from
its pure Acts, and forms its Judgments only with regard to the Ideas of Sense,
and in confusion with them; and so must also be deprived of the freer
influences of Divine Grace by that means.

Now Quickened is, when from this sunk, this liveless State, by a true
Repentance, and through the Communications of the holy Spirit, (the privilege of
Repentance, and strength to perform it, being both purchased for us by the
meritorious Sacrifice of Christ) quickened is, when from this sunk, this
liveless State we are thus restored to an uncaptivated use of our Minds, the
true Apprehensions, the right Judgments belonging to them; and have the Rays of
Grace more freely acting our Minds or Spirits, to deliver them more from the
straitness of Sense, enlarge their Capacities beyond themselves, and carry them
to several advances of Knowledge in the way of Godliness, that could be no
proper Acquirements of theirs, or result from them however honestly prepared
and exercised. Thus we attain the utmost advantages of reasonable Creatures, or
become Christians indeed.

Let us now see how these two Principles, which define the Unregenerate, and
the Regenerate State, Dead in sin, and dead to sin, so frequent Phrases in the
New Testament, how each of these will act, or operate in the several
Obligations Mankind are under, with respect to themselves, the other
individuals of Humane Nature their Brethren, and God; as likewise take notice
of the Fates, and Consequences that attend these both.

And this lower Principle, when it determines, or governs the Man, only prompts
to the pleasures of Sense, as corrupt Nature has the strongest Bias, or stands
most inclined in several Persons. Some it drives on to the grossest
Satisfactions, an eager pursuance of the Affections of Flesh, Lusts properly so
called, That most war against the Soul, most hinder its native Aspirings, and
Powers, and even degrade it from the eminency of its Nature, its Spiritual
Kind, that it can employ none of its Faculties on its proper Objects, not even
on the eternal Being himself, whose Image it is, and in Communion with whom its
truest, its chiefest felicity consists; but only use them with respect to the
Body, wherein it is so immersed, to invent some new sensual Entertainments, or
more enjoy the experienced Instances of this Brutish sort, or Apologize for
them. And this the Heathen World, who had the Rules of Morality of their own
making, not being blessed with Revelation, an inspired Law, true Reason
declared, and enacted by God, affords us a dismal example of, even in some who
were of the most refined Thoughts, the most raised Philosophy among them. And
'twould be well, if many enjoying the advantages of the Gospel, in an utter
rejection of these advantages, and despite of the Spirit of Grace too, that
more largely accompanies this Dispensation, did not still both pursue and
defend, or maintain such wicked Courses.

And the reason of these Men is not only thus warped to patronize Sin, and
employ it self in Fruitless searches of still some new sensual Delights, the
lawful and allowed Instances whereof, that are without Remorses also, ever
affording the greatest; I say the reason of these Men is not only thus warped,
but in a great measure defaced, and lost, while they so far consent, give
themselves up to Carnal Relishes, confused Satisfactions arising from Body, as
both to destroy those Relishes, or Satisfactions through too vehement Indulgence
of them, and even dispatch the Animal too; which one may believe, none would
do, not considering an after State, destroy the thing they would obtain, and
themselves likewise, unless they were forsaken of Reason before.

Others this sensual Principle carries to as sensual an Effect, fordid
Covetousness of this Earthly Mammon, either with regard to Carnal Enjoyments,
that through the value this has in a Degenerate World, and in its procurement,
they may drink more deeply of these Enjoyments; or perhaps on the account of
still a more fordid, more unreasonable love of this Mammon it self, that they
may obtain great stores thereof, while they are not able to answer, or satisfy
any of the uses to which it serves; or that they may Infidelly rely upon it for
all their Supplies, without having recourse to the invisible Hand, and
Distributions of Providence, which requires more thought, more free abstracted
exercise of Mind than such Persons are capable of; which Love and Dependence so
unduly placed constitutes Idolatry in its formal Notion ( Col. 3.5.) And when
this Covetousness, and, what always attends it, Coffeehouse with his present
share, influences the Man, how will it hurry him to all the Instances of
Injustice, and Injury with whom his Intercourse, or Concerns are! For as to his
Neighbor, this has no regard to his Advantages, no not even to the necessary
Demands of his Nature, but still incites to some new Acquests, to pursue
private Interests, his Pleasures or his Profits with the utmost Damages that
can befall other People. This is the nature of Self-Love that is founded in
Sense, which looks no farther than it feels, whether its Pleasures, or its
Pains; nor can Dictate in any larger compass, than to purchase the one, and
redress, or prevent the other. And this narrow Self-Love determined to Body,
was that which the Heathens built their whole Structure both of Politics and
Morals upon; their own Advantages in this respect, a better Provision for this
Animal Life, and that with regard to particular Persons, was the Ground of all
their Rules, and Laws. Justice indeed had a name among them in their several
Languages, and was prescribed by them, but as it were on the account of their
great ones only, to fence these from Injuries, not for the Common Security, or
Benefit of Mankind.

To consider these Heathens in their sundry Commonwealths, they grasped into
their possession whatever they could hold without Reprisals upon them, and then
justified themselves by that true pretense, if rightly applied, and when it is
so, always includes a Reward for others, the public good; but this they
confined to their particular Societies, as if the rest of the World had been
nothing to them, no parts of the great Community of Men. The Stronger ever took
their Opportunity of the Weaker to pillage and spoil them of what they could;
these were always Robbers as far as their rapacious Hands could reach, being
like Beasts of Prey; as the same Brute Nature prevailed in both. No Chancery
lay between Opulent States, and their never so Innocent less Potent Neighbors,
witness the Romans, who, though the most Civilized of the Heathen Nations, yet
could never manage their excessive Greatness with a due notion and sense of
Right. They extended their vast Spread-Eagles-wings still where they saw they
could probably Conquer, and gave the Style of Justice to all their violent and
usurping Attempts; as Lactantius somewhere remarks. And as the States behaved
themselves in their public Actings, so we may be sure not only the great Ones,
but even all others within those Provinces practiced likewise as far as they
were able, using no juster Methods severally, than the public Example was, or
what the ruling Parties prescribed. Thus the Mind, or the Man, while immersed
in Body, and operating under the Instincts of Sense will behave himself as to
his Brethren, which I wish could not be observed in Countries professing the
holy Institution and Laws of Christ, or where our own Pilgrimage is.

And with respect to God, and the several Duties that every Perfection, or
Attribute of His Challenges from us, where the Mind acts according to the
Apprehensions that are excited in it from its Commerce with Body, and with that
impairment of its own Faculties that necessarily belongs to that manner of its
acting, or where the sensual Principle prevails, the Man can exert none of
these bounden Obligations upon him, he can neither contemplate his all-perfect
Nature, nor pray to him, nor trust in him, nor acquiesce under his Portion, or
Allotments from him, as he ought to do.

Contemplation and Prayer require our deepest, our intensest Thoughts, an
Abstraction from all the Suggestions of Body; we must have no sensible Ideas
before us, when we address, or think of God; we must then free our selves of
all Similitude, have no resemblances in our Minds, which if we should
entertian, besides the Disturbance it would offer to our present Exercise,
would be downright Idolatry, while we advance even the most inactive senseless
Nature, namely, Matter, all Similitude being in such, into the place of God, or
at least make it a Compound with him, as some of the old Heathen did. ( Tull.
de N. D. L. 2.26.)

Our Prayers must be an inward Act, the employment of our Spirits recollecting
themselves from all the World about us: and as they must thus be the Exercise
of our better parts, so they must be especially determined with relation to
these on Heavenly things. And it must be also the severest Meditation of a
purified Soul by habits of Virtue, and so capable of attaining the right
Perceptions belonging to it, while not perverted, or captivated by Sense, that
can furnish out the Arguments of a true Faith, and so lay the ground of our
Reliance on God, or Resignation to him among the many difficulties of this Life.

But the sensual Principle, a Mind exerting it self under the influence of Body
can never be able to reach these Acts it will ever petition, if it pray at all,
and with an irregular vehemence too, wrong matter, very prejudicial to our true
Good, such as will expose us to manifold hazards of our Spiritual State, viz. a
great abundance of these Worldly Enjoyments, and at the best, when rightly
fixed, 'twill be carried off by desultory Phansies, wandering Affections, such
necessarily being those, that mainly depend on a sensual Principle more warmly
excited, a material Nature in continual Flux, that, where it is so concerned, so
much a cause, cannot be the ground of a steady Thought; and 'twill always be
full of Diffidence and Doubt, as it sees no farther than present things, if it
admit at all of these great Duties, Faith in its just extent, or Prayer, and
the Object of them; but where it is in its proper predominancy, it will
certainly beget, a Renunciation of both. This is the dark Cave of Atheism, and
of all desponding, despairing Thoughts, viz. the sensual Nature in its
prevailing Habit, when the Mind forms its Apprehensions thence, which must
needs then have very short Prospects of things, whatever its pure Capacities
are, and very perverted Notions of them, see them much otherwise than they are
in themselves, while it not only beholds them through such a thick Atmosphere,
but as it were in an Animal Mixture and Confusion therewith. For according to
the Ascendency this has over the Man, as it is the exalted Principle of his
Life, he discerns more obscurely, or nothing at all of the great universal
Spirit, God, his comprehensive Providence as to every event, especially
concerning any of his best, his reasonable Creatures; nor of a State of
Immortality after this present Period is ended; he cannot look above the Sphere
of Matter, what affects his Senses, and so denies all spiritual Subsistences, a
God with his several Administrations, and Acts; as the perpetuity of particular
Beings likewise, whose Contexture he concludes will at last be dissolved, and
they returned into their common Nature, a first Matter, whence all things
happily sprung by chance, being the only eternal Subject he can conceive; thus
the Stoics from such a kind of Philosophy argued even with respect to Souls
themselves. Tull. Tusc. Q. L. 1.63. M. Ant. L. 6.24. Lips. Phys. Stoic. Lib. 3.
Diss. 11.
They maintained these to be capable of Dissolution, and that they should be
actually dissolved in some time; the more immersed in this Animal State, or the
worst sort to continue less space after Death; and even the most Virtuous, (who
had exemplified the highest Morals, most lived up to their Reason, most
resisted their lower Appetites, or Propensions of Flesh) not to surmount their
fatal Period, the Conflagration of the World, but then to fall back into the
friendly, and congenial Elements, as one speaks, or as another the greatest of
that Sect, Marcus the Emperor, into the seminal Forms, or be dispersed into
Atoms; whence we may observe their notion of Souls, as to their substance, that
they thought them material or only more refined Body.

And therefore this Person must only be determined to present Satisfactions, to
gratify Sense in all its Appetites, and his main Designs be to compass these
without any regard either to the Benefits, or Rights of his Brethren, unless as
he stands in Society with them, these comport with his own. This is the (...),
the wisdom of the Flesh, that I am afraid still so governs even the new World
of the Messiah in defiance of all that he has done; which the Apostle
immediately styles Enmity against God, where he mentions it, that can never be
subject to his Laws, but ever vehemently resists him, and urges a contrary
behavior to him. It Is the Spirit of the World still reigning in it, or of the
natural Man that receives not the things of the Spirit of God, nor can know or
perceive them, because they are spiritually discerned. Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 2.14.

I do not deny but that there may be great fervours of Devotion, rapturous
Affections even truly placed on their Heavenly Father, fervent Charity toward
their Brethren, strong pangs of Remorse for any inordinacies of carnal
Appetite, which will produce as vehement Purposes or Resolutions against them;
I do not deny, nay, I doubt not but all these may be in Persons acted by the
sensual or lower Life, and as this is a more impetuous Principle, much more in
them at certain times, than in the truly Religious. But then these not being of
an uniform Tenor, but some transient Ardours that quickly cool, not bringing
forth a constant Duty, a Gospel Holiness in its several respects, but being
often interrupted by some greater Misdemeanors, neglects again of these
bounden Offices, even where they most indispensably relate to God, a Heart
mainly set, as may be well observed, toward the things of this Earth, one may
be fully convinced that these gleams of Piety are only Mechanical, proceeding
from a certain temper of Body, and not from a rightly disposed Spirit, a
Christian habit, or frame of Mind.

Let us now consider the Fates and Consequences of this depraved Estate. And
first, what restless Turmoils must this sensual Principle, that can never be
satisfied when it governs the Man without any Laws, or Restrains upon it; and
what outward Afflictions, what Enmities and Contests with other People, whom it
will ever be invading in some respect, will it expose him to? This is evident,
and obvious to all: unbridl'd Lusts, sensual Affections, or Desires let loose,
are those that first fight within us, cause intestine Wars, and Disturbances at
home, and then render us obnoxious to all the Distresses that can befall us from
abroad, every one being as ready in this common Circumstance, this sunk habit,
to revenge himself, as any else can be to attempt an Injustice or Fraud upon
him; so that this will found perpetual Mischiefs continually bandied from one
another: ( Genesis 16.12.) Not to mention the Bodily Diseases, the Pains and
Maladies, as it were in the foreign subject to ones reasonable part, ones true
self, that attend such courses: As neither to insist on the impairments of
Understanding, the blindness and ignorance, and wrong Sentiments brought into
it by this means, when one must walk in the dark, not having the satisfaction
of a right Notion, and rule of Duty, a steady Principle to live upon; this
great advantage, if not belonging to a rational Creature, all Mankind, yet
which certainly is the privilege of those who are blessed with the Oracles of
God, being lost through the delusions of customary sin, vices long indulged, or
persever'd in. Whence the Judgment is depraved, the true sense of the turpitude
of Sin wholely taken away, and that other great Faculty bestowed on Man, his
free Determination, the liberty of his Will, so mightily strengthened by the
Grace of the Gospel toward the better part, a holy Conversation, abolished
likewise; so that such a Person must be altogether managed by his Appetites and
Passions, as those drive him on, and he still voluntarily undergo the worst
sort of Slavery in the whole World, though he has experienced the Mischiefs of it
a thousand times; I say, not to insist on these real Miseries, nor to bring
into the account the Pangs of Conscience, that are nearer Sufferings, not so
remote to us as our Bodies, in the center of Perception, namely the Reproaches
and Upbraidings of his Mind for his Brutish Behavior, so utterly disagreeing
to the Dictates or Verdicts of Reason, which Upbraidings must needs be the
greatest natural Torment, besides what may be inflicted, in a thinking Nature,
when it cannot endure its own censure of its Ways or Actions, and so as often
as it reflects on them must ever accuse and corrode it self. I say, not to
mention these pangs of Conscience, that will then certainly even here pursue
Men, when the Appetites are sometimes surfeited; Such contrary Tortures are in
the breasts of Sinners, and so by that means never intermitting Pains there of
one sort or other.

Nor can such a Person have any comforts flowing from the Deity, whatsoever his
sufferings may at any time be, who has such dark Apprehensions thereof, no
grounds of a sure Faith in God, so as to enjoy the mighty supports that even
the notion of an infinite Being of such Moral Perfections affords Mankind; and
who is also under such opposite Habits, so quite contrarily disposed to him,
that he can no ways partake of him in his blisful Emanations, that so freely
descend on every Individual of the reasonable World, where they are not
repulsed, or where a right temper and frame of Spirit can receive them. These
are the Miseries that accompany an Unregenerate State (if they were not rather
to be felt, than described) even in this World.

But the dismal Scene commences after; here are some intervals of a pleasurable
Entertainment, such as the sensual Faculties afford, and compensate Men withal
in this state, where their alluring Objects are, and they can exert their
proper Acts, though these Pleasures be of an inferior kind, below the great
Enjoyments belonging to Men, and engage such Fatigues in the purchase of them,
and ever defeat our Promises from them, and are so short lived at the best. But
when we come into the spiritual World, where the Objects are of a refined
Nature, and require such Faculties, and tastes in us, the sensitive Scene being
over and finished with its whole delights, we must then be capable of enjoying
God, and living upon him in the pure Exercises that refer to him, or else we
must needs be miserable for ever. But it must be by a habit of rectified Reason
through the privileges of the Gospel, a spiritual Sensation advanced in our Minds
by a due Observance of all the parts of a Christian Virtue, that these, viz.
our Minds can be able to exert their own Powers, and follow the Tendences that
are born in them, perceive, and relish abstractedly and freely from the
infection of Body; it is this alone that can render us qualified, and truly
prepare us for that great Employment, our utmost felicity of Conversing with
God, and his dwelling in us, or we in him. 1 John 3.24.4.12, 13. But this
Principle is dead in profligate Sinners, the contrary temper, a sensual Habit,
not slain in the opportunity allowed for that purpose, possessing their Souls;
and therefore unless this can be mortified, and the other revived in our after
Mansions, which the Scriptures afford us no hopes of, they being only alive to
the things of sense and this World, as they went off hence, must ever be
coveting quite unattainable Satisfactions there, with bitter Resentments, eager
Remorses among vain Desires, and shall be able to partake of no blisful
Entertainments, even when they are in the proper Region, where these chiefly
are.

This is the spiritual Death, or Death of Sin, when the first Propension of the
Soul toward God is diverted, and lost through Foreign Desires promoted in it
from its Commerce with this gross Body, its habitual pursuance of the Delights
of Sense; and its Communion intercepted with that only true beatifying Object,
that it cannot employ it self upon him in a pure Contemplation of his boundless
Attributes, which is one part of the great Happiness of Intelligent Creatures,
nor admit his gracious Influences into it: but standing quite in another
Inclination to a sensual State now dismissed, and gone, that only had its
Reason for our Probation a little while, it will ever be hankering after these
poor Vanities, like the Israelites when they were removed from Egypt, except
(as was intimated before) its present habit can be changed even here in this
second Life, which is a Dependence altogether groundless, nay, which has the
greatest Argument against it, when People have neglected the accepted Time, the
Day of Salvation graciously offered them; or except God in the effect of his
infinite Goodness would render us happy, as it were forcibly without our
selves, which is impossible, the nature of Happiness being such, that it must
ever proceed from a voluntary Spring, and free Actions in a reasonable Being;
though God declaring even his infinite Goodness in other particulars, all with
relation to this World, and our attainment of Holiness, here, we may be well
satisfied that such a forcible change of Men's. Tempers, if it could be, would
be no proper Instance of his goodness, and that no Reserves thereof are to be
expected afterward. This is the sad dismal State with the Infelicities that
attend Mankind in both Worlds without the Benefits of a Redeemer and being Born
again, or Renewed in the Spirit of their Minds through him.

What positive Punishment, and to what degree may be poured forth on such
Rebels to their Maker, nay, who have not only contemned his Authority, but
insulted his Mercy in Christ Jesus, trodden under foot the Son of God, and the
Ransom he purchased with his own Blood, we cannot define: however we may be
certain from the Expressions of Scripture, whether literally taken, or to
denote Sufferings by Metaphorical Language, that these shall be very grievous
ones, though, if they should be our own Portion, we must confess such Offenders
deserve.

Let us now see how our Redeemer has delivered us out of this State, and what
we must contribute toward our complete, our entire Deliverance from our
selves; as likewise how the Redeemed, viz. true Christians will behave
themselves, and what their Happiness redounding thence must be.

And as to the Benefits we partake of from Christ, we are fully assured that he
Mediated for us (who were in a State of Enmity with God) by his own Blood,
offered himself a Propitiation, and Sacrifice on our behalf; the Dignity of
whose Person, he being as far exalted above all the Orders or Degrees of
Angels, as the Creator of them is, and the voluntariness of the Oblation
entering into the Atonement, and adding an infinite Merit to it, he not only
procured us the Favor of God, Remission our Pardon of all our Offenses on the
only possible Term of our Happiness, a true Repentance, but likewise obtained
such Communications of the Spirit to be even a preventing Influence, and
conferred upon us without any Preparedness in our Tempers for them, (as the
first Graces are so conferred according to the manifold Testimonies of
Scripture ( Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.3, 4. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 3.5. John 15.16.) or else
we could never be partakers of them in our fallen State. And we may even
demonstrate these from Experience: we often find such workings in our Minds, as
could not probably proceed from them in the use of their own Faculties; as
Checks of Conscience then pursuing us, while we are just about engaging in any
unwarrantable Act, and the Animal Affections being afloat overcome
Consideration, and will not admit of any sober Thought; as likewise immediate
Instantaneous Enlightnings, sudden Admonitions cast into us concerning some
important Duty, or Behavior, whereas the progress of Reason is in a Chain of
Things by Deductions, or Inferences, and the Lessons it teaches in the just and
due Exercise of it self, not as it were a flash in our Minds; as also Thoughts
often long detained, or continued on our Spirits, and pressed upon them, these
still pursuing us with great Importunity toward some Instance of Virtue, or to
heighten our Remorse for some ill Behavior: when as our Minds so beset with
the Affections of Sense, are roving and inconstant, and especially not apt to
fix on a Pious Meditation, and least of all on such as causes Trouble to them;
these so haunting our Souls, and overcoming all the Pastimes of the World to
remove them, nay, sometimes mastering our utmost Contrivance, the whole command
we have of our Wills against them, and at last obtaining their happy Effect.
These with the other particulars at least must be thankfully acknowledged to
the loving Spirit of God preventing us, and as Convictions thereof. And this
blessed Spirit with all his saving Gifts or Influences is the Procurement of
our holy Redeemer, who by his so highly Meritorious Sufferings, besides the
Pardon of our Trespasses on the only true Term thereof, ( John 7.38. Tit. 3.6.)
obtained such liberal Measures of Grace on our account to attend our smallest
Endeavors with them, nay, even excite these first of all, as, if we fail not,
our Compliance with those Heavenly Succors will rescue us from the Power of
our past Offenses, secure our Christian Behavior or Virtues against every
Temptation that shall at any time be permitted to befall us, and while we duly
peruse the written Revelation vouchsafed to us, replenish our Minds with all
Sacred Knowledge, influential on Godliness, every necessary Article of a Saving
Faith.

We have these Advantages, this common Treasure through our Lord's Mediation for
all Mankind, as it were extraneous or without our selves, but which may be
brought into the Faculties of our Souls, and rendered an inward might of theirs,
if we please. The Graces of the Spirit, if we hinder not their force, will
enable us for the highest Exercises of Piety; every inveterate Appetite of our
Natures, all the Assaults of Sin upon us must submit to him, being allowed to
possess our Minds, and display his infinite Efficacy in them, that can only be
resisted by our selves, or the obstinacy of our Wills against him. God will
exhibit the same invincible Strength in us, and along with us for Moral
Purposes, that he wrought in Christ after a Physical manner, when he raised him
from the Dead. ( Ephesians. 1.19, 20.)

Hence then being thus thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, we must be sure
to reduce these Heavenly Virtues or Powers into Act, Crucify the whole Body of
Sin, the old Man after the Image of the disobedient Adam with the Affections
and Lusts, ( Gal. 5.24.) so that we pronounce not of our Satisfactions, nor
establish our Notions and Estimate of Things through the Instigations of these,
or with respect to them: we must through these gracious supplies afforded us,
that are only effectual in our Endeavors with them, repress and keep under the
Appetites of Body, rescue our Minds from the most unnatural subjection to them,
that they may be able to exert themselves freely, possess a clear Reason
retrieved, and set at liberty from sensual Byasses, which so being a right
Conduct of Life, and discerning things truly, as far as its natural Sphere
reaches, will easily submit to the farther Enlightnings of Divine Grace, that
always both prevents us, contributes to the forming of such a just Habit of
intelligent Creatures, and then more plentifully comes in with it.

Now this true Christian Principle, (our reasonable Natures, or Faculties
recovered into their free Estate, and then attended with more liberal, or less
interrupted Influences of Grace) where it informs, or directs the Man; in
respect of himself, it prompts to the strictest Temperance, or Purity, even
with regard to the inmost Propensions, or Motions of the Heart, that these ever
be repressed, where they are enormous, and being brought into Act would be a
Transgression of the Gospel-Law: It inspires a Man with the truest Thoughts,
both of the Entertainments or Delights of Sense, and those relating to Mind,
that the one are mere Brutal Instances (if some kinds of Intemperance be not
worse than those, without any Example in inferior Creatures) quite unbecoming
a reasonable Being; and that when the Soul once consents to such, or entertains
it self with polluted Phansies, (the Resolution of this our thinking Part one
way or other, being that which determines the quality of our Actions) the
Trespass is over in a right account, there laying no difference between our
allowing the luscious and unlawful relishes of Sense within our selves, and the
acting there of, but the Contagion of the Fact, or the Injury reflecting and
redounding on others in the latter case; and 'twill suggest to us, that the use
of our upper Natures, as independently as we can of their gross Companions, the
pure and abstracted Exercises of our Spirits on their right Objects, being our
suitable Acts, or proper to our kind, must constitute all our unallay'd
Pleasures, our true Delights.

And with respect to our Brethren, who partake with us in the same nature, it
will incite an equal regard, the same common Offices, where opportunity is
afforded, to all of these, that it would insist on in the nearest Interest, or
Instance of Self. It helps a Man, as it delivers him from the confinements of
Sense, to a true notion of the Grounds, and Reasons of a general Beneficence,
or undistinguished Advantage where he is capable thereof, as well to others as
his own Soul; not only that every Person stands in the same Prerogatives both
with regard to the parts he consists of, and the Gospel-Promises, or the
Heavenly Bounties he may enjoy, if he pleases, (so that according to an
equitable Verdict no Preference lays) but because the Benefits we confer on
others are more, so on our own account, reflect larger and better Advantages to
our selves: when we supply the wants of any in any respect, there not only
springs up a great satisfaction in our own Breasts, the Results of Love, the
sweet, the most delightful Passion of Joy, as we have defeated the Afflictions
of our Brethren in some measure, at least afforded them a present Relief, if
not mended their case for afterward, which must needs communicate the same
comfort, wherever the true Christian Temper and Sympathy is; not to reckon the
Pleasure that so belongs to beneficent Persons, of their being in the favor,
as they may well suppose, and better regard of all People, which gives them the
confidence of their own Kind, that they can freely address any of them, and
affords all the benefits of Converse and Society, that Men are so made for,
that is so necessary in Humane Life, with one another. Or if because of their
other Virtues, ( all which are linked in a Chain together, so that one cannot
really and in truth be without the rest) the Reproofs these are in a wicked
World, they be disappointed of the due Treatment they might reasonably expect,
and meet only with Insults instead thereof, 'twill more than support them, that
they have done their part, been Friendly and Bountiful as they were able, and
not deserved such usage from any; I say, not only these Advantages attend
Beneficence, where Men are so loosned from Self, and the World, as to be able
to procure them, and be Possessors of them; but one far greater is still
behind, our Minds are improved, and gradually carried on by the proper Acts of
this great Gospel-Affection of Charity, to farther Seize of the Habit
thereof, and so still can admit of freer Communications of God's good Spirit,
or Grace into them, which if they can admit, be sure they shall enjoy. These
Advantages questionless in all respects the first Christians experienced, who
so bravely surmounted the intanglements of Property, (the great Bane of most
Virtues among Christians) and resigned it up among all their Brethren, equally
distributing, or bequeathing their Estates, as every one had need, more to
others than they left for their own share, if those needed more.

This Christian Principle moves the Man upon the generous grounds of Value, or
Esteem of his own Kind, and Friendship toward it, and as its Instances are
repeated, continually promotes that happy Temper in him, as free from all
Suspicions, as private Designs. As to the behavior of Heathens toward their
Brethren, or whose Actions proceed not on the Gospel-doctrines, such a
Principle in their Soul, all their Politics, and Morals in this respect are
influenced from a Jealousy of Humane Nature, to fence as well as they can
against Insults and Injuries, and offer less Hardships to other People on this
alone slavish score, that they return not greater, or retaliate upon them. Good
Humor and Benignity toward their Creator's and their own Image, which acts
the Christian, is no Motive with them. This is the Spirit of the Leviathan, and
other Materialists, as I may so call them, of the Epicurean Herd, who have writ
of Governments, and put their Systems of Ethics upon us, that have their
Foundations in Sense only, viz. Reason hindered as to its true prospects, and
warped by it.

And as to the Duties respecting God, the Man thus retrieved into the freedom
of his Reason from its Servitude to Sense, and thus capable of the Influences
of the Spirit of Grace, and thus enlivened or quickn'd thereby, he can easily
bafle all the attacks of Atheism, carry his Faith and Assurance above the
Region of Matter, believe an eternal Omnipresent Spirit no ways liable to
Bodily Eyes, and other Immortal Spirits likewise created by him, that can only
be the subjects of Reason and Thought, one whereof he knows is lodged, or
confined within his feeble outside, his Tabernacle of Clay, and performs all
the intelligent Acts there.

Discerning their reasonableness, the relation they bear to the Nature of Man,
he will readily observe every Rule of the Gospel, the strictest Precepts of
Righteousness and Virtue, and having purified his Mind by that means, brought
down the stubborn Principle of Flesh, the Seat of haughty Conceit and Pride,
and no Interest of his laying cross to the most comfortable Notion of an
Almighty, Good, and Just Being, he will not only entertain this great Doctrine
without the least diffidence, but extremely triumph in it, build all his Trust
or Affiances upon it, and make it the support of his whole Life, whatever
Circumstances he be concerned among; giving up his Assent to whatever is
revealed, after his Conviction of the Revelation it self, though he no ways
comprehends the internal Reason or Mode thereof; as not only that one Spirit
existing from nothing, or without any Cause pervades the Universe, is present
in every part thereof, to observe and govern all Events, but that there are
three complete Subsistences, distinguished every one by personal Acts, in the
strictest unity of a spiritual Being. This he is fully persuaded of, being
plainly delivered in the inspired Books, notwithstanding that he cannot account
for it by any Faculties he has: the Carnal Part being well subdued, as I
observed before, in which Arrogance is founded, there is nothing to oppose God,
but the Mind presently submits to whatever he declares, even concerning the
unconceivable Mysteries of his Nature, as every Creature that must needs be
finite in its Powers, the highest Seraphin thinking wisely and understanding it
self, will certainly do.

Such a Person, so acting above the Principle of Sense, and he only, can be
duly Conversant in Spiritual Exercises, with a just Intention address God,
offer up a more fervent Supplication to him, entertain himself suitably in
Contemplation of him, the study of his All-perfect Being, or Nature, as as he is
more delivered from the importunity of the Fleshy Appetites, that so obstruct
these blissful Instances: whence he will enlarge the Faculties of his Soul
through this right determination, this due use of them, that they shall be able
to discern more of God in their own mere act, while they attain their native
Aspirings more. Yet nevertheless but a small part of this Sacred Knowledge is
thus obtained in this happy Person, being so qualified in his own Temper, the
holy Spirit will diffuse himself freely upon him, and still by farther improved
Beams, as this Christian Habit is more advanced, till his own weak Faculties be
as it were absorpt in the Rays of this Comforter, and he only see, and act
through Him, as far as God can reveal himself to a Virtuous Soul, a Saint of His,
or work by him, and produce the Fruits of Holiness in him consistently with the
Freedom of a voluntary Creature, that must have its Behavior reckoned to it
self. This blessed Spirit will then be another vital Form within him wholly
overruling his own Spirit, which being more recovered into its pure Nature,
and less subject to the will of the Flesh, the Root of Disobedience, or Corrupt
Desire, must be more easily governable by him, under his Conduct in all things,
more securely led through his clearer Suggestions to every Instance of a
Gospel-Behaviour. So that such a Person may say with St. Paul, It Is not he that
lives, but this blessed Inspirer, this Spirit of Christ that lives in him, (
Gal. 2.20.) This would be the circumstance of all Men, if this gently
operating, but invincible might, where it is duly complied withal, were not
hindered, mainly as to most People, altogether in some, by unmortify'd Carnal
Desires. For this Heavenly Advocate our Lord obtained for us, acting
conformably to our free Constitution, in still small Voices, gentle Whispers to
our Souls, or Breathings upon them, such as leave the Compliance entirely at
our Pleasure, and the Action our own, with the Retributions belonging to it:
his workings can no ways possibly be perceived among reigning Affections,
Appetites set in their full Strength whether to sensual Delights, or Profits;
nor he attain any of his blessed Effects in those Persons, where these are
after such a manner, as our Savior tells us, most part of People being such,
that the world cannot receive him. ( John 14.17.)

Now when we have arrived at this, as I may say, Science of God through our
honest Compliance with the first Motions of Divine Grace, as also faithfully
pursued a Virtuous Attainment in every respect, to purchase farther Measures
thereof, and so have obtained in these Heavenly Enlightnings a more convictive
Assurance of his infinite Goodness, so abundantly exemplified to usward, his
Fatherly Providence, or care of us here, and the everlasting Joys, the Rewards
he has prepared for our Christian Obedience after this frail State is ended;
when by this means we have arrived at these more enlarged notices of God, and
more fully discovered that he is Love, we must needs be induced, these certain
Conclusions laid up in our Minds cannot but have a prevailing Efficacy on
Humane Liberty to a more vigorous and earnest Endeavor of a Gospel-Holiness,
if it were only in Gratitude to our great Benefactor, that we should not offend
him, and not a means of our own Bliss: which Gospel-Holiness will ever draw
down more plentiful Influxes of the blessed Comforter, the Spirit of Truth into
our Minds in the same degree that it self is, and ever augment this Science of
God, a Gospel-Knowledge, and Virtue or Piety being mutual Causes of one another.

Let us now observe what attends this Christian Habit, how it recompenses Men
for their Pious Diligence, their Honest Labors in acquiring it, what its happy
Effects are. And when our Actions answer the true bent, the first inclination
stamped on our Souls, are under the direction of free Reason, and the more
plentifully displayed Beams of the Spirit, when our Behavior is thus governed
in all respects, how secure shall we be from every thing that can interrupt our
Happiness, whether the Disturbances that always accompany a sinful Instance in
any particular, a pursuance of sensual Affection too far, or Diseases of Body,
or Remorses of Mind, that immediately follow the sinful Instance, or will not
long stay behind, especially this latter and worse sort, that at least will
awaken in another World, if perchance through the deceitfulness of sin they be
stifled here, when being stripped of all sensitive Delights we shall have nothing
to afford never so little interruption to them!

But we shall not only be thus negatively happy by this means, but, as far as
our Natures are Purified and Capable, enjoy all the positive Degrees of
Happiness: every sensual Extravagancy repressed, every Allurement or Temptation
repelled founds a Satisfaction much above what results from our shameful
Compliance with it, which will be no momentary, transient Business, but ever
endure, and be a comfortable Reflection in our Minds. The subjecting of our
inferior Natures, and the government of our selves according to our best, our
reasonable Faculties, and the holy Spirit influencing these, must needs afford
us the most pleasurable Resentment, one of the chiefest, the truest Happiness
belonging to Men.

But when these best Faculties of ours in the light of Grace are determined on
their proper, their most suitable Object, viz. God, toward which they can
never move with too much Transport, what a Theater of Heavenly Thoughts will
this offer to them, or they be then furnished withal, such as answer our
Natures, and can satisfy all the Capacities of our Souls, and which will ever
entertain them with fresh wonders, while they are fixed on a perfection that has
no bounds, and can never be comprehended by created Beings?

And as to the quiet enjoyment of our Lives, these farther Discoveries into
this vast Ocean, where there is still an infinite Prospect, or Sight beyond,
viz. God, how will they establish our Affiance in him, render us secure in our
dependence on him, not only advance a resigned temper or submission in our
Spirits with regard to his sundry Methods with us, but a cheerful Obedience to
his hardest Precepts, though we should not discern the Reasons of either, the
one, or the other; because being then more fully persuaded of his both immense
Wisdom and Goodness, we shall be certain that he can order nothing in our
behalf but with relation to our true advantage, our chiefest good!

And with reference to Prayer, the indispensable Duty of our sort of Creatures
so frail, so indigent as we are, these clearer, and farther notices of God can
only support a true Devotion, enable us to pray with a due Attention
considering his awful, his tremendous Majesty, and for Blessings in general
without determining him, or particularizing upon him, which always proceeds
from some unsubdu'd Carnal-Affections, that are ever most eager for their
proper Gratifications, such as we should continually be restrained from; and so
these will place us indifferent, as we should be in the disposals of Heaven,
the special distributions of the Divine Foresight with respect to any of us,
that God sees most convenient for us, or our present state most requires. As
these enlarged Evidences of God will abundantly satisfy us, that whatever he
does in our private Concerns, every particular Dispensation of his to usward
is determined from Goodness, and the kind working of a Fatherly Love: So they
alone can furnish us with the Reasons of Thankfulness at all times, and beget
that pious habit in our Souls.

Now these assured Doctrines of a Sovereign Being, which can only be advanced
from a due conquest of the Fleshly Affections, and the freedom of Reason,
especially employing it self on the Inspired Writings, and the more liberal,
the less hindr'd Influences of Divine Grace by that means, seeing the natural
and proper Effects of the love and benignity of our Heavenly Father are again
opened, and let loose toward sinful Men, through Christ Jesus; these assured
Doctrines of a Sovereign Being, what grounds of undisturbed Contentment and
Happiness must they be in every state of this present Pilgrimage! 'twill be
impossible that any Events should discompose us, when we are firmly possessed
of these several Articles of Faith in God.

But then still farther as we more put forth these proper Duties of Faith in
him, Prayer, Affiance, Resignation, and the like, we form our selves more into
his Image or Similitude, and become more capable of his pure Emanations, the
only true Light, and Wisdom proceeding from him, and he actually too displays
these more in our Minds, that we shall apprehend, and know through them, that is,
with respect to the revealed Truths, which only are of true concernment to us,
much above the reach of our own Faculties, or what they could attain in their
best state by any Improvements they are capable of, these revealed Truths being
the most important Objects of our Knowledge will appear more evident, and
brighter to our Souls in the Beams of the Spirit more plentifully diffused, or
acting upon them, when by means at least of some degree of a suitable frame, a
more advanced Gospel Temper, there is less Impediment to those Heavenly
Shinings.

Whence our principal Thoughts, our main Desires, the Themes of our Converse,
the delights we take in the Society of our Brethren, will be all with regard to
God and Virtue; which may be a sign to our selves that we are in this blessed
State, as our Savior speaks concerning a truly Regenerate Person, That which
is born of the spirit is spirit. John 3.6.

We shall then be intimately united to God, partake of a blessed Communion with
him in all the Bounties of his diffusive Nature, as we attain to be true
Christians, or are created again in Christ Jesus after his Image; ( Ephesians. 4.23.)
we shall thus be those Sheep of our Savior, that are safe in his Father's
hand, whom none can be able to pluck away from him, ( John 10.28, 29.) being
kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. ( James 1.5.) These are
the great Enjoyments, and Happiness that a Christian Temper possesses, one of
an enlivened Soul, a Person quickened by the Spirit of God enjoys even in this
Life among all the Perplexities and Troubles of it.

But when we come into the Heavenly part of this blessed state, these grossly
constituted, these refractory Bodies to the motions of our Minds being changed
into Celestial, Spiritualized ones, compliant in all things; and the Pious
Habits, the Propensions we have gained from a Life of Virtue, and toward God
exerting themselves freely with the Influences of Grace, that now informing
such disposed Subjects are under no restraints, what bright displays of Divine
Truth shall we perceive in our Minds? what farther discoveries of the Mysteries
of the Deity shall we be ever replenished withal? how will the deep
contrivances of the wisdom of God, and his infinite Love, not only in the
Creation, but more signally in the manner of his Redemption of the lapsed
World, and his Government of it, his several Dispensations with regard to the
untoward dispositions of his free Creatures, whom he bestowed so much of his
own Prerogative upon, or made them such Images of himself? how will these great
Subjects, that we so little attain at present, the knowledge whereof must most
entertain our pure Minds, and unite them to God with an inseparable Affection
that nothing can remove, how will these still more appear, and be manifested to
us, which will ever afford our Minds thus without all Impediments, thus in
their utmost preparation, fresh Scenes, unperceived Instances both of Wisdom
and Goodness, till they can arrive at Omniscience, or comprehend Infinity, that
is, throughout endless Ages? Being with St. Paul, and even in a more purified
Habit than he then was, literally and really in Body and Spirit rapt up into
the third Heaven, we shall see and discern unutterable Things, that our narrow
Languages answering our scant Knowledge here can no ways express, nor we now
apprehend, if a charitable Angel should be induced to declare them to us, the
Glories of the Spiritual World, and the Divine Actings with respect to the
Souls of Men, far transcending the wonders of this material one. New Faculties
shall be then afforded us, or, which are now hindered through the disadvantages of
this State, opened in our Minds; whence we shall discern naked Spirit, the
substance of immaterial Natures, even the great Omnipresent Creator of all, by
as evident a sight, as we now do Body.

To see God which is the Promise to the Pure in Heart, ( Matt. 5.8.) those that
follow Holiness, ( Heb. 12.14.) not through a Glass darkly, that is through the
gross Instruments of our outward Senses, which reason for the most takes its
first hints from, and works or exercises it self upon, though they cannot admit,
or at all acquaint us even with the contexture of Earthly Bodies; to see God
not by means of these, from the Characters we gather of his infinite
Perfections in this visible Universe, but face to face, know even as we are
known, (1 Cor. 13.12.) to see him as he is (1 John 3.2.) plainly distinguishes
between the knowledge of this, and the other World, and one would think, sets
forth another mode of Apprehension of the now unperceivable Objects there,
answerable to the present Conviction of our Senses and corporeal Sight.

Indeed we may be satisfied of the Being of Spirit, as assuredly as we can be
of Matter, but then this is by long Deductions, laborious Demonstration, not
immediate Intuition or a present glance, which seems to explain the
forementioned Phrases: the one kind of these ways of Knowledge, as affording
sufficient Evidence of the greatest Truths, if we duly employ our Faculties
about them, being proper for our Probation or the Trial of our Honesty, and the
other for the Reward thereof.

Now this Apprehension or Knowledge of God after an Intuitive manner, as it
must be larger, and more comprehensive, what a rapturous Love of him will it
kindle in our Breasts, that Passion that founds our utmost Happiness when thus
rightly placed? How will this command all our Appetites toward him, and still
create new ones as the former are answered, and have drunk their fill! (
Ecclus. 24.21.) Eager Desires that can never be satisfied are a true cause of
our Felicity here, by means whereof as our Thirst is more, we shall continually
more Communicate with him, and be always drawing down fresh Supplies from that
only inexhaustible Spring, which will send forth Rivers of Pleasure for
evermore.

This is the Christian Habit or Principle, a Revival from the dead State of
Nature, when through a Course of Gospel-Obedience we have well mastered the
Affections of Sense, the lower Gratifications that the Soul perceives and
enjoys from thence, and so partake of larger Communications of Grace or the
Divine Nature: it is this that makes us capable of our true Felicity, the
Kingdom of our Savior, ( which is within us, as he tells us, Luke 17.21.) both
here, and hereafter.

And thus having given an account of the freer Influences of the holy Spirit in
the Souls of Men, as they have more prepared themselves by a Gospel-Virtue, I
would not be understood concerning Revelation properly speaking, as if I meant,
that he should discover some farther Instances of the Mind of God to usward,
than is declared in the New Testament, a higher state of Holiness now required,
(as some fondly talk of the Kingdom of the Spirit (some more particulars to be
believed, or practiced; (not to mention some Doctrines, and Explications of
certain Places repugnant to the Tenor of the rest of the Scriptures, which
must proceed from another Author) or that he should repeat by some new
Teachers, and such Gifts in them as he bestowed on the Apostles, even their
very Doctrines, only perhaps in variety of Expressions, which so mainly delight
some People, especially if delivered in a Canting Style, conceited Phrases,
that more strike the Fancy, than inform the Understanding, such as our now
pretended Prophets commonly use; whereas in truth there is no need of all this,
(which if once requisite must be done over again in every Age) but there is no
need of this, the whole Counsel of God for the recovery of the lapsed World to
his Grace or Favor, and the Methods he used to that purpose, being fully
delivered by such Miraculous Testimony, as cannot reasonably be denied; so that
those, who will not be induced in the exercise of their Freedom to study this
Revelation, which, God be thanked, he has given us in Writing, and observe or
practice the Terms of their Happiness it proposes, can never certainly be
prevailed upon by any other Courses, that Heaven can design; nor do I mean that
this Spirit should dictate words to People (which perhaps he never did either
to Prophets or Apostles, only presenting a Scheme of Divine Truths to their
Minds, but leaving the Language to themselves to be expressed according to
their different ways of Education, and the prevailing Temper in them, as we may
observe their Figures and Style ever answered these) I say I do not mean that
the Spirit should dictate words to People, enable them to speak even the known
Doctrines or Rules of the Gospel after an Extempore manner, which would
supersede their own Faculties, and probably be an occasion of their Neglects in
Heavenly Knowledge, as it would greatly administer to Spiritual Pride and
Contempt of others, both which we may see the example of in a sort of Men among
us that only conceit these things of themselves. But my meaning is, that the
Spirit communicates such Light and Grace, such clearer Informations of all
saving Truths, with respect to the Understanding, such stronger Motives toward
the rectifying of the Will, upon our compliance with the means afforded us, our
due perusal of the Sacred Volumes, the Dictates of this Spirit, our honest
Endeavors in the ways of Godliness, according to the Precepts delivered in
those Volumes, as will secure us from any dangerous Error in point of Doctrine,
and enable us against all our evil Affections for every Virtue of a Christian
Life, we ever obediently following his Guidance and comporting with him. This I
mean by the larger Gifts of the holy Spirit in a Gospel-state, that being
dispensed on our due Concourse with his first Motions, a Virtuous Temper by
that means after some measure obtained in our Minds, they are only in order to
our farther attainment of that Temper, to afford our infirm, lapsed Natures
proper Assistances for that end; not to operate in fluent Discourses, or
particular Revelations, when we already have a complete Book given forth by
this Spirit of our Faith and Practice, that is, of our whole Duty, what God
enjoins us, or is required of us in the nature of Things, with regard to our
eternal Bliss; and especially we cannot suppose this holy Inspirer thus to
operate after this manner, where Men employ not their main Industry, do not
diligently Meditate in this Heavenly Book, which Moses with respect to the Old
Testament, commanded his Charge the Israelites, to do Night and Day; ( Deuteronomy.
6.7.11.19.) nor prepare their Minds by a more eminent degree of Gospel-Morals
or Holiness of Life, as some People, who must be Conscious of their Defects in
both these Instances, unreasonably maintain of themselves, and others, that
they are enabled whether to Preach or to Pray, and, I am apt to think, as much
without Forethought or Study too, as the Apostles were.

And then as to this Doctrine of Habits, the establishing the Spiritual Life,
the Heavenly Felicities and Joys upon them, which I all-along here do, as I do
likewise the more liberal Gifts of the blessed Comforter in our Souls, though
this may not possibly be admitted by all, but a pure Obedience, not as it any
ways disposes us for them accounted the Term of those great Rewards, yet this
Doctrine, I think, however it may be rejected, plainly appears to be the Import
of the Gospel-Law, as this is not satisfied with outward Performances, Opus
operatum, bare Acts of Obedience, but every where condemns such, giving them
their deserved Style of Hypocrisy, when they are alone, and requiring a
compliance of the reasonable part, a reconcilement of the Heart to its several
Precepts, that these be observed, or conformed withal in our very Thoughts,
which would be quite a needless Discipline, unless an inward frame thus
attainable were necessary for the Graces our Lord purchased, the Joys he
proposes.

And besides our blessed Savior expressly says, he repeats it to us, that we
must be born again, or else we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, ( John
1.13.3.3, 5.) that is, as he explains it, we are to obtain a new Nature, quite
in opposition to the Desires of Flesh, have another Temper advanced in our
Spirits according to the Mind and Will of God, so as that we may be capable of
his Heavenly Bliss. And the Apostles frequently tell us in Emblematical Phrases
with reference to Christ, that we must put off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh, be altogether dead to them, buried with our blessed Redeemer in Baptism,
when taking upon us his holy Profession, we are to renounce those abominable
Practices; and likewise through the Faith of the operation of God, his Almighty
Power declaring it self in our honest Endeavors, We must be raised with him to
righteousness of Life, (Col. 2.12. Romans 6.3.) That we must crucify the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, whatever proceeds from that evil Principle, (
Gal. 5.24.) that we being Dead, as Christians should be, to these Worldly
Enjoyments, and our true Life hid with Christ in God, we must mortify the
Members of our Unregenerate Man, which are set upon the Earth, Earthly
Interests or Pleasures, there recounted by that Apostle ( Col. 3.3, 5.) This
old Man we are enjoined again to put off, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful Lusts, and to put on the new Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness, and true Holiness (Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Col. 3.9, 10.) we must be
transformed by the renewing of our Minds. (Romans 12.2.) All which places being
so many Testimonies of the holy Spirit, besides the plain Assertion of our
Savior, evidently set forth, that it is something beyond a mere Obedience,
which duly distinguishing may be accounted the Effect thereof, where sincerely
performed from just Motives, viz. a Habit of Piety, as our Minds are recovered
from the Affections of Body, a Spiritualized Temper, with such sort of
Appetites or Desires in it, that disposes Men for their eternal Bliss; not the
pure Instances of Obedience only, which may possibly be performed, even
habitually too, through a kind of Mechanism, or for sinister Purposes without any
amendment of Spirit, or reformation in the Soul, the sensual Nature with its
proper Offspring still being the reigning Principle in such Persons. And the
Apostle expressly confirms this, that it must be a Habit of Christian Purity, a
Triumph or Mastery over the Desires of Flesh, that founds the Disposition for
our true Happiness, declaring likewise that an Indulgence of these lower
Appetites is the Genuine Cause of our eternal Sufferings, the fruitful Parent
or Seed-plot of our Miseries, whence they naturally spring: To be carnally
minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and Peace. And again, if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if through the spirit ye do mortify
the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. (Romans 8.6, 13.) and again, he that sows
to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. (Gal. 6.8.) and again in the
latter respect only (Romans 7.5.) The motions of sin do work in our members to
bring forth fruit unto death.

And indeed I am apt to believe that all the revealed Precepts of God are only
Warnings of the Events of Things, what will fatally follow the kind of our
Moral Behavior or Actions, and the bent of our Minds one way or the other, not
what is arbitrarily dispensed upon them: and methinks this more answers the
wisdom of God, when things are so constituted, that Men's Fortunes attend the
Habitudes they are under, and follow their free Actions, or the Dispositions
they have brought into their Minds by that means. This renders God as kind to
us, as we will be to our selves, he thus putting our Happiness in our own
hands, that through the Helps he has afforded us in his beloved Son, we may
obtain it to what degree we please; and this acquits him of Severity, which
some call Injustice, on the account of eternal Punishments for Temporary
Faults, when these are the Fates of Men's Aversion to him, the wicked Temper
they have voluntarily acquired, and made in themselves.

I do not deny but that there will be both positive Rewards and Punishments,
but these are still founded and have their Cause in our own Tempers. And I
cannot think but the contrary Doctrine, that the Heavenly Felicites are merely
with respect to a tenor of Obedience, that may be such an outside business,
without deriving its effect to the Heart, and not on the ground of such an
Effect, or internal Habit; I cannot think but this lessens the Notion of the
Divine Wisdom, as it takes away the relation of the two States, this, and that
of Heaven, to one another, not making their Happiness both of a piece, the same
Temper or Principle with their proper Enjoyments carried on to their perfection
there; and as it puts the Circumstances of the next World, Blessedness, or
Misery only upon an arbitrary Decree of God, not so corresponding with the
Natures of things, or consequential to them: Nor seems it a consistent or
agreeable Proceeding with a free Creature, that he should have any Events
attending him, but what are, as it were necessary upon him, the Results of that
Temper he has formed in him.

But that we may even have the experience of this Doctrine or observe it in
others, we plainly see that Habits of Life determine the sort, and found the
most affecting Relish or Sense of all the Enjoyments we have; nay, that this
Relish commonly lasts (not to say always) after the proper time is over of
pursuing those Acts from whence it was, as Plutarch tells us concerning the old
Olympic Wrestlers, who had safely come off from so many hazards, that they
mainly delighted to be Spectators of those savage Exercises, when years had
deprived them of the Honor, as they esteemed it, of being Parties themselves,
viz. of spilling their own Blood, or that of others in them. And we may every
day sadly remark in worn out Debauchees among our selves, how their Vices stick
in their decrepid Natures, and what polluted Souls they carry about with them;
and if this be so as to Vicious Courses, when People are disabl'd from acting
any more the wicked Instance, much more will it hold with regard to the Habits
of a Holy Life, where the capacity of the Virtuous Act not only continues, but
is ever increased with a farther complacency, that must likewise attend it.

Thus we lay the Foundation of our after State, whether Happiness or Misery,
from our own Behavior; Heaven possesses us according to our Improvements of a
Gospel Virtue, or Hell seizes us while we persist in our Evil Courses, these
begin here, the one, and the other, how they will increase, or enlarge of
themselves in a Spiritual World, (though we may pretty well guess at this part)
and what positive degrees may be added to either of them, what Light and Glory,
or what inflicted Punishment, we cannot tell farther than Revelation teaches
us; but be sure they are both dispensed, being said to be Recompenses, and
eternal too, upon the ground of the use of our Wills, or our voluntary
Behavior, as that has wrought certain Dispositions in us; or to speak the
Pythagorean Language, (...) (Hierocl. p. 314.) as by our growth and increase in
Holiness, (the Assimilation That founds to all good Spirits, Angels, and God)
we prepare our selves to be Partners with them in the freest Communications of
that infinite Being, whereon depends all the Happiness of created Natures, as
well theirs, as ours.

We are thus to be quickened through the Efficacy of the Spirit, and our earnest
Diligence, or Strivings with him; a Christian Temper, a Habit of the highest
Gospel-Righteousness is thus to be obtained, or laid in our Minds. And I think
no more can be urged to engage us to the attainment thereof, than that 'twill
make us as knowing in the best kind, and as happy as we can possibly be, or our
Natures will admit of, both here, and hereafter; unless that will more prevail,
that the neglect of this, or the contrary Habit from a course of Sin will
render us miserable to the same degrees, which is a matter of equal Truth, and
a more forcible Argument with most People, though it express a great Depravity,
and Disingenuity in them. That therefore, by all the most prevailing Means, and
Motives that can be offered a reasonable Creature, we may arrive at a State of
Holiness, even according to the Doctrines of our blessed Savior, God of his
infinite Mercy grant through the Mediation of this blessed Savior, and in the
helps of the eternal Spirit, to whom, three Persons, and one undivided Essence
or Nature, be eternally ascribed by us, and every Creature in Heaven and Earth,
all Honor, Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise.

Amen, Amen.
THE END.

