AN ESSAY UPON THE Fourth and Fifth Chapters OF THE REVELATION.

SHOWING That the Church of ENGLAND B. L. E. Is particularly described in those
Chapters.

By WALTER GARRETT, Vicar of Titchfield in Hampshire; sometimes Fellow of
Trinity-Colledg in Cambridg.

LONDON; Printed for the Author, and sold by Israel Harrison at
Lincolns-Inn-Gate in Chancery Lane. 1690.

To their Most Excellent Majesty's WILLIAM and MARY Our most Gracious King and
Queen.
May it please your Majesty's;
THese Papers are not prostrate at your Royal Feet for Patrociny; they beg
nothing of your Majesty's, but Pardon and Acceptance: They need no Shelter; the
Winds never hurt such Shrubs as these: but if they need it, they deserve none.
This Address therefore is purely the Result of a certain rapturous Excess of
Joy and Gratitude, for that late wonderful Deliverance of this Church and
Nation, which it has pleased Almighty God to give us by your Sacred Majesty's
unparalled Virtue and Conduct. Such elevated Affections will be offering
something, even tho they have nothing fit to offer. I only say, that my Design
is good; which is to make it evident to your Majesty's, and to all the World,
in my way (that is, by Scripture-Prophecy) what a Heavenly Church, even in the
Esteem of God himself, your Majesty's have saved from Ruin. May your Reign be
made as glorious and as prosperous in protecting it. And let it not be imputed
to me as a Crime, if in my Zeal for my Holy Mother, I assume the Freedom for
this once, to declare to your Majesty's what I seem to have learned from the
Word of God, That in covering the established Church, your Reign will be truly
glorious and prosperous.

Your Majesty's may also have the satisfaction here to see how highly God has
owned your Royal Protestant-Predecessors and Progenitors. And as my Method
leads me to it, I doubt not but, by God's Assistance, to show as great Things
of your Majesty's, when once I have prepared the way for it. In the mean time
the whole World is Witness, that You are the chosen Servants of Jesus Christ.
Chosen, I mean, not by Man, but by God only. For how can that Act of Man be
called a Choice, that was so apparently overruled by an Almighty Hand,
justified by so unquestionable a Right, extorted by so irresistible a Merit?

I conclude with my hearty Prayers for the best of Princes in the best of
words, which are those of our Common-Prayer-Books (so We call them, but God
calls them Thus our Common-Prayer-Books are called, Rev. v. 8.
Golden Vials full of Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints) That the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, the only Ruler of Princes, would so replenish You
with the Grace of his Holy Spirit, that You may always incline to his Will, and
walk in his way: Endue You plenteously with Heavenly Gifts, grant You in Health
and Wealth long to live; strengthen You that You may vanquish and overcome all
Your Enemies; and finally after this Life, grant that You may attain
Everlasting Joy and Felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I am, Your Majesty's most Obedient Subject, and Servant in the Lord, WALL.
GARRETT.

An ESSAY upon the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of the Revelation, showing from
the principal Characters of the Vision, that the Church of ENGLAND B. L. E. is
particularly described therein.
MY Design at present is not to give an Explication of this Vision, (...) (as
they call it) but only to represent the main Strokes of it. And because I
intend to be very short, I shall forbear all prefacing, and content my self
with only minding the Reader, That in a late Book, entitled, A Resolution of
three Questions, etc. I have clearly proved (for ought I find to the contrary,)
1. That the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Revelation, are properly a
Prophecy of things to come to pass after St. John 's receiving the Vision of
them. 2. That by Opening the sealed Book, Rev. v. is meant, or prefigur'd the
Explaining of it. 3. That by the Throne in both those Chapters is meant a
Throne of God on Earth, and not his Throne in the highest Heaven. From these
Principles, which I take to be evidently and demonstrably certain (for which I
refer my self to the aforesaid Book,) I now come to give some general Account
of the meaning of the Vision.

And since it appears, that the said Chapters are a continued orderly Relation
of Things seen by St. John, as Types of Things to come to pass after, and which
were not in being at the time of his receiving the Vision: if in looking
forward from that time, we could but pitch upon any one remarkable Passage in
the Vision, and apply it certainly to its proper Event, we should be in a very
fair way of expounding the whole Prophecy, so far as it is fulfilled; it being
no very hard matter for those that have any skill in the Prophetic Style, to
apply Prophecy to History, when they know whereabouts to seek for it. Now, if I
be not very much mistaken, the second Verse of Rev. v. is of that Nature; I
mean, such as may certainly and irrefragably be applied to its proper Event.
Here therefore we must fix our Engine, (to wit, upon the Point of Time referred
to in that Passage) if e're we hope to move this dark Prophetic World (which,
like the Natural one, consists of Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Creatures in them)
into some better Light, than it has yet been viewed in.

The words of Rev. v. 2. are these, And I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a
loud Voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to loose the Seals of it? That
by Angels in the Vision, are meant Men in the Completion, there needs no other
proof than the unanimous Consent of all Interpreters whatsoever, who thus
expound the Angels of the seven Churches. But I have more particularly See
Resol. of three Questions, page 15, 16, 17, etc.
proved, as to the Prophecy we are now upon, that it concerns only things that
were to come to pass on Earth; and consequently this Angel must be some mortal
Man. But it cannot be any Man of an ordinary Character; forasmuch as he is set
forth to be a strong Angel, and said to have proclaimed with a loud Voice. The
Substance of his Proclamation we have in these words, Who is worthy to open the
Book, and to loose the Seals of it? The Book is the same which the Lamb takes
out of the Hand of the Sitter on the Throne, Rev. v. 7. and opens, Rev. vi. 2,
etc. where also we have the Contents of each Seal set down in order. By Opening
its Seals, is meant Explaining it; and, by being worthy to open them, is meant
being able to do it; as it is expounded in the very next Verse, viz. Rev. v. 3.

Let us see now if we can find, in all the time from St. John's receiving this
Vision downwards, any such Person, being a Man of extraordinary Quality, to
have made a public and solemn Proclamation in the hearing of the whole World
(as it were) to the aforesaid purpose, and we may certainly persuade our
selves, that He is that very Person referred to in the Prophecy.

One I know, that fully answers every one of these Particulars; and I believe
the whole Series of History from St. John's time to ours, affords no other
Instance. I mean King James of famous Memory, in his Preface to his Apology for
the Oath of Allegiance, page 108. lin. 1, 2, etc. It cannot be denied but K.
James was a strong Angel, as being Sovereign Monarch of three flourishing and
potent Kingdoms. And it is as evident, that he spoke in that Preface with a
very loud Voice; for he inscribes it himself expressly, To all Christian
Monarchs, Free Princes, and States. So that he must needs have been heard far
and near. If therefore his Proclamation be for Substance the very same with
that in the Prophecy, what doubt can remain, but that the Prophecy is to be
expounded of it; and that its Author, the King, is that strong Angel there
spoken of?

We must know then, that this good King, after having given his Conjectures (as
himself calls them) upon several Passages in the SEALED-BOOK, endeavoring to
find the Antichrist in them (as may be seen in page 84, 85, 6, 7, 8. etc.)
concludes that discourse in these words (p. 108. lin. 1.) My only Wish shall
be, That if any Man shall have a fancy to refute this my Conjecture of the
Antichrist, that he answer me orderly to every part of my Discourse; not
contenting him to disprove my Opinion; except he set down some other Method
after his Form, for Interpretation of that BOOK OF THE APOCALYPSE, which may not
contradict no part of the Text, nor contain no Absurdities. Otherwise it is an
easy thing for Momus to pick quarrels in another Man's tale, and tell it worse
himself; it being a more easy practice to find Faults, than to amend them.
These are the King's own words; so plain and applicable of themselves, that
without troubling the Reader with any Remarks upon them, I appeal to his
Judgment and Conscience, whether he do not think them to be the same for
substance with the Proclamation in the Vision, Who is worthy to open the Book,
and to loose the Seals thereof?

Since therefore every Particular answers so exactly to the Vision, and the
Case is so uncommon and extraordinary, that nothing like it can be produced
from the beginning of the World to this Time, we must never hope to attain the
sense of any Prophecy, if we cannot see a Truth so manifest as this is, viz.
That in our Gracious Sovereign King James the first, was fulfilled that which
is foretold Rev. v. 2. of the strong Angel proclaiming with a loud Voice, Who
is worthy to open the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof? And though this
Truth (as many other things) may seem so strange at first, that we shall hardly
trust our very senses in attesting it: yet (being grounded on so certain
Evidence) I make no doubt but when a little thinking shall have rendered it
familiar, we shall easily acknowledge it.

Taking therefore this so unquestionable a Truth for our Key to the whole
Prophecy, let us try if we can penetrate any further into the Recesses of it;
by taking a general view of some of the most remarkable Passages that precede,
and some others that succeed this of the strong Angel proclaiming.

If we look backward, we find in the Verse next before (viz. Rev. v. 1.) The
Sitter on the Throne represented with the sealed Book in his Right Hand. Can
any thing be conceived a more lively and natural Resemblance of THE DEFENDER OF
THE FAITH (the peculiar Title of our Kings) than this? Who knows not that the
right Hand is both the Instrument, and the Symbol, of powerful protection? And
as for the Book, it is manifestly a part of that Sacred Volume, wherein the
whole Faith of a Christian is comprehended. And it is withal, such a part of
it, as perhaps no King in the whole World has ever taken in hand to that
purpose as the King we speak of did, who is as zealous in expounding it, as any
Interpreter we shall meet with. From hence therefore there arises another
great assurance to us, that the former part of Rev. v. is a Prophecy relating
to the Person of that excellent Monarch.

Obj. But how comes the King to be represented as God, fitting in a Throne,
Rev. v. 1. and in the very next Verse, only as as a strong Angel, i. e. a
Minister of God? I answer; Because in DEFENDING the FAITH of that Book with his
right Hand, he did the part of a King, or earthly God; but in showing himself
so sollicitous for the understanding of it, he appeared but like a Minister, or
Divine, or (in the phrase of the Apocalypse) an Angel of the Church. It is the
King's own distinction; Page 4. of the Preface before cited.
I thought it (says he) not comely for me being a King, to put my Name to Books
concerning scholastic Disputations, whose Calling is to set forth Decrees in
the Imperative Mood, etc. Whence you see how fitly (even according to the sense
of the King himself) he is set forth in the first Verse as God; in the next,
but as an Angel. Tho even in that, his Character is observed in a great
measure, he being represented, not as an ordinary Angel, but as a strong One,
with a loud Voice. In like manner, and for a like reason, the same Person who
is called at Verse. 5. a LION, is in the very next exhibited as a LAMB.

From hence I shall deduce this Corollary (which also every Particular
hereafter to be discussed, will confirm) That by the Sitter on the Throne is
meant the Kings of ENGLAND; or else, how comes King James to be found upon it?
(For it is evident that he wrote the Book afore-quoted, after he was come to
the English Throne.) I must desire it also to be observed, That in
Scripture-Prophecy, one King, or Sitter on a Throne, is set to signify a whole
Succession of them. Which is so well known to all the Candidates of Prophecy,
that I must not waste my time in the proof of it.

Let us therefore look back to the IVth Chapter; where, from what has been
said, any one would expect to find some mention of the great Achievements of
the Glorious and Renowned Queen Elizabeth; immediate Predecessor to King James.
Accordingly we find the Sitter on the Throne to be described there (verse. 3.)
as looking like a Jasper and a Sardine Stone; i^e^ glittering with Jewels, the
peculiar Ornament of Great Ladies. The Rainbow round about her Throne, in sight
like an Emerald, is her excellent Parliament (the best Jewel in her Crown) by
whose Concurrence the Church described in the next Verses, was established. For
Waters in this Prophecy are expressly said to signify People, Rev. xvii. 15. And
therefore the Waters that are above the Earth (in which the Rainbow is always
painted) must signify People of the highest Quality; of which our Parliaments
consist. And it is further observable, that a great many Witnesses of the Truth
(such as the Parliament we speak of was) are remarkably called a Cloud, Heb.
xii. 1. So that the Rainbow here, may very well be expounded of the Parliament
in the first of Queen Elizabeth. For that incomparable Princess, coming after
the Deluge of Popery that her Sister had brought upon the Church, and like the
Sun in the Firmament, darting her bright Beams of Gospel Light upon her
Parliament, that attended on her Throne; how could it more fitly be
represented, than by a Rainbow? Which also is a happy Omen, that our Church
should never more be drowned in Popish Superstitions. The 24 Elders sitting on
so many Thrones (or Seats) and crowned, are the inferior Clergy, by whom the
Reformation was begun, while the Bishops (all of them almost) adhered to
Popery. These Elders therefore now, as having obtained so signal a Victory, are
represented with golden Crowns, and white Robes, the constant Emblems of
Success to the Evangelical Party. The Thunders, Lightnings, and Voices from the
Throne, are the Laws then made for dispossessing the Romanists. The seven Lamps
of Fire, are a Type of the Church, divided (according to the solemn Thus the
seven Seals of the Book, Chap. V. 1, etc. are but one continued Seal (or
Mystery) running through the whole Book. And this Seal is called seven Seals,
only in respect of the Division of the Book into seven Parts. For if the Spirit
had been pleased to consider the Book without respect to any division, he would
have mentioned but one Seal. And again, if he had pleased to divide the Book
into seven times seven Parts, he would have made so many Seals. The like may be
understood of the seven Lamps here, and the seven Horns of the Lamb, Chap. V.
6. denoting the Church, considered as divided into seven Intervals; and of the
seven Lights in the Lamps here, and the seven Eyes of the Lamb there, denoting
the seven Spirits of God, (that is, Angels, or Ministers of his Church;) [or
the Holy Ghost that influences and inspires them.] For one Spirit, or Angel of
a Church, signifies the whole Succession of its Pastors during any one
Interval. And again, one Holy Ghost is called seven Spirits, with respect to
the seven Intervals of the Church that he presides in.
use of this Prophecy) into seven Intervals: the Lamps (answerable to the
Candlesticks, Rev. i. 20.) denoting the Church, considered as seven Churches
with respect to the said Intervals; and the Fires in the Lamps resembling the
Rev. iv. 5.
Spirits, Angels, or That by Spirits in this Prophecy, are meant Ministers,
appears from Rev. xvi. 13, 14. where the Spirits of Devils working Miracles,
must needs be the Ministers of Antichrist: Consequently the Spirits of God,
must needs signify the Ministers of Christ.
Ministers of the Church; as the seven Stars are expounded in the place just
now quoted. The Sea of Glass, ver. 6. is a Type of the People (for so the Sea
almost always signifies in this Prophecy) and this Sea is said to be of Glass
like Crystal, to denote at once their Clarity, in respect of their abhorrence
of Popish Superstition; and their Brittleness, in respect of their proneness to
Faction. By the living Creatures are meant the Protestant Bishops, soon after
the first sitting of this happy Parliament, consecrated, and settled in their
respective Sees. These are said not to rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Whereby is
intimated that a pure Liturgy was now established, in honor only of the Holy
Trinity (and not as formerly, of Saints and Angels) whose constant Morning and
Evening-Services are full of Doxology to the blessed Trinity, like that in the
Prophecy. And such is ours exactly; Glory be to the Holy,
Lord,
Father, and to the Holy,
God,
Son, and to the Holy,
Almighty;
Holy Ghost; as it which was,
was, and is,
is now, and ever and is to come.
shall be. I know Interpreters are wont to content themselves with expounding
this Doxology, Holy, holy, holy, etc. in general terms, of the Honor that is
given by the Church to the blessed Trinity. But I desire it may be considered,
that no account can be given in this way, of the Addition of those words, which
was, and is, and is to come. This Passage whoever rightly weighs, will easily
conclude with me, that (since it is no where found in Scripture, but only in
the Revelation) it is used here with particular respect to that celebrated Form
of Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; as it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be. The Church and constant Liturgy being
thus established, they all join in solemn Thanksgiving (prescribed by the
living Creatures, or Bishops) for so great a Blessing, ver. 9, 10, 11. in these
words, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for
thou have created all [ (...), as if it had been (...). Thus the Prepositive
Article is expounded Joh. xi. 51, 52.
these] things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created. 2 Cor. v. 4.
and vii. 11. Gal. v. 8. 1 Thessalonians. v. 27. 2 Thessalonians. i. 11. and iii. 14. 1 Timothy vi.
14. Col. iii. 8.
They who think the Creation of the World 4000 Years before (and for which the
whole Church has ever since given Glory and Praise to the great Creator) is
here the thing the Church gives Thanks for, Rev. xix. 20. Heb. v. 4.
must needs be guilty of a very great Impertinence, for no such thing is once
hinted in the whole Relation. This therefore is a Thanksgiving for a New
Creation, as the Isa. xli. 20. xlv. 8. lxv. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc. Ephesians. ii. 10.
and iv. 24. 2 Cor. v. 17. Gal. vi. 15.
Scripture is wont to call it, that is, a Restitution, or Reformation. And yet
not that Reformation neither, which was made in the World by the first
preaching of the Gospel; which may be gathered from the very Title in ver. 1.
where these things are all called Things that must be hereafter: So that it
cannot possibly be the Church that was established in St. John's time; but must
be that which was reformed (according to the Primitive Pattern) afterward.
Thanks therefore is here given to God for bringing in the Reformation by Queen
Elizabeth. Which Exposition is exactly answerable to that which has been given
at first of Rev. v. 1, 2. where it appeared that the Sitter on the Throne, and
the strong Angel proclaiming, was King James the First. For if that be granted
(as it needs must be) who can his Predecessor be, that established the
Reformation, but Queen Elizabeth? And thus much of Things before.

Let us now see what follows upon the Angel 's proclaiming. The next Verses
tell us, that No Man was found (viz. in K. James's Reign) able to open the
Book; to the great grief of the People of God sollicitous of these Mysteries,
whose Person in this It is usual for the Prophets Actions to represent the
Peoples. For which see the whole fourth Chapter os Ezekiel. Also Chap. xxiv.
from ver. 15, many other places of that Prophecy. Also Isa. xx. 2, 3, etc.
xxii. 4. Jer. iv. 19, 31.
St. John himself sustains, ver. 4.

At length, to wit, Anno 1632, appears Mr. Mede, being one of the Elders of
this Church, with an admirable Explication of the Book. And he is the first
that ever hit upon the way of it. Which, as it is easily defended, and is
actually done by Dr. H. More in a little Treatise he calls Appendicula
Apocalyptica; so is it openly confessed by Accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies, Par. I. Chap. 8.
Mr. Jurieux, a learned Writer of the French Church, in these words; Joseph
Mede, in my Opinion, is the first that understood any thing of the Sealed Book.
And it is evident that Mr. Mede has got the Name of expounding the sealed Book,
from all Interpreters whatsoever: there being no Man that has expounded any one
Seal to purpose, but he is a professed Follower (that I may not say, Admirer)
of Mr. Mede. Insomuch that even those Judicious and Learned Divines (for in
this Style their Title Page speaks them) the Continuators of Mr. Pool's Work,
tho they show themselves very loath to follow him (as being perhaps of a
different Communion) yet are they forced to do it, almost all along, with
frequent Elogies of his Fame and Learning. And where they venture to dissent
from him, they are very unhappy; of which this Paper will admit of but one
Instance, which is this. Mr. Mede expounds the first Seal (containing a Vision
of a White Horse, whose Rider went forth conquering and to conquer) of the
wonderful success of the Preachers of the Gospel. This the Divines think to
mend, by expounding it of the Victories of the Roman Heathen Emperors. But they
consider not, that Whiteness, tho it be used in the Revelation twenty times (if
I have rightly computed them) yet it is never applied but only to the Saints.
Besides, particularly as to Horses of a white Color, (a Type, which tho
perhaps translated from the Romans (as some others are observed to be) whose So
Live. v. 28. 1. triumphantem albi per urbem vexerant equi. Ovid. de Ponto II. 8.
49. Claudian. de bello Getico, v. 127. Plin. Paneg. 22. 1. And Apuleius in his
Apologia, Peram and Baculum Philosophis exprobrares? Igitur and triumphantibus
quadrigas albas, etc.
Triumphs used to be performed with white Horses: yet in this Prophecy they are
so appropriated to the successes of the Gospel, that) let any Man read but Rev.
xix. 11, 14. and he will be afraid to interpret them to any other purpose than
Mr. Mede has done. For it is a very dangerous thing to give away the peculiar
Badg and Livery of the Servants of Jesus Christ to Pagans, tho Emperors. For
indeed, the Color of the Roman Conquerors was not White, but Red (that is,
bloody) and expressly so called, Rev. xii. 3. as the Divines aforesaid own upon
the place. But if any Conquests were of a deep Crimson, they were the Victories
they achieved over the Saints; of which yet the Divines do not blush to
expound the White Horse and his Rider, as the more probable Opinion. Lastly, it
ought also to be considered, that the Rider in the first Seal went forth
CONQVERING AND TO CONQVER; which is no Tautology (tho the Divines are pleased
to overlook it) nor is the like Expression used (that I remember) any other
where. But it is very apposite to express the going forth of Jesus Christ in
his blessed Apostles, to establish such a Kingdom, as should never be
destroyed, but should subdue Dan. vii. 27. Rev. xi. 15.
all other Kingdoms to it self for ever. Whereas if we apply it to the Roman
Emperors, it is both frivolous and false. The former, because the Conquests of
Rome were in a manner finished before the Times there referred to. It was
Senectus Imperii, the Old Age of the Empire, as Proaem, ad lib. 1.
Florus calls it. And the latter, because Rome never could be said to go forth
CONQVERING AND TO CONQVER (unless we will make the Repetition to signify just
nothing) but rather, conquering for a while, that afterward she might tumble
down, and break in pieces with her own weight.

Thus much I thought good to say upon this occasion in Vindication of Mr. Mede,
that it might not appear strange, if we fix upon him for the Elder predicted in
Rev. v. 5. that gave the first notice to the Church, of Christ's having
prevailed to expound the sealed Book; for Christ was pleased to use him as his
Instrument in expounding it. And this Exposition was set forth So the Author
himself dates his Episte to the Reader.
Anno 1632, that is, in the Reign of King Charles the First, of blessed Memory;
which is signified by that Elder's being here made to give Christ the Title of
the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of David: For Christ is set forth
according as he appears in his Church; sometimes as a Great Rev. xvii. 14.
Conqueror, otherwhiles in great Rev. xvi. 1, etc.
Distress. Now in King Charles the First, Christ appeared as the Lion of the
Tribe of Juda, the Root of David. For by the Tribe of Juda (so famous in the Sea 2 Samuel ii. 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. xv. 10, 13. xviii. 6, 7. xix. 9, 10, 41,
42, 43, 1 King. xii. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Scripture for their Loyalty, and constant adhering to David and his House,
when the rest of the Tribes rejected him) are signified the Loyal Party in King
Charles his time, that served him faithfully, and followed his Fortunes. These
owned him, when the rest made it their constant business to oppose him; and at
last deprived him, not of his Kingdom only, but his Life. Well therefore is he
likened to the Lion of the Tribe of Juda.

And he is called the Root of David, as being (when Mr. Mede put forth his
Exposition) the Father of that afterward so Glorious Monarch K. Charles the
Second; who carried in his Life and Reign so intimate a Resemblance to the
Patriarch David. For which it may suffice to refer the Reader to the Service of
the Church, set-forth upon Occasion of his Majesty's most happy Restoration;
for there the Parallel is conspicuous. Only one thing may yet further be
observed; that, as 2 Samuel vi. 17.
David, so K. Charles II. also, brought in again the Ark of the Lord, and set
it in its place. Which is a thing so remarkable, that it might justly prejudice
the whole Hypothesis I here proceed upon, if after the said Year 1632, (wherein
came forth Mr. Mede's Exposition) there be no notice taken of the various
fortunes of the Church of England, which happened to her, to the amazement of
the World, within the space of eight and twenty Years extfollowing. For any one
will be apt to think, that the subverting of the Church, and killing of the
King for standing by it, and usurping his Son's throne for twelve Years time,
on the one side; and then, the wonderful Work of God in restoring both King and
Church in the Year 1660, on the other side, are things as worthy to be made the
subject of this Prophecy, as any thing that has, or can be said of any of the
former Princes. Let us therefore see what follows in the Prophecy.

Verse. 6. (...), And I looked, and lo, (a Preface, which is never used to any
ordinary matter) in the midst of the Throne, and of the four (...), and in the
midst of the Elders, a Lamb standing as if it had bin slain, (i. e. a Lamb
revived after having been slain) having seven horns, and seven Eyes; which are
the seven Spirits of God sent forth ((...), which So just before in this very
Verse (...) is the Lamb* which had been slain, but is now revived.
had been sent forth tho now returned,) into all the Earth. That by this Lamb
is meant the Church, appears not only by his Horns (which constantly in Daniel,
and in this Prophecy, signify Kingdoms; and, we know, the Kingdom of the Lamb
is his Church;) and by his Eyes, which are expounded the Spirits, Angels, or
Ministers of God, that had been They are the same Spirits, (i. e. Ministers of
the same Church, which was established by Qu. Eliz.) that are spoken of here,
and in Rev. iv. 5. only here they are said to have been sent forth, or driven
from their Residencies, in the Sectarian Persecution; which had never happened
before to the Church by her established. And note, that as the Lamb signifies
Christ, or his Church; so the seven Spirits signify the Holy Ghost, or his
Ministers, indifferently as the Sense requires.
sent forth into all the Earth, or exposed (as we say) to the wide World
(during the King's exile,) but were now restored to their rights again: but
also from an unquestionable place in Rev. xvii. 14. where it is said of
Antichrist, and his Accomplices, that they should make War with the Lamb, and the
Lamb should overcome them; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, etc. Now
it is evident, that Antichrist neither did, nor could make War against the
Person of Christ, but only against his Church; whence it undeniably follows,
that by the Lamb is meant the Church of Christ; or rather, Christ victorious in
his Church; for it could not else be said of the Lamb, that he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings.

Let us therefore, in the Verse we are upon, understand by the Lamb slain,
Christ in the Church of England, naturally slain in the Person of his
Representative, King Charles, I, and politically slain in the King his Son, and
in the Church, which ran the same fate with them; and then, by the Lamb looking
as if it had been slain (that is, revived after Slaughter) and standing in the
midst of the Throne, etc. must needs be signified the Restoration of the King
and Church, who came, and took the Book out of the right Hand of him that sat
upon the Throne, ver. 7. that is, he came and took the Regal Power (to which it
peculiarly belongs to DEFEND the FAITH of that Book) out of the Hand of him, or
them, who at that time were in Possession of it.

And it evidently appears yet further, that this Lamb cannot be Christ in
Person, taking any Book out of the Father's right Hand; 1. Because St. John did
not see him all the while till now. 2. Because it is expressly said, that he
CAME, and took the Book; whereas, if he had been all the while at the Sitter's
right Hand before, it could not have been said, that he CAME and took the Book
out of it. 3. Because upon the Lamb's taking the Book, the Elders (who are
certainly Mortals upon Earth; the word never having been used to express any
other) sung a new Song, ver. 8, 9. which shows, that they saw the doing of it;
and consequently, that it was done on Earth; and therefore not by Christ in
Person. All which I here offer, besides eight Arguments in my Resolution, etc.
to prove the Throne to be an Earthly Throne. It remains therefore that all
these things were suffered and done by Christ in King Charles the First and
Second, and in the Church in their times; since every thing agrees thereto so
exactly, and is not applicable to any other King and Church in the whole World.

I have here given only a taste of my intended Exposition; but such a one as is
sufficient to convince any Man, that is not hardened against Conviction. For he
that can think so many wonderful things to have happened by chance; and in such
order too, as to favor my Hypothesis, but not at all respected by the Spirit
in the Prophecy, is in a very hopeful way of believing the World it self to
have been made by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, and that it is not rather
the Contrivance of an Infinite Wisdom, and the Workmanship of an Almighty Hand.
Although (to note this also by the by) the Hypothesis I have here laid down, leads
me not only through the Chapters now before us; (as shall be seen hereafter, if
God will) but as easily, and as certainly, through the whole Book of the
Apocalypse. In fine, I crave no favor for this Notion: if it be false, let it
not want the Censure it deserves; but if true (as I am certainly persuaded, and
as he will find, that gives himself the trouble to consider it:) it must needs
be joyful News both to the Church of ENGLAND, and to all others that she holds
Communion with.

For, in a word, the Church and Kingdom described in the fourth and fifth
Chapters of the Revelation (since it is certain that they are a Body, or
Society of Believers Militant in this See the Resol. of three Quest.
World, and not Triumphant in the other) must needs be that Church (or rather,
State of the Church) which was to succeed the fourth Monarchy, and is commonly
known by the Name of the Fifth: Because the supreme visible Head of it, is
likened to God, not at large, or with respect only to his Power, Goodness,
Wisdom, Majesty, and the like; but with particular relation to his Rev. iv. 9,
10. v. 14.
living for ever and ever. And so likewise, when the King and Church restored,
are set forth by that glorious Type of (...), a Rev. v. 6, 7.
Lamb [looking] as if he had been slain, and were revived again, and exalted to
the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty on high; the very same thing is
intimated, to wit, that the Kingdom and Church signified by the revived Lamb,
should never die, Death should no more have Dominion over them: like as it is
noted of the true Lamb after his Resurrection, Romans vi. 9. For this Reason, I
say, the Kingdom of the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Revelation, must needs
be the fifth Monarchy, because the King thereof is likened to God and the Lamb,
with particular respect to their living for ever and ever. For as every King
resembles God in his Power; so none resembles God in his Truth, but a Lover and
Defender of the Truth; none in his Mercy and Goodness, but a Merciful and Good
King; none in his Immortality, but a King, or (which is all one in Prophecy) a
Succession of Kings, that shall never have an end.

Now there never was, nor ever will be any such Succession, but only that of
the fifth Monarchy. And this is called a Kingdom which shall never be
destroyed; neither shall it be left to other People, but it shall break in
pieces and consume all the other Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, Dan.
ii. 44. The like is said Dan. vii. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People
of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

If it be said, That the Kingdom of England was destroyed by the Rebellious
Parliament in Forty Eight; I answer, A Kingdom is not said in Scripture to be
destroyed, unless it be seized by another People. And this is abundantly
evident in the Roman Kingdom; which running through so many Changes of Kings,
Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors and Popes, is yet reckoned
but as one and the same Kingdom, as will not be denied by any Man.

The Church indeed is not like a Kingdom in this respect; for even Englishmen,
if of a different Communion may destroy the Church of England. For in spiritual
things there is as much difference, and more, between an Orthodox Englishman,
and an Englishman that is an Heretic or a Schismatic; as there is in Civil
Matters, between a Native of England, and of another Country. And as no Man
would say, that the Church of England was destroyed, when only some Members of
that Church are removed, and others of the same Communion put in their places
(which yet I pray God may never be,) so the Scriptures do not reckon a Kingdom
to be destroyed, no not although the very Form of Government be subverted (the
Case of Kingdoms being not so tender in this Point, as that of Churches, whose
Government seems to be unalterable, as being of Divine Appointment) while it
continuces in the hands of the same People. And therefore the Perpetuity of the
fifth Monarchy is remarkably described in these words, amongst others
afore-quoted, that it shall not be left to other People, as all the other
Monarchies were to be.

And then, as for the Church of England, tho that was to die, together with the
Person of the King that was then Head of it: yet since the King (together with
the Church) restored again in 1660, is compared to the Lamb slain, and risen
again, and exalted to the right Hand of God, Rev. v. 6, 7. there seems to be no
fear, that the Church of England should ever be destroyed another time, since
it is so remarkably said of Christ himself (who in this is made a Figure of his
Church) that being raised from the Dead he dies no more, Death has no more
Dominion over him.

If it be said, That the Church of England is too small and inconsiderable for
the Accomplishment of the things spoken of the fifth Monarchy; I answer, the
fifth Monarchy is compared but to a Stone cut out of a Mountain, Dan. ii. 34,
45. and such is the Stone of the Church of England to the Mountain of the
Church of Rome, out of which it was cut, and that, without Hands too: So that
if the Church of England in the beginning of its Reformation, had been vast and
mighty in Extent and Numbers, it could not possibly have been the fifth
Monarchy: but being but a Stone to a Mountain, it may very well be it, which
shall become it self in time a great Mountain, and shall fill the whole Earth,
Dan. ii. 35. The like is foretold of this State of the Church, Isa. lx. 22. A
little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation: I the Lord
will hasten it in its time. Since therefore there is no question but the fifth
Monarchy was to begin in a small People; and as little, that God can bring his
Purposes to pass whenever he pleases: the Littleness, the Smallness, the
Inconsiderableness of the Church of England, can be no just Prejudice against
its being the fifth Monarchy, but is rather an Argument to evince it.

But enough of this, and perhaps too much: For what will it all signify? I
cannot believe it, says one; it is impossible, says another. To these I say, I
cannot help their not believing it; and we know, with God nothing shall be
impossible. But if any one of them will give himself the trouble of a diligent
and serious search into the Business; to such a one I dare aver, that he will
find it a far more easy and compendious way to disbelieve, than to disprove it.
May the God and Father of Lights, so illuminate all our Minds, and sanctify all
our Hearts with his holy Spirit, that both the erroneous may come over to the
Communion of this excellent Church, the wavering may be established in it, and
the steadfast may walk worthy of it. Amen.

FINIS.
SOLI TRIUNI GLORIA.

