Numb. 2. A Paraphrase upon Rev. 1.
The Plain Meaning of the First Chapter of the Revelation, set forth in way of
Paraphrase, and Notes. Being also an Exhortation, not to Rest in the Literal
Sense of the Epistles; but to seek out for such a one, as may be Answerable to
the Stateliness of their Common Frontispiece, I Know Thy Works.
Line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little, Esaias.
XXVIII. 10, 13. Which things are an Allegory, Gal. IV. 14. THE Reader is here
supposed to have had a sight of the former Sheet; where I explain the three
first Verses; and so I proceed to the Business in hand; which is,

A Paraphrase upon Rev. 1.

V. 1. The Revelation, whereof Jesus Christ is Author; as God, and not as Man;
for no Man is Capable of such Foreknowledge; The Main End, and Scope of it
being this, viz. To Fore show unto His Servants some things of Great
Importance, near approaching; to wit, Those Things, which in the XXI, and XXII
Chapp. are said to have bin Showed to John, by one of the Vial-angels. The same
Joh. who V. 2. has Recorded the Doctrine, and Miracles of Jesus Christ; and was
himself a Present Witness of them. V. 3. Now, for Encouragement to the Studious
of these Mysteries, Blessed is he that Interprets (says the Spirit) and they
that attend to the words of This Prophecy; and Live answerably; and Observe the
wonderful Workings of God's Providence, in bringing to pass the said great
Things Predicted in it: For the Time of their Accomplishment is Now at hand: it
being the latter end of the Vial-times, which the Revelation chiefly addresses
to; before which Times it could not be rightly Understood, and in respect of
which Only, it is properly called a REVELATION. Notes. Observe here, that
although the Blessedness may after a sort be so interpreted as to belong to the
Reader even of the Literal sense of this Prophecy; there being many Excellent
things, appearing in its very Superfice: yet those words [for the time is at
Hand,] which are assigned as the Reason of the Blessedness, cannot be applied,
but only with regard to the Mystical, or Prophetic sense of it. But here we are
to note also, That the Visions of this Book begin at V. 9. All before that, is
but a Preface, containing the Title; the Author; the main Scope and Design; the
Scribe; the Benefit of Reading it. All which are comprised in the 3 first
verses. Afterward, as John had received a Commandment at V. 11. to write what
he had seen, (or should see) and send it to the Churches etc. so, in the 4th
verse, he begins his Epistle to them, in these words; V. 4. John to the seven
Churches which are in Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace, from God, who in
these Visions has bin represented to me, under the Title of, Which is and Which
was, and Which is to come, Chap. 4.8.16.5. and from the Holy Ghost, who has bin
Represented to me, as Seven Spirits before the Throne of God, Chap. 4.5. Notes.
One Church, considered as divided into Seven Intervals, is represented in this
Prophecy, as seven Churches: just as One Empire, for the like reason, is set
forth as Seven Beasts, or Empires, Chap. XVII. For that Empire, under its sixth
Head, is represented as a Dragon; Chap XII. 3. under its seventh, as a Leopard,
etc. Chap XIII. 2. So a Book, with One Seal, (consisting of One Continued
Mystery all along) is called Chap. V. 1. a Book with 7 Seals. Because the Book
is there Considered, as Divided into Seven Parts. And in like manner, the
Ministers of the Church who in this Prophecy, are Usually called the Angel of
it; if the Church it self be considered as Divided into seven Intervals (or
Churches) are called Seven Angels. These Angels are also called Spirits, Chap.
4. 5. V. 6. And as the Lamb is sometimes Christ, and sometimes his Church ( see
my Notes on Chap. 4.9.) and the Sitter on the Throne, sometimes God, and
sometimes the King; according as the sense Directs; so a spirit is sometimes
the Ministers of the Church, and sometimes the Holy Ghost himself, under whom
they Minister; who has constituted them his Overseers, and who acts in them
and, by them. Lastly, as one Church is 7 Churches; one Angel, seven Angels; so,
one Spirit is seven Spirits, according to the sevenfold Division of the
Church, in which he is. And whereas these seven Spirits are said to be before
the Throne, which argues them to be Ministering Spirits: it will come all to
one, if we understand them of the Holy Ghost (as I have said) considered as the
Actuater, and the influencer of his Ministers; that is, as making good our
Saviors Promise, that he should Abide in, and with the Church for ever, John.
14.16, etc. For God is represented no otherwise (according to the Mystical
sense of this Prophecy) than as Ruling in and by some King; nor Christ, than as
suffering, or Triumphing, in his Church; nor the Holy Ghost, than as Acting in
his Ministers.

V. 5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the Faithful Witness; who laid down his
Life for the Truth's sake; and is Risen again, as the First Fruits of them that
sleep in him, 1 Cor. 15.20. and who, by his Faithful servants, has frequently
done the same, as has bin showed me in these Visions. Who, presently after his
Resurrection became in his Own person, The Prince of the Kings of the earth;
and in these Visions has bin Exhibited as such, in his Vicegerents on Earth,
Chap. 22.3, 4, 5.21.23, 24, 25, 26. Unto him, who, in his Own Person, has
Loved us, and Washed us from our sins in his own Blood: V. 6. And, as has bin
showed me in the following Representations, has (by the Ministry of Reformed
Princes; and particularly, of those of England) highly Honored us, both Laics
and Clergymen, with great Power, and Large Revenues, to be employed in the
service of God, and his Father; and now no more, after the Restoration of the
Church of England, to be taken from us; To Him be Glory; and Dominion, for ever
and ever. Amen. Notes. The main Business of the Revelation, being to set-forth
the Honor of Christ its Author, V. 1. may be conceived as the Reason, why St.
John singles Him. out from the other Persons of the Trinity, contenting himself
with a Bare Mention of the Father and the Holy Spirit, and expressly ascribing
Glory and Dominion to Christ only; a thing very well worth our Observation. For
this is well accommodated to the Business in hand; which is, per varios casus,
and Discrimina, to bring us in the End, to that most Glorious, and most
Desirable Establishment of Christ's Eternal Kingdom in the world. Chap. XXI,
and XXII. and withal, to assure us of our Savior's Divinity. With relation to
which things (to wit, the Kingdom of Christ on earth; and his Equality with the
Father,) we are also to understand the next two verses; thus.

V. 7. Behold, he is Coming speedily, in his Chosen servant, to take Vengeance
of his Enemies; attended with a great Retinue. His Glory shall be very Manifest
Then to Every body; even to those that had a hand in his Own, or in any of his
servants Death; to His, and their Persecutors, and Murderers. And it shall be
matter of Remorse to all Earthly, Sensual, and Degenerate Professors; that ever
they, or their Fathers; had bin concerned in any such Injurious, and
Destructive Practices. They shall then Repent, and give Glory to God by their
Unfeigned Conversion. And so the Tyranny of Antichrist shall be Abolished, and
the Kingdom of Christ Established in the World. Even so. Amen; says every Pious
Soul. Notes. The Subjects of Rome being noted by Waters, Rev XVII. 15. the
Regnant Part is left to be understood by the Earth; which, like an Island,
Overlooketh, Presideth over or (as the Spirit himself there expresses it)
sits upon those Waters. And thus is that Type of Earth constantly taken
wherever it occurs, throughout the Prophecy. And we may Observe also, That as
this verse has Relation to the Kingdom of Christ on Earth: so the Next, as has
bin said, is a Declaration of his Divinity, according to the Letter; and of his
Never-ceasing Care of his Church, according to the spiritual meaning of it.
Thus,

V. 8. I am that Very God, to whom belong all Titles of Honor to Him ascribed
by the Ancient Prophets. More particularly, with respect to my Church, I am
Alpha, and Omega; the the Deginning, and the Ending; says the Lord Jesus
Christ compare V. 11, 13, 17, 18. the First, and the Last (a Title, by the
Prophet Esaias, Appropriated to the only True God, that is to Me; for he saw my
Glory, and spoke those words of Me) which is, and which was and which is to
come, the Almighty, And accordingly, as will be seen evidently from the
following Visions, I continue with my Church (as I have promised them)
throughout All Ages. Mat. XXVIII. ult. Notes. These verses hitherto we are to
look upon, as the Preface; setting-forth the Main Scope of the Book; and
particularly Insisting on the Chief Vision of all. Which had also bin
represented to the Prophet Last. from Chap. XXI, 9. etc. to the end of the
Revelation; and which, for both those Reasons (to wit, both as the Last, and
the Chiefest,) may well be conceived to have left the strongest Impression on
his Mind, and to have lien Uppermost in his Meditations; when (having bin a
Spectator of the whole scene) he came to send an account of it, accorning to
Order, to the seven Churches. The following verses to the 12th, are a Plain
Declaration of some Circumstances, relating to St. John's Receiving the
Visions; and of great Use for our Understanding the meaning of them. Especially
that Circumstance of his being in the Isle of Patmos as will appear by and by.

V. 9. I John who also am your Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle that is called Patmos,
for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Which my Desolate,
and Disconsolate Condition (as an Instance of his Tender Care over All that are
Afflicted for his sake) he was pleased to make an Opportunity of imparting
Great and Glorious Mysteries to me, in the following manner.

V. 10. I was in a Rapture, or Ecstasy, on a certain Sunday, of all the days in
the week; which the Lord will have to be observed in a peculiar manner and to
be employed to his own Honor, in holy Exercises, and Meditations; and I heard
behind me, a great Voice as of a Trumpet (resembling the Voice of the Ministers
of Christ, Esaias. LVIII. 1.) Saying I am Alpha, and Omega; the First, and the
Last; the Church before the Reformation, and the Church Reformed: and what thou
see, write in a Book, and send it unto the Seven Churches, which are in Asia:
unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto
Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

V. 12. And being thus posited in the Isle of Patmos, and turning the Byes of
my Mind, as directed by the Bare sound of the words, toward Asia; I could not
perceive the Voice, that spoke to me. For which cause it was, that the Voice
spoke Behind me: that thereby I might be obliged to turn my Mind Westward,
toward Rome. by which was intimated to me (and in Me, to Every Reader of the
following Epistles. That there are Two Senses of the Name of Every Church; the
One Litteral, which is the Fore right sense: and the Other Mystical; which
sounds Behind us as it were; so that we must Turn our Imagination from the
Letter, ere we can Discern the True Purport of the Epistles. The same thing,
which is also signified in the Sealed Book by the writing within the Book,
(which could not be read without Unsealing the Book;) and the writing on the
Back side, Obvious to Every eye, Rev. 1. Wherefore being thus Turned toward
Rome, I perceived what I looked for; to wit, an Appearance of seven Golden
Candlesticks; of Asia, a very Faint Resemblance [as may appear from All
accounts that are given of the Epistles in the Literal way;] but of the Church
of Rome considered as Divided (after the Custom of this Prophecy in other
Cases) into seven Intervals, a most Bright, and Lively one. Notes. This I hope
to make appear by the following Exposition. Only we may observe, that as the
Empire of Rome is set forth by the Mystical name of Babylon, Chap. XVII. so the
Church of Rome here, by the Churches of Asia. And as the Mystical Babylon has
some Resemblance to the Real one: so, no doubt, the Mystical Churches of Asia.
to their Prototypes. So that the Epistles may be accommodated to the Real
Churches of Asia, after a sort; (and as the Vision Rev. XVII. may be to Real
Babylon;) but there appears no Life nor Spirit in them, til they are applied to
the Mystical Churches.

V. 13. And in the midst of the Seven Candlesticks, I saw the Lord Jesus
represented in the Form of the Rulers of his Church, his Immediate Ministers,
and Vicegerents; from the Beginning to the ending; which we are to consider, as
an Exemplification of the Title he had just before assumed, of being the First,
and the Last. In which, the first thing that offered it self was his (...) [ as
the Septuagint calls one of the Priestly Habits, Exodus XXVIII. 4.] a Long
Garment down to the foot; implying that Government of the Church of Rome, and
Inspection and Care of the Faithful in that Communion, from first to last
should be (for the far greatest part) in the hands of Priests, next under
Christ. And those, Grave, Ancient Men; agreeing to the Representation of the
Head and Hair of the Apparition, which were White like Wool, as White as Snow.
And his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, burning with Zeal against Idolatry:
(compare Deuteronomy. XIII. 8. Acts. XVII. 16. Ps. LXXIX. 5. etc.) which was the great
Offense, that still exercised the Patience of the Faithful all along; till in
the Latter times of that Church, (for Rome is not reckoned as a Church. in this
Prophecy, after the Reformation) which are signified by the Feet of this
Appearance (for which, comp. Dan. II. 33. etc.) Burning the servants of Christ
alive, became the Stated Revenge of their Opposing Idolatry. And therefore were
the Feet of the Son of Man represented like unto Fine Brass, as if they burned
in a Furnace, and his Voice was as the sound of many Waters; that is, Peoples,
and Nations; of which the Church of Rome, the great Metropolis of the Empire,
all along (but especially since the Constantinian Revolution) has consisted. V.
16. And by Miracles, and Signs and Mighty Deeds, and Extraordinary Providence,
as with his Right Hand, he still Supported his Faithful servants, the Preachers
of his Word; and, for the more effectual Enlargement of his Kingdom; raised up
Emperors, and other Potentates, to join their Temporal Power, with the
Spiritual of his Priests; which, like a Two-edged sword, might Cut Both ways.
And the splendour of his Countenance (whereby he brought Men under his
Obedience, Acts. IX. 3.4. XXVI. 13.14. Psalm. LXVII. 1, 2. and signifies here,
the Light of his Glorious Gospel) was as the San shines in his Strength. Which
being both the Uppermost (or First) part of the Image; and yet the Last thing I
was directed to take Notice of; is a sign, That it ought to be referred, both
to the First and Last Times of the Church signified by the Image: to wit, That
as she was at first Converted (and Particularly, her first Bishop St. Paul) by
such a Glorious Light; so she should be at Last Reformed by such a another,
Spiritually understood. Notes. The Right Hand of God is used in Scripture, 1.
For Gods Miraculous Power, ( Exodus XV. 6. Acts. 11.33. V. 31.) 2. For Regal
Power, God's Peculiar Blessing, and Direction, ( Isal. XVII. 7. XVIII. 5. Rev.
V. 1.) 3. For Both; ( Psalm. XLIV. 3. LXXVIII. 54.) And thus also Christ, or any
Good King, that fights his Battles, may be called The Man of God's Right Hand,
Psalm. LXXX. 17. wherefore, by its Place in the Image before us; where the
Voice, as the sound of many Waters, on the one side, has a Manifest Aspect upon
the Mighty Increase of the Church of Rome, upon Constantine's coming to the
Empire; and the Two-edged Sword on the other side, to the Twofold Power, that
the Church thereby attained; I cannot but think, that the Right Hand ought to
be referred Principally, to that Notable Deliverance of the Church, by
Constantine the Great; and to the Favor of many Pious Princes afterward,
consequent thereupon; who showed themselves Nursing Fathers to the Family of
Christ.

V. 17. Whereupon I fell at his Feet as Dead; and was therein a Type of the
Reformation; that is, of those, who by the Zealous Preaching of Wickliff,
Luther, Calvin, and many other Godly Ministers of the Gospel (the Light of
Learning also breaking-out with a surprising Luster at the same time were
brought-off to Purity of Religion, from the Romish Superstitions. Notes. The
Feet of Christ are very fitly set to denote the Stanch, Stable, and suffering
part of his Church; by reason of that Ancient Prediction which they manifestly
allude to, concerning the Serpents bruising the seed-of-the-Womans Heel, Genesis
III. 15. Now there is in this Hieroglyphic, a threefold mention of Christ's
Feet. One, in the (...), or Garment down to the Foot; in the First part of the
Description. Which may be referred to the Apostles St. Peter, and St. Paul, the
Basis or Foundation of this Church of Rome; as the Apostles are called Ephesians.
11.20. The next, just after the Description of his Fiery (or Jealous) Eyes;
which is very appositely seconded with that of his Feet, like unto Fine Brass,
as if they burned in a Farnace. For they that could not endure to see the True
God dishonored by Idolatry, were sure to be cast into a Burning Fiery Furnace.
This therefore signifies the Fiery Trials of that Church, both before
Constantine, and also before the Reformation, It signifies those before
Constantine, by virtue of its place in the Description. For it is followed by
that Voice like the sound of many Waters; which refers (as has bin observed
already) to that Vast Augmentation of the Churches Numbers, made by
Constantine's coming to the Roman Throne. which Advancement of his came just to
Closeup the Hottest of all the Ten Persecutions. And it signifies also the
Persecutions, that immediately Preceded the Reformation, in virtue of the place
that the Feet have in the Body; which is the Last, and Lowest of all; whereby
are signified the Last times of that Church, that is represented by the Image,
Dan. 11.33. The third mention of Christ's Feet, is in the words we are now
upon; to wit, next after that of the Glorious Light, whereby the Reformation
was effected. When I saw his Countenance so exceeing bright and dazzling, I fell
(says the Prophet) at his Feet as dead. Whereby is implied, That the
Reformation was to be brought in immediately upon that horrid Burning of the
Faithful, in Queen Mary's days, for their constant Profession of the Faith.
Which is here expressed by the Feet of Christ like fine Brass, as if they
Burned in a Furnace. And he laid his Right hand upon me, that is, And by the
Ministry of Kings (particularly of the English) he laid, as it were, his Right
hand upon me [see the Notes on the former verse;] and bid me not to Fear; for
He would certainly stand by me in the Profession of his Holy Truth. For (says
he again to me) I am the First and the Last; am Present with my Church
throughout All Ages; both with the Primitive, and the Reformed; both with the
Church of Rome and with the Church of England, etc. I am he that lives, and
was dead, both in my own Person, and in the King and Church of England; Chap.
V. 6. and behold I am now alive again in both respects for evermore (it being
not possible, that either I, or the said Church, should suffer Death again a
second time) Amen; And have the Keys of Hell and of Death, whereby I am
empour'd to destroy all Enemies; and am now about to put in use the Power, I am
invested with. Notes. These Keys are an Emblem of Christ's Kingdom which when
he comes to settle in the world, he brings in his hand the Key of the
Bottomless Pit; to shut Satan up into it, that he may no longer have his
Liberty, to deceive the world. Chap. XX. 1, 3. And thus we see in this
Hieroglyphic, a Notable Representation of the Church (and of the Lord Jesus in
it, and with it) all along, from First to Last. In the Church of Rome first;
and, upon her Rejection (whereof more, in the Epistle to Laodicea see also Romans
XI. 20, 21, 22.) in the Church of England. But here we may observe, That the
Condition of the Primitive Church, is set forth by a visible Representation:
but that of the Reformed Church, by Speech. Upon which it may be fit to Note,
That St. John constantly represents a Member (one or more,) of the Reformed
Church and consequently, is never found, either to speak, or to be spoken to,
but only in the Times of the Reformation. Instances we have, Chap. IV. 1. V. 5.
VI. 3, 5, 7. VII. 13. X. 8. and in many other places. If it be Objected, That
the Epistles describe the Fates of the Primitive Church and yet are Dictated to
St. John, every word of them: I answer, True; but then, Observe withal, That
the Dictator himself (to whom all times are Present) first puts himself into
the Times of the Reformation, before be speaks a word. His Voice indeed is said
to have bin as the Voice of many Waters before: but no distinct Word was heard
from him. The Epistles therefore are sent, as from the Reformed Church to the
Primitive; and contain the One's Censure of the Other, as it is drawn in their
Writings. To which purpose again, is that of the Prophets Looking back, Chap.
1.12. ere he could see the seven Candlesticks. For, as he had his Mind upon
Asia first (as is said already) but was made by the Voice to turn himself
toward Rome: so, as a Prophet, we are to suppose, that he had his mind upon
Time to Come; but was Turned by the Voice to time Past. That is, At his first
Entrance into his Prophetic Ecstacy, being rapt into the Times of the
Reformation, he could not see the Primitive Church of Rome, without
Looking-back. And this is that which has bin already Intimated, from the first
3 verses, That the Revelation, as a Prophecy, speaks to the Vial-times only.
Which Notion, if it seem a little hard at first to comprehend; I pray, How can
you expect, but that some should do so? Get over it therefore for the present,
with as little Prejudice as you can. The Rest are Easier; and at last will make
This Easier also; nay, a little Time will put it past all Question.

V. 19. In the end, with reference to the business I was called to, he added
these words, Write the things which thou have seen, every thing as soon as thou
have seen it [ Compare Chap X. 4. XIV. 13. XIX. 6. XXI. 5.] both This Vision
that thou have seen already, and those that are to follow: concerning the
Affairs both of the Church of thy own times, and from thence to the Reformation
(for these, we must note, are the words of an Interpreter, and not of one that
has a Part in the Representation; and therefore are to be understood Plainly,
of the Real Time then Present) and Write also the State of the Reformed Church
(which is called Chap. IV. 1. Things that must be Hereafter.) The Mystery of
the seven stars, which thou saw in my Right Hand, and of the seven Golden
Candlesticks. The seven Stars are the Angels, or Ministers, of the Seven
Churches; and the Seven Candlesticks, which thou saw, are the Seven
Churches. Notes. From hence again it appears, That the Epistles are Mystical.
For Why else are Candlesticks put for Churches; and Stars, for Ministers, if
every thing else be Plainly to be understood? And why in plain Epistles so
formal, and Unheard Of an Interpretation of Two words (not very Difficult of
themselves neither) but to warn us, That the Epistles are not written in a
Vulgar Style; but are all of a Piece with what is thus Explained; and to Oblige
us, not to take up with the Bare Letter, where a Convenient Exposition can be
given in another way? Lastly, Do but read the Epistles of St. Paul, St. James,
St. Peter, St. John, or St. Jude, and compare them with these here before us:
and you will not stick to say (or think at least) That if there be no sense of
these Epistles, but the Literal, they are not without reason Placed the Last in
the Sacred Volume. Let us see then, What may be made of them in the Mystical,
or Allegorical way; called also spiritual. Chap. XI: 8. (where Rome is said to
be Spiritually called Sodom, and Egypt, and (the Place) also where our Lord was
Crucified, that is, Jerusalem; not Quatenus the Holy City, but only Quatenus
the Place where our Lord was Crucified. As much as to say, It is a sort of
Church indeed, but no Better a one, than this comes to. Let us see, I say, what
may be made of the Epistles in this Spiritual sense.) For, as for the Literal;
notwithstanding our Saviors so solemn Ostentation of his Extraordinary
Knowledge, at the beginning of Every Epistle, as if it would appear from the
Discourse it is prefixed to; I am confident, That no Man, from all the Literal
Interpretations, that have yet come abroad, has formed any better Opinion of
our Saviors knowledge, than he had before; to say no worse. For which very
reason, Brethren, if there were no other, Let us be persuaded to open our Eyes,
and to look about us a little; and to seek for such a sense, and Heartily (when
offered) to Embrace it, as may be apt to raise our Esteem of that Divine
Prescience, which our Savior we see, does so much in this Prophecy, and above
all, in the Epistles, value himself upon; and to Convince every Good Christian,
That the Author of these Epistles has shown a much larger Reach of knowledge in
them, than is shown in any of his Disciples Epistolary Writings; and, that That
Inscription, I Know Thy Works, Promising something very extraordinary; and for
that purpose so Observably Placed in the most Conspicuous Part, the very Front
of every Epistle (an Ornament which the Literalists, for what I find, could
very well dispense with) Deserves the Place it is affixt to, and becomes it.

LONDON, Printed June, 1699. And are to be had at Mr. Ball's in Lee-street hard
by Red-Lion-Square.


