THE Bloody Babylon: OR, A Collection of some Particulars Concerning the
PERSECUTION Raging in France against the Protestants, FROM THE PEACE of
RESWICK, TO THE MARTYRDOM of the Reverend Monsieur BROVSSON, INCLUSIVELY. In a
LETTER to a LORD.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, Sanguine orevit,
Sanguine duravit, Sanguine finis erit.
LONDON: Printed for George Huddleston, at the Black-moor's Head near
Exeter-Change in the Strand, School.

My LORD,
THE last time I had the Honor to pay my Duty to your Lordship, you were
pleased to give your Opinion concerning the True Relation of what has been
transacted in behalf of those of the Reformed Religion, during the Treaty of
Peace at Reswick, with an account of the present Persecution in France, lately
published. Your Lordship approved the Design of the Author in the First Letter,
viz. to relate with what Warmth and Vigor the Protestant Plenipotentiaries had
labored to procure some Ease to the Distressed Reformed; it being absolutely
necessary This Nation should have a right Information in that Matter, since the
Protestants in general had been in the dark till now, and were apt to suspect
that They had been wanting in their Endeavors to obtain any Benefit for them
by that Peace, which was designed for the Repose of all Europe: But that by the
perusal of this Relation, it would appear that their Solicitations would not
have proved ineffectual, could the French Court have been prevailed upon, or
Bigoted Popery persuaded to a Compliance with the Dictates either of Humanity
or Christianity.

As for his Second Letter, which contains a Tragical Description of the
Persecution Raging in France since the Peace, your Lordship, who knows the
Truth of the several Particulars there mentioned, as well as the Impudence of
the Papists, who make it their Business everywhere to give out, That there is
no such thing as a Persecution, did very well apply the way of the Spiritual
Babylon, to that of the Adulterous Woman spoken of, Prove. 30. 20. She eats,
and wipeth her Mouth, and faith, I have done no Wickedness. The Church of Rome
vents her Fury, by inflicting the most exquisite Torments upon the True
Protestants in France; and yet in England, Holland, etc. says, I have done no
such thing. To which your Lordship added, That it might be serviceable to the
Public, to see a Collection of all the Declarations, Decrees, and Orders of
the French Court, issued out against the Protestants, together with some
Particulars concerning the severe Execution of them; but such as should be
certain, as to Matter of Fact, that is related either by Eyewitnesses, or by
Persons of undoubted Credit, and published without any Discourse or Reflection
upon it; and that such a Book would contribute very much to give the World a
true Idea of the miserable Condition of the Reformed in France, and to increase
that Fellow-feeling all the Protestants should have to one another, and to the
shaming (if possible) the Papists out of their usual Trick of Murdering,
Hanging, Breaking upon the Wheel in one Place, and stoutly denying it in
another.

Your Desire, my Lord, is to me a Command, and I heartily wish, for the sake of
our distressed Brethren, I could not satisfy your Lordship in this particular
so much as I can. There is no difficulty in performing the Task; and therefore
I shall in the first place give an Account at large of all the Declarations and
Decrees lately issued out against Them; and in the next, bring in some
unquestionable Instances with what Eagerness and Severity they have been
Executed, as well as those which have been already seen but at different times,
as also such as never appeared till now to the Public View; that by the full
Prospect of them all together, any Judicious or indifferent Person may be
convinced of the Cruel Persecution now in France, and pity the sad Case of the
Reformed there, as well as abhor the Barbarity of the Papists.

The King's Declaration, Prohibiting his Subjects to settle in Orange, or to
Exercise the Pretended Reformed Religion.
LEWIS by the Grace of GOD, King of France and Navar, to all to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting: The Zeal which we have always had for the Only
and True Religion, having excited in us a desire to Extinguish Heresy, which
had spread it self all over our Kingdom; We still believed, That all the
Authority which God has put into our hands, ought at all times to be made use
of most effectually and successfully, to succor and defend his Cause. For this
Reason, after we had demolished the Churches of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, and forbidden all the Exercises of it, by those who professed it. We
omitted nothing that we thought most effectual to bring them back into the
Bosom of the Church: We took care to have their Children bred up in the
Sentiments of true Christians; and prohibited, under severe Penalties, all
those who out of a blind Obstinacy-rather chose to abandon their Estates, their
Families, and their Country, than renounce their Errors, to depart our Kingdom.
And in regard that all our Care had no other aim, then the Glory of God, and
the support of his Church, he has been pleased to assist us hitherto with all
the success we could desire; and we have with delight beheld, that the greatest
part of those whose Conversion seemed to be the most suspected, have at length
sincerely acknowledged and embraced the true Religion. But seeing there are
some remaining still, who staggering in their Faith, might relapse into their
former Errors, if the Principality of Orange, enclosed within our Dominions,
might serve them for a Place of retreat, to settle there, and perform the
Exercises of the Pretended Reformed Religion, or of any other forbidden Acts.
We thought it our Duty, precisely to explain our Intention upon that particular
Point. For these Reasons, by these Presents, signed with our Hand, we have
made, and do make, most express Prohibitions, and Inhibitions, forbidding all
our Subjects, of what Quality or Condition soever, to go and settle themselves
in the Principality of Orange, under any Pretense whatever. We also enjoin all
those who shall be found to have settled their Abodes there, to return within
Six Months, to Commence from the Publication of these Presents, under the
Penalties set forth by our Declaration bearing date August 1669. We likewise
forbid all our Subjects to Perform any Exercise of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, to Contract any Marriage within the said Principality of Orange, or
to send their Children thither to be Baptized by the Ministers there, or to be
by them instructed in the Exercises of the said Religion, or in any other
Studies; and generally, not to do or suffer to be done, by their Children, or
others of whom they shall have the Tutelage or Education, any Exercises or Acts
which are not permitted and used in our Kingdom; and all this under the Penalty
of Death, upon the Infringer of these Injunctions. Nevertheless, it is not our
Intention, by these Presents, to hinder our Subjects from going into the
Principality of Orange, nor from staying there so long as the Necessity of
their Affairs, or their Trade shall require. Thus we give Command to our
Beloved and Faithful Counselors holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, that
they order these Presents to be Read, Published, Registered, and put in due
Execution, according to their Form and Tenor; for is this our Will and
Pleasure. In Testimony whereof, we have caused our Seal to be affixed to these
Presents.

Given at Versailles this 23d Day of November, 1697. and of our Reign the 55th.
By the King, LOUIS.
And below, PHELYPEAUX.

LEWIS, by the Grace of GOD, King of France and Navar, to all to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting, Whereas by our Declaration of the 23d of
November last, we forbad all our Subjects, of what Quality or Condition soever,
to settle in the Principality of Orange, or to Perform any Exercise of the
Pretended Reformed Religion there; and at the same time, we gave them leave to
reside there, so long as their Affairs, or their Trade should require. But
being given to understand, that several disaffected New Converts abused that
Liberty, and under the false Pretense of Trade, which nevertheless they do not
follow, repair to the City of Orange, there to perform the Exercises of the
said Pretended Reformed Religion, in defiance of our Prohibition: And though it
be our intention, that our People should enjoy all the Advantages they can
expect from the Peace; and to favor Trade as much as it is possible for us to
do, by giving all the Encouragements necessary for the carrying of it on, with
the greatest Success: Nevertheless, as it would not be just that those of our
Subjects who are refractory to our Orders, should abuse the specious Pretense
of Trade to evade the Execution of our Declarations, we thought it Necessary to
Explain our Meaning more precisely, touching the Manner of their Trading, for
the future, within the Principality of Orange; to the end that they who have no
other aim then to drive a Trade bona fide, may do it more freely, and without
fear of the Penalties mentioned in our Declarations. For these Causes,
conformable to our said Declaration of the 23d of November last, we have, and
do permit by these Presents, signed with our Hand, all our ancient Catholic
Subjects to Traffic and Trade in all manner of Goods and Merchandise in the
Principality of Orange, upon Condition however, that before they set out for
that Principality, they ask leave of our Governors, Commanders, or Intendants
of our Provinces, where they shall have their Abodes; to whom they shall
declare the Nature and Condition of their Trade, which being done, leave shall
be granted them without any scruple; and when they shall arrive in the Province
the nearest to that Principality, they shall show their License to the
Governor, Commander, or Intendant, under the following Penalties to be
inflicted upon those who shall presume to go into the said Principality without
Licenses; viz. the Men to be Condemned to the Galleys for their Lives; the
Women to be five Years Imprisoned, and to pay a Forfeiture of 3000 Liyres;
which Penalties shall neither be Remitted or Abated. And it is our farther
Pleasure, that our said Declaration of the 23d of November last, be exactly
observed, according to its full Form and Tenor. This we give in Command to all
our beloved and faithful Counselors, etc.

Given at Versailles, Jan. 13. School. and 55th of our Reign. LOUIS.
And lower, PHELYPEAUX.

The King's DECLARATION, Giving leave to those who had departed his Kingdom for
the sake of their Religion to come back again, upon Condition of abjuring their
Religion, and professing the Roman.
LEWIS, by the Grace of GOD, etc. greeting, Having by our Edict of October. 1685.
abolished throughout the whole Extent of our Kingdom, the Exercise of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, which the Misfortunes of the preceding Reigns had
obliged the Kings our Predecessors to Tolerate therein, we forbad at the same
time, those of our Subjects who professed the said Religion, to depart our
Kingdom; the Men under the Penalty of being Condemned to the Galleys; the Women
under the Penalty of Confiscation of Body and Goods. And by our Declaration in
May, 1686. we forbad all those who had embraced the Roman Catholic Religion to
depart the Kingdom, under the same Penalties; but in regard a great number of
those who had the Misfortune to withdraw themselves into Foreign Countries,
contrary to those Prohitions, have desired to return again, and there to
Profess and Exercise the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion, and for as
much as our Goodness to our Subjects has inclined us to give them particular
Permission so to do; It is our Pleasure also, to grant a General one to the
same end, for all the rest who have the same desire, and hereby to secure them
all from the Penalties which they have incurred by their Disobedience to our
Orders. For these Reasons, with the Advice of our Council, and out of our
especial Grace and Favor, full Power, and Royal Authority, we have by these
Presents, Signed with our Hand, Permitted and Granted, as we do hereby permit,
and grant to all our Subjects, as well Men as Women, who left our Kingdom,
contrary to our Edicts of October, 1685. and our Declaration of May, 1686. to
return back within six Months, upon Condition, that they Profess and Exercise
the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion, and freely there to remain,
behaving themselves therein like the rest of our Subjects. And it is our
farther Will and Pleasure, that they make their Declaration of it to the
respective Governor or Commander, in the first place under our Obedience,
through which they shall pass in their Return into our Kingdom, of which they
shall take a Certificate; Which same Declaration we order them also to
reiterate, three Days after their arrival, before the Principal Officer of the
Royal Bailliage, where they intend to reside, and within Eight days next
following, to make their Abjuration before the Archbishop, or Bishop of the
Place, or before the Curate, or other Ecclesiastic, having power to receive
it, or to show them their Certificate, if they have done it in any other Place,
after their Return into our Kingdom, to the end it may be allowed by them, if
they see cause so to do: Which done we discharge them from the Corporal
Punishments mentioned in our Edict and Declaration; imposing, as to this
matter, perpetual Silence upon our Proctors General, and their Substitutes, so
that they shall not presume to prosecute them for the future for the same
Matter, upon any pretense whatsoever. To this end, we give in charge to our
Beloved and Faithful Counselors, holding our Court of Parliament at Paris,
that they cause these Presents to be Read, Published and Registered, and the
Contents thereof to be put in Execution, according to their Form and Tenor,
etc.

Given at Versailles, February the 10th, and of our Reign the 55th. Signed,
LOVIS.
And Lower, PHILYPEAVX.

These Declarations have been both preceded and followed by particular orders
to the Intendants of all the Provinces of the Kingdom against the Reformed,
empowering them to give Sentence without Appeal against the New Converts, who
have been taken in some Assemblies, and to seize upon all the Children, who
were of years to receive Instruction; at the same time Inhibitions were set
forth, prohibiting all the newly Reunited to Exercise any Employment or Trade,
unless they perform all the Duties of Good Catholics. This we were informed of
in November last, and received advice in January following, that by the King's
Command to the Intendant of the Province of Languedoe, all the New Converts who
have Children of Age to go to School, are obliged to send them thither, as also
to public Instructions and Catechisms, upon pain of being constrained by
pecuniary Mulcts, and other ways of Severity; and if they persevere in
Disobedience, they are to have Soldiers quartered upon them, to whom they are
to pay so much a day till they comply, and also to be further prosecuted, and
punished as the King shall ordain: Schoolmasters, and Mistresses, Curates and
Vicars, are to take a List at the beginning of every Year of the New Converts
Children, and if they fail to come to School, they are to give Notice of it to
the Kings Intendant; and the Schoolmasters and Mistresses are obliged to go
every day to Mass, with the Children committed to their care, etc.

These Declarations and Orders have been so diligently and severely Executed,
that many will (I fear) speak on their Deathbeds, as Cardinal Wolsey did on
his, If I bad served my God, as well as I have done my King, he would not at
this time have cast me off; as you may see by the few following Instances.

In December last they writ from Poitou, That the Sieur de M^^pcon D'Ablege,
Intendant of Justice, gave Sentence, without Appeal, upon several New Converts
of that Country, that were assembled together for the Exercise of their
Religion, two of which he caused to be hanged, one at Poitiers, and the other
at St. Maixant, and he has also Condemned several to the Galleys, others to
Banishment, and others to terrible Forfeitures.

A Copy of a Letter from Poitou in last March.
HEre has been published by Sound of Trumpet, an Ordinance of the King's, by
which all Persons are enjoined to discover those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who are returned, or shall hereafter return from Foreign Countries,
to the end they may be forced to make their Abjuration. To which purpose,
Commissioners are appointed in every Quarter, who have order to look after this
Affair. They have also Registered the Children of all the new Converts that are
in this City, and have signified to their Fathers and Mothers, that it is the
King's Pleasure, that they themselves should carry them regularly to Mass,
under the Forfeiture of Twenty Five Livres, and to have Dragoons quartered upon
them every time they miss: Which has been put in Execution in Sevennes, and in
other Quarters at Somizes, a Town near Montpellier, they have raised above 2000
Livres by Forfeitures of this Nature. Our Intendant continues his Rigor in the
Execution of these Severities with an indefatigable and furious Zeal. Within
this little while he Condemned to Death three Ministers, who were hanged within
a few Days after they were taken. He has also Condemned two Men to the Galleys,
for having been at Orange without leave: And sending for some of our most
considerable Merchants, he told 'em, That the King was resolved to have but one
Religion in France; and that if the New Converts did not go to Mass, and
Conform as good Catholics ought to do, they would be ruined and sacked by the
Soldiers. We expect here Monsieur De Broglio, with two Regiments of Dragoons,
who are to be quartered upon those that refuse to do, as they are ordered.

A Copy of the Affidavit that Francis Daubinet, made before a Justice of Peace,
in March, School.
FRancis Daubinet, Merchant, a Protestant born in Montpellier, makes Oath,
That in January last he saw one du Plan, of St. Laurens le Munier in Sevennes,
hanged in a Place called les Planade, between the Citadel and the City of
Montpellier, upon no other account than that of having prayed to God: That he
saw the said du Plan going out of the said Citadel to the Gibbet, praying to
God with great Fervency; and that he heard him* then making Complaints against
two Jesuits, who would needs accompany him to the place of Execution with a
Crucifix in their hands, and saying, Merciless Men! you have not long since put
my two Brothers to death, and now I give up my Life, as well as they have
already done, for Christ and his Holy Protestant Religion. And that when they
offered to save his Life, if he would abjure his Religion, and turn Papist, he
answered, He would not do it. And that the Jesuits perceiving that his Prayers,
which were very fervent, caused great attention among the People, and drew
Tears from the Spectators ordered five Drummers to beat their Drums, to hinder
thereby the People from hearing his Prayers. This Deponent moreover says, That
about a Fortnight before this Execution, he saw Mr. Rowzier, living in a Town
near Jomieres in Languedoc, brought out of the Citadel of Montpellier, in order
to be conducted to Marseilles, and sent to the Galleys there as a Slave,
pursuant to his Condemnation, for having accompanied to Orange a Protestant
Maid, the Papists saying, That the French King would have none of his Subjects
to go and hear any Prayers and Sermons in Orange, or to have any Commerce with
that City. This Deponent does further declare, That in the beginning of
February last, several Persons of Villevielle near Somieres, went to
Montpellier to complain to the Intendant Baville, That Mr. de Villeville, Lord
of the Manor of the said Town, had killed a Woman by beating her with a Stick
to force her to go to Mass, and struck out another's right Eye: But all the
Justice the Plaintiffs got from the Intendant for the said Murder and Cruelty,
was only this Answer, That Mr. de Villeville had put in execution the Orders he
had received from the King, whom every body ought to obey by going to Mass,
etc. All these Particulars the Deponent certifies upon Oath to be true, and
notoriously known to all the Inhabitants of Montpellier.

A Copy of a Warrant, the Original whereof was sent from Castres to a Refugee
living in London.
MR. -- or Mrs -- having failed to send -- his Son, or Daughter, to the
Catechism and Mass this Day, shall pay to Mr. Charteau, Receiver of the Fines
levied upon the New Converts the Sum of 25 Livres; and till he has made the
said Payment, and obeyed the Orders of my Lord Intendant, expressed in his
Ordinance on the 22d of December last, Four Soldiers of the Militia shall be
Quartered upon him, whom he is to provide with Victuals, and allow besides, 10
d. a day; which Number may be increased; if it be thought convenient.

Given at Castres, March 11. School. Signed, BARBARA.

From Bordeaux, March 15. School.
HEre has been published a Decree, by which the New Converts are obliged to
Baptize their Children within 24 Hours, and to bring them up in the Romish
Faith, under the Forfeiture of 500 Livres. By Order of Mr. de Sourdis, Twenty
young Girls have been taken from a School-Mistress's House, and carried to the
Ladies of the Faith. They also continue their Prosecutions against the New
Converts, who shall fail in acquitting themselves of the Duties that are
prescribed 'em.

From Paris, March 31.
THey have lately writ, That they have put into the Convent of the New
Catholics the young Lady Bertha, who was Contracted to a Gentleman, who is a
new Convert as well as her self: At the same time they sent to the Bastile the
Sieur Riviere a Lace Merchant, who is also one of the New Reunited. Sometime
after, they took up a Young Lady of Poitou, whose Name is La Touch Cher^ut,
Niece to the Marquis Dangeau: And from Bordeaux they write, that all the
Children of the New Converts are actually taken up, and sent away to be
Educated in the Roman Religion, which puts them into a strange Consternation,
for they never expected such Usage, who always so earnestly panted after Peace
Some of these Gentlemen desired Passports to retire into Foreign Countries, but
instead of granting their Desires, they are so much the more narrowly watched.
The Convent of the New Converts is so full, that they are forced to hire a
House in the Neighborhood to supply their want of Room.

An Abstract of two Letters from Castres in Upper Languedoc.
May 10. School.
THE Rage of our Enemies increases every day, the Count Broglio is come hither
since Tuesday last, breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against the Church
of God: He began by summoning all the heads of Families, and would see every
one of them in particular. They all make a stout Resistance, but are all
dragged into Gaol, and some of them have been banished. Mr. Thomas is gone for
Dijon. Mr. Du Buisson who has five Children for the most part seized on as well
as his Estate, is sent beyond Moulins. It would be too long to mention all by
Name; there might be some who had not strength enough to suffer all the
Torments they were put to, who, however, have not altogether promised to turn,
but desired time to consider out* The number of them is very small. I cannot
forbear naming Mr. Auriol, Uncle to those Gentlemen of his Name who live now in
London; and Mr. Cauaille. They have dragged Mr. Bernard into Prison, after
having quite ruined him, and seized on his three Daughters, whom they put into
a Nunnery at L'^^tr^^. But I will not insist upon Particulars. They allow but
three or four Hours time to those whom they take out of their Houses, and do
not enquire, whether they have either wherewithal to bear their Charges; or any
Cartiage for their Journey. To morrow is appointed for the Women to make their
Personal appearance. They are ready to go, those at least who have any love for
their Religion, and the Number of them is very great. Good God! why should we
not all persist in the Faith, both Men and Women, for even Children of Ten
years old hold out, and there is not one among them willing to yield. This is a
Miracle, which God Almighty sets before our Eyes, and which we must make a good
use of. This Roaring Lion, the Count Broglio, went the day before yesterday to
Roquecourbe, but all the Inhabitants of it, having forsaken their respective
Houses, he met no body there, and threatened to raze their Town to the very
Ground, in case they refuse to return home. They have cited all the Heads of
Families living in our Hill-Country. A great many of them arrived here
yesterday; most of them are put in Prison* And I do not think that they have as
yet mustered them all. In short, our Miseries are very great, and we cannot
say, when God Almighty will be pleased to come and relieve us. Can it be
possible that the Protestant Princes should quite forsake us? Alas! We beg
nothing else of them, but their intercession to our Great King, in order to
obtain the Liberty of going out of his Dominions; This favor perhaps would be
granted to their Request. In short, our Enemies excuse their hard-heartedness
with this pretense, saying, That their ill usage against us, is only by way of
Reprisal, since the Irish Catholics are more severely dealt with by the
English Protestants. We cannot believe what they say, but should be very glad
to be informed of the Truth of it. We still entreat the Prayers of the Church.

Castres, May the 18th, School.
WHo is able to give a full Description of our Miseries! It is impossible for a
Humane Soul to reach it. Our Calamities are so great, that no body can express
them. The Count Broglio went from hence on Monday last, after having either
banished or Imprisoned part of the Inhabitants. There is no need of giving you
their Names. And at his departure he left Orders to carry Bills to their
respective Houses, whereby they were all admonished to go to Mass; and in case
they do not appear there, by a Decree made for that purpose, the Goods and
Estates of the Rebels (for so they call us) are to be seized, and their Houses
demolished. The Bills were delivered, but they answered, The King is Master of
both our Goods and Lives, and we are ready to give them up for his Service, but
our Souls belong to God only. This Answer has been set down in writing, (not
perhaps at length,) but at last they entered us in the Register-Book, not as
good Subjects, but as Rebels to our Great King. We shall in all probability
shortly see the Issue of this Decree; for the execution has constantly
attended their Threatenings. The poor Inhabitants of Roquecourbe have for saken
their Houses. The Papists thought they would come back again; but they were
mistaken; for they have not been seen since, although they have sent a hundred
Men to prevail upon them to return home by the fear of their total Ruin. It Is
not known whither they did retire, as well as the Inhabitants of la Crousette,
and other neighboring places. Questionless they live in Holes and Dens like
the Primitive Christians. They write from Montauban, That 800 Families there
have deserted their Houses, and are ready to bear the Assault they are
preparing against them. They have seized on the Estate of Mr. de Lespinesse,
because he would not deliver up a Son of Mr. C^mdoner the Minister: His Wife is
ready to be brought to bed, and is in the Street, because no body is in a
Condition to relieve her. They have also given a Judgment in Court against, and
seized on the Estate of Mr. Pelisster le Gres, because he absconds with Four of
his Children. In fine, one cannot enumerate all the Particulars as it should
be. The Hope we had, and which they gave us from all Places, of an approaching
Ease and Delivery, has been the cause of our Ruin. Many who were very Rich,
are not now worth a Farthing. Good God! who would have believed that so many
Potent Princes, who are our Brethren in Christ, would have abandoned us! But
you will say, They could not sue for the Restitution of our Edicts, because
'twas too much. But they could at least have asked that we might have had leave
to depart this Kingdom without any disturbance, or that they would put us to
death all at once: The thing was very possible, since it has been already
done. But they think of us no more than if we were not in the World. Sure we
must have greatly offended God, seeing he permits Princes, and our Brethren in
Christ to forsake us. However, we must hope, that God Almighty will come to us
in due time: He is a God to help in Extremity; alas! he must then come a^^y
very speedily, for we are at our last Gasp. We see now that whosoever hopes in
him shall never perish. We continue to desire the Prayers of the Church.

From Niort in Poitou, July the 13th. School.
A Gentleman Refugee in London, received a Letter, wherein he is told, That
they expected there, the Marshall D'Estrees, accompanied with Soldiers, not
only to hinder the New Converts from making their Escape, but also to work out
their sincere Conversion: And that there are Dragoons quartered at Co^longe,
Fontenay, Chastagnerage, etc. upon the New Converts who do not perform all the
Duties of Good Catholics, and live at Rack and Manger upon them, and they that
refuse to obey, are ruined by Amerciaments, for the payment of which they are
forced to sell their Beds from under them.

July the 25th. School.
TWo Gentlemen called Trouilla and Laborde lately come from France, Certify
under their Hands, That in May last, the Sieur Darhets, Surrogate of Mr. Pinon
Intendant of Bearn, came to Orthes, and being attended with four Guards or
Sergeants went into a School, and ordered the Schoolmaster to bid his Scholars
repeat their Popish Catechism by heart before him; which thing a Boy Ten years
old, and Son to Mr. Cafaudonec, Merchant, refusing to do, he was by order of
the said Surrogate immediately shut up in the School by his Guards, and whipped
by the School Master to the very blood, insomuch as he had died by the blows,
had not a Doctor ordered some Remedies to prevent it.

These two Gentlemen do further Certify, that the same day, the said Surrogate
sent a Gentlewoman Fourteen or Fifteen years old into the Nunnery of St.
Vrsula, with order to let no body see and speak with her. She was dragged every
day to Mass; but they could never prevail upon her to turn her Face, and kneel
before the Altar; insomuch as the Abbess with the help of some Nuns, having
bound her Hands behind her back with Ropes, tied her fast to a Pew, and let her
continue a whole Day in that Posture. This Gentlewoman by striving to be rid of
her pains, made the Rope slip as far as her Neck, but then she was almost
strangled, and called for help, but the merciless Nuns did not cae for her
Cries, till one of them came into the Church, and saw her almost dead:
Thereupon she went immediately and acquainted the Abbess with it, who being an
Eyewitness of the danger she was in, did untie her, and confined her to a Dark
Chamber, where she was exposed to bad Weather, seen by no body, and no light
allowed her for a Fortnight, till she was taken so ill, that they began to fear
her Life, and therefore the Nuns let her go out of the Nunnery, by the special
leave of Mr. Darbes, who had before seen the Declaration of a Surgeon about the
dangerous Condition of the said Gentlewoman.

The Persecution does not rage on the Land only, but also on the Sea; for
enquiring of one Mr. Anthony Capion who came lately from Marseilles, where he
was a great sufferer, about the lamentable Condition of those Protestants who
have been sent to the Galleys upon account of Religion, he delivered into my
hands a List of the Names, Country, Number, and the date of the Condemnation of
every one of them. It would be too long to relate all these Particulars; we
shall have shortly the opportunity to do it, only we will say for the present,
That the Number of them amounts to 277. Some Popish Slaves who have been
converted by the Instruction, Patience, and good Behavior of the Protestants
in Chains, being included: And that the said Gentleman certified under his Hand
August 2. School. That the Marquis of Mommort, Intendant of the Galleys there,
being informed that Mr. Lansonieres, formerly a Counselor in Poitou, and Ten
years since Slave there, upon account of Religion, did as well as one Mr.
Serres formerly Student in Divinity, distribute some Alms which was given them,
to the other Confessors, ordered some Men to constrain them by a severe
Bastinado, to declare from whence they had received the said Money, which thing
they refusing to do, he sent them into a dark and stinking Dungeon, wherein
they as well as many others have been for these Two years shut up close
Prisoners. That in the Castle called Casteldy, there are two other Confessors,
named Paul Raga^ and John Monier, of Saint Croix in Cevennes, detained two
years and an half, in a Dungeon where they never see the Light; and in the Fort
called Saint John, there is one Mr. Lefevure of Champagne, who has been
Prisoner Ten years. The they will not give leave to any of them to write to
their Friends in order to be relieved by them. That two Sergeants of the
Garrisons that are at the For^s St. Nicolas and St. John, in that City, having
given some of them Paper and Ink to write a Letter, and being taken in the
Fact, were immediately Condemned, and Hanged on the Rampire, tho Mr. Serres,
Junior, being brought before the Council of War, and before these two
Sergeants, begged on his Knees the favor of dying in the Room of the Sergeant
who had furnished him with the means of writing but a Consolatory Letter, but
to no purpose.

The said Gentleman declares further, That there was a Young Gentlewoman of 18
Years of Age, who when she was a dying refused to perform the Duty usual to
Papists on such Occasions, but after her death her Corpse was drawn Naked
throughout all the Streets of Marseilles by the Hangman, and buried under the
Stones the Rabble threw at it. And that another Confessor being very Sick,
desired to be blouded, but the Commander came to him, with his Pistol cocked in
his Hand, and pointing at his Head, told him, He had nothing else for him, but
Pistols to break his Pate.

A Copy of the Affidavit taken by Catherine de Gaudeul, before Justice Ellis.
August 8. School.
CAtherine de Gaudeul born in Alenson in Normandy, lately come from France,
makes Oath, That being removed by a Letter under the French King's Privy
Signet, into a Prison at Paris named La Salpetriere upon the Account of her
Religion, two Protestant Women, born in Meaux, were likewise sent thither for
the same Cause, and used with very great Cruelty: But because they would by no
means turn Papists, but on the contrary, went as often as they could into
retired Places to Pray and sing Praises unto God, kneeling in the Mire and upon
Snow; Marguerite Pataclain, the Superior and Governess of the said Prison, and
Ann B^ucheron her Assistant put a wet Sheet on one of them, and shut her into a
Room with two Mad Women, who fell upon her, and dispatched her, by thrusting up
their Hands, and pulling her Bowels out of her Body, which was afterward
boiled and Dissected by Surgeons. That her fellow sufferer, named Sarah, was
sent next to the said Mad Women, whom she pacified a little, by giving them
what Money she had by her. But for all that she received many Blows and Wounds
from them. That when the said Sarah came out of the said Room, she informed the
other Prisoners, that she had trod upon and seen the Guts of her Friend, and
that the Mad women told her, how they had killed her, and threatened to do as
much to her self, if she would not turn Papist; and that the said Fact was so
Notorious in the Prison, that many of the Prisoners, Papists as well as others,
did many times charge the above said Governess and her Assistant with the
Murder of the Deceased.

Catherine de Gaudeul.
Jurat. Coram me 8 die, Aug. School. Tho. Ellis.

Uzes in Languedoc, October 21. School. N. S.
I Came yesterday from Montpellier, where I had been about our Brother-in-Law
-- Business, where I heard that a Fair was to be held at Orange, and was really
so, the 25th of August last, in order to facilitate the Commerce, and to show
(as it was given out by the Papists) that they had no mind to hinder any body
from going to Trade in that Principality. Accordingly our Intendant ordered,
That all the Guards who were set at Roquimaure, Ardoise, and all other posts on
the Rhone should be taken off. All those who went, or pretended to go to the
said fair did assist there at the public Exercises of the Protestant Religion,
and at their return to their respective homes, declared publicly, that they
had seen no Guard on the Road, and that all the Passes were free and open. This
good News was so great an Encouragement, that the First Sunday in September
last being appointed for administering the Holy Sacrament, Two or three thousand
of our Protestants of both Sexes thronged thither. But our Intendant having
been informed of it, set Soldiers on all the Avenues, who seized about One
hundred of them at their return, and binding them, two and two together,
brought them in that Posture to Monipellier, where they were no sooner come,
but they were immediately sentenced, and sent to the Galleys, and 38 Women and
Maidens condemned to Prison for Six years: And our poor Brother-in-Law is one
of the Number. Think, I pray, what condition our poor Sister and her Daughter
are in. God grant all these Confessors strength to suffer patiently their
Affliction, and to carry cheerfully their Chains without repining, seeing they
suffer for no other reason, but for Worshipping and Praying to God in his
Church. Among them, there are Mr. Bourelly, one of the Brothers of Mr. Fabre,
Apothecary, the very same who served His Majesty of Great Britain Ten or Twelve
Years in Holland, and Ireland, and was after married at Courtezon, a Town
belonging to the Principality of Orange: The Brother-in-Law of another Fabre,
Apothecary at Bagnots. Mr. Ribes and Jonquent, Merchants of Nimes. A Merchant
of Alez in Cevennes; another living about Roubiac, Nephew to Mr. Christol of
Servieres; a Son and Daughter of Mr. Lafons, Attorney of Servay; a Brother of
Mr. Carrieres, who lives now in London; there will be now two Brothers
together, for one of them has been these Twelve Years in the Galleys,
resolutely persisting in the Reformed Religon; I saw his Father at Montpellier
soliciting for him, but to no purpose. I never saw so dismal a Spectacle! No
body was exempted from Punishment, but only three Youths of 14 years of Age,
and an Old Man named Jaumes, of Vzes, Aged 75. All the rest of those that were
condemned and sent to the Galleys were Inhabitants of Lussan, La Bruguiere,
Nimes, St. Laurens, and other Neighboring Towns, etc.

Orange, October 5. School.
HEre lately happened a thing which will strike you with Horror, and oblige you
to join your Prayers with ours to implore Gods Mercy. They had taken all the
Guands away from the Towns in the Neighborhood of this Principality, so that
it was generally believed, every body might have liberty to go and return
freely. This was the reason that a great many came hither upon a Communion-Day,
but in their return home over the River Rhoues, they were stripped Naked, and
knocked down with Cudgels, and those who returned into Dauphine, going through
Camaret, were by the order of the Pope's Nuncio in Avignon, Assaulted and
Murdered by the Country People, but many of these Boors who had surrounded
them were killed, because having made a Ring to prevent their Escape, the shots
from one side bore to those of the other, opposite to it. You will in a short
time see an Exact and Faithful Relation of it. The Papists have taken away the
Crosses they had formerly set up on the Ruins of our Churches, with a great
deal of Pomp and Ceremony, after having adorned them with Ribbands, Garlands,
and the most precious Things they had. I have no time to say any more about it,
but this action strikes all good Men with Horror.

POSTSCRIPT.
There are in this Town, about Four hundred of those Protestants who were come
hither, who having either tarried behind, or seen how severely those who went
before were used, came back again, remain shut up, and dare not go home, for
fear either of the Galleys, or Prisons, and chiefly since they hear that they
have seen at Nimes Fourscore of them bound in Chains, and going to the Galleys
of Marseilles.

Vittre in Brittany, November 2. School.
Dear Sister,
SInce my last, I have been Arrested by an Order under the King's Privy-Signet,
and sent Prisoner to Vannes, where I shall be kept till I produce my Son
Daniel, and therefore I earnestly beg of you, that so soon as you have received
this, you will send him back again to me by the first opportunity. Pray do not
lose time about it, for the Intendant is at Rennes, and threatens to do me all
the Mischief imaginable, and to let me rot in Prison, in case I do not make my
Son return from London where I had lately sent him. Do not fail therefore to
send him to me. My Wife and all our Friends are in great Affliction, and I
sorrowful beyond Expression: I can say no more,

Dear Sister, Your humble Servant and Brother, JAMES HARDY.

Montpellier, November 4. School. N. S.
Sir,
YOU have heard long since of Mr. Claude Brousson, and of his unwearied Zeal
for the Protestant Religion. He was born at Nismes of Noble Parents on his
Mother's side, and bred up an Advocate or Counselor: And pleaded at the Bar
with such Force and Eloquence, that he was admired in the Presidial of Nismes,
the Chamber of Castres, and in the High-Court of Toulouse; but after the Ruin
of the Protestant Churches he retired into Switzerland, where he published many
Books concerning the present Persecution, and came several times into this
Kingdom, in order to Instruct and Comfort his distressed Brethren. The Papists
who discovered his wonderful Progress, did what they could to Catch him, but by
God's Providence he avoided their Snares; so that after having been four Years
undiscovered in France; he went into Holland, where he was ordained Minister,
and there published a Book of his Travels, wherein he gives Account of several
particulars concerning the Sufferings and Martyrdom of many Ministers and
Protestants, and of his wonderful Preservation: But because this Book will be
undoubtedly Translated into English, I Will content my self with relating, these
two Particulars only, viz. That a great number of Protestants having met
together on the Hills of Vivares, the Dragoons, by the Order of the Intendant
Baville (who was in that Country) surprised them, and killed upon the spot
Three hundred and fifty of them; one of these Dragoons, a Faithful Apostle of
the Red Dragon spoken of, Revel 12. discovered among the slain, a Woman lying
dead on the Ground, and holding still her Child in her Arms. When the Babe saw
the Dragoon drawing near him, he smiled at him; but this Barbarous Executioner
was so far from being moved with the Smiles of this Innocent Creature, that he
thrust his Dagger into his Bosom, and lifting him up, called to his Comrade,
and said, Hey, do thou not see this Frog. This Diabolical action was related
to the Intendant, but he took no Notice of it.

The other Particular concerns Mr. Brousson himself, who says, That the
Intendant Baville was so enraged he could not catch him, that he set a Prize,
first of Five hundred, and after of Ten thousand Livres on him, as a Reward to
whomsoever should take him: That the Papists had drawn and dispersed many
Pictures of his, to discover him thereby; and that when they suspected him to
be lurcking in any Wood or Den, they sent Dragoons, and let loose Hounds to
find him by the Track and Scent. Being once driven out of the Wood by the
Violence of the Rain, he discovered them coming upon him; and having the
convenience of a Bush near at hand, he there absconded till he saw Four Troops
pass by him; and by that means he escaped out of their hands by a wonderful
Providence, who had no doubt blinded them: This and some other Reasons obliged
him to depart out of France, and retire into Holland, where he staid a while;
but a little after, he grew so uneasy, that he could neither Eat nor Sleep;
and when his Friends asked him the Reason of it, he replied, That he felt an
inward Motion, prompting him to go and Comfort his Distressed Brethren: So he
came back again into this Kingdom, where he for a long time Preached,
Instructed, Comforted the True Refomed, and reclaimed many Apostates for their
Apostasy; and many profligate Sinners from their ill Lives. But at length he
was discovered and seized, on the 19th of September last at Orleou, a Town in
the Province of Bearn, and from thence brought to Lescar, where Mr. Pinon,
Intendant of that Province was; who first asked the Prisoner his Name, who
readily owned it to be Brousson; and next, the Reason, Why he was come into the
Kingdom* To which he Answered, That he came to Exhort his Brethron to
Repentance. To what Repentance, said the Intendant to him? To the Repentance of
their Sins, replied Mr. Brousson. At last they asked him, if he had not known
the danger of his Design? To which he said, That he had undertaken the thing
out of Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and upon mature Deliberation. The
Examination being over, the Intendant committed him to the Prison of Pau, till
further order from the Court, and ordered the Jailor to allow him a Bed, be
Civil to him, and Guard him within sight. At last Orders came from the Court,
and the Intendant Baville, (the mortal Enemy of the Protestant Religion, and of
Mr. Brousson) sent three Expresses to Challenge him as his Prisoner. And so the
20th of October he set forward in a Calash to Montpellier; but before his
departure, he desired to speak with Mr. Pinon, and his request being granted,
he said to him, That seeing he had but a short time to Live, he would spend
part of it, in praying for him, and returned him thanks for his Civility. The
Intendant was so moved at his Discourse, that he gave his Guards fresh Orders
to be Civil to him upon the Road. When Mr. Brousson came into this Province of
Languedoc, he was delivered into the hands of the Captain of the Life-Guards of
the Count Broglio, attended by one hundred Granadiers, and brought to the
Citadel of Montpellier in the Flying Chariot of the Intendant Baville, where he
arrived October the 30th: He never was bound, but constantly guarded within
sight of the Soldiers. The Day after his arrival, the Intendant went to the
Citadel to hear him; the first Question he put to him was, If he did not know
the King's Edicts and Declarations, whereby the Ministers were forbidden, under
pain of Death, ever to come into France: To which Mr. Brousson answered, That
after the Apostles Example, he thought himself bound by the Duty of his
Ministry to venture all, to come and Comfort his Brethren. He did not deny, but
he had at several Times and Places given the Communion, but would by no means
name either the Places or the Persons to whom. And answered the other Questions
put upon him with a great deal of Conduct and Wisdom. During the time of his
Confinement, our Intendant, as well as the Abbot Camarignam, Son to the late
President Crouset, had many secret Conferences with him, but we do not as yet
hear of any Particular of them; it is said only, That the Intendant allowed him
no other Meat and Drink but that which was carried to him from his own Table,
which Mr. B^ousson would not touch, but betook himself to Prayers and Fasting,
and eat and drank only Bread and Water. The 24th of this Instant, he was in the
Morning brought to his Trial before the Intendant Baville, and some Counselors
of the Presidial. They charged him with two things, one True, and the other
False; the True one was, That he had Preached in France against the King's
Prohibition; and the other False was, That he had endeavored to bring (during
the late War) the Enemy into the Kingdom, and stir up a Rebellion. Mr.
Brousson confessed the former, but denied peremptorily and absolutely the
second Article. And every one knows, that it is the Custom of Papists to charge
the Protestants with Crimes against the State, in order, to Extenuate their own
Barbarity, and Eclipse the Glory of the Sufferings and Martyrdoms of the
Reformed. But the Truth is, the thing was resolved before. hand, Mr. Brousson
was to die: And therefore he was condemned to be put to the Rack, and Tortured
both Ordinary and Extraordinary, and next to be broken alive upon the Wheel:
When they came to read the Sentence to him, he showed an undaunted Courage, and
a great Resignation to God's Will. The Reading of his Sentence being over, he
was brought and presented to the Torture, and being stretched Naked on the
Bench, he said to the Commissary, That he had told the Truth of what they had
asked him concerning himself; That if they had forgot any thing else, he was
ready to give a Faithful answer to it; but as to his Brethren, it was to no
purpose to urge him to declare them, for he had rather be torn in pieces, than
to betray his Ministry. As soon as he had declared this, he was taken off the
Bench, and excused the Rack, upon which he said, I will magnify the Lord as
long as I live, etc. The Courage, Mildness, and Innocence, the Intendant
discovered in the secret Conferences he had with his Prisoner, prevailed (I
think) upon him, to abate something of his Cruelty.

When these things were thus practiced within the Citadel, they were Erecting
without, in a Place called L'Esplonade a Scaffold, whither Mr. Brousson was
brought in his ordinary Habit, about Four of the Clock the same Afternoon,
without having his Hands or Feet tied, and attended by the Abbot Camarignam. I
saw him going to Execution, earnestly Praying, and looking steadfastly up to
Heaven. One cannot express the Mildness and Courage wherewith he went and
ascended the Scaffold. One might easily discover the Calmness of his Soul, by
his cheerful Countenance in his way to the Place of Execution, and all the
while hear the Sighings and Groans of the People, who bewailed the hard Fate of
a Man of so great Merit and Piety. Having ascended the Scaffold, he began to
deliver his Dying Speech, which was no doubt as Pious and Comfortable as his
Life had before been; but we were hindered from hearing much of it, because on
such Occasions the Papists beat Drums, to prevent by their Noise, the good
Effect of the pious Exhortations and Prayers of the Reformed Martyrs. This was
the Reason why Mr. Brousson put off his own Cloths, and yielded both his Hands
and Feet to be fastened on the Cross, saying, That he esteemed himself very
happy, in that his Death had some likeness with that of his Savior. 'Twas only
at that time they read to him that Clause of his Sentence, whereby he was to be
Strangled before he was broken upon the Wheel. The Executioner, after having
fastened him, went down under the Scaffold, and having half-strangled him, the
Billet broke; which accident made Mr. Brousson come to himself again; and the
Abbot Camarignam hearing him pray to God, came near him, to whom Mr. Brousson
said, Sir, I pray God Almighty reward your Charity toward me, and grant us the
favor to see one another in his Paradise. These were the last Words of his;
for he was immediately Strangled and Broken upon the Wheel. This great Man has
been lamented by all, the Papists themselves have been amazed at this sight of
Courage and Resolution, and the Protestants though sorry for his loss, were yet
Comforted, for so great an Example of Resignation to God, and Zeal and
Constancy for the Defense of his Gospel; and indeed this is an illustrious and
extraordinary Instance in the Age we live in, wherein we see so little Zeal for
the True Religion, and and so very great (though Blind) Zeal for propagating
the False one by Persecution and shedding of Blood. Mr. Brousson's Death was a
Sermon more Moving and Eloquent, than all those he delilivered in his Life
time, I do not make any question, but the Intendant Baville might say of Mr.
Brousson (with as much reason as he did concerning another Minister he had some
years before put to Death) If the Hugonots serve the same God we do, there will
be a sad reckoning for him and other Papists. And one enquiring of the
Executioner about Mr. Brousson, a little after the Execution; He answered, That
if he durst speak, he could say much, but could not forbear saying, That he
died like a Saint.

I thought, My Lord, to have brought here my Task to an End, but am prevented,
by a New Declaration against the French Protestants, whereby the French King
will have them to know what Usage they are for the future to Expect, in case
they do not turn good Catholics, the Abstract whereof, I now give your
Lordship. The Declaration was given at Versailles, the 13th of December, School.
and Registered in Parliament. Wherein his Majesty enjoins the Execution of this
Edict in October 1685. repealing the Edict of Nantes, and of others made in
pursuance thereof. Forbids all his Subjects to Exercise the Pretended Reformed
Religion, to meet together in any Place on this account in any Number, or on
any pretense whatsover: And to harbor any Ministers, and directly or
indirectly to hold any Correspondence with them. He admonishes and enjoins all
Archbishops and Bishops to employ their utmost Zeal in the Instruction of the
New Converts, and to order their Curates, at least on Sundays and Holidays, to
read Instructions and Catechisms to them. He recommends especially to the Lords
of Manors, and the said New Converts, to assist exactly at Divine Service, and
Commands them, that they always behave themselves therein with Reverence,
especially during the time of the Celebrating the Holy-Mass, and adore on their
Knees the most Holy Sacrament on the Altar, and observe Abstinency from Flesh.
He Commands all the New Converts to cause their Children to be Baptized in
their Parish-Churches within 24 Hours after their Birth; and all the Midwives
to give the Curate of the Place Notice of the Birth of such Children; He
enjoins the establishment in all Parishes, as much as is possible, Masters and
Mistresses, in order to Instruct particularly the Children born of Parents
formerly Protestants; all Guardians to send them to the Schools and Catechisms;
and bring them before the Archbishop or Bishop, when they shall require it, in
the Course of their Visitations: He commands all Physicians, Apothecaries and
Surgeons, who shall be called to visit Sick Persons to give notice thereof
to the Curates of their Parishes, that the Patient may from time to time
receive the Benefit of the Sacraments. And in fine, That no Person shall be
admitted into any public Place, Office, and Employment whatsoever, but under
Attestation from the Curate of their Parishes, Certifying their good Life, and
their Exercising the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Religion.

After the reading of such a Declaration, one may wonder that every Article of
it was not backed with severe Penalties, as Prison, Galleys, and Gallows (as it
was given out and expected) but with general and ambiguous Threatenings, only
such as are, We command on pain of exemplary Punishment to such as shall fail
therein: Or these, To punish the Offenders by Fine, or even by greater
Penalties, as the nature of the Cause shall require. But the wonder will not be
long, and the Cunning of the New Declaration will be soon detected, if one
takes the care to scrape the Sweetness and Gold off the out side of the Pill,
by comparing it with the Edict of October, 1685. and others made in pursuance
thereof; for he will immediately discover the Bitterness of it, viz. That the
Penalties expressed in the Edicts and Declarations already made on this account
(to which this New Declaration refers the Reader) are nothing else but
Prisons, Dungeons, Gallows, and wheels. Thus they have heretofore exactly
executed the French King's Declaration against the True Protestants; and thus
hereafter they will undoubtedly explain this New one.

For it was no sooner out, but the Bishop of Man's, to show his Zeal, published
an hectoring Letter and Mandate, wherein after having said that the King having
forced the Protestant Princes and Allies to accept of the Peace his Majesty
offered them, had now a mind to Compel the timorous to a sincere Resolution to
embrace the Catholic Faith.

He adds, That pursuant to his Majesty's pious Intentions, he requires all
Deans, Priests, Curates of his Diocese, to send in forthwith an exact List of
those Families and Persons of both Sexes in their respective Parishes, who are
suspected of Heresy, and show no Marks of the Catholic Faith, which they had
seigned to have embraced.

If the zealous Bishop was speaking of forcing the Protestants, we could not
deny his Assertion, because we know it by a very sad Experience; but no body
will grant to his Zeal, That the French King has constrained the Protestant
Princes to receive, in spite of their Teeth, the Peace from his hands; the
French Plenipotentiaries themselves will convince his Lordship of the contrary.

I have, My Lord, several other Instances at hand of the Cruelties of this New
Persecution: But these which I have mentioned though few in number, and in
comparison to those we already know, and what we have not as yet heard of,
because c^^mitted in Dungeons, are sufficient to convince any reasonable M^^,
much more a Christian, of the Reality and Fierceness of the New Persecution:
Nay, we wish with all our Hearts that there were fewer Instances than those I
have already related; because then our su^fering Brethren would be less
persecuted by the Papists, and the Papists less guilty before God.

However* in these few Particulars, one many easily discover all the Characters
of a barbarous Persecution, and the sad case the French Protestants lie now
under: For let any judicious Man represent to himself on one hand, a Potent
Prince, who is resolved at any rate to complete the Destruction of the
Protestant Religion in his Kingdom, and his Magistrates, Officers, and
Soldiers, striving who shall be the most diligent in promoting his Design, that
is, breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord;
And taking Commission from their Superiors, That if they should find any of
this Faith, whether they were Men or Women, to bring them bound to some Prison
or other, and add to the horror of dark and stinking Dungeons the most cruel
Torments.

And all this practiced not only in some, but in all the Provinces of a vast
Kingdom; and not upon a few, but upon all persons, of what Rank, Quality,
Condition, Sex, or Age whatsoever, for the space of above Fifteen Years. The
Constancy they find every where, and which deserves the Admiration and pity of
the most barbarous Executioners, increases rather than diminishes their Fury
and Cruelty.

And on the other hand, after he has taken a View of the general Calamity that
rages in all the Provinces, and in all the Protestant Houses, let him go into
the Galleys, he will find them full of Confessors; upon the Roads, he will meet
with many others bound with Fetters. Let him represent to himself the dark and
stinking Dungeons full of Men and Women, Maidens and Little Children, and see
the Tears and hear the Cries of both Parents and Children, when snatched from
their Bosoms: Let him look on the Dragoons, committing the greatest Outrages in
a thousand and thousand Houses; and in other places shooting, killing, and
scattering great numbers of those who were gathered together to serve God: And
see Fathers and Mothers seized and dragged to prison in this Town, because they
have sent their Children out of the Kingdom; and in other places many
apprehended, because they had a mind to depart, and all in a general Motion
either to hide themselves, or to make their Escapes, even over high Mountains
that had been till now inaccessible. Let him represent to himself great numbers
of Apostates lying under the Lashes and Torments of their Conscience, for
having forsaken the Truth, and committing to their own Knowledge Idolatry; and,
on the contrary, many Protestants and Ministers put to the Rack within the
Walls of the Prison, going on cheerfully, some to be hanged on the Gibbet, and
others to be broken upon the Wheel, and he will have a glimpse, but not a full
sight of the New Persecution; and conclude, That France breeds now Monsters
more horrid and cruel than Africa does; That the Papists, strive to imitate and
out do the Devil, that roaring Lion and great Murderer, in damning Souls, and
to perform an impossible and contradictory thing, that is, to constrain the
Protestants to believe Popery to be true, which they are fully convinced in
their own Consciences to be false.

But since the Papists will hearken neither to the Dictates of Humanity, nor to
the Principles of Christianity, we have nothing else to do but to pray to God
Almighty, That he will be pleased to convert them, and grant the Protestants
the Gift of Patience and Constancy in their Suffering.

God is Witness, my Lord, to the many fervent Prayers your Piety has
heretofore put up in behalf of the afflicted French Reformed; and many of them
who came into this Kingdom are Witnesses to the Comforts your Charity has so
liberally afforded them: So that I do not make any question but your Lordship
will practice them both for the future, and hope you will be pleased to receive
kindly this doleful Discourse you have put me upon, and which I could have
enlarged, but have contracted, humbly offering it as a Token of my ready
Obeisance to your Commands, being, with all the Respect possible,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble And most Obliged Servant, P. G. D.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by George Huddleston.
1. THe Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury; containing Fifty Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions;
Together with the Rule of Faith. In 1 Vol. Fol. 2. An Introduction to the
History of the Principal Kingdoms and States of Europe. By Sam. Puffendorf,
Counselor of State to the King of Sweden. 8vo. 3. Memoirs and Observations,
etc. made in a late Journey through the Empire of China. By Louis le Compte
Jesuit. The 2d Edition, with a Map of Chin^. 8vo. 4. Kalendarium Hortense: Or,
The Gard'ner's Almanac; directing what he is to do monthly throughout the
Year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in prime. By John Evelyn Esquire F. R. S.
8vo. 5. The Blessing's of Eighty eight: Or, Some Discourses, Meditations, and
Poems on our late Deliverance from Popery and Slavery. By Tho. Lyster. 8vo.

