Mrs Elizabeth Gaunt's Last Speech, who was Burnt at London, Oct. 23. 1685. as
it was written by her own hand, and delivered to Capt. Richardson Keeper of
Newgate.
NOt knowing whether I shall be suffered, or able, because of weaknesses that
are upon me, through my hard and close imprisonment, to speak at the place of
Execution, I have wrote these few Lines, to fignify that I am reconciled to the
ways of my God toward me, tho it be in ways I looked not for, and by
terrible things, yet in righteousness; for having given me life, he ought to
have the disposing of it, when and where he pleases to call for it; and I
desire to offer up my all to him, it being but my reasonable service, and also
the first terms Christ offers, that he that will be his disciple, must forsake
all and follow him: and therefore let none think hard, or be discouraged at what
has happened unto me; for he does nothing without cause in all that he has
done unto us, he being holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works;
and it is but my Lot in common with poor desolate Zion at this day; neither do
I find in my heart the least regret for any thing that I have done in the
service of my Lord and Mr. C. Jesus, in securing and succouring any of his poor
sufferers, that have showed favor to his righteous cause, which cause, tho it
be now fallen and trampled on, as if it had not been anointed, yet it shall
revive, and God will plead it at another rate than ever he has done yet, with
all its opposers and malicious haters; and therefore let all that love and fear
him, not omit the least duty that comes to hand, or lies before them, knowing
that now Christ has need of them, and expects they should serve him; and I
desire to bless his holy name, that he has made me useful in my generation,
to the comfort and relief of many desolate ones, that the blessing of those
that were ready to perish has come upon me, and been helped to make the heart
of the widow to sing; and I bless his holy name, that in all this, together
with what I was charged with, I can approve my heart to him, that I have done
his will, tho it does cross man's will; and the scriptures which satisfy me are
Esaias. 16. 3, 4. Hide the outcasts, bewray not him that wandreth; be thou a
covert to them from the face of the spoyler. And Ob. 12, 13, 14. Thou should
not have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress: but
men say, you must give them up, or you shall dye for it; now who to obey, judge
ye; so that I have cause to rejoice, and be exceeding glad, in that I suffer
for righteousness sake, and that I am accounted worthy to suffer for
well-doing, and that God has accepted any service from me, which has been
done in sincerity* tho mixed with manifold infirmities, which he has been
pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive And now as concerning my crime as
it is called, alas! it was but a little one, and might well become a Prince to
forgive. (But he that shows no mercy, shall find none.) And I may say of it in
the language of Jonathan, I did but taste a little honey, and lo I must dye for
it; I did but relieve an unworthy, poor, distressed family, and lo I must dye
for it; well, I desire in the Lamb-like nature of the Gospel to forgive all
that are concerned, and to say, Lord, lay it not to their charge; but I fear it
will not; nay I believe, when he comes to make inquisition for blood, it will
be found at the door of the furious Judge, who because I could not remember
things through my dauntedness at Burton's wife and Daughter's witness, and my
ignorance, took advantage thereat, and would not hear me when I had called to
mind that which I am sure would have invalidated the evidence; and tho he
granted something of the same kind to another, he denied it to me at that time:
my blood will also be found at the door of the unrighteous Jury, who found me
guilty upon the single oath of an out-lawd man; for there was none but his Oath
about the money, who is no legal witness, tho he be pardoned, his out-lawry not
being reversed, the law requiring 2 witnesses in point of Treason, and then
about my going with him to the place mentioned (viz. the Hope) it was by his
own word before he could be out-lawd; for it was but about 2 months after his
absconding, so that tho he was in a Proclamation yet not high Treason, as I am
informed, whereby I am clearly murdered; and also bloody Mr. Atterbery, who
has so unsatiably hunted after my life, tho it is no profit to him, yet through
the ill will he bears me, left no stone unturned, as I have ground to believe,
till he brought it to this, and showed favor to Burton, who ought to have dyed
for his own fault, and not to have bought his life with mine: and Captain
Richardson, who is cruel and severe to all under my circumstances, and who did
at that time, without all mercy and pity, hasten my sentence, and held up my
hand that it might be given; All which, together with the great one of all, by
whose power all these and multitudes more of cruelties are done, I do heartily
and freely forgive as against me, but as it is done in an implacable mind
against the Lord Christ and his righteous cause and followers, I leave it to
him, who is the avenger of all such wrong who will tread upon Princes as upon
mortar, and be terrible to the Kings of the earth; and know this also, that tho
you are seemingly fixed, and because of the power in your hands, are weighing
out your violence, and dealing with a despiteful mind, because of the old and
new hatred, by impoverishing and every way destressing those you have got under
you, yet unless you can secure Jesus Christ and all his holy Angels, you shall
never do your business, nor your hand accomplish your enterprises; for he will
be upon you ere you are aware; and therefore that you would be wise,
instructed, and learn, is the desire of her that finds no mercy from you.

ELIZABETH GAUNT.


