EIPNIKON: OR, A TREATISE OF PEACE BETWEEN The two visible divided PARTIES.

Wherein is enquired, 1. What Peace is here intended. 2. Who the Parties are
that differ. 3. Wherein the Difference consists. 4. How they fell out. 5.
Wherein they ought to agree. 6. How they may be persuaded unto peace. 7. By
what means Reconciliation may be made between them.


How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Sons of God, Math.
5.9.

And, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1.

By Irenaeus Philadelphus Philanthropus, Presbyter and Professor of the more
ancient Doctrine.

LONDON, Printed by T. J. for Nath, Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil. 1660.

A PREFACE TO THE Godly Learned READER.
IT is not the duty of a genuine child to be still and silent, when he hears
his Parents chiding; much less to be so disobedient as to provoke them with
(...), O well done Socrates! O well said Xantippe! When the dumb Son of
Craesus, saw one ready to kill his Father, the indignity of the fact made him
speak, and say, (...), kill not Craesus. And indeed what ingenuous son of the
Church can see the Reverend fathers of it, and the Presbyters, whose love
should be as conjugal, to maintain not only a domestical and friendly chiding,
but even open enmity and strife, so that they break out into sides, and
parties, and are even at daggers drawing, (as we say) what child can see this
misbeseeming contention, but he must step in and part the fray, he must speak a
word of pacification and reconciliation between them? For although Solon would
not that any should be Neuters, when the City is rent by schism, yet he forbids
not endeavor of any to make peace.

Or if he or any other should so envy the blessing of peace unto a divided
people, sure I am, a wiser then he, has said, Blessed are the peacemakers;
for they shall be called the Sons of God.

When therefore I saw two parties who ought to be most dear one to other,
standing at defiance one against the other, and no intercessor, no mediator of
their tribe between them, I was constrained to undertake this Task; Which
indeed is a business worthy the labor of one far more able then my self. Yet
has no man imposed this work upon me; nor had I any other motive, but the love
of the God of peace and love, who is the love it self; the common love to
mankind, the love to my country too lately rent and torn by civil wars, upon
the same occasion, my love unto my dear Mother the Church of God. So that it is
purely a work and labor of love, which accordingly I desire, may be lovingly
accepted.

I know, it will be questioned, who has made this bold attempt to interpose
himself as an umpire between two so potent adversaries? I was aware of that, as
well knowing, that he who parts a fray, oftentimes bears blows from both
sides. And what account do partial men make of such? They esteem them as
neuters and lukewarm persons. And therefore such have great need to be
supported and encouraged by the God of peace and love.

Moses had experience of this when he went about to make peace between his
brethren, Exodus 2.13. who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us? And what
aspersions suffered the Apostles and Ambassadors of peace, and, how contrary to
their profession and practice? That they were disturbers of the common peace,
deceivers, enemies to Government, and many like slanders.

When St. Peter went about to break down the Partition Wall of Jewish
ceremonies, and so to make peace between Jews and Gentiles, he was accused of
it as a great crime, and put to his apology, Acts 11. And when St. Paul went
about to promote the same business, what opposition found he both from Jews
and Gentiles: Scourged, stoned, imprisoned, buffeted, reviled, persecuted,
accounted unworthy to live upon the earth. Yea, Christ himself the peace it
self and true peacemaker, what contradiction of sinners did he suffer against
himself, for the very same work in the eminency of it? Wherefore it is enough
for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his Lord. Nor do
I fear to spend or to be spent for the advancement of so great a work.

Howbeit that mine endeavors might the rather prosper, I have concealed my
name; as well knowing, that men are wont to make a God or a devil of a man's
name. If such or such a precious man speak this or that, it is received as an
oracle from God; if the same thing be spoken by one decryed as supposed
heterodox and erroneous, it is esteemed by the same men a damnable error.

I desire therefore, that the judicious Reader, will rather have regard to the
subject and matter before him, then trouble himself with enquiring whence it
comes.

But truly there is so much the less hope of prevailing with men, in this
business, because we see how loosely the bond of perfectness is tied, how weak,
how bri^^^^ is even among Professors of Religion, how loving, how dear, how
familiar soever they seem to be, if a little honor or gain accrue to some one
or other, whereof all were capable, presently envy and strife arises,
detraction and evil speaking. As you have seen a company of dogs playing
together, (it is a resemblance befitted such currish friendship,) you would
think they loved one another extremely; cast but a bone among them, they are
presently together by the ears.

And because most men are of Themistocles mind, they love to hear themselves
well spoken of, and of Saul's popularity, they would be honored before the
multitude, therefore they make a tacit Covenant among themselves, no way to
disquiet or molest one another in their sins; As if the angry man should agree
with the drunkard, upbraid not me with my peevishness, and I Will not trouble
thee with thy ripling. Spare me, says the coveteous man to the proud, meddle
not with my coveteousness, and I Will take no notice of thy pride. Say nothing of
my revengfulness, says the vindicative man, and I Will not molest thee with
thine incontinency, etc. such Covenants as these seldom or never come above
board, but are contracted by mutual and tacit consent; because most men
extremely love themselves, their ease and security in the flesh; And while
these contracts last, all the devils goods are in peace, his wrath, his
intemperancy, his pride his coveteousness, his uncleaness, his revengefulness,
and all the rest.

So that what ever pretense of religious ties there may be among these men,
these are no other then the bonds of iniquity. For the true love and peace is
founded ^^^urity, as St. James teaches, chap. 3. And if so, ^^ere would not be
such mutual connivence at one another sins, but a rebuking of our brother;
otherwise, all this pretense of love is indeed no other then hatred, according
to the Lords own reasoning, Levit. 19.

Yea, among those who seem to hold the bond of perfectnes, more inviolably, how
remissly and negligently is peace maintained? A cross word, a little
disrespect, some small detriment and loss it ravels all that love and peace,
which had long time been knitting together: But an Opinion that like Samsons
foxes, it sets all on fire, and scatters them like Babel. And a little breach
ma^es a perpetual rupture, and division; Solomon tells us, that the beginning
of strife is as the letting forth of waters, Pro. 17.14. but he says not what
the end will be. Whereas indeed the people of God who are firmly bound in the
bond of perfectness, are like the more subtle and purer creatures, like the
more spiritual natures; as when the Sunbeams are divided, they immediately
unite themselves together again; so does the air and water, says the wise man:
much more do the saints of God, who are of a spiritual and heavenly nature; if
there fall out any unhappy division among them, they unite themselves presently
together again in the perfect bond.

And this people of God invite all men to partake with them, and to be joined
with them in the same bond, as St. Jo^^, in the name of them all, says, That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you also may have
fellowship with us; And truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3.

But such is the bewitching of unrighteousness, says Solomon, and such a
jealousy upon every motion made that way, though the most excellent way, that
it is very hardly entertained by any, unless they know well the person whence
it comes, and that he is of their own side.

Howbeit, in other matters men are not so partial and curious; As were you in
danger of wrack at sea, or your house were on fire (which God forbid) and some
one came out of good will to help you, would you refuse his help, unless you
knew of what Religion he were? Or suppose some person of great quality were
dangerously sick, and the College of Physicians were advised withal, would a
sovereign remedy be rejected, because offered by the hand of a plain simple
man, unless you knew of whose Church he were, and what his judgment was
concerning predestination, election and reprobation? Certainly that very tender
of love in your distress might prove him a good man, at least to you, what ever
his Religion were: it is possible a man may be a very good Christian, yet of
none of the visible Religions in the world. Nor are you wont to neglect a good
commodity at a small price, though proffered by a Jew or a Mahumetan. Now, are
there not many at this day who concerning faith have suffered shipwreck, making
a naked belief all their Religion? whence it comes to pass, that iniquity burns
like a fire, Isaiah 9. Yea, do not many instead of the fear and love of God,
and keeping his commandments, continue doting (or rather sick or mad, (...))
about questions and contentions about words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, [or blasphemies] evil surmises, [or suspicions] perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness? And although the precious truths of God be manifestly revealed unto
them, yet do they utterly refuse to be helped, except by some of their own
party. I thought it therefore most safe for my self, and more conducing unto
these men's information to appear to them under a disguise, that I might deceive
them into a better mind.

But since His Majesty in His most moderate Declaration has now condescended
so low as may consist with His Authority and Prerogative, and used all real
inducements unto peace and unity, what farther means is left for the restoring
of this Church and Kingdom, disjoynted, yea, broken and scattered like the dry
bones which Ezekiel saw, Ezekiel. 37. what means is left for the bringing them to
life again, but the endeavors of wise, pious, and moderate men, their examples,
counsels, and prayers: By such moderate men the Kingdom stands, and the Church
also.

And what means did the Lord command Ezekiel to use, but prophesying to the dry
bones, and prophesying to the winds for a breath upon them? There is some hope
therefore of restoration left, since the Lord commands Ezekiel to prophecy to
the dry bones, and say unto them, Hear the word of the Lord.

O that the wise, pious, and moderate men according to the strength of God in
them (that is Ezekiel) would drop their word upon these dry bones! O that they
would pray to the father of spirits, that he would vouchsafe them the spirit of
life, and the spirit of moderation, that every bone may know its place, and
come unto its bone, that there may be a mutual yielding according to the due
measure of every part, that so all may become one body, as the elements cannot
become one body, while their qualities are in their intense, but in their
remiss degrees, and tempered one by other.

Until this be done, what anguish, what dolor and pain disquiets and torments
the whole body! But when every one knows his place and moves in it, as he
ought, with delight, what a change will then follow? What less then even life
from the dead? Then shall the whole Church rise up, tanquam acies ordinata, as
an army with banners, Cant. 1.4.6.4.
and the great banner over all shall be love. Then shall judgment,
righteousness and peace be set up in the earth; judgment shall run down like
water, and righteousness like a mighty stream, and abundance of peace so long
as the moon endures. Then shall there be no more strife who should be the
greatest, or who should rule others, but all shall yield unto the Lord his
Kingdom in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy ghost. O that this were
come to pass in every one of our souls.

EIPNIKON: Or, A Treatise of PEACE BETWEEN The two visible divided PARTIES.
WHen a Scare-fire is once broken forth, and spreads it self, wastes and
devours, and endangers all the Neighbor-hood, it is not then due time to
enquire how it began, or who kindled it; but it concerns every one then to put
to his hand and help to quench it: Nor will I now enquire how our fire of
dissension was kindled among us, or who was the Bontefeu and Author of our
Combustions. For beside that, such inquisition would be unseasonable, should we
stir the Embers wherein the Coals of burning Zeal lie glowing, there might be
danger (...) of provoking and blowing up the like flames of contention. Only
thus much we may say in general with the Wise Solomon, that only from pride,
comes contention. And scornful proud men burn up the City, but wise men turn
away wrath (as the LXX turn Proverbs 29.8.) Saul persecuting David, troubled
the Land, 1 Samuel 14.29. And another Saul like him, persecuted Christ, Acts 9.
They both figure the arrogance of self-seeking men (that is Saul) who envy the
reign of the true David, the love of God and our Neighbor. Every hotheaded
fool can blow the coals of Dissension, but moderate and understanding men
only, men of an excellent spirit, or (as it is in the Hebrew, Prove. 17.27.)
men of a cool spirit, can quench that fire.

And this I shall endeavor by the help of God, at this time; And it is high
time, when the sparks of this fools-fire flee abroad in the dark among the
ignorant people, in Pamphlets and scurrilous Libels, in Tavern and Alehouse
meetings, in pot-valor, in siding and encouraging either other his respective
party, in deriding and jeering, in detracting and slandring, in railing and
inveighing, it concerns thee, and me, and every one who profess obedience to
the Gospel of Peace, to put to his helping hand, and to pluck his brother out
of the fire.

That this may be done, and Peace and Reconciliation made between Parties at so
great a distance, we must enquire, 1. What Peace is here intended. 2. Who the
Parties are that differ. 3. Wherein the Difference between them, consists. 4.
How they fell out. 5. Wherein they ought to agree. 6. How they may be persuaded
unto Peace. 7. By what means Reconciliation may be made.


1. What Peace is here intended? Surely not all that is called by that name.
That name is (...), from knitting together in one: so that Peace in general is
an Union or Agreement. But there is a bastard kind of Peace, which may consist
with sin and iniquity, such as ungodly men maintain among themselves, who mean
while are enemies to the true Peace. Such is that whereof Jeremy speaks, Jer.
6.14. where the Prophet deciphers such a condition as we shall find ordinarily
in the world; a mutual humoring and pleasing one another, and procuring one to
other ease and quietness in the flesh; A Peace endeavored and pursued by all
men, and with all men. And for the greater confirmation of that Peace, the
Priests and Prophets of that time had learnt to sing Placebo, (and would God
they sung not to the same tune in our time) they complied with carnal men for
the promoting of their own and others temporal advantages, for the obtaining
their corrupt interests, gaining for themselves and others ease, pleasure,
profit, credit and reputation in the world; whereas indeed this is no true
peace, but a more fleshly security. For so the Prophet describes it, From the
least of them, even to the greatest of them, every one is given to
covetousness; from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals falsely:
They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace. Christ came not to send such a Peace upon
the earth: Nihil boni est in unitate, nisi unitas sit in bone. There is no good
in Unity, unless unity be in Goodness. The true Christian peace, the peace we
would promote, is joined with Righteousness, Psalm. 85 14. with Holiness, Hebr.
12.14. with Truth, Zach. 8.16. with Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. Such a
Peace may be described Tranquillitas Ordinis, a Tranquillity of Order; or,
Ordinata concordia, an Orderly Agreement of men one with other. For where
there is no order, there is confusion, where there is confusion, there is
disturbance and breach of peace. Where there is strife and contention (which is
opposite unto peace) there is confusion and every evil work, says the Apostle,
James 3.16. Therefore confusion and peace are opposite one to other, 1 Cor.
14.33. God is not the God of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of
the Saints.

Peace therefore consisting in Order, it involves a relation to another, and so
is (...), a Relative, and in reference unto another, whether that other be our
own conscience, when the war of our affections and lusts fighting against the
soul, is ended; for so the effect of righteousness is peace, Esaias 32.17. Or
(which differs not really, but only formally from the former) whether that
other be God himself; for so being made righteous by faith, we have peace with
God, Romans 5.1. Or, whether that other, be all other men besides our selves. And
this is the peace especially which we should all endeavor to follow; which yet
supposes the two former, peace of Conscience, and peace with God, which is the
foundation of all true peace with men. For so the Saints are filled with this
peace by believing, Romans 15.13.

That we may the better understand this our duty, we must know, that this
Peace, Union, and Agreement, has Love for the Root of it. Which being
twofold, either Complacentiae, or Benevolentiae, either that whereby we love
and affect another, quia bonus, because he is already good, and so we love his
virtues and lovely qualities; or else that love when ewith we affect another, ut
sit bonus, though he be bad for the present, that he may be good, and so we
love his person, not his ill qualities and conditions. And to these two we may
add a third kind of Love, Complacentiae and Benevolentiae simul, as when we
love one who has some good beginnings of good wrought in him. According to the
first kind of Love, holy men of God love their like, such as are Saints and
holy men. Thus the Saints are called (...), friends, 3 John v. 14. And their
love is such a bond of perfectness, or such a perfect bond, as the Apostle
calls it, Col. 3.14. that it knits all the holy ones of God together all the
world over. According to the second kind of love, a good man may love his ill
neighbor, and by his love, win upon him and make him lovely. According to the
third, a good father loves his towardly child, that he may grow in grace, and
the laudable beauty of an holy life, and so become in person and qualities
every way lovely.

Answerable hereunto, Peace which proceeds from Love, must be proportioned and
extended unto men: whereof, because some are good, holy, gracious and virtuous,
and may be truly called Christians; Others evil, unholy, unrighteous, and
untoward, and though called, yet indeed falsely called Christians, because they
have not that life which should make them truly such. Others there are in a
middle way between both: with all these we must maintain an outward peace, but
differently; thorough and perfect with the first sort; with those we must
maintain entire peace, which proceeds from the first kind of love, the Love of
complacency. With the second we must exercise entire peace also, but not so
thorough, so perfect, and intimate as with the first, but such only as they
are capable of, because this peace proceeds only from the second kind of
love, the love of Benevolence or bounty. With the third also we must maintain
peace, such as they are capable of, a mixed kind of peace, tempered with that
which they call nor lis, but urgiun, a friendly and loving strife and
contention, that they may be thorough-lovely, and capable of entire and
thorough peace.

As for the first kind of Peace with good and Godly men, it may be easily
preserved and maintained, because there is the same best ground of Love, and
from hence a mutual affection, and reciprocal compliance, and sweet harmony of
souls and spirits intimately maintained on both sides, whether the parties so
agreeing be otherwise personally known or unknown unto us, near unto us, or
further off from us; Yet peace peace to him that is afar off, and to him that
is near, Esa. 57.19. as in a musical instrument the greater and less strings,
though far off one from the other, yet have an harmonical agreement, and are
consonant one with the other, whether in Diapason, or Disdiapason, the distance
hinders not the agreement. And the reason is, Quae convenient in uno tertio,
inter se quoque convenient. They which agree in one third, agree also among
themselves. Now the God of Love and Peace, is the God of all the world; and
therefore the people of God being every where dispersed in every Nation all the
world over, agreeing in God, and working all their works in God, agree also
among themselves. And this is that peace, which all good men desire to advance
with all men. O that the Lord would enlarge all our hearts to the enterrainment
of so large, so general, so necessary, so truly a Christian Peace!

2. Who the Parties are, who are at difference.
THe parties at disterence have some things common among themselves; And it is
a sad thing to name it: They are both by profession Ministers of the Gospel of
Peace, whose common Office it is to be Ambassadors of Peace: These are the
Parties at difference. The Apostle describes them according to their common
Function, That they are Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of
God, 1 Cor. 4.1.

Howbeit, though the parties at difference have one common Name and Office, and
are both called Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, and Stewards of the Divine
mysteries, yet are they distinguished one from another in place and dignity.
And so there are three degrees of Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.

It is not my business or principal intention to decide the Questions, whether
a Bishop and a Presbyter be one and the same; or whether a Bishop, a Presbyter,
and a Deacon be distinct Orders and Degrees; or whether a Bishop be of Divine
Ordination, or only Ecclesiastical Constitution. These and other Questions
emergent, have been judiciously handled by diverse Learned men of the Church of
England, as Doctor Field, Mr. Hooker, Hadrian, Saravia, and others; howbeit I
shall not wholly decline the Controversies as I meet with them, but show my
judgment, and the ground of it.

Thus much we may generally observe, that although every one of these Names
imports a proper and distinct Function, yet is every one of them equivocally
taken in Scripture; as the name Bishop, Acts 20.28 Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1.
Deacon, 2 Cor. 3.6. besides other places. I shall speak of them as they import
their proper and distinct Function.

As to the first of these, the Bishops. The Name (...), Episcopatus,
Episcopacy, or Bishopric, is an Office which imports inspection and oversight
of others; An Office of great care and labor, pains and industry: He who
desires it, desires a good work, 1 Timothy 3.1.

This Office of Episcopacy, or Inspection, proceeds from proficiency and
growth, according to the increase of God in the obedient man, as I shall show
more anon.

The Bishops Office is the same with the Apostles, and is distinctly so named
as one and the same with the Apostleship, Acts 1.20. Let another take (...) his
Bishopric. And he who desires (...), a Bishopric, etc. Nor is there any doubt
but the Office under that name is by Apostolical tradition, being so universal
in all Churches where the Gospel was preached; which therefore must be of
Divine Institution, unless we should think that the Apostles delivered any
thing to the Church without Divine Authority.

And because there may be greater degrees of proficiency and growth, according
to the increase of God; As also because there may be need even to the Overseers
themselves, of one or more who may oversee them; qui custodiat ipsos Custodes
--; as David though a Prophet, yet had he his Seer; besides the Bishops
themselves, there have been Archbishops and Overseers of the Bishops themselves.

Such degrees of Proficiency and Orders there were, or at least the ground of
them, among the Apostles themselves. So St. Paul says, he was not behind the
very chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.5. such therefore there were; And these were
Pillars to support the Church, Gal. 1. And of how great extent St. Peter's
Diocese was, I know not, but St. Paul's was as Oecumunical and universal, as
large as the Church it self. For so he tells us, That the care of all the
Churches came upon him daily, 2 Cor. 11.28. Nor is the like testimony to
confirm St. Peter's universal Archiepiscopacy, as this is. And therefore if St.
Peter were an Archbishop and Primate of the Church, St. Paul was an Archbishop
and Primate of all the Churches; and the exercise of that Function proves him
to be an Archbishop; for since Timothy and Titus must be Bishops who ordained
Elders, surely St. Paul must be an Archbishop who ordained Timothy and Titus
Bishops.

Next to the Bishops are the Presbyters in order and degree, though according
to the time of institution and ordination, the Deacons were made before them,
as appears Acts 6. compared with Acts 14.23.

Presbyter is so called from (...), which signifies old, or an old man; yea,
honorable in regard of old age, which is or ought to be grave, and venerable,
and experienced in many things, whence persons so qualified are honorable, Ezra
6.8.

Hence (...) a Presbyter has his name, which may be Englished Elder. We may
describe such an one according to his Office, a Minister of the Church, who
teaches the Word of God, and administreth the Sacraments, according to Acts
14.23. 1 Timothy 5.17.19. Titus 1.5. James 5.14.

A Presbyter considered according to his proper degree and rank, is inferior to
a Bishop, because a Bishop is President and Overseer of the Presbyters. For
although every Bishop be a Presbyter, yet every Presbyter is not a Bishop. Thus
every Bishop is a Minister, as has been before shown, but every Minister is
not a Bishop, which he observed not, who therefore proves that Timothy was no
Bishop, because St. Paul calls him a Minister, 1 Timothy 4.6.

There is yet a third Ministry which has properly that name, (...),
Deaconship, and indeed there is little left of this Office, but a name. Their
Office we learn out of the express Scripture, Acts 6. where we read of the
first institution of it, and the reason of it, that they might take off part of
the Apostles burden, the daily ministering unto the poor, that the Apostles
might be wholly vacant, and attend the ministry of the word and prayer. Yet
were not the Deacons so wholly employed in serving tables, but that also they
preached the Word, as appears in the examples of Stephen, Acts 6. and Philip,
Acts 8. who were two of those seven first chosen to that Office.

But whereas some will not allow them any other employment then ministering to
the poor, the after practice of the Church best interprets their Office. And
whose Authority can we sooner follow, than St. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and
Martyr, one who immediately succeeded the Apostles? He on the way to his
Martyrdom wrote unto Here his Deacon, to take care of the poor, widows, and
fatherless; also that he should know the Laws himself, and explain them unto
others. He mentions also in the same Epistle, a third part of the Deacons
Office, That he should do nothing without the Bishops; For they, says he, are
the Priests, and thou art the Minister unto the Priests, as at Jerusalem St.
Stephen ministered to James and the Elders, etc. So that the care of the whole
Church belongs to the Bishops and Priests. To whose help the Deacons were given
by Divine Ordination; and we find their pattern in the Jewish Church; as we
often read of the Nethinims given as Anxiliaries to the Priests and Levites.

Whence it appears, that the Deacons Office was sacred, and thought worthy to
be administered by the Apostles themselves; and when they would impart it unto
others, see what manner of men they require, men of honest report, full of the
Holy Ghost and wisdom, Acts 6.3.

By all which a great defect is discovered among us, especially in these last
times. We have known how to make numberless numbers of poor, widows, and
orphans; but how to make choice of widows indeed, such as St. Paul describes 1 Timothy 5. if such be to be found, I fear we know not, or regard not. And that
high Office heretofore Apostolical and Ecclesiastical, is now become Laical,
and administered by persons of very mean quality; yea, in diverse places they are
entrusted with taking care of the poor, who are very poor men themselves, and
need others to take care of them. It is an Office now become so poor, so
contemptible, that no Episcopal man, nor Presbyterian will strive for it.

I have described as briefly as I could, these three Degrees of Ministers in
the Christian Church, which answer to their pattern prefigured in the Church of
the Jews; wherein we find three like Orders of Ecclesiastical persons, High
Priests, Priests, and Levites, which typified in the Christian Church, Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons.

And that these degrees may not be slighted, or thought arbitrary, or of man's
device and invention, the Ministry of the Jewish Church had their Idea and
Example in heaven, which Moses was commanded to copy out; See thou do all
things, says the Lord, according to the pattern which was shown thee in the
mount. And that pattern the Apostle discovers when he tells us, that the Angels
are all ministering spirits.

Accordingly Dionysius observes three Hierarchies of Angels, and disposes three
sorts of Angels in every Hierarchy; and in the highest, Seraphim, Cherubim, and
Thrones. In the next, Dominions, Virtues, and Powers. In the third and lowest,
Principalities, Archangels and Angels; which distribution is followed by some
of the Fathers and Schoolmen, who from hence have taken their three
Hierarchies of Angels. Lucifer was an Hierarch, and had his Regiment in the
place of this world, if he would have kept it, whereof Jud v. 6. says, (...),
The Angels that kept not their (...), Hierarchy, or Principality. Yea, he has
yet a Regiment in the evil world, ruling in the sons of disobedience, until he
be cast out by a stronger then he, and hence did his envy against our first
Father Adam principally spring, because he saw, man was created to be an
Hierarch in his place and stead.

But this is evidently enough to be proved out of the holy Scriptures, that
some among the Holy Angels are Superior, some Inferior. So much the very names
of Angels and Archangels import, which yet is strengthened by the exercise of
their Functions: See Zach. 2.2, 3, 4. where one Angel meets another, and sends
him with a message to the Prophet, commanding him not only to go, but also to
make haste and run. St. Gregory from hence learnedly and judiciously collects
thus much; When one Angel says to another, run, there is no doubt, but they
who send, are the greater, they who are sent, are the less.

Which collection is far more rational then that of a certain Gentleman, who,
because all the Angels are ministering spirits, from thence concludes, that all
the Angels are equal. Without doubt the man who so reasoned, was out of his
element. Should one thus argue, All the creatures are serviceable unto man;
therefore they are all equal among themselves, who would not deny that
consequence out of common sense and observation? And shall we think, that the
only wise God, who has created so various and different degrees of creatures
in due subordination in this inferior world, He has not also ordained and
constituted the services of all Angels in a wonderful order in the inferior
world? Is the God of order more pleased with order in the earth, then he is
with order in heaven? Or shall we rather more truly affirm, that they who have
endeavored to drive all order out of the Church, and to bring in an
Ecclesiastical policy like that of the Cyclops on earth, the same Titans are
become (...) fighters against God, and endeavor to rout and disorder the host
of heaven.

Christian religion requires not a parity neither among the people, nor among
their Governors. They are not equal, for it cannot be that any Commonweal or
society of men should long continue, as the Christian church must do, if it
consists of an Arithmetical equality: But as by the contrary qualities of the
elements, and the opposite motions of the Sun, Moon and Stars, those Ordinances
of heaven, the world is disposed and tempered for eternity, Jer. 31.35 6, 7.
so of necessity must the world of men consist of diverse degrees, ranks and
orders; like the strings of an Instrument, if they make melody, they must be
tuned in due Symmetry and proportion, some higher, some lower; so among men
some must be high, others low; some in authority, others under authority; they
must not be equal, not all in unison: He is but a ridiculous Minstrel, Chorda
qui semper oberrat eadem, that is always harping upon one string. What they
allege, That he who is greatest among you, Matthew. 23.11.
shall be your servant, proves a greater and a less. And though you be
brethren, yet there is a firstborn who rules over his brethren. Yea, this they
themselves admit who most dispute against it, when they constitute a Yearly
Moderator over the Presbyters; For although their Annual Officer has no
warrant from Antiquity, yet in that they make a President over the Elders, they
acknowledge a necessity of precedence and order. For were they all equal, all
would command, and none would obey; Every man would rule, and no man would be
ruled; Every man would contemn, and be contemned by every man; No respect would
be had by one to the virtue and merit of another. So that from this jarring
dis-harmony and discord, there must needs follow a dissolution of the
Commonweal; and the greatest equality would molder away into the greatest
confusion and inequality, as Pla^o reasons in his 6th de Legibus.

Hence it appears that there are different Orders, and due subordination of
them in the Church, and among the Ministers of it.

3. Wherein do the Parties differ?
I Will not name all the Controversies between the Episcopael men and
Presbyterians, lest while I go about to make up the gap, I make it wider. I
shall name those wherein principally the Parties differ, and they are either
concerning the Essence of Eviscopacy, or what is annexed thereunto.

The Controversy between the Episcopal men and men of Presbyterian persuasion
concerning the Essence of Episcopacy, is either whether it be all one with
Presbytery; or if it appear not so to be, whether it be taken away by the
Covenant. Touching the former, the Presbyterians affirm, that a Bishop and a
Presbyter are one and the same. And for proof, they bring diverse Scriptures, as
Acts 20. Tit. 1. where the same who are Presbyters are called Bishops. And
Phil. 1. where the Apostle salutes the Bishops and Deacons; where by Bishops,
Presbyters must be understood, otherwise this inconvenience would follow, that
the^e should be many Bishops of one Sea. These Scriptures are brought by
Hierom, and Aerius was of the same judgment.

The Episcopals answer to these Scriptures, affirming, That the word Episcopus
is equivocally attributed to the two superior Orders of Ministers. And that an
Argument founded upon an ambiguous term, cannot be solid and firm. And for
Aerius, Epiphanius has sufficiently answered his Cavils, and put him among the
Heretics. And, since Hierom upon the same ground defends the same erroneous
Tenent, if Aerius were an Heretic, Hierom herein cannot be Orthodox. The
Stories of both evidently prove, that Aerius magnified Presbytery, because he
could not be a Bishop, Hierom because he would not.

And although the Presbyterians foundation be so weak, yet almost all the
Reformed Churches are built upon it, against the practice of all the Christian
Churches in all Ages, from the Apostles times downward. Zanchy a Learned man no
way engaged in this controversy, says thus, Quid certius ex Historiis, etc.
what is more certain out of Histories, out of Councils, and out of all the
Fathers Writings, than that those Orders ( Bishops and Presbyters) have been
constituted and received in the Church, by the common consent of the whole
Christian Commonwealth.

But the Opposition against Episcopacy is of greater Antiquity, than it is
commonly conceived. For whereas most what its referred unto the time of Aerius,
we find exception against that name soon after the Apostles times, as appears
by that excellent Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, which Cyril Patriarch
of Constantinople sent in the Year 1632* to King Charl's of blessed memory,
bound up with a Copy of the LXX. as an acceptable Present by way of
thankfulness to his then Majesty, for enlargement and favor which by his
Letters he obtained for the Christians, of the Grand Signour. That Epistle was
publicly read in the Church in diverse places, says St. Hierom, in Catal.
Script. Eccles. A very rare Monument of Antiquity, which this latter Age owes
to that glorious Kings mercy.

This Clemens is mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians, chap.
4.3. Whom Ignatius in his Epistle ad Trallenses calls a Deacon to St. Peter,
whose disciple he was, says Origin; contemporary to Peter and Paul, says
Epiphanius: who was Bishop of Rome and Martyr after the Apostles, says
Ruffinus. Others also of the Greek and Latin Fathers, make honorable mention
of him, as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Basil,
Athanasius, Optatus, Milvirtanus, Augustine, Eucherius, and others, cited by
that Learned Gentleman Master Patrick Young, who published this and another
Epistle of Clemens ad Corinthus, printed at Oxford Anno 1633. The first Epistle
is genuine and (...), undoubtedly true, as appears by Testimonies taken out of
it by the forementioned Fathers. This by divine providence most seasonably was
brought to light, after it had lien hid so many hundred years; and if it had
bin thankfully received from the good hand of God, it might have prevented that
Bellum Episcopale which broke out seven years after this Epistle was published.
In like manner the good God forewarned the whole Nation by a book found, and
ripped out of the Maw of a Cod-fish in Cambridge-market, on Mid-summer Eve 1626.
a few days before the Commencement. It bare Title, A preparation to the Cross;
unto which, two other Treatises of divine argument were joined in the same
volume written by John Frith, who suffered as a Martyr in Queen Mary's days:
this volume was published by Doctor Goad, under the name of Vox piscis, or The
Bookfish. So seasonably was the Epistle of Clemens set forth, and upon an
Argument importing a like state of things to that unhappy time of 1640. and to
these present times.

The Church of Corinth was factious, as appears by St. Paul's Epistle to them, 1
Cor. 3.4. Which yet afterward returned to their former sobriety, moderation
and piety, as Clemens testifies.

And among their Commendations, he minds them that (...), that ye walked in
the Laws of God, being subject to your Leaders, and giving due honor to the
Presb^ters or Elders among you. And afterward he exhorts them, (...), Let us
reverence those who are ^ver us, let us honor our Elders, etc.

Whom does Clemens here understand by (...) and (...), but the Bishops? After
whom he names the Presbyters or Elders, as a distinct order and degree under
the Bishop. And to make it appear that the degrees of Bishop, Presbyter, and
Deacon, answer to the like Order in the Jews Hierarchy, as has been shown,
page 53. Clemens transfers the same degrees Ecclesiastical among the Jews, to
the Christian Ecclesiastical Policy. (...), etc. To the chief Priest is
attributed his proper ministeries. To the Priests are ordered their proper
place. On the Levites are imposed their proper services. The Laik is bound by
Laical precepts. Let every one of you, brethren, in his own order and station,
give thanks to God with a good conscience in gravity, not transgressing the
desinite rule of his ministry.

And page 54. he refers the first Ordination of Bishops to the Apostles
themselves, (...), etc. The Apostles preached the Gospel to us from the Lord
Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ from God. For Christ was sent from God, and the
Apostles from Christ. Both these were done decently, and from his will. For
(the Apostles) receiving commands, and being fully ascertained by the
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, and confirmed by the Word of God, with a
certain assurance of the Holy Spirit, they went forth preaching that the
Kingdom of God should come. Wherefore preaching through the Countries and
Cities, they appointed the first fruits of them, having tried them by the
Spirit, for the Bishops and Deacons of them who should believe; nor was this
done newly, for it was written many Ages before, (...), Esaias 60. I will appoint
their Bishops in righteousness, and their Deacons in faithfulness.

And what marvel (says he) is it, if they to whom this business was entrusted
by Christ, ordained the fore mentioned (Bishops?) since also blessed Moses a
faithful servant in all Gods house, noted all things in the holy books which
were commanded; whom the other prophets followed with one consent, giving
testimony to them which were by him established for Laws.

Then for a terror to the seditious persons, he alleges the Lords decision
and determination touching the Priesthood, against the Rebels, Number. 16. When
page 57. he infers, by like reason, a determination of the Question touching
Episcopacy, (...), etc. And our Apostles, says he kn^w by our Lord Jesus
Christ, (...), that there would be contention about the name of Episcopacy; And
for that cause, having received perfect foreknowledge, they ordained the
forementioned (Bishops) and gave a course how afterward, if they died, other
approved men should succeed and exercise their Offices.

Much more might be added out of that excellent Epistle of Clemens, very
pertinent to our purpose, which I commend unto the judicious Reader. Upon the
whole matter, we may say thus much: That since the Epistle is unquestionably
genuine and true, and of Apostolical style and argument, the Testimonies taken
from thence ought to be of more weight with us, than mere humane Authority;
yea, and meeting with sober and moderate spirits, they may put an end unto this
Controversy, touching the Essence and being of Episcopacy, and the difference
of it from Presbytery, according to Divine and Apostolical constitution. But
let us further enquire, whether Episcopacy be taken away by taking the National
Covenant Many of the Presbyterians affirm it; many Episcopal men deny it. The
Presbyterians allege the second Article of the Covenant, wherein the
Covenanter vows the Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, that is, Church Government
by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. And this supposed Mis government being removed,
he vows in the first Article (somewhat immethodically) to endeavor Reformation
according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches.

Many Episcopal men allege for themselves, That whereas two Articles of the
Covenant are mainly urged, 1. The extirpation of Episcopacy and Bishops, a
fruitful Tree which bare even those who would root it up. 2. And the planting
of Elders and Presbyters in the place of it.

In the first Article of the Covenant, as it first came out of Scotland, after
these words, [according to the Word of God] was added this sentence, which we
would have understood thorowout this Covenant, or words to the same effect. It
was put in a parenthesis, and accordingly was thought fit by some afterward to
be left out. But what ever their reason might be such a clause was necessary to
the taking of the Covenant. For it is a necessary qualification of the object
of a Vow and Covenant, that it be de rebus licitis, of things lawful: Because a
Vow differs only formally from a Promissory Oath; Now Juramentum non est
vinculum iniquitatis, an Oath is not a bond of iniquity. Since therefore the
holy Scripture is the measure and rule of things lawful, a Vow and Covenant to
extirpate Episcopacy, could not be lawful, since it is (...), expressly
commended in the word of God, 1 Timothy 3, 1.

2. Besides, the Covenant was intended against tyraunicum imperium Episcoporum,
the tyrannical imperiousness and domineering of Bishops, as Dr. Arrowsmith
interpreted that part of the Covenant, in his Epistle to the Foreign Reformed
Churches. It aimed not therefore at the extirpation of Episcopacy it self, much
less was it intended to introduce a greater and more tyrannical domination to
be set up among the Presbyterians, as most men complain who have felt it, or
feared it. The slovenly Cynick who trod upon Plato's neat Bed with his dirty
feet, saying he trod down Plato's pride, he was not aware of Plato's true
answer, That he trod down his pride indeed, ac superbia majori, with greater
pride. Hence it appears, that the taking of the Covenant does not tend to the
ex^irpation of Episcopacy it self, which is an Office lawful, and according to
the Word of God, and the ancient Laws of this R^^^^, but at the removing the
tyranny exercised by some persons who have administered that Office.

Thus Episcopal men acquit themselves of the second Article of the Covenant. As
for the first, wherein the Covenanter vows to endeavor Reformation according to
the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. Here are two
paterns of Reformation: 1. The word of God. And 2. The example of the best
Reformed Churches. 1. It is best to say nothing of the former, how suitable the
endeavor of Reformation has been to the rule of Gods Word. As for the example
of the best Reformed Churches, it was not without an overruling hand of
Providence, that no certain and definite Church, whether of this divided
judgment, or that, is specified or named in the Covenant; but it is left to
the consideration and conscience of every one who takes the Covenant, which
Churches, and which of all the Churches is the best Reformed. That we may the
better understand this, we must enquire,

1. What a Church is: And 2. what the Reformation of a Church is, whence it
will appear which are the best Reformed Churches, and which of them is the best
reformed.

1. A Church may be described a Congregation of men fearing God, believing in
him and Jesus Christ, loving him, and obeying him.

When I call it a Congregation, it is not only to be understood an union, or
gathering of men together in some certain place, as an house, or town, or city
only, as examples may be found in Scripture of all these; But this gathering
is more generally to be understood, as that which is wrought by the spirit of
God, gathering all the people unto Shilo, Gen 49 10. 2 These. 2.1. Otherwise how
unreasonable were it (which yet has been practiced) that men for their worldly
ends, living in some town or city, should be enforced to the Religion of the
predominant party in it? When it is added, that this congregation is of men
fearing God, believing in him and Jesus Christ, loving and obeying him, this
description comprehends all who can be said to be of the Church of God.

What then is Reformation?

2. Reformation is the renewing of the mind and heart acc^^ing to the shape,
form, and image of God. For whereas God made every man upright, (the word is
not (...), but (...), not proper, but appellative) Eccles. 7.29. They had
sought out many inventions, it is necessary, that they be not conformed unto
this world, but be transformed by the Renewing of their mind, that they may
prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God; which, while
they are conformed unto this world, they cannot prove.

Hence it is evident, that Reformation of the Church, is not only according to
the judgment or opinion, (which is rather information then reformation) but
mainly and principally according to the will, affections, actions, and whole
conversation, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Both outward and inward, yea, 2 Peter 3.11. In
all holy Conversations and Godlinesses, as the Greek words fignifie, being
plural. For we cannot know what is the true Doctrine, unless we first have bin
obedient unto the will of God, Joh. 7.17. So that their glory is vain, who
vaunt themselves to be the best reformed Church, because they say, they are
Orthodox, which is only of a right opinion. For if their Doctrine and Life be
examined according to the Lydius lapis, and Canon of the Scriptures, they will
be found to have less whereof to glory, in respect of both, than many others
whom they account hetorodox and erroneous. Whence it will sollow, that fince
the best Reformed Church is to be esteemed according to Doctrine, the
Presbyterian Church cannot be the best reformed, because it teaches that the
perfect life and life of God, is impossible. Also,

Hence it appears, that since Reformation is according to the life of God, and
Christian conversation and manners worthy of God, the Church called
Presbyterian, cannot be the best Reformed Church, because they profess that
their sanctification and holiness is only in part, which the Apostle says,
must be perfect, 2 Cor. 7.1.

From all this which has been said, Episcopal men collect thus much: That
since the taking of the Covenant does not take away Episcopacy, neither the
Reformation according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches, does establish the Presbyterian Government; it follows, that
Episcopacy, or the Government by Bishops may stand, notwithstanding the
Covenant: And the Presbyterian Government cannot stand according to the
Covenant.

2. The Difference between these two Parties, is in regard of those things
which are annexed unto Episcopacy, and they are either Titles or Forms. 1.
Titles of dignified persons, as Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, Metropolitans,
Archdeacons, etc. which, say some, make men proud and insolent.

Episcopales, ut huic respondeant calumniae Presbyterianorum ne vulgi opprobrio
ipsos exponant, ipsorum famae consulunt atque idiemate Latino ipsis aurem
secretam ita personant. Quod nonnulli autumant, Episcoporum, Archiepiscoporum,
Primatum, Metropolitanorum, reliquisque titulis homines honorates insolescere,
ambitiose gerere se se, tyrannos evadere, populum opprimere, etc. non graduum
ista titulorumve sunt, at hominum vitiaqui sine dubio indigne ad eminentes
hasce dignitates evecti, rectius haec ad montis radicem, apud servulos
bestiasque reliquissent.

Atqui sperandum non est una cum titulorum contemptu, avaritiam, superbiam,
ambitionem ac tyrannidem contemni: Fuerunt qui magnificis jam seculi nominibus
relictis, in claustra se se abdentes, appellari se minores, imo minimos omnium
voluerunt. At numquid hoc modo temperarunt sibi ab his animi morbis? Absit!
Refert alicubi Rhabanus Maurus Moguntinus Abbas Monachos aliquos in caenobio
suo ampla patrimonia cum honoribus mundi renuntiasse; at invidiam tamen,
superbiam, ambitionem, avaritiam, aemulationem ita non abdicasse, uti de uno
quadrante acerrime ac superbissime vitilitigarent. At ista longo sunt
intervallo dissita. Verum ita reformata forte religio nostros omnino subegit
animos Evangelio, uti nullae sint apud nos ejusmodi vel avaritiae, vel
invidiae, vel superbiae pestes inveniendae. Nimirum ex quo Primates,
Metropolitani, Archiepisco^i, Episcopi, Decani, Archidiacont, reliquique
titulis ornati Ecclesiae Ministri rejecti sunt explosique, omnia cum modestia
humilitate insigni, summaque cum aequitate ac animi moderatione gesta sunt.
Scilicet!

Recordemur itaque (res enim recentis memoriae sunt) quaenuper ante paucos
annos excluso titulorum, nominumque magnificorum tumore, ab hominibus novis and
nullius nominis apud nos acta sunt, eaque sine legibus notis (quae visae
forsitan reformatae parum, parum Christianae) praetextu religionis reformatae
facta sunt.

Forum civil primum disqu ramus.

Ubi Leguleius pro cliente suo uti par erat, (rem gestam expertus loquor)
municipales leges, easque secundum aequum and bo^um regulas observandas
aliquoties insti^isset, non nemo ex judicibus Aulae petivendulorum ( vulgo
Haberdashers-Hall) ita respondit; Nos non uxta leges communes, non secundum
Cancellariae regulas hic judicamus, at prout e^ conscientiae suae dictamine
cuique visum est. Vestram fidem Lectores! Quae futura tandem reformatio, quae
etiam in rebus civilibus judicandis, neque lege comnouni, nique aequitate
dirigetur! Al^erum autem forum five Consistorium adeamus, quod voeant
Ecclesiasticum illiusque paulisper scrinia rimemur. Id ex primariis omnium
judiciorum divisorum hominibus constitit, at prae caeteris ex Presbyterianis,
qui vocantur, atque Independentibus. Illi vero vocabulo (...) examinatores,
appellati, qui quaestionem in Ecclesiasticorum beneficiorum cand datos
exercuerunt. Famosum potius quam inclytum genus hominum, qui strenue admodum
Tortorum officium praestiterunt; adeo ut exper^us non nemo dixerit, Diabolum
plane stultum fuisse, qui sancto Jobo scabiem affricuisset, exquisitius multo
atque omni equuleo long trucufentius atrociusque fulsse tormentum, si ad
Phalaridas illos (...) ingenui viri amandarentur examinandi, si quis e clero
Episcopali ad illos accedat cum advocatione patroni ad pingue and opulentum
beneficium Ecclesiasticum post quam long a ^am dilatiore, moraque diuturmore
fatigatus, introitum tandem ad Inquisitores obtinuit, Deus bone! quam insulsas,
quam ridiculas (quis enim alias ab illiteratis zelotis expectaverit?)
quaestiones andire satisque facere necesse habuit, indignus, insufficiens,
ignarus, scandalosus reputabitur.

Quid in causa est? mal^gnus est: heterodoxus est, uno verho; non est noster:
Benefic^um tanti per annum valoris Orthodoxum aliquem conostris non dedecebit.
At super hac^re aliiisque pluribus Tilenus adeundus. Unum autem exemplum addam
quo tandem finiam. Quidam haud it a pridem vir doctu, and partium Episcopalium
venit in hanc ^u iam examinandus. Illum inquisitorum antesignanus adoritur;
Inter alia consimilis farinae problemiata, proposuit istud; Quo sensu Deus
author peccati dici potest! Cui alter, quo, ait, sensu? Certe nullo, nisi
non-sensu. Hominem praefidum! impudentem! perfrictae frontis! Eo ventum
audasiae, uti quis Inquisitori eique primario ica responset!

R^icitur homo, and merito scilicet; quippe qui Gra^ia destitutus (nempe, non
Dei, sed Inquisitorum) qualis ille Johan. 9. a Phariseis pro responsatione haud
absimili excommunicatus. Quid ille? Ad Patronum rem defert. Quid Patronus?
Dicam impegit Inquifitori, [Quare impedit vocant.] Quid Inquisitor, quid ille?
Ad Protectorem (...) festinat, asylum iniquitatis. Queritur apud ipsum,
contemni Commissionem examinatorum. Nihil illam deinceps valituram, si legi
communi sub^iciatur.

Hanc adveertite vos expostulationens (Anglicanae libertatis reique publicae
Assertores) Quanta olim cura cautum est nequando Episcopi vim legibus
inferrent? Eccos Presbyteros eccos Indepentes (superbum nomen!) qui a nulla
omnino lege pendent, exemptos volunt a communi lege se suosque. Quod utique
documento est fore, uti, si quando ipsirerum potiantur, abrogaturos communilege
suamque disciplinam pro lege, secundum conscientiae sue dictamon, imposituros.

Quod autem sititulis ac nominibus honorificis homines intumescant, at an
Metropol^^^^orum, Primatum, Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, etc. an
alienereipublicae consimilibus: Illi sunt Diocesani Presbyteri, Archidiocesani,
etc. qui sunt ad illum modum? At hi conficti olim a Presbyteris asque in
illorum locum sufficiendi. Hoc ego certissime novi statutum a primariis
Presbyterianarum partium neu quid ex immutata forma regiminis honorum
titulorunave deperderetur. Caeterum ex his quae conmemorata sunt, haud arduum
est consicere, homunciones, etiam sine titulis honorumque decoramentis,
opprimere alies, ambitiose gerere se posse, insolescere ac superbire.

As the Presbyters except against Titles of honor, so likewise against Forms of
Godliness, and those of two sorts, either Forms of Prayer, or forms and modes
of ceremonies, which consist either in gesture or vesture. As for the form of
Prayer, let us first enquire what that is, against which their exceptions lie,
and then we shall endeavor to satisfy those exceptions.

The Liturgy or Common prayer, so called, is a System of select Scriptures,
Prayers, and Praises proportioned according to the necessaries, and spiritual
proficiencies of all Gods people.

1. To those under the fear of God, in the entrance of the Liturgy, certain
sentences out of Scripture are premised, showing the necessity of Confessing
our sins, and raising our hope of pardon, and forgiveness of them.

Then follows a Form of Confession, and after it, Absolution from sins, and
the Lords-Prayer in special for the Remission of sins. And because confession
is either of sins or of praise, after the confession of sins, follows the
confession of praise. Which yet cannot rightly be performed, unless the Lord
enable us so to do. And therefore we pray, that the Lord would open our lips,
etc. Accordingly we give glory to the holy and blessed Trinity; And we exhort
one another to sing unto the Lord, and heartily to rejoice in the strength of
our salvation, etc. Psalm 95. In which Psalm, after the declaration of Gods
power, David prevents an objection suitable to their state under fear, and like
unto those in Kadesh-barnea [in the mutable, and unsettled holiness of the
childe-hood:] The objection may be framed thus, we are not able through the
power of God, to subdue our sins, and to perform acceptable service unto God,
and therefore we shall perish in our sins, and never enter into the Heavenly
rest. The Psalmist therefore dehorts us from hardening our hearts, lest we
should be like those farthers of the Hebrews, whose carcasses fell in the
Wilderness, etc. To which purpose the Apostle applies that part of the Psalm to
the Hebrews in the same spiritual estate, Heb. 3. and 4.

2. To those under faith in Christ, Christ is propounded in the Psalms, (as
some of the Ancients have interpreted all the Psalms of Christ; and our Lord
points us unto them, as giving testimony of himself, Luke 24.) also as
foreshewen in types, and figures of the Law, and storied of, and prophesied of
in others books of the Old Testament; In regard of all which, Christ is said to
be (...) Yesterday, Heb. 13. When these have some way, (...), discovered Christ
unto us, we break out into the praise of God, saying or singing, We praise
thee, O God, etc.

After that Christ is discovered in types, histories, and prophesies more
obscurely, He is more clearly manifested in the flesh, and expressed in one or
other of the Evanglists or Acts of the Apostles. After which, the Church
acknowledges, and blesses the Lord for exhibiting His Son, according to the
promises, and his forerunner John the Baptist. Or which concerns all Nations,
Psalm 100. Oberoyful in the Lord all ye lands.

Then follows the confession of Faith in the Father, Son and Spirit. Out of
this faith, the Minister and People pray mutually one for other. Which done,
the Minister prays for those things which the Epistle or Gospel holds forth,
in the Collect gathered out of them; then prays for Peace, and thirdly for
Grace, That we may fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger, but that
all our doings may be ordered by his Governance, to do always that which is
righteous in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In these prayers, the Petitions are more general, therefore the Litany is
added, containing more particular Petitions according to the several temporal
or spiritual wants of Gods people. Wherein and afterward prayers are made for
the King, the Royal issue, and spiritual Governors, according to 1 Timothy 2.

3. To those under the love of God and their neighbor, is propounded a prayer
out of largeness of heart unto God, Unto whom all hearts are open, all desires
known, unto whom no secrets are h^d, that he will cleanse the thoughts of our
hearts, by the inspiration of his holy spirit, that we may perfectly love him,
and worthily magnify His holy name through Christ our Lord.

This cannot be done unless the Lord be pleased to write his laws in our heart,
which we pray for; which done, we return to our prayer, in special for the King
and the royal issue, etc.

Then such Scriptures are propounded for Epistles and Gospels as befit that
eminent estate.

And because they who are in such a condition, have a more explicit knowledge
of God the Father, Son and Spirit, and other Articles of the Faith, the Nicene
Creed is added.

And because prayer is to be accompanied with almsgiving, certain sentences
are then propounded stirring us up thereunto. And so that Service concludes
with a prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church, etc.

The like reason there is of Evening-prayer.

The explication of these and other particular services would require a just
Tractate.

Against this form of prayer the Presbyters except: For why should any form of
prayer be imposed upon the people of God? Or if any, why so long? Why that
which is clogged with so many repetitions? Why not a prayer more spiritual?
Must one and the same fit all ages of the Church? Why are Godly men thereby
hindered from the exercise of their gifts? Why must they use such a form of
prayer, as is taken out of the Massbook? Yea, why are many Canonical Scriptures
left out of the Calendar, and Apocryphal placed in the room?

Episcopal men allege for themselves, that there is no Church in the world,
no not that which the Presbyters account the best reformed, but it has a form
of prayer; Because not only they who are grown up in religion, but the young
ones also, who are not able to pray of themselves, may thereby be instructed
and taught how to pray; such were John's disciples, and such were Christ's, whom
therefore they both taught to pray. But if exception be against a form, because
a form, every conceived prayer is a form unto those who hear it; which is well
to be considered by them, who except against a form of prayer, because a form.

But if a form of prayer be needful, they ask, why so long a form of prayer?
Why has it so many repetitions? It Is true the Liturgy has repetitions in it.
Yet are not all repetitions vain or Heathenish, such as our Lord forbids,
nor for that end; but to express the fervency and ardour of affection. And
therefore we read many iterations of the same petition or thanksgiving (which
will amount to the same exception) used by David, as else where; so especially
Psalm 136. For his mercy endures for ever, twenty six times used in that one
psalm. Yea, and our Lord himself is said in his prayer, to have used the same
words. But although this blame were justly laid upon the Common Prayer, yet do
not many of them who except against it, much mend the matter in their conceived
prayers; wherein they use most what many repetitions, especially when they are
at a loss, and know not what else to say; which is not seldom. And as for
length of prayer. The whole Liturgy, Litany, and all, is not so long as many of
their conceived prayers. And if their prayers be so long, surely it is their
own fault, if all that time they do not exercise their gifts. What they say of
spiritual prayers, are there any more spiritual in all the Latin or Greek
Liturgies? How much less in these men's conceived prayers? And if there b^ some
of all Dispensations in all Ages of the Church, why may not this form of prayer
composed as I have shown, fit all Ages of the Church? Nor do Episcopal men deny
but that many of the Church-prayers are extant in the Mass Book. And is it not
for the credit of the Roman Missal, that so excellent prayers are found in it?
What though all the Epistles and Gospels, or the most of them may be read in
that Book? Are they therefore one jote the worse? Or is the Scripture any whit
the less true, because it has been cited by the father of lies? Feign the Mass
as abominable as any man can make it, will any reasonable man refuse what is
unquestionably good, because it has been ill used? May not the Sun shine upon
a dunghill, and yet loose nothing of its purity? It is true, that some Canonical
Scriptures are omitted in the Calendar, and Apocryphal set in their place, as
the two Books of Chronicles, the Book of Canticles, the latter part of Ezekiels
prophecy, much of the Revelation, and some others. And why not? For although
all Scriptures were written for our edifying, yet all Scriptures do not edify
alike. As for those Canonical omitted, the Episcopal man dares appeal to the
Presbyter, whether Adam, Seth, Enosh, and the rest of the Genealogy, edify so
much as the Scripture Canonical or Apocryphal appointed to be read in place of
it. Yea, whether the History of Judith may not edify as well as the History of
Jael. Yea, why he, though with much study he has hardly attained to the true
meaning of the latter chapter of Ezekiel, and the Book of Canticles, and the
Revelation, yet should desire that the same Scriptures should be propounded to
the understanding of the rude multitude ex tempore, and hope that thereby they
should be edified.

The Learned Jews were not thought to envy the people the Holy Scriptures, when
they forbade the novices the reading of the three first chapters of Genesis,
and some other Scriptures, lest they should frame ill interpretations of them.

Many other exceptions are taken by the Presbyterians and others, against the
Book of Common Prayer; which are so frivolous, that its apparent their
Palmarium, their main Reason against it, is, -- Stat pro ratione voluntas, They
would not have it.

But the Presbyterians take great exceptions against the Forms of Godliness
expressed in Ceremonies in Gesture, as Bowing, Standing, Kneeling, enjoined at
the performance of diverse parts of the Divine Service, with which the Church of
God should not be burdened.

Concerning such Ceremonies, Episcopal men say, That a reason may be given of
them, according to the different parts of the Service where they are commanded
to be used. Diverse of Episcopal persuasion have written particularly of these;
and therefore I refer the Reader to them for satisfaction. I shall only add a
Rule out of Ticonius, cited by St. Austin.

When any thing in Scripture is prescribed to be done, without the
circumstances when, where, how, etc. it should be done, which yet cannot be
done without such circumstances, that duty to be done must be circumstantiated
out of the word elsewhere mentioned, or according to the ancient custom of the
Church.

As when the Apostle says, Preach the word, yet adds not when, or where, or
how, a due circumstance of place and manner, may be taken from the practice of
Ezra, Nehem. 8.4. or of Solomon, 2 Chr. 6.13. where the word turned a Scaffold,
signifies rather a Pulpit. So when our Lord says, Baptize all Nations: And
touching that other Sacrament, Do this as often as ye do it in remembrance of
me. The mode or way of administering and receiving these Sacraments, is no where
commanded, and therefore its left to be directed by the Fathers of the Church.

But whereas Forms of Godliness are either in gesture or vesture: 1. In
vesture, as the Surplice. At this some take most offense, because it is of
humane invention, yet is it used in Gods Worship; and certain parts of the
Ministers Office may not be performed without it, as the administration of
Baptism, etc. 2. Besides we ought not to conform our selves unto the
Antichristian Papists who use that vestment with very great reverence. A ground
of great suspicion, that it is a Babylonish garment, because it is one of those
merchandises wherein Babylon traded, Revel. 18.14. 3. Lastly, all things ought
to be done to edifying. But what edifying can there be in wearing of a Surplice?

The Episcopal man must satisfy these doubts, otherwise he must leave off his
Surplice. But that he may keep it on, he answers thus to the first scruple,
That the Priest must use some garment or other in his ministration; and since
no certain desinite vesture is enjoined him in the Gospel, the Governors of the
Christian Church have thought meet some way to imitate the Jewish Priests, who
in their service, according to Gods ordinance, wore a Linen Ephod, so that
they borrowed not this garment from the Papists. What they supect of the
Babylonian ware, that by the fine linen was prefigured the Surplice, is
groundless; For the word (...), or (...), they answer either to (...), or
(...), which may be doubted whether they signify linen or lilk, as our
Translators render the latter word in the margent, Exodus 25.4. And if so, the
Presbyters (say they) make us finer than we are; we wear no silk Surplices.

But what if one should question the Presbyterians Genevagown, as the
Presbyters question the Episcopals supposed R^man Surplice? This is not without
precedent. A man learned and eminent in his way, one of the late Assembly,
being a Nonconformist, he refused to wear a Surplice. He had a son, a pregnant
young man, who not only scrupled the wearing of the Surplice, but the Master
of Arts Gown also; from which scrupulosity his father much dissuaded him. To
whom his son returned this answer, Father, if you shall be pleased to give me
your reasons, why you forbear the use of the Surplice, I shall tell you mine,
why I wear not a Gown. Nor was this young man alone of the opinion. A good
woman once told me, she had no exception against my Doctrine, only she was
scandalized at my Gown, being a Relic of Rome. I told her the fashion of my
Gown was not taken from Rome, but that it is indeed the fashion of the
Burgomasters of Geneva; which gave her much satisfaction. Woe to the Teachers,
and these who are taught by them! How have they neglected that talent of Gods
grace in them, and are cast into outward darkness, even the darkness of outward
things.

To the third scruple, which only has a show of reason, they say, The Surplice
edifies not, as all things ought to do in the worship of God. Surely it does
edify, but because flesh and blood would always be tampering in the Worship
of God, its here to be excluded, when we say, that the white garment does
edify ex naturarei, non exhumana impositione: The Surplice edifies out of its
own nature, not by invention or imposition of men. For whereas the Priest ought
in righteousness and holiness to exceed at least the common sort of people, the
Surplice is a distinctive Character between them; And has in it the
signification of inward righteousness, which the people in their Response,
pray, That the Priests may be clothed withal, out of Psalm. 132.9. Let the
Priests be clothed with righteousness; For the fine linen is the righteousness
of the Saints, Rev. 19.8. which we purcha^e of the Lord Jesus by Faith and
Prayer, Revel. 3.18. whence arises spiritual joy and cheerfulness in the
service of God, Eccles. 9.8. whereby we become like unto the holy Angels, Acts
10.30. and begin to do the will of God in earth, as it is done in heaven. So
that the Episcopal men reason thus: If the fine linen be the righteousnesses
of the Saints, according to Revel. 19.8. the Babylonian sine linen will prove
the false righteousness, whereof the Presbyterians have no small share, when
they imagine themselves clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and renounce
all inward inherent righteousness, which is to be fulfilled in us who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.

So that maugre all that has been objected, Episcopal men may wear their
Surplices.

But the Presbyterians will not be satisfied; but what they want in reason
against the Ceremonies, whether in gesture or vesture, they make up in passion,
and call the Ceremonies Popish; and say, that because they are used by the
Papists, therefore it is not safe for the Reformed Churches to use them. Why?
Because the Papists are Idolaters, they are Antichristian.

Nor will I make Apology for them, says the Episcopal man, no, nor for our
selves. When men are charged to be Idolaters, is it in regard of the outward
Idol only, or the inward also? We read Ezekiel. 14.3. of idols in the heart. Does
not the Apostle say, that covetousness is idolatry? And that some there are who
make their belly their god? Yea, what if these latter be the worse Idolaters?
Surely since Gods eyes are upon the heart, an Idol there is most abominable.
Are they Antichristian? Does not the Apostle say, there are many Antichrists? 1
John 2. and are there none of them in us? As for multiplicity of Ceremonies, or
no Ceremonies at all, if any Church can be without all Ceremonies, which I much
doubt, (for they who most oppose all Ceremonies, if well looked into, have
their Ceremonies.) But if one Church have multitudes of Ceremonies, and another
none at all, whether shall we justify of the two?

Two women fell out, the one called the other where, the other called her slut.
They are both naught.

The multitude of Ceremonies or gay ornaments, may render the Church of Rome
suspected to be a strumpet. Yet the want of all Ceremonies, (as decent
distinctive garments) as they do not prove the Protestants Church to be chaste
or honest, so neither does it render her comely.

Surely a principal regard ought to be had of Peace, even with the Papists, and
how can that be advanced better, than by complying with them in what is orderly?

For whereas we are bound as much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all
men, are the Papists, yea are the Turks or In^idels excluded from this peace?
And whereas its enjoined, that as much as lies in us, we should live peaceably
with all men, surely we ought to seek peace with them in all such actions,
gestures, postures, ceremonies, as are not forbidden in the holy Scriptures.
And whereas the Romish Church is held by diverse Protestants to be a true
Church, though much corrupted, as a man though diseased, yea full of sores and
putrefactions, is yet a man; we may, yea we ought according to the Rule named,
in all things that are true, honest just, pure, lovely, of good report, etc.
Phil. 4.8, 9. seek peace with them; and with an holy Spagirik purge out
whatever is corrupt among them.

Alas! both they and we are as a company of men fallen into a deep pit, and we
quarrel one with other in the dark, like the Andabata who fought with their
eyes shut.

How much more safe is it that we all endeavor to get out of the pit of
corruption, and become guides to others of so doing?

We have heard some principal differences between the parties; But

4. How fell these parties out?
THere are different reports, and it is but reasonable, that we hear both.

The Episcopal man tells us, that the faction of Aerius, observing how many
Ecclesiastical Dignities were wisely conferred, and worthily bestowed on
persons pious and learned, they envied the flourishing estate of the Church
under Episcopal Government; and being ambitious of those honors, whereof they
were conscious to themselves they were most unworthy, and despairing that ever
they should pass through the Temple of Virtue, into that of Honor, they
resolved, Flectere cum nequeant superes, Acherenta movere. And therefore for
the satisfaction of their envy and ambition, by their pretense of piety, and
zeal for the truth (that is, their own chosen tenants) and feigned fear of
Popery, they stole into an interest much stronger then their own, whereby they
thought, they might command all the world. Under the forementioned pretenses,
they engaged the mutable populacy already weary and surfeting of a long peace,
unto their party, by whose help what could they not do? Some would change the
Civil Government, others the Ecclesiastical. And all presumed, that the sword
could effect all this. And therefore the young men must be cursed into the war,
and the Pulpits must sound with Curse ye Merez, etc. And they did it bitterly.
Yea, Merez has been cursed on both sides; and the young men terrified out of
doors, conscientiously to kill and slay, and the most have been thought to go
forth in their simplicity. O how many thousands have been slain in this and the
neighbor Nations! And many of those who returned with broken Legs and Arms,
and elsewhere wounded in their bodies, are dead in Hospitals, cursing those who
cursed them out. Then the lean kine came forth, and eat up the fat ones; men of
decayed and desperate fortunes, repaired their estates with the ruins of those
who were peaceable in the land.

Then was a man made an offender for a word; and a snare was laid for him who
reproved in the gate, and the just was turned aside for a thing of naught. And
have we not known notorious whore-masters, reeling drunkards, profane swearers
and cursers, abominable liars, incarnate, envy, hatred, malice and all
uncharitableness, have we not known those, and a thousand such masked under the
visor of the godly party? For the cover of all this wickedness, was that
damnable art of seeming Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy that might be felt, it was so
palpable. The Episcopal man will draw a vail over all the rest which might be
added.

Let us hear the Presbyter. He lays all the blame upon the Episcopal clergy
and tells us, that their ambition and tyranny has ruined all; That this begun
to work in the time of St. John, who notes both in Dioirephes, then Bishop,
before Aerius the Presbyter appeared in the Church, that Diotrephes (...), 3
John 9 10. Diotrephes was notable for his ambition. He might no doubt (...),
have had the place of a Primate. It Is necessary in every convention of men that
there be one chief and first, and others after him. But Diotrephes was (...),
he loved priority and primacy. St. John blames his ill affection. At all feasts
and all meetings of men, there are places of superiority; nor does our Lord
disallow it, where he says, lest a more honorable man come, etc. Our Savior
blames ambition in them, who love the upper most rooms at feasts, and the chief
seats in the Synagogues. Nor does he disapprove salutations, Math. 5.47. but
chap. 23.7. He reproves the Rabbis affectation, who loved greetings in the
markets, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi. Nor was this ambition of
Diotrephes discovered in some one act or other, but it was habitual in him, the
Apostle says nor (...), but (...), which notes continuance in that affectation
and ambition. And yet the Article (...) adds to his habitual ambition, he was
notriously loving high place and primacy.

And have there not been such Diotrephes among us, (...), who have loved to be
lording it over their brethren? yea, above their superiors? what a shameful
ambition was that, when one Primate sat in the others lap? our English Story
records it. How much greater ambition to advance himself above the King, who is
supreme, says St. Peter. (Let his pretended Successor note that) Ego, and Rex
meus. I and my King.

The Kings heart, though he be supreme, must not be lifted up above his
brethren; And should the Priests heart be lifted up above his brethren? yea
above his Sovera^gn?

Does this proceed from knowledge? that puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. or indeed rather
from want of knowledge? A little knowledge puffs up; but a great deal makes men
lowly. A few Pease or Beans make a great noise in an empty bladder blown up;
but a full sack makes none at all. An empty Hogshead sounds more than a full
Butt.

Or does this ambition arise from power? Surgit animus cum potentia, The mind
commonly exalts it self with power. And then most what abuses that power to
oppression and tyranny over others under them. So that it is not safe to
entrust so much power in one man's hand. It has been observed, that they who
have power in their own hand, unless they be awed by the Omnipotent God, are
seldom just, according to Mich 2.1. They practice iniquity, etc. because it is
in the power of their hand; For (...), men most of all do injury when they have
power. Therefore Diotrephes the Primate was a Tyrant, domineered over, and was
in urious to the flock of Christ. He cast the brethren out of the Church, 3
John v. 10. And what have our Bishops done less? which is quite contrary to our
Saviors precept. It is the speech of our Lord, and the Bishop of our souls to
his Apostles, Math. 20.25. The Rulers of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them, and the great ones exercise authority over them; but it shall not be so
among you.

The Episcopal man answers the Presbyter, and tells him, That some of his party
framed a false Translation, and he takes advantage of it for his cause. For had
the Lord given his Apostles power, it was then lawful, no doubt, to have power:
And if they had power and authority, might not they exercise it? Otherwise to
what end had they it, if they might not use it? Quid mihi divitiae, and so why
have I power, si non conceditur uti? if I may not use it? And if the Rulers of
the Gentiles might use their power, why might not the Rulers of the Church use
that power also which the Lord has given them? But the words are not well
translated; (...) signifies word for word, to lord it, to domineer, to be
imperious, and that other word (...) is to abuse authority, according to the
signification of (...) in composition. Thus did the Rulers of the Gentiles, and
their great ones; but it must not be so among Christ's Apostles, nor the Bishops
their Successors, they must not domineer, they must not abuse their power over
Gods heritage, 2 Cor. 1.24. the Apostle having testified his authority and
coercive power, he limits it of himself, Not, says he, that we have dominion
over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye have stood.

We take notice hence, and let the Presbyters observe it, Diotrephes was a
Bishop in the Apostles time, and St. John was an Archbishop, who threatened
Diotrephes an Ecclesiastical Censure, for his tyrannical abuse of his authority.

Nor do men of Episcopal persuasion go about wholly to excuse the Hierarchy
from all blame. Howbeit, they are not of Hams race, that they should discover
their fathers nakedness. Only thus much they acknowledge, That great men have
great faults; nor ought we to marvel at the matter, says Solomon, Eccles. 5.8.
But among those faults, certainly this was not the least, That, whether through
indulgence or connivance, or downright negligence, they suffered a foreign
government to grow up under them, even to the extirpation of themselves, and
with them, of the Kingly Power which protected them. A most grievous,
lamentable, and deplorable ruin!

At neutratamen authoritas pessundata simul potest and semeluno nisu
restaurari. Etiam licita, post abusum, potestas haud potest facile
redintegrari. Pientissimus ac prudentissimus Rex regimini suo rectam init viam,
subditos bonis moribus atque homine Christiano dignis instrnit, and monita de
regno Dei praestruit regno suo: atque adeo authomitate Dei in ani^^is hominum
autho^ it atem confirmat suam; Et sic justitia stabilit sollum suum? An non and
hoc firmissinaum Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae fulumentum. An non hoc and ipsi
maxim (...)? An alias unquam populo persuadebiturjus esse divinum ^piscopatus?

Reverendi Patres Ecclesiae siliorum suorum querelas audire ne dediguentur.
Severius olim justo atque haud pattern actum, ubi aures amputatae illis qui
Episcopis obedire detrectarunt: Quamvis eni^^ illi hac contumelia dignissimi,
at hi cert^ indigni qui facerent tamen. Fest is etiam diebus, utut precibus
communibus interfuerint, suae cuique vocationi, per Apparitores, haud licitum
vacare, cum tamen sox diebus hebdomatim Dominus labor^e jusserit. Curias
Ecclesiasticas aliquoties reculis nullius momenti turbari. Levibus eas alicubi
personis, non Dei timentibus administrari unde Officiales ab officiend^, non ab
officie fortiri nomen. In rebus Ecclesiasticis dijudicandis idoneos esse magis
Episcopo Presbyteros, eosque pro veteri more, quam laitos, (ut factum aliquando
perperam) Assessores. Excommunicationum fulmina pro causis nihil saepius
emitti, cum tamen haud vacet exignis rebus adesse Jovi; nec de minimis curet
lex. Caeremonias cortice^ religionis curari magis quam medullam ejus, pietatem
morumque probitatem. Genuflexiones ad mensam sacram sine Canore omnino fieri.
Nimirum his induci facillime opinionem scandalosissimam ac periculosissimam
transubstantiationis; atque adeo persecutionem qualis olim temporibus Marianis.
Imo and horrendum illud nuperum civil bellum utut etiam aliae causae
procrearint, potissema tamen ea fuisse creditur, quod religiosuli (non dico
quam religiose, quam licite, quam pie) turbas ideo moverint, ne res eo in loco
essent quo dudum fuerant.

Superpellicum and caetera ornamenta Ecclesiae ac caeremonias haud (...) ac
vehementer urgenda; verum illa seusini rectius ac peditentim inducenda.
Siquidem licet illa longa sint antiquitate veneranda, novae tamen hominum
generation nova plane atque noviter inventa existimantur, ideo quod aliquandiu
desuetudino interciderint: iique rebus jam novis studere videntur, qui
laudabiles tantum Ecclesiae mores conantur antiques instaurare. Caeremonias
Ecclesiae passim exercere, nullam tamen expositionem extare, nullum Rationale
divinorum, quo rerum in Ecclesia it a vel secus gestarum ratio reddatur.

Desinam jam tandem plurium. Prodiit libellus ante pauoos dies, cui pro titulo
est Non-conformista, de precibus communibus and caeremoniis in quo, si qua vel
Topica, vel (...), contra Leitugriam Anglicanam, omnia (...) corraduntur. Totus
totus ille libellus ect recocta crambe.

Optabile tamen est uti reverendi Patres illa quae vere sunt offendicula e
medio mature tollant, omnemque scrupulum si fieri possit, examinant ex anin^is
dubitantium. Nimirum utut in illo libello haud pauca sint quae vel ex
ignorantia, vel e partium studio profecta, quae contr^^ilitant argumenta, tamen
haud dubie nonnulla sunt qua solidam responsionem postulant. Quale illud est in
sepeliendi formula: Ubi cadaver (forte nebulonis improbi) humo committitur
firma certaque spe resurrectionis ad vitam aeternam. Quam nemo quisquam sanus
concipit. At Presbyter it a dieat, opertet. Hoc atque alia certe quandiu
prostant omnium oculis, nec iisdem satis aperte fiat, omnino vera esse sal^em
rudibus and illiteratis atque (...) videbuntur. Unde suspiciones ac susurri,
odia mutua, and invidiae, animositates atque aemulationes, and quid mali non
inde oborietur?

Neque par est ut ista sola prudentissimi pretissimique Regis urgeantur
authoritate, alias plurimum valitura; siquidem in rebus ad religionem intime
spectantibus, ubi cum Deo ummediate agitur, necesse est uti mandata sua
veritate ratione, insitoque suo pondere convincant animos hominum; Caeteroqui
humana sola authoritate mixa and suffulta, dempta authoritate illa (quid enina
ni demere possit pro suo Re^ arbitrio ^sires exigat,) sua levitate spreta and
contempta evanescent.

But while the Episcopal man acknowledges some miscarriages by some persons
under the Government of Bishops, he enquires, Were there none committed by the
Presbyterians, in that very time when they were Probationers for their New
Government, and when Policy might have inclined them to more plausible and
gentle demeanor, whereby they might have won upon the affections of the
people? However, was it reasonable or equal, that the faults of some one or
few, should redound to the blame, yea extirpation of the whole Community? Judge
righteous judgment. Is it just, that because some Aldermen have been faulty in
the Transactions of these late times, therefore the whole rank and order of
them should be taken away? Or, because some Presbyterians have been zealous and
pragmatical in many unwarrantable actions, is it therefore just or reasonable,
that the whole order of Presbyters should be extirpated?

O that these divided Parties would leave off the blaming one another, and
would enquire,

5. Wherein they ought to agree.
THe endeavors of most men toward pacification, have been spent in presenting
certain Tenants and Principles wherein they would that all men should agree.
Hence the formula concordiae was framed, and many other Confessions and
Articles of Religion, as those of the Church of England.

But its worth the enquiry, whether all these pretenses of Agreement tend not
rather to division and disagreement than union amongst men; that in some
particular Opinions some might accord, and in others oppose all other men. To
this purpose pains have been lately taken.

But the issue has been rent and division: Because they have endeavored such
an Union as should be made by equivocal and amphibological Phrases, which may
be understood and taken diverse ways, which could hold men no longer together
than that Artifice was unridled. And if men agreed in these Tenants, then they
were on this side, or that, which gloried by increase of their party.

Thus the Pharisees compassed Sea and Land to make Proselytes. And many like
them, have labored to make men Orthodox, as they speak, that is, to bring men
to their opinions, to think as they think, while mean time little or no regard
has been had of the Christian life; nor do men consider, that it matters not
much of what Religion or Opinion any man is, if he be a knave.

The holy Scripture directs us not so much to Principles of Speculation, as to
good affection, life, and practice. If thou do well, etc. Genesis 4. Cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc. Esaias 1. He has shown thee, O man, what is good,
etc. Micah 6. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life, Math. 3. In every Nation they that fear God and work
righteousness are accepted of him. Otherwise, to dogmatize, to know, and
believe, and hold this or that principle, without the life, affection, and
action, cui bono? to what what purpose is it? See what account the Spirit of
God makes of such Theory and Faith, see Romans 2. and James 2.

What then is it wherein we should agree?

That wherein they who differ, and we all ought to agree, is the wisdom and
life of God in righteousness and holiness of truth.

This wisdom is begun in the fear of God: The progress of it, is in faith and
hope: The consummation of it, is in the love of God and our neighbor.

The life of God is that, from which we have been all alienated, and unto which
we are again lovingly called. The archetypon of this is God himself, who is our
life; and the Son of God who is our life, and the Spirit of God, which also is
the Spirit of life.

This life is explicated in righteousuess, which comprehends all graces and
virtues; of which that Poet, whose verses were accounted Oracles, says, (...):
which Tully turned, Justitia in se se virtutes continet o^nes. And we may
English it, In righteousness all virtues are contained.

The effect of this righteousness is peace; whence another of the old Poets in
his Genealogy of Virtues and Graces, which he calls Gods, says, (...), Peace
is the daughter of Justice and Equity.

This divine life came forth from the Lord in all purity. This was prefigured
by Eve taken out of Adam, that is the life ((...)) taken out of Christ, of whom
then to come, Adam was a figure, Romans 5. This Eve is the mother of all those
who truly live, as Jerusalem is said to be the mother of us all.

As this life came spotless and pure out of Gods hands, so it must return unto
him. And therefore Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify it, and cleanse it with washing of water by the Word, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or
any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians 5.25,
26, 27. Hitherto we are to be gathered, Genesis 49.10. 2 These. 2.1. Hither tend
all the labors of the Bishops and Presbyters. Herein we all ought to meet,
Ephesians. 4.13.

This divine life has been much obscured and counterfeited by all sorts of
Philosophers and false Christians, and is said for that reason, to be taken
from he earth. The Lord Jesus therefore appeared to make discovery of this
divine life, John 17. This is life eternal to know thee, and whom thou have
sent, Josus Christ. And therefore the Apostle says, that he has conquered
death, and does (...), enlighten or illustrate the life which was darkened and
obscured before, 2 Timothy 1.10. And it is more and more discovered in the growth
of it.

For as there are different ages in the natural life, so likewise are there in
the spiritual life. And the wisdom of God enters into the holy souls according
to the ages, Wild. 7.27. To which purpose, the Apostle is to be understood,
Ephesians. 4 7. Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure
(...), of the gift Christ, that is, of Christ himself who is that gift, as our
Lord calls Himself the gift of God, John 4. For as the visible sun, by few or
many and often revolutions, makes a like number of natural days or years in the
outward and visible world; after the same proportion, in the invisible and
spiritual world, the sun of Righteousness lifts up the light of his countenance
on the souls of those who fear him, on whom he arises, Malach. 4.2. And
accordingly make some younger, some elder, some old aged men. For if in truth
and in Gods computation, they were elder or younger, whom the world accounts
such, who should be more full of days then Adam and Methusala? Who yet are
never, in all the Scripture said to be old men. But Abraham the father of the
faithful, who had soon Christ's days, is said to die in a good old age, and
Joshua, Job, David, Jehoida, with some others, all children in respect of those
two, are yet styled old men and full of days; when yet the eldest of them all,
if we regard their natural life, in this outward world, came short of Adam and
Methusala, many hundred years.

The Wise man speaks home to this, Wisdom 4.8, 9. That honorable old age is not
that which stands in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years,
but wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and the unspotted life is old age. And
speaking of Enoch the youngest of all those Patriarchs, in regard of natural
life, and the father of Methusala the eldest; he being made perfect in a short
time, fulfilled a long time. They who are grown up in this divine wisdom and
life of God, are said to be old men and Senators. Thus (...), are Ambassadors,
such as are employed in that honorable Function, 2 Cor. 5. So they were called
Apostles, because they were sent by the Lord, what ever their natural age was.

They who were further grown up in the divine wisdom and life of
righteousness, were called (...), Presbyters or Elders; And from the name
Presbyter, otherwise Priester, Priests have their name by a contraction.

Which is an honorable title, and such as was common with princes; as the
Priest of On, Genesis 41. may be as well rendered, the Prince of On. David's sons
were (...) Princes, 2 Samuel 8.18. Jer. 5.31. They who were the most aged and
eldest in this divine life, were the Apostles or the Bishops their Successors;
whence Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. 6. Strom. (...), Proficiencies of the Church
of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons. So that neither Bishops nor Presbyters are of
their own, or any other man's making; not of men, nor by men, Gal. 1.1. Paul
planteth, and Apollo waters, but the Lord himself gives the increase. For as
in natural aggeneration, the man may eat and drink, but the increase is not in
his choice, he cannot add one cubit to his stature; even so a man may partake
of spiritual nourishments, and feed on faith, but his increase and proficiency
is not in his one choice, but the Lord gives it. And St. Peter shows wherein
his Presbytery consisted, viz. in the participation of the death and life of
Christ, 1 Peter 5.1. A w^^ness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker
of the glory that shall be revealed.

And St. Paul proves his Apostleship by his sight of the Lord, and he tells the
Elders of Ephesus, that the holy Ghost had made them overse^rs^or Bishops
(...), Act. 20.

But these were made immediately of God, we read of those also who were made by
men. Tit. 1.5. However that be true, yet man's constitution of Elders,
presupposes Gods preceding work in them. Thus the Lord commands Moses to look
out such Elders as he knew to be such, Number. 11. And in our ordination, the
persons to be ordained, are required to give an account what motions and
inclination of Gods spirit they have had disposing them to that holy function.
And in this regard the Apostles, and other Ministers of the Church are called
Gods gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. Nor does our Lord any where say, that he will put
an end unto, or change that dispensation: so that we may always expect those
gifts from God unto his Church, until the ^^nction or spirit of God so teach
some men, that they shall not need that any man teach them. Such a state there
is, whereunto some had attained, unto whom St. John wrote, 1 John 2.27. The
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; And ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, etc.

Whereas therefore some at this day dispute against an immediate call from God,
they go about to take away Gods preventing work, when he gives his gifts unto
men; and take the whole work of making Ministers unto themselves; so that such
are not Ministers of God, but man's only; because they have not Gods immediate
call to the Ministry, nor his preventing work in them.

I am aware of a doubt, which this assertion leaves behind it; For if the
Ministers of the Church be of Gods making in such a sense as I have shown, how
then does the King make Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Ministers of that
Hierarchy?

I answer: Both may consist. For as the God of order has made man according to
his image, which especially consists in his dominion over the creatures; so he
has made Kings and Potentates and generally the higher Powers in a more
peculiar manner after his image, which consists in dominion over men; whence it
is that he has distinguished mankind, into superiors and inferiors, and stamped
his character and mark of distinction upon both. On Kings, Potentates and the
higher Powers, no has imprinted multum Dei, says Aquinas, much of God, Exodus
22.28. Psalm 82. Joh. 10 35
and so makes them like himself, Gods, as the Scripture calls them; and our
Lord acknowledges them such, and gives the reason, he calls them Gods, to whom
the word, viz. the essential word of God came, by whom Kings reign (so Ireuaeus
understood it) to whom the word and image of God came, and that gives them now
hearts, 1 Samuel 10 and 12.6.
and turns them into other men, and so makes them as the Lord is said to have
made Moses and Aaron, that is, advanced them, as our Translators render the
word.

For besides those personal endowments of the higher powers, no doubt other
Gratiae gratis data the^e are attending on those high Functions. Wet ye not,
says Joseph, that such a man as I can divine? And Caiaphas spoke not that of
himself, but being the high Briest that year, he prophesied, says St. John.
When a multitude of men stood about that fiery furnace, whereinto the three
captives were cast, Nebuchadnezzar alone saw the fourth who was like the Son of
God. Cur tibi soli innotuit? says Hippolytus, How came thou alone to see
this? He gives reason; The heart of the King is in the hand of God.

Now as the God of Order inwardly enables the higher powers, by the impression
of his image, so he makes them outwardly to be acknowledged such by imprinting
on them that excellency of dignity and honor which we call Majesty, which is
originally in God himself, from whom it is derived to Kings and Governors, his
images on earth, as even the Philosopher could say. A Character so indelible,
that even in the wracks and downfalls of Princes, it might yet be discerned.
For so we read, that the Roman Lictor an able young man and armed, being sent to
kill Marius the Consul, now proscribed, decrepit, unarmed, alone, imprisoned,
yet he durst not strike him, being himself first stricken with the Majesty of
Marius. And when the news was brought to Vespasian, that Vitellius was
overthrowen, there suddenly appeared in his countenance, a luster of Majesty
never observed before. Such was that which appeared in the face of Moses,
Eccles. 8.1. Number. 11. Judge. 6 1 King. 10.26.
so that the people could not behold him. The wisdom of a man makes his face
to shine, says Solomon. The like may be argued in the seventy Elders, in
Gideon, in Saul, in David, in Solomon.

For as the God of Order makes this impression of Majesty in superiors, so he
imprinteth an agnition of it in inferiors. There went a band of men after Saul,
whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10. And he it is, says David, who subdues
the people under me. He it is who touches the hearts with love or fear, or
hope, or some other way best known to himself, and so wins them to submission.
For indeed who can conceive it other then divine ordination that so many
multitudes of men of so various, so contrary natures, tempers, dispositions,
judgments, etc. should all submit and yield subjection to one or few of the
same mold and like affections? Surely it is no other then the Lords doing, and
it is wonderful in our eyes.

This generally and necessarily premised, we may add some what more
particularly concerning the Kings of this Land, That our Common Laws
acknowledge them to be certain Gods upon earth, and ascribe unto them a kind
of ommipresence, and ubiquity, perfection, and immortality, and other
excellencies like those of the divine nature.

And if our Laws and Lawyers acknowledge those, and ascribe them generally to
their Kings, how much more should the Divines own in their good Kings, not
only those which the Schoolmen call gratiae gratis datae, but much more the
gratiae gratum faciextes, as the divine wisdom and piety, goodness and mercy,
and compassion, etc. Such as, without flattery, all impartial men own in our
present Sovereign, even in their eminency, together with a spirit of discerning.

Whereby he is enabled to discover the several proficiencies and growths of
Gods graces in good men, according to the increase of God in them. When
therefore he conferres dignities on persons duly qualified, he owns the gifts
of God in them. Which because it is difficult, the wise man referres the Kings
detemination unto an higher principle no other then divine, Prove 16.10. where
he says, that a divination, divine sentence, or oracle is in the lips of the
King; his mou^h transgresses not in judgment. And although there are who
would restrain this to civil affairs, and the decision of them; yet according
to that presence of God with Kings, wise and good Kings, Solo^oon may be
understood to speak of ^^ine matters, and the disposing, and ordering of them
also. (...), whereas Ejusdem potestatis est tollere and ponere, it belongs to
the same power to put out of place, and put in place, to dishonor and
dignifie; the King has a precedent for both in the wise Solomon, who thrust
out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, 1 King 2.27. And Verse 35. he put
Zadok the Priest in the room of Abiathar. And although Bellarmin would not have
Solomon do this ut Rex but ut Propheta, not as a King, but as a Prophet, what
is that distinction worth, if the King be guided with the same good spirit of
God? as has been shown.

Would God these ungrateful nations did not too much verify what is prophesied
of these last times, 2 Esdr. 15, 16. They shall not regard their King nor
Princes! O that the character which Gildas Sapiens gave of the Britains before
the Conquest, and their unthankfulness to their best Kings, were not too true
of many in this present generation! Si quis Regum mitior and veritati
aliquatenus proprior, in hunc quasi Britanniae subversorem, omnium odia telaque
sine respectu, contorquebantur. If any of their Kings were more mild or meek,
and somewhat nearer to the truth, all their hatreds and darts were cast against
him without respect, as the subverter of Britany. How true of those is that
which was long since said of the King of England, that he was Rex diabolorum? O
that we all knew, and duly considered, what a season, what a divine leaven of
life and righteousness, what a cement of love and unity, what a binding chord
reconciling of all jarring dissonancies and differences, our good God has sent
among us, (as appears by all his Proclamations, and especially his late
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, in all which breathes a spirit
of life and righteousness, love, unity, and peace,) that we might walk worthy
of him! Then would the divided Parties the better know,

6. How they may be persuaded unto peace.
WE have our gracious Kings eminent example, who himself umpires these very
differences between the divided parties; which is the property ^^^wise and good
prince. It is true that Tyrants and Usurpers in all Ages have bin wont either
to find, or make and nourish Differences among the people, that their
emulations and animosities being spent upon their opposite respective Factions,
they might have no leisure to look into, or disturb the security of their
Oppressors; as a certain Player at Rome, when the Praetor asked him of what
profession he was, told him, That he was one of them, who whyl'd the populacy,
that they might not have time to consider, prevent, and hinder his knavery.
Upon this ground Machiavel taught his Scholars this Lesson, Divide, and impera;
Divide, and rule: He had lea^ned this Maxim of his Tutor the great Abadden and
Apollyon.

Quite contrary has been the practice of all good Kings, Princes, and
Governors, and our Sovereigns, one of the best of them, to assimilate their
people, and render them like unto themselves in virtuous and holy life, and so
to rule them in unity, peace and concord. And what enmity they cherish among
their Subjects, its no other than what they learned of their Sovereign, the
King of kings, who put enmity between the seed of the woman, and the seed of
the serpent, even the Law of Commandments, Ephesians. 2. whereby they may become
enemies to sin and iniquity. And this enmity drives out the sin, that Davus qui
turbat omnia, which breaks all peace with God and man. Happy, thrice happy they
who enure themselves unto such contention, as is wholly exercised upon the
enemies of their own house! Such reflex actions guided by divine wisdom, rend
to the subduing of our brutish affections. Such enmity is safe, while it is
employed at home; but when it breaks forth of doors, and becomes directed by
the earthly, sensual, divellish wisdom, what ever the pretense may be, it tends
to confusion and every evil work; as he who aimed at a beast, but slew a man.
Such fire is safe and serviceable on the hearth, but what is more unsafe, more
destructive, what devours and consumes more, when it comes abroad?

We have heard how exemplary the King is in this very business. And how
powerful such a royal leader is, may appear by that almost proverbial verse,

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
The whole world's composed to the pattern of a King.
How much more prevalent ought his precept and example to be with us, where the
King of kings, whom our King and all other good Kings own as their Sovereign?
He it is who is the Author of Peace and Lover of Concord, the God of peace,
Phil. 4.9. The Son of God is the Prince of peace, Esaias 9.6. His principal type
of Kings, is Jedidiah the beloved of the Lord, Solomon the peaceable, as his
names speak him, and such was his reign. His principal type of Priests, was the
peaceable Melchisedec, the priest of peace, yea the King of it, King of Salem,
which is King of peace, Hebr 7.2. His Prophets are the Messengers of peace,
Esaias 25. His Argels first proclaimed peace, Luke 2. His Apostles and Ministers
are the preachers of peace. His Gospel which they preached, is the Gospel of
peace, Ephesians. 6.15. His way is the way of peace, Luke 1.79. He himself is the
preacher of peace, Ephesians. 2. the peacemaker, yea the very essential peace it
self, Ephesians. 2.14. Thus God the Father by his Son, his Argels, his Prophets, his
Apostles, his Ministers promote this Common peace among men. And his design and
end is the very highest, Union and Communion with himself in his divine nature;
For which the Son of God ^rayes in behalt both of his Apostles, John 17.2.19.
and of all those who shall believe on him through their word, that they may be
one even as the Father and Son are one, 20, 21, 22. This is that glorious end
whereat God himself aims in his precepts of pea^e, that we may be par^akers of
Christ, Heb. 3.14. That we may be partakers and communican^s in the divine
nature it self, 2 Pet. 14. That our fellowship may be with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John. 1.3. That God may be all in all.

If so high aims are at the advancement of our peace and unity, should we be
wanting to our selves in the endeavoring after so great a Blessing as the
Blessing of Peace? It is the first good testimony wherewith we find the Sons
of Jacob honored, that they were peaceable. These men are peaceable among us,
Genesis 34.21. And the Primitive spiritual Sons of Jacob were wondered at, See how
the Christians love one another. Nor is there any thing so much wanting to the
felicity of this church the Israel of God in this nation, as the true
inheriting these two testimonies of Love and Peace, which invite and draw down
the Blessing of everlasting Life, Love, and Peace. For where brethren dwell
together in unity, there the Lord commanded that his Blessing and Life for
evermore. Nor is there any doubt, but were we united in love and peace, the
Spirit of life, love, and peace would be upon us. For the promise is made to
those who were then afar off, as we are, Acts 2. Phil. 4.

Consider this Idea, this Image of life, love, and peace, and look inwardly
into thy self who ever thou art, Episcopal or Presbyterian, whether thou find
it living in thee. Consider the pattern, and be ashamed of thy pride and
ambition, thy strife and contention. And remember its required in that mystical
Ordinance touching the Gospel-Priesthood, Ezekiel. 44.14. That all the Priests of
the Lord be the sons of Zadoc, not such sons of Zadoc who were Sadduces, who
deny the resurrection, and the reward of the Just in the life to come, but just
and righteous persons; such as the sons of Zadoc, humble and lowly, not proud,
not ambitious, not contending who should seem to be the greatest. The sons of
Zadoc are faithful and true in what ever they speak. They are merciful and
compassionate, liberal and bountiful, full of alms-deeds, lovers of
hospitality, lovers of good things and good men, sober, just, holy, temperate.
Such must the sons of Zadoc be, that they may be like unto that true Zadoc,
that Just One, Acts 22.14. that humble, faithful, merciful High Priest, Heb.
2.17.

For indeed why (my brethren of the Presbytery) should we above all other
Parties, and divided Judgments, be the most ambitious of ruling over others?
Is it our learning that puffs us up? There are, no doubt, many Learned men
among us in our way: yet are there also many, whom we oppose, not inferior to
us in the knowledge of the Scriptures, to say no more. Or is it our obedience
to what we know, that makes us seem to our selves better then other men, and
worthy to govern them? (For pride is a worm that sometime breeds even in the
trees of righteousness, Esaias 61.3.) Surely some of those, whom many of us most
despise, have more understanding of spiritual things, and are more humble, more
self-denying, more patient, more obedient unto the Truth, then the most of us
are. And in r^^son they must be so: For they who aim at the perfect life, and
believe it possible to be obtained, they must have the life mere abundantly,
then they who believe it to be impossible, as the most of us do. Because belief
grasps and lays hold on the power, Esaias 27. and hope is the ground of all
endeavor: where therefore there is no such belief or hope of the perfect life,
there can be no earnest endeavor to obtain the same. The greater endeavor, the
greater is the attainment; as he who aims at the Sun, shoots higher than he who
aims at the Moon.

Or is it your wealth, or strength, or confidence in the
joynt-Commonwealth-interest, which you inveigled long since into your party,
which raises your ambition? They have found, that should you compass your
grand design, it would not countervail the blood and treasure which has been
already spent in vain. They rest satisfied that your misplaced zeal has
undeceived them; so that they judge it much more safe to expiate that error,
whereinto you lead them, then to engage in a new, lest the latter prove worse
then the former.

Besides, are you not aware, how little warrant you have from the holy
Scriptures for any such enterprise? Does not that oracle fly in your faces,
which at other times is much in your mouths, not by might, nor by power, but
by my spirit? says the Lord of hosts.

Do you not perceive that so doing, you should not trust in the true God, but
in your Mammon? You cannot serve both together. Nay, should you not forsake the
Lord of hosts, and honor the God of forces? Dan. 11.38.

Or have you such power, think you, with the rude multitude, that ye can by
them promise your selves advancement of your cause? Or can you hope for like
pr^sperous success (if it can be called prosperous, which is founded on Ataxy,
Anarchy and Confusion,) that a prime Reformer of yours boasted of, when he, by
insinuations with the populacy, had changed the Government of a certain City,
Hac faece hom number evicimus? By these dregs of men, says he, we obtained our
purpose. Believe it, they are become so wise by costly and bloody experience,
(...), that, as by a stratagem in war, they will not be deceived a second time.
For although there may be some ignorant Zealots; who are lead by your
purse-strings, or example, or counsel, or entreaty, and others who know no
better thing, may follow you in their simplicity; Yet the generality of the
people being sensible only of an outward austerity and formal pretension of
Godliness without any conviction of inward power and efficacy, they will not
hazard a cut finger for the advancement of your Government. Yea, some wise men
conceive, that you would not so eagerly oppose the ancient Government of the
Church with your novelty, but that you fear your former bold enterprises would
not be safe, without attempting somewhat that's worse -- Brevibus Gyaris aut
carcere dignum. Or, that by indulgence and favor, you may come off, among
those of your party, with the reputation of resolute and conscientious men. Or,
that some principal sticklers and leaders among you may have their conscience
better informed with a Deanary or Bishopric. Or, because there are some
unquiet and unpeaceable spirits among you, who conceive that Atheism,
profaneness, impiety, and all irreligion would violently break into the Church,
unless they stood in the gap to keep it out. Alas, Good men! They are like
those little wooden statues which are set under the main beams of an house,
with very piteous faces, as if they bare up the whole building, whereas indeed,
were they taken away, the house would stand very well without them.

But what is their pretense? They conceive the Christian faith is in hazard,
and would be lost, if they stood not up in defense of it. And therefore they
allege scripture for warrant of their contention, that they may sin by the
Book. For why? They ought, as they say, to contend for the faith that once was
given to the Saints, Jude verse 3. That is (says the Gloss of the Quarto
Bible,) against the assaults of Satan and Heretics. Whence some gather, that
they should strive with others for the Apostolical faith. But in reason; men
ought first to contend for the faith once given to the Saints, that it might be
in themselves, viz. faith in Christ the wisdom of God, and power of God, 1 Cor.
1, That faith, that is, the obedience of faith, as Romans 1. and 16. That
victorious faith which overcomes the world. 1 John 5.4. Whereas therefore some
then, as at this day, had brought in a lazy kind of imagination, which they
called faith, that Christ had done, and suffered all things for them; and so
became ungodly, and turned the grace of God into wantonness, and so sinned,
that grace might abound; And so they denied the Lord Jesus Christ the only
Lord, when they obeyed other Lords, as Esaias 26. And pretended impotency,
weakness, and inability to do the will of our only Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. These Jude exhorted to contend for the true faith once delivered to the
Saints. For had we the true faith, which was once given to the Saints, it would
no doubt empower us against all ungodliness, and all wantonness, yea all the
lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; which are all that
is in the world. 1 John 2.16. And the true faith is the victory that overcomes
that world, 1. John 5.4. Which faith, were it in us, it would overcome that
pride of life, whence comes this contention, who should seem to be the greatest.

But they will have no Peace, they say, without Truth. This is an old juggle,
whereby the credulous and ignorant multitude were seduced into the late War,
and so persuaded to believe a lie. Not but that peace is, and ought to be
joined with truth, as Zech. 8 16.19. and elsewhere. But is not peace also found
coupled with righteousness? Esaias 32.17. and with holiness, Heb 12.14. and love,
Psalm 119.165. and purity, James 3.17. And what Truth is that which is joined
with Peace? Is it not notoriously known, that they are wont to call their
Principles and Opinions which they have chosen to hold, by the glorious name of
Truth, according to which they account themselves, and would be accounted by
others, Orthodox?

But does not our Lord Jesus call himself The Truth? John 14.6. Now mark what
kind of Truth the Lord Jesus is, Ephesians 4.20. Ye have not so learnt Christ,
if at least ye have heard him, and have been taught in him, as the Truth is in
Jesus, that ye put off according to the former conversation, the old man, which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of
your mind; and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and holiness of Truth. Whence follows truth in speech, wherefore
putting away the lie, speak ye every one truth to his neighbor, etc. This truth
they had learned, to whom St. John wrote, 1 John 2.21. I have not written unto
you, because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no l^e is
of the truth. This is the Truth unto which the true Peace is ^oyned, and
without which there is no Peace.

Wherefore, beloved Brethren, let us beware, lest under what pretense soever,
we break the peace of the Church, or the peace of the Nation; either of which
ought to be more dear unto us than our own lives. Let us take heed, O let us
advisedly, seriously, and timely take heed, brethren, lest contrary to the
practice of Christ, and the holy Apostles, according to the custom of the
unbelieving Jews and Heathens, and some Zealors of our own, we go about to
reform the world. It was said of the Lord Jesus, that he perverted the Nation,
when he converted it; and of the Apostles, that they turned the world upside
down; when, by the weapons of their spiritual warfare, they cast down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalted it self against the knowledge
of God, and exalted the humility and meekness of Jesus Christ. They never went
about to reform a people, by raising Riots, Routs, and Tumults. They were not
the Apostles, but the unbelieving Jews, who moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the
City in an uproar, Acts 17.5.

Let us beware, beloved Brethren, lest we go about to reform the Church, as the
woman did when she sought her groat, according to an old false reading of the
vulgar Translation, Luke 15.8. evertit domum, she overturned the house, when
she should have only swept it, according to the true reading everrit domum.
For surely the wise woman, the Church, seeking the Lords image lost in his Coin
[Man,] by the light of the Lords Candle, which is his Spirit, Prove. 20.27. she
sweeps and cleanses the house from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, until
she find her Lords image in righteousness and holiness of Truth, and so
becomes reformed and renewed in the spirit of her mind.

This, this is the true Reformation of the Church, not overturning it; as
Bertius says we do, when we go about to reform it. O let us prove him a false
prophet, who has these words in his Breviarum totius Orbis terrarum, page 7.
Habent hoc pr^prium Calvanistae, ut statum in quem irrepserunt, evertant, neque
ante conquiescant quam ipsi rerum potiantur. Irrisores, turbulenti, factiosi,
disputaces, ingrati, arrogantes supra quam dici aut credi potest, hosts
Catholicorum juratissimi, quique non tantum ipsi nihil conferunt ad repellendam
imminentem Christianorum cervicibus Turcarum vim; sed etiam motis intestinis
dissidiis bellisque impediu^t alios Reges id conantes, quin and opes viresque
ipsorum a communi host aversas in mutuam Christiano^um perniciem concitant.
Atque hoc ipsis est reformare Ecclesiam.

I shall leave this upon your spirits sadly to be thought upon; and speak a
word unto my Brethren of Episcopal persuasion.

I know many of you, beloved Brethren, and I believe here are far many more in
this and our neighbor Nation of Ireland, eminent in wisdom and piety, men of
profound learning, sober, grave, just, prudent, etc. who have been refined and
purified in the furnace of humiliation, and are come forth as vessels of honor
fit for their Masters use. These are (...), persons who hae far transcended the
envy of their persecuters. And having been turned into strange Countries, have
declared evidently what difference there is between (...) and (...), one
unlearned and learned. Unto these I say only, Macti estote, proceed and shine
forth as lights of the Church.

To you I speak, who have been Sufferers also, but, if report not only of your
enemies, but even of your friends also wrong you not, some of you have not
improved your sufferings to the advantage of your own souls, or the Church of
God, so that you cannot truly and experimentally say, It is good for us that we
have been afflicted.

Are not many of you returned the very same men you were, only worse, as being
more heightened with pride, more embittered with envy, more enflamed with wrath,
more enlarged with desire of revenge?

Atqui cum peccata carnalia plus habeant infamiae, spiritualia plus de natura
peccati, (quod sanctus Gregorius ait) Ut fama vestrae parcam, Latin vos
pacciis alloquar. Aiunt e vobis esse, (at spero eos admodum paucos esse) qui
ventri nimium indulgent, mutuo se poculis provecant, invitant se plusculum,
etc. An non hoc idem ipsum vitium est, quod pientissimus Rex haud feret in
eajulo, haud feret in tressi agasone? Anidem ipsum tulerit in Ministro Dei? An
non etiam vos illi feciales, qui contra haec flagitia moresque vitioses,
prudentissimi Regis inimicitias indicitis? Qua front utcunque caperata
inhibetis illud, quod vita licentiori comprobatis? Pudet haec opprobria vobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.

Are ye they who are come out of that great tribulation? Rev. 7.14. should not
then your garments be made white in the blood of the Lamb? Should not you be
planted in the likeness of his death, and so be made also like unto him in his
pure, innocent, and spotless life and resurrection? So should you be fit to say
in way of thankfulness, with that Heavenly Quire, Blessing and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for
ever and ever! Amen. This is an heaventy Doxology when the heavenly life speaks
it. Otherwise an unholy, debaucht, and vicious life is the greatest
ingratitude, especially in a Priest.

For what honor, what glory can be to God, what profit is it unto you or to the
Church of God, that holy hands have been laid upon you and that you be made
Priests, if by a sinful life you dishonor ^od and that holy function, and
render your selves unfit for the discharge of it? Flatter not your selves, not
please your selves in that honorable name of Priests; and that thereby you have
power to bind and loose, so that whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Do you consider what that
worthy name imports? Is not a Priest such an one as is grown up unto the old
age of Christ? Ephesians. 4. And dare you in your nonage, while yet you are subject
to the sins incident unto the spiritual childhood, and before you are so
strong as to overcome the evil one, dare you assume to your selves the power of
binding and loosing, even while you your selves are bound with the chains of
your own sins? Can you think that such great works as are binding and loosing,
are annexed to your persons, or to the due qualifications of the Priesthood,
and such as ought to be in you? There is no doubt, but, as the Priest under the
law, had skill to put difference between holy and unholy, and clean and
unclean, which he could not do, if he drank wine or strong drink, before he
went into the Tabernacle of the congregation, Lev. 10. so neither can the
Gospel Priest discern between holy and unholy, righteousness and
unrighteousness, pure and unpure, so as to bind or loose, if he be drunk with
wine wherein is excess, or drunk, and not with wine, Esaias 29.9. as with the
spirit of opinion.

O my beloved brethren, the Gospel Priest must well understand the nature of
sin and corruption, and temptation unto sin, and the devices of Satan, and
means and ways how to escape them; He is the spiritual man who judges all
things, 1 Cor. 2.15. Who knows the mind of the Lord, Romans 11.34. Who has the
mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. ult. Such a Priest is able and fit to bind and
loose, as having received the spirit of God, and been endued with power from
above. Otherwise its great boldness, and presumption for any man to assume such
power unto himself. And what, my Brethren, emboldens you here unto? Because,
you say, you are made Priests: And therefore you presume to take the Apostles
authority for your pattern, to whom the Lord Jesus said, Those sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. John
20.23. O when shall we deal sincerely and impartially with the holy Scriptures!
How often do men cite the divine testimonies, as the devil alleged part of
Psalm 91.11, 12. to our Savior, Math. 4.6. Where he leaves out what was most
necessary to be understood? And in this case of great moment, men do the very
same; For where our Lord says, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. he
premiseth those words, Receive the Holy Chost. And then immediately follow
chose other, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins
ye retain, they are retained. They therefore who have received the Holy Spirit
of God, are the fit men for the discharge of the Gospel-Priesthood.

Wherefore, my Brethren, boast not of your power, but rather pray unto the Lord
for his Holy Spirit, whereby you may be empowered; For our Heavenly Father will
not fail to give his Holy Spirit unto those his children who ask him, Luke
11.13. and are obedient unto him, Acts 5.32.

Nor can the Book of Common Prayer, though full fraught with Divine Petitions
and Praises of God, nor your daily reading of it, render you divine, or, as ye
are called, Divines, unless your selves have a share of what you pray for. Do
ye not pray, that we may hereafter (that is, after the Confession of sins) live
a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of Gods holy Name? And in the
Communion-service, do not you put up unto God this large Petition? That we may
ever hereafter serve and please him in newness of life, to the honor and glory
of his Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yea, do you not pray every day,
that we may fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger, but that all
our doings may be ordered by his governance, to do always that which is
righteous in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord? Is your charity more
fervent toward others, than toward your selves, Brethren? Or is your endeavor
less in behalf of your selves, than in behalf of others? Do you pray, that they
may live a godly, righteous, and sober life; that they may ever serve and
please God in newness of life; that they may fall into no sin; that they may do
always that which is righteous in the Lords sight, etc. and do you not pray for
all these things in behalf of your selves? If so, whence is the complaint that
these things are not found in you? that you have but a small part of them? For
if you prayed for them so, that your selves might be partakers of them, there
is no doubt but our good God would grant your requests, because they are
according to his will; Now this is the confidence that we have in him, that if
we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we desired
of him, 1 John 5.14, 15.

Yea, and because you pray not for your selves, it is much to be feared, that
your Prayers are not heard for others. For in this sense the Proverb is good
and true, That Charity begins at home.

And this is the ground of another Complaint, That the Common Prayer is
resorted unto by many loose and debaucht persons, (and I believe it is as true,
that many close hypocrites resort unto conceived prayers.) And hence arises
one of the Presbyterians Invectives against the Book of Common Prayer, that
(like as St. Paul reasons against the weakness of the Ceremonial Law, Heb.
10.1.) it cannot make the comers thereunto perfect. Not that they think it
possible, that any one should be perfect in this life, by what ever power God
gives a man (their own words in their large Catechism) though Christ and his
Apostles enjoin us to be perfect; and Epaphras prays for the Colossians, that
they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God, Colos. 4.12. But
this is the Presbyterians argumentum ad hominem.

Howbeit this cannot be imputed unto the Book of Commonprayer, that it cannot
render men perfect: For the defect is not in the prayers, which are in
commensuration even to the highest perfection, as elsewhere, so especially
where the Church prays, that we may perfectly love God, and worthyly magnify
his holy name. But indeed the great defect is in the Comers thereunto; or many
of them, who, without due consideration of either prayers or praises, turn them
over their tongues carelessly, and negligently, as if the very hearing and
reciting of these prayers were the only true and perfect service of God, and
think, he is pleased with such a performance of it, and so they rest in it
tanquam in opere operato. Yea, I have heard it alleged, that the Common Prayer
is that pure offering whereof the Lord speaks, as to be fulfilled among the
Gentiles, Mal. 1.11. In every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and
a pure offering.

Surely by Incense, Prayer is understood, according to Psalus 141.2. But the
pure offering is little understood, and less practiced, even the daily
sacrifice of mortification which is taken away according to Daniels Prophecy,
Dan. 8.11, 12, 13. and 11.31.

Truly what is generally spoken, may be applied more properly to the Book of
Common Prayer, Quaeneglecta vilescunt, eadem si considerentur, habentur
admiratione. The method of the Liturgy, the Prayers and Praises of God in it,
because neglected by Presbyters, yea, and by many Episcopals themselves, they
are not esteemed; but if, according to their weight and moment, they were duly
considered (some offenses being removed) they would provoke pious men of both
parties even to admire them.

So that the principal thing that is wanting to the Honor of God, the good of
his Church, and the due estimation of the Book of Common Prayer, is the
Christian life which is required out of it. This, my brethren, procures
authority to your Priesthood, veneration to your outward Divine Service, and
due respect unto your Persons. Without which, neither a Long Cassock, nor a
Broad Girdle, nor affected Gravity of Deportment will avayl any thing at all,
among wise and good men. Ad populum phaleras --

Not that these are despicable, as some vain and ignorant men have thought
them, but indeed venerable, if we consider what they import; as we shall
understand, if we remember our vow in our Baptism, which I fear, the most of us
forget, viz. an abremutation of Satan and all his works, etc. which in the
ancient Church was expressed by (...), I renounce Satan. And belief of the
Gospel, and all the articles of the Christian faith, and the keeping of Gods
commandments; all which were comprised in the opposite phrase, (...), I enroll
my self in Christ's Matricula, or Military Roll. So that the Christian
Profession is a kind of warfare; and the person baptized promises to continue
Christ's faithful Soldier and servant unto his lives end. And this is that which
the Priest holds forth in his Sagum or Cassock, which was Vestimentum militare,
a military Garment, and so used by the Germans, says Tacitus; and it is the
same which is in use among most Soldiers at this day. Plutarch calls it (...),
a Soldiers garment, which, says Nomius, he wore above all his other apparel; a
figure of Charity which must be put on above other, Col. 3.14. And because love
must be sincere, Romans 12.9. the Christian Soldier must be girded with the
girdle of Truth, Ephesians. 4.15. and 6.14. For the Girdle was a part of the Roman
Soldiers armor, Cingulum militare, the Soldiers Belt, a quo arma dependent,
says Isidor, whereon his other weapons hung. Yea, when the Israelites came out
of Egypt, it is said, Exodus 13.18. they went up harnessed; the wo^d is (...),
which is properly accincti, girded, importing thus much, That the Israel of God
going up out of the Spiritual Egypt, must be armed with the whole armor of
God, especially with the Girdle of truth, faithfulness, and sincerity; as also
with strength, Psalm. 18.39. and with chastity, wherewith the Lord implies his
Spouse should be girded, Jer 13.11.

O my Brethren, both of Episcopal and of Presbyterian persuasion! consider, and
be hearily ashamed of your common error, that ye have both been so grossly
mistaken, that ye have neglected the common enemy, even the Devil, against whom
we are all engaged by our Vow in Baptism, and deserted the common Cause of
Christianity, the crucifying of the old man, and are fallen foul one upon
another. Do you know no better the devices of Satan? Are you so little known to
your selves, that you take no notice of your lusts that war in your members? Do
you no more regard them who are without? What opinion, think you, has the
religious, and irreligious world of you? Remember, the Cause you are engaged
in, is the Cause of God: you have entered covenant with him upon these terms,
that you should fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil. The Cause is
Gods Cause, and must needs be good. The Apostle calls it so. Fight the good
fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. It Is a Cause wherein all the people of God have
been engaged from the beginning, even since the Lord put enmity between the
seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, and promised, that the holy
seed Christ should break the serpents head.

It is the Good Old Cause. Let not the old subtle Serpent any longer beguile
you, who deceives the Nations. Quit your selves like men. Lay down your Enmity
one against another, and join all your forces, and all your courage against the
common enemy: and so the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
quickly.

Mean time let us enquire into the (...), the things which make for Peace, and

7. By what means Reconciliation may be made between the divided Parties.
THe Divine Life, the effect whereof is Peace, is discovered to St. John,
Revel. 21. and every one who is willing, is invited thereunto. But its vain
labor to discover the life, which is above to the wise, says Solomon, Pro.
15.24. unless we have a Jacobs Ladder, whereby we may ascend thereunto. This we
may do by diverse steps or means; which are either such as remove obstructions
out of the way of peace, or such as positively direct our feet into that way.

For as the godly life is a necessary means for the obtaining the eternal life
and peace, which is homogeneal, and of the same nature with it; so is the death
unto sin a necessary means of obtaining the godly life, as the Apostle reasons,
Col. 3.4. when Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear
with him in glory; mortify therefore your earthly members, whence it is that
sinful men are said not to know the way of peace, Romans 3.17. And who can direct
us better into this way, than he who is the Prince of Life, Acts 5. And prince
of peace, Esaias 9. who appeared the Dayspring from on high to visit us, to give
light to them that sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, and to guide our
feet into the way of peace.

Into this way he leads us by precept and example. By precept of humility, and
lowliness of mind, by self denial, and taking up the cross daily.

Humility is the first step toward Mortification, and that extreme necessary,
because pride the contrary hereunto obstructs the way of Peace, Pro. 13.10. For
only by pride comes contention. And if only by pride, whence, I beseech you,
proceed the present contentions among us? Is it not because (...), every one
would be greatest?

Truly a very strange thing it is, that men eminent for learning, and
profession of Christianity should so openly spend their zeal and heat about
that old dispute, who should be the greatest, Luke 22. It Is true, this
Controversy was among the Apostles; but they had not yet received the holy
spirit, which I desire both parties advisedly to consider. Why should they not
rather endeavor after the fairest object of emulation, the only lawful
contention, who should be the best? The Lacedaemonians herein condemn too many
of us Christians, who were wont to exercise their Children in such questions as
these, who in all Sparta was the most sober, most just, most prudent, most
valiant man, etc. And it was one of them who say, Nemo me major nisi qui me
melior; No man is greater then I, unless he be better then I am. Yea, although
I doubt not, but the main design of the Covenant was outing of the Bishops, and
Inning of the Presbyters in their room, yet in the close of the Covenant, by an
overruling hand, the Covenanters vow, That our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire and endeavor, for our selves, and all under our power and charge, both
in public and private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our
lives, and each one to go before another in the example of real Reformation.

This close of the Covenant which is most consonant unto the word of God, has
been, I fear, quite forgotten, and the main endeavor has been to go one
before another in wealth and honor; as for the endeavor, and strife to exceed
one another, in performance of our duties toward God and man, O how modest most
men are! O how easily does every man yield to another to go before him!

Yet if any man, according to the Covenant, endeavor to exceed others in
goodness, (who have bound up themselves by their principles, which they resolve
not to exceed) if he endeavor to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect,
he is accounted at least erroneous in his judgment, if he can escape the
Gardiners sheers of Discipline, and cutting off, for presuming to grow in grace
above his neighbors.

The contention is not who should be the best man, but who should be the
greatest. And only from pride comes this contention. And this is a great part
of self which is to be denied. That Is the second step.

Self-denial. There are in man since the fall, the abridgements of three selfs!
One whereby he agrees with the beast, and lives according to the principles of
brutish man.

2. Another whereby he agrees with the old fubtil scrpent, which deceives all
the world with false principles of corrupt reason, Revel. 12.

3. The third, whereby he agrees with God, and the heavenly man, 1 Cor. 15.
This last we must deny to be ours; not I, but the grace of God which was with
me. The fear of God and keeping his Commandment, is (...), all the man, says
Solomon, Eccle. 12. what ever else is in the man, it is either the beast or the
devil: Both which make up the corrupt self, which the true man must deny. The
Grace of God which is able to save all men has appeared, says St. Paul,
teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2. Such as fight
against the soul, they are the sensual and brutish self.

And the same Grace of God arms the believer with weapons might^y hrough God,
for the casting down imaginations or reasonings, and every high thing that
exal^eth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. That Is the denial
of the diabolical self. What store of matter does this juncture of time afford
for self-denial! Such as the Apostle feared he should find among his factious
Corinthians, such we may be sure is to be found among us, 2 Cor. 12.20.
Debates, envyings, wrathes, strifes, backbitings, whis^erings, swellings,
tumules. This is the ^econd step, which who^oever ascends, he must expect
assaults from the beast and the devil, which he has denied, and renounced. And
therefore it will be necessary, that he ascend also the third.

3. The Cross; which he must take up daily. But what is the Cross? Or rather
what is it not? He who undertook to write a Clavis Scripturae, a key wherewith
to open the Scripture, says the Cross is, Omnis generis Calamitates, piorum
presertim veritatis causa toleratas. Calamities of every kind of the godly
born, especially for the truths sake.

But if affliction, or persecution, or calamity, such as he understands, were
the Cross, then must we take them up and bare them, as we are commanded to take
up the cross; But we are warranted to flee persecutions, Math. 10.23. when they
persecute you in one City, flee to another; but verse 38 of that chapter, he
tells them, that he who takes not up his cross and follows him, is not
worthy of him. Besides, its possible that the Christian Church may for some
time be without persecution; For Acts 9.31. then had the Churches rest
throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in
the fear of God, and comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. But shall we
think that the Christians then laid aside the cross, which our Lord commands
those who will be his disciples, to take up daily and follow him?

Add hereunto, that if afflictions were the cross which must be taken up, then
should only poor and miserable men, who could not avoid afflictions, they
should bear the cross; but our Lord enjoins this duty unto all who will be his
Disciples, Luke 9.23.

Nor do I doubt but the reason why men incline rather to this Gloss, that
affliction is the cross, because all manner of afflictions and tribulations may
be born, and yet sin may remain and live; which generally men love better than
their estates, their honors, yea their lives.

I have written of the Cross more largely, because the bearing of it is a duty
most necessary, yet almost generally mistaken. What then is it to bear the
Cross?

The bearing of the Cross is the Christian patience, Revel. 1.9. It consists in
bearing and suffering all assaults and temptations unto sin, from all sorts of
causes inward and outward, without our yielding thereunto. And because this, of
all other Christian duties, is most contrary to the garb and fashion of the
world, which lies (...), in the evilone, exposed to the obedience of his lusts,
and is most opposed and spoken against; hence it is that the bearing of the
Cross, consists also in suffering ignominy, shame, reproach, cursing, and evil
speaking.

So that we see wherein consists our conformity unto Christ crucified, viz. in
bearing all assaults and temptations unto sin, with out yielding our consent
thereunto; as also in bearing shame and reproach, and ignominy which follows
thereupon, from the evil world. Of the former, the Apostle^ eaks, Gal. 2.^0. I
am crucified with Christ, c. 5. They who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts. Of the latter, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, etc. consider him who endured such contradiction of
sinners, against himself. Where we have Christ's example, and our imitation of
it expressed in those words; Let us run with patience that race which is set
before us: and Hebr. 13.12. Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered without the gate. There Is Christ's example; our imitation
follows, verse 13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp,
bearing his reproach. When our old man is now crucified with Christ, that the
body of sin is destroyed, that henceforth we may not serve sin, then all the
heavenly minded ones, all the quicksighted Eagles meet at the dead Body; And
Christ being lifted up, will draw all men unto him.

Then, and not till then, appears Equity, so that whatsoever we would that men
should do to us, even so we should do to them. For while our iniquittes
separate between us and our God, while our hands are defiled with blood, and
our fingers with iniquity; while our lips speak lies, and our tongue mutters
perverseness, etc. while our feet run to evil, and make haste to shed innocent
blood; while our thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, while wasting and
destruction are in our paths, we cannot know the way of Peace; nor is there
any judgment in our goings: For having made ourselves crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein shall not find peace.

Whence follows a spiruual blindness of mind, desperation, guilty conscience,
apostasy, and revolting from God. And therefore terras Astrea reliquit.
Judgment is turned away backward, and ustice stands a far off, for truth is
fallen in the street, and trodden under foot, because we depart not from
iniquity, Dan. 9.13. By reason of these obstructions in the way of
righteousness and Peace, it comes to pass, that equity cannot enter, Esaias 59.

But when as by Humility, Self-denial, and taking up the Cross, these
impediments are removed, and they who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts, they meet in the way of righteousness, judgment and
equity, Prove. 2.9. Then the way of Peace is opened and made known.

For whereas the universal righteousness consists in privative and positive
duties, departing from evil, and doing good, as the Prophets advice i^, cease
to do evil, learn to do well, putting off the old man, and putting on the new,
mortifying sin, and living unto God, the effect of both, is Peace; depart from
evil and do good, seek peace, and pursue it, Psalm 34.14. And the work of
righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness is quietness and
assurance for ever. Which is a demonstration of peace, quietness and assurance
from the cause of them, which is righteousness; and, to confirm it to us, as
most certain, the Prophet repeats the cause, righteousness, Esaias 32.17.

The (...), ratio causandi, or causality will appear from hence, Peace is the
compendium and abridgement of all temporal and eternal happiness. And
righteousness and holiness, which sometime are taken for the same, are the
image of God. Heb. 12.12. as Plato with the scripture, affirms, (...), whereby
we are enabled to enjoy that happiness, that Eye Salve whereby we see God; for
God cannot be approached unto but by somewhat of himself. The eye cannot see
the sun, but by being informed by the light of the sun; In thy light shall we
see light. Since therefore righteousness and holiness is of God, it is necessary
for the obtaining and en^oying the peace, rest, quietness and assurance for
ever, as the Scripture often testifies, Deuteronomy. 16.20. Righteousness,
righteousness shall thou follow, that thou may live and inherit the Land.
Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Psalm. 85.10. which the Apostle
figuratively understood, Heb. 7.2. Melchisedec is first by interpretation King
of righteousness, and after that King of Salem, which is King of peace.

Nor let it seem strange that I seem to have gone so far about to seek the
(...), The things that make for peace, and means to advance it. It is a true,
solid, and durable peace, which I propounded to my self to enquire after, and
to commend to the two divided parties. Such a peace cannot consist with
iniquity. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. Yet how many at this
day promise themselves peace without the things which make for peace? Against
such, the Lord denounces most heavy judgments, Deuteronomy. 29 19. Yet do not many
resolve to walk in their old corrupt ways, wherein they walked before, and
thereby brought the wrath of God upon themselves, and the whole land? And yet
they hope for peace, and cry and call upon God to come unto them in their evil
ways and walk with them; but they will not stir out of their own evil ways to
walk with God in his way of righteousness and peace. Yea, and do they not think
to be accourted righteous, because Christ is righteous? But does not our Lord
say expressly the contrary, Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances,
and the bag of decitful weights? Mich. 6.

Yea, many there are who promise themselves peace, yet practice not
righteousness, which is the immediate, adequate, and propor cause of it. It Is
an heavy complaint, and I am afraid it is too true, that many who profess
themselves the righteous people, are yet no just dealers, that they will lie,
cheat, overreach their brethren in bargaining, etc. and all under a form of
godliness and pretense of righteousness. They remember not, that he is
righteous who does righteous things, 1 John 3.7.

Besides, many there are even of those who profess religion, and know that the
effect of Righteousness is Peace, who single out some certain duties and parts
of righteousness, and lay on them the stress of all religion; as keeping the
sabbath, as one of the greatest Commandments, if not the very greatest of all;
which yet the Jews accounted one of the least. When, in regard of many other
duties, that was dispensed withal, as, in periculo vitae cessat sabbatum, when
life is in danger, the sabbath cease. Nor does our Lord blame them, but
justifies them who lead their Ox or their Ass to the water on the sabbath day;
their mercy to their beast excused the breach of the sabbath. Yea, the Priests
brake the sabbath, and were guiltless. Besides this duty of the sabbath, they
urge abstinence from cursing and swearing, and drunkenness; All which, though
parts of righteousness, yet, upon the matter they tend rather to make men good
husbands then good Christians. Mean time other great things of the Law, and
main parts of Righteousness are forgotten, as having God for our God, to love
him with all our heart, all our soul, all our might, and with all our
understanding, and to love our neighbor as our selves, ^o fear God and honor
the King. To be subject to principalities and powers and that not only for
fear, but also for conscience sake. Not to kill, not to commit adultery, not to
steal, not to lie, but every one to speak truth to his neighbor, not to bear
false witness, not to go beyond our brother in bargaining, not to covet. To do,
udgement, love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God. To deny our se^ves, and
take up our cross daily, and follow the Lord Jesus, etc. unto which our Lord
Jesus directs us as the more weighty things of the law, and gospel, and wherein
the righteousness, whose effect is peace, consists; of these Altum silentium,
few or no words of these, or, if words, but words. Christ has done these
things for them.

But I must not omit certain other services, which are of high estimation, and
indeed of far greater account then those now recited. Such are days of
humiliation and prayer, hearing the word, receiving the Sacrament; which, for
their greater honor, are called Gods Ordinances, which are more venerable among
some, then the Commandments of God, which are called his Ordinances, Levit.
18.4. and elsewhere, with these and such like Temple-worships the hypocritical
people of old deceived themselves, which were most-what ineffectual, as Zech.
7. they kept a fast threescore and ten years; the Lord owned it not, as done to
himself, so that a man may perform such service unto God his whole life time
(for that is the age of a man, says David) yet all that time not please God,
which I much fear, may be said of our like kind of Worships. We had our
monthly fasts for many years, when we smote with the fist of wickedness; at
which very time was the inundation of all unrighte ousness, and all abomination
in the land, and blood touched blood, and the hand of God, was stretched out
against us. The Lord instructed Solomon, how to award national judgments, and
upon what terms, he will give peace to the land. 2 Chronicles. 7.4. If my people who
are called by my name, do humble themselves, and pray and seek my face, and
turn from their evil ways, then will I hear from heaven, and forgive their sin,
and heal the land. Many of us seem to exercise the three former, humble
themselves, and pray and seek Gods face, and glory much that they are a praying
people. And if the Lord vouchsafe any good success to them, presently they
ascribe it unto their prayers, as the effect of them. Mean time little care is
taken of turning (...) their evil ways, little exhortation thereunto, whereas
^^^ed therein lies the principal stress of the Lords direction. And commonly
men have three reasons especially why the turning from their evil ways, is not
so much urged. 1. They think it impossible wholly so to do. Yea, 2. herein they
are the more remiss, lest they should fall into that new heresy (found out by
P^scator, as I take it) of the Perfectists. And 3. lest they should seem to
merit by so doing. And for these reasons some, I fear, conscientiously abstain
from doing good.

But unless there be an universal turning from all and every one of our evil
ways, all our humbling, all our praying, all our pretense of seeking Gods face,
will be utterly in vain and to no purpose, although the best men on earth
should pray for us. When the people had desired Samuel to pray for them, he
promised so to do, but unless they turned from their evil ways, he assures
them, his prayer would be ineffectual; as indeed afterward it proved, 1 Samuel
12.23.

Hence it is that notwithstanding all the pageantry, all the ostentation of
Religion, all the partial and false righteousness, the envy, the pride, the
covereousness, the wrath, the gluttony, the chambering and wantonness, the
slothfulness in all spiritual duties, generally the sin remains, and
consequently no peace can be hoped for, which is the proper effect of
righteousness. For what peace, says Jehu, so long as the whoredoms of Jezebel
and her witchcrafts are so many? There is an inconsistency, and
incompossibility of peace with the whoredoms and witchcrafts of Jezebel.
Jezebel has a diverse Etymon, either Insula habitaculi, an Island of
habitation and dwelling, as the Island wherein we dwell; or Insula
sterquilinii, an Island of a dunghill. And this latter, the Scripture it self
warrants, 2 King 9.38. The carcass of Jezebel shall be like dung upon the face
of the field. So Jer. 9.22. O how unhappily is this Etymon this Notation
fulfilled in this Island! Jezebel spiritually understood, Revel. 2. and her
whoredoms and witcherafts. Whoredom is spiritually idolatry, a most known
metaphor. Disobedience is understood by witcheraft, Gal. 3.1. By these and all
open sin, and false righteousness, this Island (which, the h^^^man told King
Edward the Confessor, was Gods kingdom by these, this Island is made a dunghill,
and therefore what peace can be unto it?

Since therefore, my beloved Brethren, of both persuasions, such abundance of
iniquity and false righteousness such as the Apostle calls dung, Phil. 3. has
overspread this Kingdom and the Church in it, and hidden the way of peace from
us; and since the partial false righteousness has proved useless, and
ineffectual for the discovery and finding out that way, let us all and every
one of us, prose quisque, enquire and seek for peace and pursue it in those
narrow and untrodden paths, and follow the example of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has gone the same way before us, that we should follow his steps; And let
the same mind be in us, and every one of us, which was also in Christ Jesus,
who humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross.

Let us seek peace in these ways infallibly and unquestionably leading
thereunto. Let us (...), as the Apostle exhorts, pursue peace as eagerly as a
man would pursue his enemy, and follow hard after it; yet let us not use it as
an enemy, but as a dear friend, and such as we would make an umpire of our
differences: and so let every one of us entertain peace in himself, as St. Paul
persuades, (...), let the Peace of God arbitrate and rule in your hearts, Col.
3.15. as when we are injured, commonly mutinous and seditious thoughts arise in
our hearts, whereof some stir us up to revenge; suffer this, and suffer all,
etc. but others coming most what after the former, ((...), secundae
cogitationes sapientiores,) these second thoughts persuade us to humility,
self-denial, taking up the cross, long-suffering, rendering good for evil, and
overcoming evil with goodness, etc. what is therefore now to be done? (...), Let
the peace of God rule in your hearts, and that will guide our thoughts, wills,
and affections into the way of peace: Let that peace of God umpire our
differences. Let that peace moderate, arbitrate, and rule in our hearts,
whereunto we are called in one body. Will one member contend with, or do injury
to another? O no; but every member is compassionate and helpful, and bears the
infirmity and we ^^^^ss of another. The holy Apostle labors for this peace and
(...) of the Church, by the same Allegory of the members mutu^^ ^erviceableness
one to other, and to the body the Church, that there should be no schism in the
body, but that the members should have the same care one of another, and
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it.

Those last words contain an hard lesson in them. For it is much to be feared,
that our envy at our fellow members honors, and our ambitious desires of them
for ourselves, has made this schism and preach of peace in the body; which the
Apostle endeavors to prevent, when he tells us, Ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular. And how unseemly is the tum^r or swelling of ambition,
or the Marasmus or Consumption of envy in the body of Christ? Especially since
the honors of Christ's members arise with their proficiencies, as was shown
before; and their variety is ordered of God: And therefore the Apostle adds;
that God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, etc. implying forcibly, that if men duly considered that
this subordination of divine honors, is by divine institution, the evil spirits
of ambition and envy would soon be laid, especially in the members of Christ's
body: And therefore the same Apostle exhorting the Ephesians to this unity, he
begins at the lowest step of Jac^bs ladder, Humility; walk with all lowliness
and meekness, wtth long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body and one
spirit, even as you are called in one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all. But unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure
(...), of the gift Christ. And lest this different measure of grace might raise
the evil spirits of ambition and envy, he calls those dignified persons, Gods
gifts unto men which he gave, some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. which gifts he
gives for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, until we all come into the unity of the faith
and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the (...) of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.

O my brethren! let this umprage, and arbitation of peace be wrought first in
every one of our souls; For until this peace be promoted at home in every man's
own heart, especially in every one of yours, my brethren, who are of the
Ministry, how can it be hoped, that you should advance it abr^ad among the
people? Nihil dat quod non habet. How can you impart to them the spiritual gift
of peace, if you have it not your selves? Yea, how can it be but that you must
embitter them with the spirit of contention, while your selves are acted by the
same bitter spirit?

The people have a kind of natural equity among them, and, especially fince the
long civil Wars in the Nation, and are of themselves disposed to peace. And who
are they who indispose them, and disqulet them but the Ministers? As the long
Wars in Germany (to come no nearer home) too evidently have proved. St. John
Revelation 17.15. tells us, that the people are Waters: And the resemblance
between them may especially be this: The Sea of it self, though it be the
greatest gathering together of many waters, yet would it be quiet and calm as a
river, did not the winds raise the waves, and make it rage, and cast up mire
and dirt. And who raised the waves of the waters [the populacy] in all these
Wars in Christendom, but the evil spirits acting the Ministers? And what
mischief will not they do, if they meet together? If Lovi and Than, the priest
and the dragon be joined together, they make Leviathan, little less then the
devil incarnate; because corruptie optimi est pessima, the corruption of the
best is the worst of all. Therefore St. John, Revel. 16.13. saw three unclean
spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; which he interprets the
spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth,
and of the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of the great day
of God Almighty. O what an hideous degeneration is this, that the Ambassadors
of peace should become the heralds of war! But Cynthius aurem vellit, and bids
m^ Respice titulum. I must remember my time, and not too much weary my Reader,
and remember him of my method. I am engaged in the enquiry after expedients and
means how to compose the differences between the two divided parties. I have
hitherto mentioned those necessary inward means without which the solid peace,
and reconciliation will never be obtained. For what ever means may be used
without these, they will only skin over the festered sore, which will break
out again. It is only (...), the healing Doctrine which will cure all
putrified ulcers, and distempers of the soul. This had not been made use of
when the Lord complained, that the Prophets had healed the hreach of the
daughter of his people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there was no
peace, Jer. 6.14. we shall therefore in good order, after the use of inward
means, call in the help of outward.

And first it will be an hard task, to persuade the people to forbear the
choice of the Minister. They have nor precept nor example for it, in holy
Scripture, nor practice of the ancient Church to countenance it; But such a
pestilent custom has crept in among us of late, by the activity of some fiery
zealots, that thereby they might engage the Ministers to compliance with the
Government of some foreign Church, and undermine their own; that they might
teach the Minister what he should teach them; that they might fore-season him,
who should be their salt, and as the Philosopher says, (...), to make their
rule crooked, because they themselves are so. That hereby they might disaffect
him to the Doctrine and Rites of the Church, and foment a party against the
Government of it. And for this end they have created a new officer in the
Church, who must be levened with the same sour leven of the Pharisees. This
Office they have made out of the name of Lector, who was only a public Reader
of Scripture, and no preacher in the ancient Church. And great care is taken
that he be the peoples creature, as his Office is, that he may unteach in the
afternoon what the Parson delivers in the forenoon, and, if possible, work him
out; from this corrupt fountain have issued those many streams of blood in the
three Nations. So great mischiefs have proceeded from the peoples choice of
their Minister; for which they have no warrant in the Scripture as has been
said, except that which I hope they will not follow, and so it will be null to
them, the example of the idolatrous tribe of Dan, who chose Micha's idolatrous
chaplain for their Priest. Add hereunto, that as the people have no right, so
neither have they skill to make choice of the Minister, (...), every man judges
well of what he knows, were it not much more safe to commit that choice to the
Fathers of the Church who watch for the peoples souls, and must give an
account? Heb. 13.17.

But as hard a thing it will be to dissuade the Minister from submitting to the
peoples choice. Yet all ingenuous men will consider, what has been said, and
what ungodliness it is to mancipate the truth of God to the judgment of
ignorant men, and how unhansom it is to be taken by the mouth, and lead like an
horse or an ass.

It is true, the people most what love none but their own creatures, and look
upon others as enemies, and heartily endeavor their ruin, as proof has been
made by thousands of examples in these late deplorable times. Whence arises a
case which extremely disturbs the peace of the Church, and that unavoidably,
while men follow the suggestions of flesh and blood, and use not the means
before mentioned: the party esecting the Minister commonly retains the old
hatred. (That kind of people like the God whom they imagine to themselves, hate
and love whom ever they hate and love unchangeably and perpetually.) The
Minister ejected retains also his desire of revenge. When therefore
restitution is made, as in the Jubilee, and every one returns to his own
possession, what an irreconcilable jarring must there needs be? It Is a common
complaint all the Nation over. What hope can there be that the Minister, in
this case, should edify the people?

When the old hatred remains on the one part, and desire of revenge on the
other, what peace can be made? How shall the people be edified?

I shall propound an Expedient; But as when the Poets had entangled themselves
in their plots so that they could by no means extricate themselves, they
brought down their (...), a God to disentangle them; there is no other way to
unravel this otherwise inextricable entanglement, but by imploring the
Sovereign power who alone can make this expedient effectual. What if an
exchange of Livings were made? by that means the dissenting parties would be at
greater distance one from other; and as affections and all other faculties of
the soul work powerfully in the presence of their object; So on the contrary,
it might be hoped, that the hatred and desire of revenge would by absence and
distance be more remiss, and at length vanish. If this means be not sufficient,
or not possible, or fecible to remove this Offense out of the way of peace (as
indeed none outward can be without those inward before mentioned,) I shall
leave it to others of better judgment as a problem, and call in to our help
the Patrons of livings who present their Clarks to the Bishops to be sent as
Ministers unto the people.

Nimirum vitio vertitur iis qui jus patronatus habent, quod filias suas docent
Ecclesiae patrimonio; quod beneficia conferant ecclesiastica in clericos suos
sub condition non-decimandi, quod vol praesenti mercede, vel certa lucri spe,
vel favore indebito, vel ali^ quaepiam causa (siquidem plurima sunt mysteria
iniquitatis) (...) inducti, non Dei-metuentes and vere Presbyteres, at homines
male moratos, neophytos, juvenes imperitos rerum ^ui Jereclu^^tina prophetarum
schola non (...) manserunt usque dum barbae creverint, non Theologos, at
Grammaticos, Rhetoras, ant (...) Philosophia (...) modica scientia non modeste
inflatos Episcope praesent averint ordinandes; quos audire tamen solos neque
alios alibi, vi constitutenium Ecclesiasticarum neesse habent parochiani.

We must also implore the aid and assistance of both the universities, with
those of the Neighbo Nations.

Neque ferant aegre venerabiles in utraque Academia, Praefecti sociisque
Collegiorum si memorem quod passim queraentur homines, Aristotelem and
Philosophos apud vos legi, negligi Mosem and Prophetas. Adolescentes in
utr^mque partem disputandi scientiam calluisse, at recte vivendi artem non
didicisse. Ignaros parumque proficientes cosdemque nequam homines ac nebulones
non gradibus tantum titulisque literaturae humanioris oruari, verum etiam
testimonio virtutis, pietatis and gratiae deceramento cohenestari. Praeter
etiam quam quod hoc planissime mendacium sit in perpetuam rei memoriam
duraturum, imponit ita insuper ejusmodi falsum Testimonium Reverendissimis
Ecclesiae Patribus Episcopis, uti virtute illius (aut vitio potius) hi nefaris
homines Presbyteri ordinentur; animaeque populorum larvatis istis hypocritis
concreditae magis and magis, uts Beatus Gregorius ait, aedisicentur in
Gehennam.

Siquidem hujusmodi homunciones ex Academia non-tanquam personae singulares
exeunt and soli sibi solis improbi, at Radices omnes Communitatis (ut Aquinas
ait) vel Judices; vel Advocati, vel Procuratores, vel cujus illi cumque nominis
in utroque foro Legulaei; vel Irenarchae in Republica, vel Ecclesiae Ministri,
vel Curatores, Ludive Magistri ut plurimum evadunt, unaque secum ab Academia
nequitiam literis, gradibus ac titvlis armatam in regnum devehunt universum.
Haec ego saepius opprobriae in utramque Academiam a Sectariis and factiosis
hominibus cum gemitu audivi; atque utinam haec omnia essent per quam
falsisfima!

Caeterum in magnam spem veni, ex anno jam redeunte Jubilae, antiquam, cum
venerandis Praefectis, redituram disciplinam, moresque Academia, into etiam Deo
dignos; quo fiet uti qua apud vos enutritia primitus atque educata partium
dissidia, prudentia vestra and authoritate sopiantur.

But above all others we must call the Schoolmaster to our help, who if such
as h^^ught to be, he is the most serviceable instrument of all men of faculties
in the Nation, to promote ^his work; though it be most true even of him who is
Optimus Maximus, the most great and good God, and of all good men, and good
things, Optima and maxima minimi astimantur, the best and greatest are least
esteemed. Happy man who has his lot among these! as no doubt the good
Schoolmaster has, who, above all other, serves God and man in this affair.
And well he may, for he has absolute power: as the Tyrant Dionysius being
elected out of his Kingdom, chose to be a School master, saying Regnabo tamen,
yet I will reign. 2. He has the most capable subject to work upon, Udum and
molle lutum, matter soft and pliable to his hand. His work will prosper, if he
be so happy as to receive it out of a good hand, from parents who fear GOD,
honor the KING, and are discreet and peaceable; and be further so successful as
to deliver his work into a goo^ hand, which may finish it, a father-like Tutor
in the University. These two men of faculties if encouraged, may render this
Church and Nation, the best and happyest in the world. But I despair of finding
many such men or favor toward them: though some few I know (I cannot but think
honorably of Westminster-school,) and his Majesty gives countenance to all
learned and pious men.

But neither God nor men will help us, unless we help our selves. I shall
therefore commend to both parties the consideration of their former and present
estate; and deal with them first apart, then jointly. And first consider ye my
Brethren of the Presbytery; Are not ye the men who many years since complained
and groaned under the tyrannical imperiousness and domineering of the Bishops
(know your own words.) And ought not ye being then delivered from that yoke,
to have dealt favorably with your oppressors, since ye knew the heart of the
oppressed (it is the Lords argument to his people, Exodus 23.9.) ought ye not to
have returned good for evil? Should you not have endeavored to overcome evil
with goodness? I say not how non-Christiane (to say no more,) ye ruled over
them. And since the Lord has returned their captivity, and inclined the Kings
heart to make you sharer with them in their dignities and honors, and afforded
you greater indulgence then ever any of your party ever had in this Church,
ought you not to study to be quiet and do your own business, and leave the
Government of the Church and Kingdom to those to whom it belongs?

Consider also advisedly what Overtures ye have had, and what opportunities
have been put into your hand, of raising that Government which ye so much long
for; Have ye not cut your way toward it, with the sword? Has it not been
established by civil sanctions? Yet you cannot but see that, by reason of your
ambition of more power, and still more power, and of being established jure
divino, how the hand of God has been so signally against you all along, that
ye could never exercise that power you had, except only so far and so short a
time as to render it odious, and to make the Nation weary of it. Ought you not,
my brethren, from these considerations, herein to acquiese and rest in Gods
determination? Or, since all power is of God, which, by his many providential
acts, appears that he denies to you, will ye weary your selves, contend with
your brethren, and weary them, be (...), fighters against God, weary our God
also, and all in vain?

Consider also you my brethren of Episcopal persuasion; and remember the time
of your great tribulation, whereinto ye were brought, not without your own
sins, by what hand soever you were brought into it. Acknowledge that God is
just, and own his good hand in bringing you out of that great tribulation.
Leave vengeance to him to whom it belongs. Put on Charity above all, which is
the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God umpire all differences in
your hearts, to which also you are called in one body; (...), And be ye
thankful (that is a good sense: but it is a better, and more fit for that place,)
gratrosi estote (according to Hierom) be ye gracious, amiable, and lovely,
according to that proverbial precept, which it were to be wished that we all
obeyed, -- Ut ameris amabilis esto, that thou may be beloved, be lovely.
Show this love and kindness of God to your brethren of the Presbytery. You know
the heart of oppressed men, (it is Gods argument to his people, why they should
love the Egyptians) and it is the kindness of God to overcome evil with
goodness, and to love our enemies.

Let these considerations prevail with you above your ambition, above your
revenge. For consider advisedly and in the sight of God, and deal truly with
your own heart; what moves thee to desire a Bishopric, a Deanary, a Prebend?
the Bishops, Deans and Chapters lands, or the land of the living? The Honor
annexed to that high place Digi^ monstrari ac dicier, hic est; to be called
Rabbi, Rabbi; Or that highest Honor that comes of God only; whether the ease
hoped for, or the good work? Whether thou rather desire the Corpse and body of a
Prebend, or rather the duty of it, Hospitality, Almesgiving, the trayning up of
novices and young men, and fitting them for the work of the Lord, that they may
grow up and become Presbyters, Priests, or Elders; all which is the soul and
spirit of these dignities, and I doubt not but it was the end at which the
Founders and Donors aimed.

And if thou attain to these Honors, consider, the the greatest is servant of
all. That the Bishaps are Fathers and Shepherds; and such an Office as inferres
and requires suitable acts to the relations; as that the Fathers deal fatherly
with their children, though they too often stubborn children; as Moses did Number.
11. Deuteronomy. 1. that they rule the flock pedo non gladio, rather with the spirit
of meekness, then with the rod; rather with the rod then with the sword. That
they are Bishops, that is, Overseers of the Church, and like the Lord the great
Bishop of our souls, they oversee many things, and wink at small faults, as the
Lord does Acts 17. That, as they oversee all, so all see them; and such as they
see their overseers, such they think it is lawful for them to be; therefore St.
Peter would, that they should be (...), 1 Peter 5. paterns to the flock; And if
they see them spotted, they will bring forth a spotted issue of evil work.

Therefore as the Lord commanded Micha, chap. 6.1, 2. so let me the meanest of
you in both your and mine own esteem, (that is Micha) speak unto these
Mountains, the two swollen parties, who, as they say of Mountains, cannot
meet nor touch one another, but in puncto: Ye are too high, too lofty.
Remember the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, Esaias
2.12. which must come to pass before we can see the salvation of God, Luke 3.5,
6. The Sovereign Majesty, the King who is supreme, he has exceedingly
condescended and stoopt to the moderation of your differences, pardoned many
insolences, even before pardon was desired. Declared and resolved to p^^mote
the power of Godliness, and to encourage the exercises of Religion public and
private, etc. granted and confirmed a liberty to tender consciences, and that
no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for difference of opinions in
matter of Religion, which does not disturb the peace of the Kingdom. All which,
according to the divine wisdom and goodness in him, he has manifested in that
beyond all precedents of former favors, his most prudent and moderate
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs.

Shall his Majesty, my brethren, make your Peace and Unity, your mutual Love
and Reconcilation his study, and should not you much more study the things
which make for your own peace and unity, and the peace of the Church and
kingdom?

I know well, there are many very learned men, and great Students among you of
both persuasions. And I acknowledge my self much inferior to many of you; Yet,
since Micah must speak to the Mountains, let me be bold to tell you, that there
is one main point of learning, wherein many of you have declared your
non-proficiency; many of you have not studied to be quiet, and to do your own
busmess; which was the counsel of learned St. Paul to his Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. I know well, that many of you who cannot endure Episcopacy, have
been (...), busy Bishops in other men's dioceses; and intermedled with the
temporal affairs of the City and Nation, under what pretense? viz. in ordine
ad spiritualia, in order to spiritual things, which is the same whereof your
selves accuse the Bishop of Rome. Yea, there have not been wanting
non-proficients in this study, on both sides, who have vigorously disquieted
and disturbed the Church and Kingdom, and indeed were the most notable
troublers of our Israel. Some of these, to humor the people, would tell them
what the Kings Office and duty was toward his people, and to prove it out of
the Common Prayer Book, viz. to preserve the people committed to his charge, in
wealth, peace, and Godliness. And would remember the people what their
liberties and properties were, which the King ought to preserve and maintain.
And by this craft they had their wealth, as Demetrius told his fellowtradesmen;
and many a good morsel they got by it; for they had read and were perfect in
that rule -- cave ne majorum tibi forte Limina frigescant, that otherwise they
should have cold entertainment at the great men's tables.

On the other side, the King was taught, what his prerogative was, and what the
peoples duty was to him; To give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: that
every soul should be subject to the higher powers, etc. Mean time the King was
not told, what his duty was toward his people; Nor the people what their duty
was toward their King. So that both heard what the others duty was, not what
their own was; and hence both parties were embittered one against the other, by
the evil spirit in the mouth of the Prophets. Did these men do their own
business? Surely no. For though they preached the word, yet were they (...),
absurd men, and illogical, they did it out of due place, unlearned men who had
not studied to be quiet, and do their own business.

But let it be your ambition, my brethren, as the Apostle exhorts, (...),
ambitiously to study to be quiet, and do (...), things proper to your own
calling. Provoke not one another to wrath: But if you be of a wrathful
disposition, turn your wrath upon your selves; Be angry and sin not, be angry
with your froward heart that you may not sin. Envy not one another; or because
there is an Emulation in us that would be satisfied, set it upon the right
object, (...), emulate the very best gifts, but most of all that most excellent
way of charity. And if you must needs be provoking one another, let us provoke
one another to love and good works, Hebr. 10.24. Let all bitterness and wrath,
and anger, and clamer, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all
malice: and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And put on (...), holy and
beloved, bowels of mercies, goodness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: And all
this is to be done, (...), as the elect of God; A quatenus ad omne, all the
elect of God are such.

That wherein all the Churches most differ, is the service of God, by abuse of
which, the Jews pleased not God, and were contrary to all men. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
Wherefore my brethren, Episcopal, glory not in your service, but endeavor to
live that life which it points unto. Nor despise you your brethren, wh^ are my
brethren of Presbyterian persuasion, in regard of their service of God, as
superstitious, but look well into your own, whether much of it be not a
will worship.

The Lord persuade both your hearts into such a service of God, that therein
ye may please God and Men! And what service is that, but Righteousness, whose
effect is peace, and the work of both, Joy in the holy Ghost? Joy unspeakable,
(...), glorified Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. and that your Joy will be the Joy of us all.
He who in these is serving Christ, is acceptable unto God and approved of men.
And this is the Kingdom of God, Romans 14.17, 18. for the coming of which, we
daily pray. Now whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any pruise, think on these things, and do them, and the God of peace shall
be with you.

Finally, my brethren, farewell; Be perfect; be of good comfort; be of one
mind; live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the
holy ghost be with you all. Amen!

FINIS.
The Reader may be pleased to correct these more gross faults escaped in
Printing.
PAge 15. line 17. Milevitanus. l. 20. Corinthios. p. 16. l. 7. (...) ibid.
(...). ibid. l. 12. (...). l. 23. are. l. 24. is. l. 31. (...). p. 17. l. 5.
(...). l. 6. (...) p. 19. l. 2. at. p. 29. l. 35. (...) p. 30. l. 36.
righteousnesses. p. 35. l. 6. abuse. p. 36. l. 26. justitia. l. 27.
fulcimentum? l. 29. Episcopatus. l. 36. hebdomatim. p. 37. l. 6. nihili. l. 27.
superpellicium. l. 30. liturgiam. l. 34 eximant. p. 43, l. 3. inclinations. p.
46. l. 15. propior. p. 48. l. 3. who is King of kings. p. 55. l. 3. paucis. li.
7. bajulo. p. 56. l. 27. whose. p. 59. l. 23. abrenuntiation. l. 24 (...) l.
27. (...). p. 63. l. 37. born, especially. p. 64. l. 2. bear. p. 69. l. 2. 2
Chorn. 7.14. p. 70. l. 6. Jezebel is. p. 93. l. 35. (...) ibid. (...). p. 95.
l. 19. objects. l. 32. docent. p. 96. l. 3. constitutionum, ibid. necesse. l.
33. fiet. p. 98. l. 31. (...). p. 99. (...).


