Imprimatur,

Hic Liber cui Titulus ( A Vindication of the Principles of the Author, etc.)

Dec. 14. 1687. Jo. Battely.

A VINDICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE AUTHOR of the Answer to the Compiler of
the Nubes Testium From the Charge of POPERY.

In Answer to a late Pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the
Church of England.

As Deceivers, and yet True, 2 Cor. 6.8. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at
the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1688.

A VINDICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE AUTHOR of the Answer to the Compiler of
the Nubes Testium, etc.
HAD I not already promised the world in Print a speedy Vindication of my self,
the natural care and tenderness that every man has for his own Reputation are
a sufficient engagement to set about the clearing of my self from being that
Counterfeit, or teaching that Popery I am accused of in a Pretended Letter from
a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England.

I have already hinted to the world in the Advertisement at the end of my
Second Letter to Sabran the Jesuit, that I am very well satisfied not only
that this pretended Letter came out of Henry Hill's Press, but that it was the
Issue of the Representer's (or Compiler's, call him whether you will) malicious
Pen.

This, every one that I converse with, as well as my self, quickly saw, and
every man else cannot but see, that either knows the Print of Henry Hills, or
the Style of the Representer.

Having made this discovery of their unhansom underhand-dealings herein, I was
once thinking to have shown how very conformable this management was to the
Secret Practices of some of the Members of the Church of Rome in former times
against the Established Church of England; but when I found Materials increase
too much upon my hands, which would have made an Introduction too large for
such a Discourse as I intend this to be, I have upon that, and a better reason
laid that design aside.

I cannot however but tell the Representer here, that I have read and
considered his Third Chapter in his Third Part of Popery Misrepresented and
Represented about the Jesuits in Protestant Pulpits: And that I found neither
Truth nor Reason there, as I think I could make apparent unto the world, were
not this a Subject too nice for the present Age.

I will tell him also, that it would have been as prudent in him not to have
touched upon this string, since this is a Subject, in the treating of which he
does inevitably run himself upon hurting either his Cause or his Conscience.

Among the Methods made use of against the Church of England, there is none
more likely to have ruined the Church, than that which was so much in vogue in
the late King's Reign. I mean the beginning and keeping up of Fears and
Jealousies against the Church, as if her Greatest as well as most Learned
Members had been at best Popishly affected, and waited only for a good
opportunity either of stepping over unto the Church of Rome, or at least of
accommodating Matters with Her, and meeting her half way.

How successful this false and most unreasonable Slander of the Church of
England was, no person can be ignorant, that remembers even the last part of
the late King's Reign. What share some of our Representer's Friends had in the
raising or fomenting those Jealousies, and Fears of the Best Churchmen, and
Greatest Men in it, is not so easy to discover here: That they had some share
in them, is what we have very good reason to suspect, since we are sure that
they did reap the greatest advantage from them.

But when that time was come which the Fanatical Enemies of the Church of
England said the Churchmen waited only for: and when those deluding and
deluded People saw that to the Confusion of all their false surmizes the Clergy
of the Church of England continued firm to their Mother Church, and vigorous
against all the Assaults of Rome; and were as far as ever from betraying the
Cause or the Defense of the Church of England or the Protestant Interest; those
Fears and Jealousies were laid aside and buried; and the Multitude began to
have a new as well as just apprehension of things; and were not ashamed to
confess that they had been very much abused with those false Fears, and
groundless Jealousies, and that they were now abundantly convinced that the
Churchmen really were what they had all along professed and shown themselves
to be, True Sons of the Church of England, and the most faithful and diligent
Defenders of the Protestant Cause.

This discovery of the Sincerity of the Clergy of the Church of England was, I
do not in the least question, very uneasy to one Part of the World, who could
not but be highly troubled that the serviceable and prosperous Fears and
Jealousies were now out of date, and laid by as utterly useless: and I do not
doubt that they were thereupon no little unwilling to have them quite forgotten.

All the business was how to retrieve those Fears and Jealousies before they
were clean extinct: and what must be done to keep some of them up, and to
continue them in the Heads of the deluded People.

I can very easily suppose that there were as many Expedients almost, as
Welwishers to the support of the Old Method: but he in my opinion seems to have
hit on the most probable means, who was for showing to the World that there
still is an Agreement in most material things between the two Churchs of
England and Rome.

This was the Invention of one of our Representers Church, who it seems took it
very ill that the world should think the Clergy of the Church of England were
such great Opposers of Popery, or that they really were as far from being
infected with Principles of Popery as they were desirous to be thought at this
time.

That he might therefore convince the People, and expose to the world that
great mistake, He prepares a Collection, and publishes in Print his worthy
design, which was to show according to the Title it bears, An Agreement between
the Church of England and the Church of Rome.

But there were two great Mistakes committed in the publishing of that
Pamphlet, which were like to ruin the design of it, and prevent its doing any
good toward the keeping up of Fears and Jealousies of the English Clergy: the
One was, that the Author thereof did discover so plainly what Church he was of,
and the other was, that the Book did in its Title page show out of whose Press
it came.

Had it been the Work of some Protestant Dissenter, it would have required a
fairer examination, and deserved the greater credit, as coming from one who
commonly makes such professions of Conscience and Sincerity, and who (by his
former share of promoting Fears and Jealousies of the Clergy) might seem to be
in a particular manner interested to make good his quondam charge against the
Clergy of the Church of England.

Nay, had the Author but personated a Dissenter in it, and published it as from
one of that kind, it might have expected better success. But for him to lay
open so plainly himself, and to let the world know that he was of the Church of
Rome, and which was as ill managed, to have Henry Hills to set his name to his
Book, that so every one might know whence it came; this was too gross to impose
upon any, and this was enough to blast the whole design, since there are no
people of tolerable sense but would as soon as they saw whence it came, reflect
with themselves, that this Book must needs be a ridiculous sham, because if
there were in reality any such Agreements between any of the Members of the
Church of England and the Church of Rome, the Romanists would have been far
from being either so uncivil to their secret Friends, or so much Enemies to
their own Designs, as to discover their private Allies to the world, and post
them up that every Body may know them, and thereby deprive themselves of ever
having such secret Friends any more.

And therefore this ridiculous Pamphlet was so far from helping on, or keeping
up the Jealousie-Design, or doing them any good that way, The Reverend Dr.
Sh^^lock.
that it only served to provoke that very worthy Person who was particularly
aimd at and abused in it to publish a Vindication of himself, wherein he has
thoroughly basted the pretenses of his Romish Adversary, and broke the neck of
the silly design.

The ill fortune however of that fruitless design did not deter our Representer
from trying the same Method again; so good and so promising an undertaking must
not be let fall for the miscarriages of one Man; a design so necessary must be
pursued, and care only taken not to make any more such false steps, as the
former Author had, but to secure the Privacy of it.

To this good purpose our Representer comes forth, and presents the world with
no fewer than sixteen Articles of Popery extracted out of one Book lately
published by a Member of the Church of England; and this in the disguise of a
Dissenter, and without any Printers name to it, that so the Suppositious Brat
might pass undiscovered, and all that was said in this pretended Letter might
be swallowed by the unthinking Multitude as if it came from some real Dissenter.

This new Method the Representer was pleased to try first against me; for out
of my Answer to his Nubes Testium are all those Articles of Popery pretended to
be collected, which are the Subject of that personating Letter from the
Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England.

But to the great disparagement of our crafty Representer, this Letter neither
was so well managed as it ought to have been; for tho there was Art in
fathering the Brat upon the Dissenters, as if it had come from One of them, yet
this Art was forgotten, to personate the Dissenter a little better, for in this
pretended Letter One plainly sees the Representer in every Period, and his own
style carried throughout.

And therefore, as tho the Author were conscious to himself, and his Friends of
the same mind, that his style would endanger his discovery, all care was taken
that it might not be known out of what Press this pretended Letter was sent:
Randal Tailor the Publisher of it had a strict charge laid upon him not to
discover whence he had it, or for whom he did publish it, and thereupon durst
not tell whence he had it: and so resolute were they to have it concealed, that
when my Booksellers Servant went the next day to Henry Hills Printing House to
buy two or three of the Letters among other Books, they denied the Letter, and
refused to sell him any of it, tho he saw and pointed to a heap of them in the
shop before their faces.

But all this foolish care was to no purpose, since Henry Hills Print is too
well known to all Booksellers, and the Representers style to all Scholars that
have given themselves the trouble of reading his frothy Pamphlets.

I must confess that upon publishing my Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes
Testium I did expect to meet with a great deal of ill usage and slanders; I had
in my Answer to that Book of the Representer discovered two things in relation
to the Author of it, which I knew would incense and gall the Author of it as
much as they would please the Generality of Readers: the One was that He had
stole his whole Book (except a small passage or two) out of Natalis Alexandre,
a present Writer of the Church of Rome, without once mentioning whence He had
it: The other thing was, that He had stole the Book out of an Author, every one
of whose Volumes made use of by this Plagiary had been condemned to the flames
two years before by the present Pope, and all people forbid, under pain of
Excommunication immediately incurred, the keeping, reading or transcribing any
of those Volumes; and thereupon stands excommunicate for his pains by the
present Pope, and cannot be absolved by any person but the Pope himself, or the
Bishop of Rome for the time being.

The First of these did discover how much a Scholar our Representer was
notwithstanding that Pompous Collection out of Fathers: and the other showed as
plainly, how dutiful a Son of the Church he is notwithstanding all the fine
things said in behalf of the Bishop of Rome in any of his Pieces.

As I did expect, so I now have found that I have in the highest manner
disobliged our Representing Compiler, since I meet with the worst usage that
rage or malice were able to dictate. I little dreamed that in the mustering up
of my faults and mistakes, Popery would have been any part of my charge: but it
seems I was sufficiently mistaken; and tho I, who may be allowed to know my own
sense best, did believe there was no more Popery in my Book, than there is
either in my Heart or my Head, yet this prying Representer can find a great
deal of it there, and charges me (quoting place and page for it) with sixteen
Articles of Popery; which large Bill against me I will now examine.

The three first Articles of Popery that I am charged with are about the Pope
himself, in favor of whom I am charged with saying first that I can grant,
that the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of S. Peter. 2. That that See is the
Center of the Catholic Communion, while possessed by an Orthodox Bishop. 3. That
whosoever separates himself from it, professing the true Faith, and possessed
by a Catholic Bishop, is guilty of Schism.

And is this ingenuous dealing? must every Disputant be charged with what he
grants merely for disputation sake? And must every Writer be charged with what
he only supposes for argument sake, and to expose his Adversary more plainly?
This is very hard and very unreasonable measure to charge either Disputant or
Writer with teaching what he does only grant for Argument sake, and with
believing what he merely supposes for the same purpose: and yet this is my Case
in that Accusation.

I was in that chapter of my Book out of which these passages are taken,
showing what a disingenuous sort of an Adversary I had to deal with there; how
he, when he came to treat of the Popes Supremacy, instead of putting down a
just and fair account of the Pretensions of the Bishops of Rome, did only
mention two or three trifling things which any one with adding only to them
two or three necessary words might grant, and yet be as far as any one ever was
from believing the Supremacy of the Popes of Rome.

That I might therefore expose him, and show the great looseness and craft with
which he wrote, I did in that place undertake to prove it in particular: and
went through all the Heads of that chapter, still telling him at every one of
them that I could grant it, and yet continue without any obligation in the
least of believing the Popes Supremacy.

What I had said there, and granted as is usual in all Writers, merely for to
expose my Adversary, this Letter-Writer has by sleight of hand turned into
honest confessions, and makes me assert in the Letter what I had only supposed
in the Book.

Whosoever will look into that page of my Book, will quickly see how
extravagantly abusive and false this charge in the Letter upon me is, and how
very disingenuous and malicious that person must be that would from thence
affix to me as an Assertion, about the Bishop of Rome's Succession and Unity,
that which was only a School-Concession for Argument sake.

And tho this answer is sufficient with all persons of sense to convince them
what a Juggling Adversary I have, yet there is an Expression in that very
paragraph, which does express, as plainly as words can, my denial of and
disbelief of any of those things that He lays to my charge in the Letter as
fair Concessions of my Opinion about the Bishop of Rome: for immediately after
those passages set down in the Letter, I have these very words; I can, I say
subscribe (THOUGH I DO NOT) to all this without any Obligation in the least of
believing the Popes Supremacy.

And here I cannot but appeal to the world to judge betwixt me, and this
Juggling Adversary, whether any one could express his meaning more plainly, and
his dissent more fully than I have done in that place, and whether that
Adversary must not be devoid of all Honesty, Sense or Conscience that would
notwithstanding such a direct denial of mine expressed there, charge me with
believing and granting that the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's Successor, that he
is the Center of Catholic Communion, and, that it is Schism to separate from
his See.

Had my style been obscure, and my expressions been intricate, and those words,
which did declare my direct disbelief of those things, at some great distance
three or four pages off, for example, from those quoted by the Representer;
there might have been some small pretense, some little color for the knavery
used here by him; but there was no ground for any such Plea, for the
Expressions and style are plain enough there, and the words, though I do not
are in the very next line to his last quotation, and it is impossible but he
should both see them, and read them too.

With what conscience then could any man read those words, and yet have the
forehead from the very same page, to bring me in as believing the direct
contrary. I am so far from thinking that any Christian would be guilty of such
a deliberate and injurious imposture, that I believe both Turks and Heathens
would abhor and detest the being guilty of such a malicious Forgery.

As for that good Opinion of the Pope, which this Jugler mentions afterward in
the Letter as mine, I think I have sufficiently evidenced to the world in that
second Chapter of my Answer to the Compiler how little a Friend to, or favourer
of the Popes Pretensions I am. If to show that there is no ground or Authority
from Scripture for his claims to Supremacy; if to show that there is no ground
for the Pretended Supremacy from the Laws and Canons of the Universal Church
for the first six hundred years after Christ, and to back this with Three
Challenges to all the Romish Priests in England to name one Canon in the Code
of the Universal Church that does either constitute, or assert, or suppose the
Bishop of Rome to be that Head and Supreme Pastor of the Universal Church which
their General Council of Florence defined him to be; if to show I say all these
things be a discovery of a man's good Opinion of the Pope, I do here own that I
have as good an Opinion of the Pope as any Person within the four Seas.

But I am afraid that I never shall have either favor or thanks for my good
Opinion of the Pope: And however the Representer who I believe read that
chapter thorough, does tell the world of his meeting with my good Opinion of
the Pope in that Book; I am very fully persuaded that he does no more believe
himself that I have any good Opinion of the Pope, than I believe that he is at
this Instant in Japan.

But when a man's hand is in at such sort of writing and when he is resolved to
blacken his Adversary, but wants Matter and Ground for such Calumnies, He must
even do as my Adversary does, invent himself what he would fain have found in
his Adversaries Work, and charge him with saying that in his Work which he does
not, nay which he expressly denies.

I think I have fully vindicated my self from the charge about the Pope himself
against me, and exposed enough the notorius Calumny of the Representer upon
this Point: However, lest any Reader should not sufficiently apprehend the
first part of my Answer to this Calumny, and lest any of the Representers
Friends should deny the Proof of the deliberate Falsification of my meaning,
because the passage is not set down, and they converse commonly with those who
either have not, or will not, or it may be, must not look into my Book it self,
I will transcribe those two whole paragraphs thence, which are the Subject of
his Charge and my Answer, and they are these in the beginning of my Second
Chapter concerning the Popes Supremacy, p. 8.

Our Compiler being now come to a Point of debate, does not forget his art of
palliating, which was so serviceable to him in his Misrepresentations and
Representations of Popery. He cannot but know (and therefore ought to have
avoided it) that this loose talk about Successor of Peter, and Center of
Catholic Communion does not reach the Pretensions of the Bishops of Rome, nor
fully and fairly declare what Power, Jurisdiction and Authority, in and over
the Catholic Church those Bishops challenge as their Right.

To let him see how loosely he manages this debate betwixt us, I can with
putting in two or three necessary words subscribe to all our Compiler says for
the Pope, and yet be as far from owning the Popes Supremacy, as the Church of
England is or ever was. The Fathers teach, says our Compiler Nubes Testium, p.
22.
that Christ Built his Church upon Peter: So say I too, if by Fathers here be
meant two or three of them, and not the Fathers unanimously (as he has it
before) or generally. That the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of Saint Peter,
is what I can also grant, and that that See is the Center of the Catholic
Communion, if I may but put in here what is absolutely necessary, while
possessed by an Orthodox Bishop, and that whosoever separates himself from it
(I add, professing the true Faith, and possessed by a Catholic Bishop) is
guilty of Schism. I CAN, I SAY, SUBSCRIBE (THOUGH I DO NOT) TO ALL This,
without any Obligation in the least of believing the Popes Supremacy: All that
our Compiler puts down here, reaching no farther than a Primacy of Order, does
not at all suppose in the Popes any Jurisdiction or Authority over the
Catholic Church.

Having dispatched my Vindication against the Charge of the three first
Articles of Popery, I come now to examine the fourth, which does charge me with
doubting whether there be really any Controversy about Tradition, betwixt the
Church of Rome and the Church of England.

Well then, are these my expressions in the place quoted? Or is this the sense
of them there? I must profess to the world that had I not already discovered
the cheats of the malicious Representer in the former Articles, I could not
have believed that any person of common sense or learning would have been
guilty of such tricks.

I had the same occasion in my chapter about the Tradition that I had in the
former chapter about Supremacy, of showing how loose a Writer our Compiler is,
and exposing him for putting that down as an account of the Controversy which I
could subscribe to, if taken in that sense which the words would fairly bear,
and yet be never the nearer to Popery than I now am, or ever intend to be.

Upon this, coming to examine what he had put down at the Head of his
Collections about Tradition, I have these expressions; To state therefore the
Controversy about Tradition (if there really be any) betwixt us, he should not
have put down that for the account of the debate herein betwixt us, which is
agreed to by both sides, nor should have omitted that wherein WE REALLY
DISAGREE, and that is about the Scriptures being a certain and Perfect Rule of
Faith WITHOUT THE HELP of TRADITION, which the Council of Trent has made to be
of Equal Authority with the Scripture.

One would think such clear expressions as these would have prevented my being
accused of doubting whether there really be any Controversy about Tradition
betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Church of England, but no clearness it
seems can be protection against the Malice of such an Adversary as is fallen
upon me: and therefore he puts down those expressions as mine doubting, whether
there be really any Controversy about Tradition betwixt the Church of Rome,
and the Church of England; when in that very paragraph I say that We (meaning
the Churches of England and Rome) Really Disagree about Tradition's being part
of the Rule of Faith.

And therefore any other Reader, less spiteful than my angry Adversary, would
easily have seen and observed that the expression in the beginning of the
paragraph (if there really be any) was used and intended for an allusion to
that state of the Controversy which had been set down by the Compiler about
Tradition, and ought not to be wire-drawn to make me doubt that in the
beginning of the paragraph, the contrary to which I did directly assert within
three lines after.

The fifth Article of the charge against me is, that I did say that the
Tradition of the Catholic Church is to be received; and the sixth is of the
same kind, that I confessed there, That by Tradition we receive the Holy
Scriptures, and know how to separate the Scriptures from Apocryphal or
Suppositious Writings.

I do freely own that these are my expressions in that place, and these I am
sure are far from looking like Popery, if I that wrote them may be allowed to
tell in what sense I did mean and intend them.

All the service that my Adversary could expect from the citing and insisting
upon them was only to amuse the common Readers with the Word Tradition, that
they not understanding the Ambiguity of the Word, nor in what several senses
the Word Tradition was used, might be tempted to believe that I was for setting
up there that Tradition which they used to hear preached against so much by the
Clergy of the Church of England.

By Tradition here which I said we receive or admit of, I did not mean that
Tradition which is set up as part of the Rule of Faith in the Church of Rome,
nor did I any more mean Tradition as it is taken for any Doctrine of the Church
of Rome which they say was from the beginning delivered to them. All that I
meant by Tradition there was no more than the bare means of delivering down to
us the Word of God, and any Rites or Customs in the Ancient Church.

When I said therefore that by this Tradition we received the Holy Scriptures,
and know how to separate the Scriptures from Apocryphal or Supposititious
Writings: The full and clear meaning of those expressions was, that the
Canonical Books of the Holy Scriptures, or (to speak to the meanest capacity)
that the Bible was delivered down from time to time, and from hand to hand in
all Ages unto us, that we did receive them from our Forefathers in the Church
as they had received them from theirs up unto the beginning, and that since
they delivered down to us only those Books, which the Church of England does
believe and admit for the Word of God, we do thereby know that no other Books
could be part of the Scriptures, which were not handed down to us for such.

This is as much as I need to offer either in Vindication of my self, or
explication of my words, when I spoke of Tradition; but because I cannot clear
my innocence too much herein, I will show the world that I had very good
Vouchers for every word that I said thereabout, and will produce the sense of
Archbishop Usher, who never was thought by any Sort of Protestants to be any
ways inclineable to, or guilty of Popery.

This most learned Prelate in his Reply to the Jesuits Challenge has these
words about p. 35.
Tradition.

This must I needs tell you before we begin, that you much mistake the matter,
if you think that Traditions of all sorts promiscuously are struck at by our
Religion. We willingly acknowledge, that the word of God which by some of the
Apostles was set down in writing, was both by themselves, and others of their
fellow laborers, delivered by word of mouth: and that the Church in succeeding
ages was bound not only to preserve those sacred writings committed to her
trust, but also to deliver unto her children viva voce the form of wholesome
words contained therein. Traditions therefore of this nature, come not within
the compass of our controversy: the question being betwixt us de ipsa Doctrina
tradita, not de tradendi modo; touching the substance of the doctrine
delivered, not of the manner of delivering it. Again, it must be remembered that
here we speak of doctrine delivered as the word of God, that is, of points of
religion revealed unto the Prophets and Apostles, for the perpetual information
of Gods people: not of rites and ceremonies, and other ordinances which are
left to the disposition of the Church, and consequently be not of divine but of
positive and humane right. Traditions therefore of this kind likewise are not
properly brought within the circuit of this question.

Thus that most learned Man, whose Authority is so deservedly great in the
world.

The Seventh Article of Popery is, that I said there, that I was willing and
ready to receive any Doctrine not written that has as perpetual, unanimous,
and certain a Tradition as the Scripture; and that I only wait for the proving
this, and then I am ready to embrace all the Doctrines of Popery.

As for those last words, and then he is ready to embrace all the Doctrines of
Popery, which are maliciously put in the Italick Character, that so they might
be thought by the Reader to be my own words, I have no such expressions there,
and these are only the Representer's consequence draw from what I had said
there, that we only wait for their proving that any of those Doctrines they
would obtrude upon us have been thus universally delivered.

But his business here was to make the passage look as invidious as he could,
and therefore he was so very careful to put his own Consequence down in the
most odious terms that he could devise.

The former part of the Accusation about my professed readiness to receive any
Doctrine not written that has as perpetual, unanimous and certain a Tradition
as the Doctrines written in Scripture have, I do readily own, and plead guilty
unto it, since I am very well satisfied that my Religion, as a Member of the
Church of England is not in danger of being shockt or endangered by it. I do
still say, that I am now ready to receive any such unwritten Doctrines; which
expressions of mine, as well in my Book as here, are far from supposing that
the Church of England wants any necessary means of Salvation, or that there are
in any other Church any such unwritten Doctrines so qualified for a Christian's
Reception as I there require; but they do on the contrary suppose that the
Church of Rome is not able to show for any one point of Religion which they
would obtrude upon us such a perpetual, unanimous and certain Tradition as I do
demand for it.

I used those words there, because I did not only believe, but was fully
persuaded that it is impossible for the Church of Rome to prove in that Method
any of their Doctrines which are refused by us; and if it be impossible, I
suppose I am in no very great likelihood of ever becoming a Roman Catholic,
while I make a thing impossible to them the condition of my ever becoming a
member of their Church.

The eighth Article of Popery is my saying that there is no necessity of
Express Scripture for the Constitutions and practices, which his Church enjoins
in order to the more regular and decent service of God.

But how comes this to be an Article of Popery against me? And how comes this
to be christened Popery? Has it not always been the Doctrine of the Reformed
Church of England? Is not this a Doctrine common to all persuasions of
Christians in the world? I cannot but look upon the Representer in great pain
and concern to muster up a set of Articles of Popery against me, that is forced
to make a false muster, and to call that Popery which in reality is not.

His weakness is as visible as his malice in this affair; as his malice put him
upon making me odious by drawing up a charge of Popish Principles against me,
so his weakness did in this place betray him into a miscalling that Doctrine
Popery, which is common to all sorts of Christians.

The Church of England has professed this as her sense all along, that there
is no necessity of Express Scripture for her Constitutions and Orders for the
more regular and decent Service of God, but that these things are commanded
only in general, and the particular determination thereof left to the
Governors of the several Churches.

Nor is the Church of England alone, nor the only Church among the Reformed of
this persuasion; the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas do altogether concur
with Her in this; and so do all the Greek, Eastern and Southern Churches, not
one of which does require express Texts of Scripture for the several Ceremonies
and Constitutions in their Churches, for the more decent service of God, but
look upon a general Commission to the Church from the Word of God to enable and
empower them to provide and order the particular Modes and Practices.

Nay, our Dissenters themselves, notwithstanding their too great rigidness in
many things, cannot but subscribe the Doctrine I set down above, since they do
not pretend to show express Scripture for the several Orders made among them in
relation to the Circumstances of Time, Place, Postures and Gestures used in the
Service of God.

Since then what I said above, and was accused of Popery for it, proves to be a
Doctrine equally espoused by all Persuasions of Christians, as well as by the
Church of Rome, I would fain know by what Art this is to be made Popery; we may
as well, and with as great reason call the Doctrine of the Incarnation, or of
the Resurrection of our blessed Savior Popery, as that Doctrine about the no
necessity of express Scripture for Ecclesiastical Constitutions, since they are
no more the general Belief of all Christians than this last mentioned Doctrine
is.

This Charge then ought to have been omitted, since what I have said above is
so far from being one of my Articles of Popery, that it is no Popery at all,
but a Doctrine assented to by the generality of the Christian World.

Before I go on to the next Article, I must consider what he has further to
object against me in this Point. Here I am accused as if I had spoken only my
own sense, and thereby given occasion to my Adversary to post me up as a
Papist, or Popishly inclined for it, whereas I said plainly, that it was the
Doctrine of our Church, that there is no necessity of express Scripture for the
Constitutions and Practices which she enjoins in order to the more regular and
decent service of God.

But before my Adversary ends his Letter, I am brought in again, as if I had
said that we espouse a Tradition which authorizes Constitutions and Practices
without any Authority of the Written Word: but I would fain know where it was
that I said this. I said the Church taught that there was no necessity of
Express Scripture, and here it is come to no Scripture at all, for that is the
place the Representer alludes to.

I must therefore ask him seriously whether these two be the same, and whether
there is no difference between not express Scripture, and no Scripture at all:
could this Adversary show that there is no medium betwixt Express Scripture and
no Scripture at all, it would have served for some excuse for him; but since
that is impossible to be shown, all people owning that what is only employed,
or ordered in general terms, or may be deduced by rational consequence thence,
is said to be founded on Scripture, and to have the authority thereof, as well
as that Doctrine which is delivered the most plainly or expressly there, I must
accuse my Adversary of very great disingenuity here, who does so injuriously
turn the not requiring express Scripture into the not requiring any Scripture.

Malice it seems will put men that are set upon revenge on doing the most
unlawful things, and quite perverting the words of their Adversary, and making
them say what they never did, nor thought on, the Representer otherwise could
not but have seen how great a wrong he was doing me there, and his Conscience
must have upbraided him with a deliberate abusing and perverting my words: but
against that home-enemy he seems to be provided with armor of Proof.

The next Article of Popery laid to my charge is for asserting, That the
Tradition of Antiquity is highly useful and necessary for the Interpretation of
Points of Faith.

I cannot see how this comes to be Popery any more than the last Article that I
was charged with: my Adversaries business here seems to be only to amuse the
Multitude with the word Tradition; and therefore my care needs only be
employed for the acquitting of my self to let the world see all that I or
others mean by the Tradition mentioned here.

By Tradition here I meant nothing else than those Interpretations of difficult
places of Scriptures, and explications of points of Faith which we meet with in
the Fathers from the first Century downwards. Such Interpretations, whether
received from those before them, or found out by their own industry, and
comparing of one part of Scripture with another, we do embrace as transmitted
from them unto us in their Writings, and look upon such Interpretations as very
good Guides, and necessary Assistances to prevent our falling into Error, by
letting us see how from time to time such a Point of Doctrine, or such a Text
was taken by the generality, or unanimous Consent of Fathers in such a
determinate sense.

We have very great reason to value the Fathers upon this very account, because
they afford us such evidences against those Doctrines the Church of Rome would
obtrude upon us: It cannot but be very great pleasure to find that the Texts of
Scripture which are alleged by the Romish Writers for some of their particular
Doctrines are interpreted generally in a sense quite contrary by the Primitive
Fathers.

I am sure that the Texts of Scripture alleged for that great fundamental
Article of Popery, the Pope's Supremacy, by the Romish Writers, are interpreted
by the generality, and almost unanimous Consent of the Fathers and
Ecclesiastical Writers in a sense quite contrary to that which the Romanists
urge them for.

I am very well assured that in very many other Points of Doctrine we are able
to show that the Generality of Fathers did not interpret the Texts of Scripture
upon which the Romanists found them, in that sense which they contend for; and
I do believe that we may extend it to all points of Doctrine grounded upon
Texts of Scripture which are under debate betwixt the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome.

If it be Popery then to value and embrace those Interpretations which are
delivered to us from the Fathers, and which are the Best Evidences next to the
Holy Scriptures themselves of the falsehood and unreasonableness of the several
Points of Popery, and which will assist us to ruin those groundless Doctrines,
I am content to be a Papist in this Article, but am afraid I shall never be
looked upon as one jot more a Catholic for it.

I will pass on to the next charge, the Tenth Article of my Popery, which in my
Adversaries Letter runs thus, that He Honors the Saints in observing days in
honor of them: But how comes it to be here, He honors, when I said plainly
enough that WE, that is the Church of England, do it? If there be any Popery in
this charge, why is it laid to me as if I were delivering there only my own
Judgment or Practice, and not to the Church of England, whom I spoke of
expressly there?

But the Man begins to draw low, and to be put to all his Shifts to make up a
Catalogue of Popery against me, that might make some show, and therefore since
I proved so ill natured in the rest of my Book as to give him no advantage
against me, He very wisely charges that as my own, and an Article of my Popery,
which is the avowed and most known Practice of the best Reformed Churches in
the World.

It is very well known that not only the Church of England, but the best
Reformed Churches abroad do observe days in honor or memory of the Saints
departed, who do at the same time detest and abhor the putting up of prayers
unto them, or praying to them for to be made partakers of their Merits.

He that will take the pains to look into the Liturgy of the Church of England,
may quickly see what honor it is that our Church pays to the Saints; that it
is no other, nor no more than to Bless God for his manifold Gifts and Graces
unto them, whereby they were enabled to be glorious Examples of Holiness to the
World, and strengthened in any Troubles or Fiery Trials to pass through them
with a Christian Courage and Resignation; and to pray unto him that we may have
Grace to direct our Lives after their good Examples.

This is all that our Church does practice in her Liturgy, and all that she
requires in the Sermons on those Festival Days is, that the Example of the
Servants of God, and particularly of that Saint whose memory is celebrated that
day, may be set forth in the best manner, that so the Congregation may be
persuaded to direct their Lives also in the same good and holy paths.

But tho this be all that the Church of England does practice or allow, yet He
is for proving that I am for doing more; He says that I seem to grant all that
is produced in Nubes Testium upon that Subject, one of whose Instances was
their celebrating the Saints Memory with a Religious Solemnity, so to be
Partakers of their Merits.

This charge I can answer in a very few words, that I neither did grant all he
collected in the Nubes Testium upon that Subject, nor seemed to grant it: And
which is more, that I could not, since I do not believe that the most Holy Men
have any Merits, or that if they had, that others can after their decease be
either helped by them, or be made Partakers of them by celebrating their
Memories even with the most Religious Solemnity.

The next Article of Popery is so very ridiculous, that it is not worth the
putting down, or giving one word of Answer to it; but I must not omit it, lest
I be upbraided, and told that I had the cunning to slip over those points which
would discover me most, and lay me open to the world.

It shall not then be put out of its place, or thrown quite away, but shall
have its turn. In this Eleventh Article I am accused of saying, that it is
generally piously believed, that the glorified Saints do intercede for the
Church Militant.

I would fain know what all this is to me, am I to be the Generality of
Christians? Or am I to answer for what other people believe? I speak there of a
General Belief, and have not put down one Syllable of my own persuasion herein,
and yet this disingenuous Adversary is for fixing all this upon me, and puts it
down as my own Opinion, or to no purpose at all. If he puts it down for my
persuasion, he plays false since I do not hint one syllable of my sense about
it, and if it be as it really is to no purpose there, it is very ridiculous,
and ought to be contemned as such, and the Author of it for his Pains.

The twelvth Article is that I should say that the Honor which in Primitive
times was paid to the Memories of Saints, was nothing but what was highly just,
and that herein they are imitated by us, as well as by any other Christians,

I do own that these are my own expressions, or my sense if by Primitive times
be intended only the Three first Centuries of the Church, of whose Ages I
there spoke: but how comes this Article over again? this is the very same with
the Tenth Article, and has been sufficiently answered there, when I showed
what honor it was that our Church did pay unto the Memories of the Saints.

But this Scarcity of matter is a troublesome thing, and therefore the poor man
is forced to come with the Old Article over again: but tho he be so impertinent
with his second Edition of the Article, I will not be so in transcribing my
Answer to that 10th Article hither.

I could however be almost willing to show how all that the Church of England
practices and requires as to the Memories of Saints is the very same that was
practiced, nay all that was practiced by the Primitive Christians in the three
first Centuries; but since this would take up much more room than I can afford
it here, I will only mention that famous Instance of the Church of Smyrna, how
they were resolved to Commemorate their Martyred Bishop S. Polycarp. As for
worshipping him, much less his Relics, or of praying to him (as an old
translation of that Churches Epistle has it) They inform the Christians of
Lions and the whole world that they did detest the doing or thoughts of it,
that they only loved his Memory for that very great good will which he had
shown to his heavenly King and Master, and therefore did resolve to celebrate
with Joy and Praises the Birthday (as the Church did then call the day of
Martyrdom) of this Saint in Memory of him, and such as had finished their
courses like him, and for an incitement, and preparation to all that were to
combat in such bloody encounters.

Here is no mention either of Hymns or Prayers offered up to the Saint himself,
and reason good, since these were then and long after, and ought always to be
looked on as Peculiar to the God of Heaven alone.

The thirteenth Article of Popery is that I say, that the Fathers kept the
Relics of Saints with respect and Veneration, and believed that God often
wrought Miracles by them, and that they might do it too.

Thus the Representer has drawn up the Charge, and this he has done very like
himself, that is, with more slight and cunning than any Honest person would
use. For first, he puts down as my words, that the Fathers kept the Relics of
Saints with Respect and Veneration, and believed that God often wrought
Miracles by them, whereas they are not my words, but his own, he had said them
in the Nubes Testium, and I did grant them, that so I might the better show,
that granting such things were done then; this did not defend or countenance
the present Practices of the Church of Rome toward Relics.

However for that my granting and allowing of them, he has made them mine,
whereas had any other person of Sense or Conscience been to have mentioned
those Expressions, he would have put them down as said by the Representer
himself, and only granted by me.

He next lays the charge as if I had said that the Fathers indefinitely kept
the Relics of Saints; and by this the Reader must understand, if he pleases,
that I said that the Fathers in general did it, even the first Fathers of the
three first Centuries, but this is as disingenuous as the rest of his
Accusations; for when I did grant his saying that the Fathers kept the
Relics, I did not grant it of the Fathers indefinitely, but did particularly
specify what Fathers Practice I granted it to be, and did limit it to the
Fathers of the latter Ages, by which I mean the latter end of the fourth, and
the fifth, and following Centuries, as any one that will but peruse that one
page (out of which it is quoted) must necessarily see.

As to the Charge then taken all together, I had so fully expressed my Sense
and my Mind in that Chapter that he carps at, that I think I need to use no
other words to clear my self and answer the Charge of Popery, than those I had
put down in that place.

Speaking in that Chapter of the great difference betwixt what was practiced in
the fourth and fifth Centuries of the Church in relation to Relics, and what
is practiced now by the Church of Rome, I have these words. I need not examine
by retail his Testimonies from the latter end of the fourth and sifth
Centuries, the design of which he himself makes only to prove that the Fathers
kept the Relics of Saints with Respect and Veneration, and believed that God
often wrought Miracles by them: which WE do grant the Fathers of those latter
Ages did, and might do it too, as long as they kept (as they said of themselves
that they always did) from paying Religious Worship unto them: But we say
withal, that what the Christians of those Ages did about these things, does no
ways defend the present Extravagancies of the Church of Rome; the Excesses
wherein about Relics are come to that scandalous height, as to make the
learned men of their own Church ashamed of them.

They that will compare this passage with the Representer's Extracts out of it
in the 13th Article against me, cannot but discover what usage every one must
expect that dares to provoke so very angry a man.

But that I may also show my own Judgment about Relics, I will trouble the
Reader with the next paragraph, wherein if I did not set down exactly (as I
designed) the Opinion of our Mother Church of England about those things, yet I
am sure I did that of my own Soul.

As to the Practice of the Church of England, which inquires not after, nor is
solicitous about the Relics of Saints, this may be said in her defense, that
she finds no Practice or Command about any such searching after the bones of
the Dead in any part of Scripture of either Testament, but that their whole
care then was to commit them to their Sepulchers in hopes of a future
Resurrection, and never to disturb their Ashes; and therefore she thinks it
must needs be her greatest commendation, that she is more careful to imitate
what she finds written and practiced in the Scriptures themselves, than to
imitate what the fourth Age of the Church began to practice, when the Church of
Christ was near four hundred years old: The Holy Scriptures themselves are the
Rule of her Faith, and for any Apostolical Practices she inquires among them,
who lived with the Apostles or nearest to them; among whom finding nothing of
any searching for Relics, or any Miracles done by them in those first three
hundrid years, she is resolved to practice what the Christians of those first
and purest Ages did, rather than what After-ages did, wherein plenty and
prosperity let loose the reins to some peoples fancies, and made that a part of
Religion, which was never any before.

The fourteenth Article of Popery against me is that we freely grant, That the
Fathers practiced praying for the Dead; and owned it as advantageous to the
Souls departed: And that I should say that no body denis, That the Fathers in
the first Ages used Oblations and Prayers for the Dead, and that these Prayers
were offered up also for pardon of sins.

I am extremely at a loss to find how I am drawn in for Popery here, and which
way it is proved upon me: All that I have done here is to own that the Fathers
did practice those things which I could not deny without betraying a greater
Ignorance than I must pretend to in those Writers, or that I have no conscience
at all. But must my Ingenuity then be made my crime? and must I be made a
Papist for granting that, which I could not in my Circumstances deny without
making my self a bold Liar?

I am fallen it seems into very bad hands, into the hands of One, who is
resoved to blacken me without having any regard to Truth or Justice, or
Conscience.

I do not say one word there of my approving what those Fathers did; I do not
in the least hint that I am for such Practices, or that I ever use such Prayers
or Oblations for the Dead, or ever intended to do it: So that this terrible
Charge depends only, and must rest upon my granting such Practices in former
days.

But is this dealing either just or reasonable? at this rate he may make me a
defender of any the most contrary things, when I grant (as every man of
conscience must) that the generality of Fathers in the first Centuries believed
a Millennium, am I to be made a Millenary for this? when I grant that for many
Ages the Communion was given unto Infants, must I be concluded to be one that
is of opinion that it ought to be so still? or must I be represented thereupon
to the world as one that does still practice the thing, and gives the Communion
unto the little Children.

How ridiculous soever such false and extravagant conclusions appear to the
world, yet the Usage that I find from the Representer's hands is exactly the
same, and altogether as groundless as the other.

As for the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of England her self, which I
do heartily subscribe to; so far is she from either encouraging or practicing
Prayers for the Dead, that whereas in the dawning of the Reformation in King
Edwards first Common Prayer Book there was a direct Praying for the Dead in
that Prayer for the whole Estate of Christ's Church; in the next Review of the
Liturgy the Petitions for the Dead were quite left out of that Prayer, and out
of the whole Service. In the Common Prayer Book printed at London in March
1549, the Prayer for the Dead is to be met with, and so it is in another
Edition in June following in the same year at London: And in a Third Edition of
1551. at Dublin; but upon the Review which was made about that time we find it
omitted and quite left out of the Common Prayer Books, printed in 1552, and
afterward down to our times not any usage or revival of that Practice among us.

As to the Reasons for leaving off that Practice which could pretend to so much
Antiquity, I am not at leisure, nor have Room here to set them down; I must
confess that I am not at all satisfied of it from the best Instances for it.

I cannot but look upon S. Ambrose's praying for the Soul of the Emperor
Theodosius, and his resolution not to leave him, till by his Tears and Prayers
he had brought him unto the Mountain of the Lord, where he might enjoy Life for
evermore, as a Thing that might very well have been spared, nay that ought to
have been spared, since we know by the very same Oration that Saint Ambrose did
believe that the Soul of that Emperor was in Bliss, was placed in Heaven, did
enjoy at that time perpetual Light, and a never ceasing Tranquillity, and was
admitted into the Society of the Saints in Glory. I have no other defense to
make for this extraordinary Action of this Father, than to say that all this
was done in a Rhetorical Harangue, wherein the Custom of all times has allowed
the Orators to speak things that were not strict truths, and things which they
neither properly speaking believed themselves, or were desirous that others
should.

And so in that celebrated Instance of Saint Austins praying for his Mother
Monica after her decease, that God would not enter into Judgment with her, and
yet professing in the very next words that he did believe that God had already
done for her all that he did pray for; I am no more able to defend it, than I
could the Prayers of any man whom God had blessed with Children and Heirs to
his name and his Estate, if he should be importunate with God that he would
bestow the blessing of Children upon him, and bestow in his mercy but one Son
upon him to keep up his family and his name.

I do not mention these things to expose those two venerable Fathers, but to
vindicate the Practice of my Mother Church in relation to these things. I think
those that dye in the Lord have no need of our Prayers, and that those that dye
in his disfavonr can receive no benefit by them.

The fifteenth Article against me is, that I say that it is the Opinion of his
Church, that Christ's Body is really present in the Eucharist.

This charge is as ridiculous as any of the rest, for if the real presence be
the Opinion of our Church, how comes it to be one of my Articles of Popery?
Could this unreasonable Adversary have shown that the Real Presence is not the
Opinion of our Church, but only of the Church of Rome, and that I was a
believer of such a real Presence, his charge against me of a Popish Opinion
herein would have been most justly laid: But he neither offers to prove that
our Church is not of that Opinion, nor is he at all able to do it, and yet I
must be a Papist notwithstanding I believe with our Church, whose real Presence
is far from looking like Popery, since she has so often and so fully declared
that by real here is only meant a spiritual, not corporeal, or natural Presence
of Christ's Body.

Nay in that very place where I said it was the Opinion of our Church that
Christ's Body was really present in the Eucharist, I gave also the reason of
that Opinion, because we believe (as my words p. 65.
there are) that the consecrated Elements do by the Appointment of God
communicate to every faithful Receiver the Body and Blood of Christ: which is
no more than what S. Paul has said in other words before us, when he tells the
Corinthians that the Bread which he and they broke was a Communion of, or did
communicate to them, the Body of Christ, and that the Cup of Blessing was a
Communion of the Blood of Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16.


The last Article of Popery against me is of the same nature with the former,
that I do confess That that consecrated Food is the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ.

I do own that I did grant those words as taken out of Justin Martyr, but had
my Sly Adversary but had the Honesty to have put down the words that do
immediately follow there, I am sure that this would either not have been put
down as an Article of my Popery, or that my Accuser would have been hist at by
all men for his folly in charging me with it, since immediately after those
words I did express my self thus; We have already granted that it is (to wit,
that the Consecrated Food is the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ) however to
corroborate what we said above, it is evident to a Demonstration that this
consecrated Food was still Bread, and not transubstantiated into the natural
Body and Blood of Christ, because S. Justin says at the same time and in the
same sentence that our Bodies are Nourished by that very consecrated Food; to
affirm which of the Natural Flesh of Christ is impious and detestable.

Thus I have gone through, and fully answered this large Charge of Popery
against me, and since he was not satisfied in the Letter to set them only once
down, but does for the greater security of effecting his designs against me,
repeat them in short before he ends his Letter, I will do the same here by my
Answers unto them.

The first charge therefore in three Articles about the Pope, and the fourth
about Tradition, I have shown to be as Notorious and Scandalous a Falsification
of a man's words and meaning as the greatest Cheat in the world could be guilty
of: that the six next can be called Popery only by the same Figure that we
would call the Belief of Christ's Resurrection Popery, because all Christians in
the world believe it as well as the Church of Rome: which is a thing so
horridly foolish, as no one but he that has more Malice than Wit or Logic in
his head could be supposed guilty of: and for the last six, they are most
falsely nicknamed Popery, and most ridiculously laid to my particular charge;
except this Malicious Adversary can show that to make a thing Popery it is
necessary that it be believed and practiced by all Churches that are against as
well as for the Church of Rome; and that I am the Generality of Christians, or
at least the whole Church of England.

If ever Rage and Folly, Malice and Weakness were equally discovered to the
world, it certainly was in this wretched Letter, wherein all the care seems to
be either to pervert my words, and falsify my meaning, or to put down that as
said by me, which was not so; as meant by me, that was not so; and as said by
me in particular, which was common unto all Christians.

Notwithstanding this injurious usage of me, yet I cannot but thank the
Representer for it, since he has by this Letter discovered to the world what
sort of person he is; and thereby given warning to the world to have a care how
they believe One that will be guilty of such dishonest things; He may write on
as long as he pleases, but this usage of me will, I question not, prevent his
doing any mischief by it, since Men are for reading those Books only wherein
they have reason to expect Truth, Candor and Integrity; and are always upon
their guard against, if they vouchsafe to read, an Author that can and does
write without any concern for Truth, Conscience or Honesty.

I will before I conclude make one short address unto the Dissenters, that they
would have a care how they suffer themselves to be imposed upon in these
things. I know this Author makes it his great care to keep them still aloof off
the Church of England, and therefore is upon every occasion, nay without any
occasion still putting them in mind of the late Execution of Penal Laws, and
how they were harassed by them. But can they believe after all this that this
man is their real Friend, whose Principles and Practices look quite another
way? I think his affixing this most false and injurious Letter unto some of
them is a fair warning how much real kindness he has for them, who was so very
desirous to have this Letter thought by all people to be theirs, which is made
up of nothing else but folly, falsehood and slander. What is this but to have
the world to believe that the Dissenters are still the same foolish, false and
slanderous people that most of his Church did use to think them, and I am
afraid, do still continue to do. I will trouble them no further, but request
this at their hands, that they would make it their Prayer to God, that they
never may be guilty of the dishonouring of God by affording their helping hand
to the ruin of the Protestant Religion.

FINIS.

