A SERMON OF THE PASSION Of our Blessed SAVIOR Jesus Christ.

Preached on GOOD FRIDAY.

In his Excellencies the SPANISH Ambassador's CHAPEL.

By J. G. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner, near Turn-stile in Holbourn. 1686.

Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater non bibam illum?

The Chalice which my Father has given me, Shall not I drink it?


Words of the eternal Word made Flesh, spoken to Peter in the Garden, when he
cut off Malchus his Ear, Recorded by St. John, in his 18th. Chapter. etc. And
part of the Passion read in the Church on Good Friday.

THE Passion of our dearest SAVIOR is represented unto Us, by His own divine
Self, under the notion of a Chalice, or draught that was to be Accepted and
Swallowed down by the Person that was to Suffer. Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater;
The Chalice which my father has given me, shall not I drink it? The same Thing
as to say in Reproving Peter for his forwardness without leave or authority:
The Passion which my Eternal Father's Will is, I should undergo for thine and
all the world's Redemption, will thou presume to put by; Dispute the Decrees of
Heaven, and a Sacrifice to Him so acceptable, shall I refuse or neglect to
Offer up?

In the same manner had He long before expressed His Sufferings; when to Curb
and Repress the ambitious Thoughts of the Sons of Zebedee, who would be content
with a no less humble place, than the Right and the Left of the KING of Kings,
when seated on His Throne; Dic ut sedeant hi duo filii mei unus ad dexteram,
alter ad sinistram in regno tuo. He answered them, Potestisne bibere calicem
quem ego bibiturus sum? Can you drink the Chalice which I am about to drink?
Are you ready to Suffer with me? can you imitate my Passion? have you both
Courage and Will enough to share and partake with me of that heavy Burden,
that my Shoulders shall be charged withal?

And in the same Sense again, did the Royal Prophet cry out, in the Person of
such as Suffered for Justice, Quid retribuam domino pro omnibus quoe retribuit
mihi? Calicem salutaris accipiam. What shall I retribute to my Lord my God, for
all he has conferred on me? I will embrace his Chalice; I will make a Return
unto Him of all I received from him, by Offering up my Life unto Him.

O Blessed JESUS, what a Chalice have Thou chosen to drink for Us? What a
bitter Potion has thy FATHER allotted Thee to swallow? But, What do I say, thy
FATHER? It was not He alone that Tempered and Mixed this Draught for Thee; They
were the Sins of Men that gathered the Ingredients, and made the Compound; and
yet I must say, it was His Father did it: Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater; The
Chalice that my Father gave me, shall not I drink it? The Father therefore gave
it, and our Sins were the occasion. Our Ingratitude and Wickedness surpassing
all bounds and measure, made the Peparation; the eternal Fathers All-surpassing
Goodness and Charity unto Man, lay the injunction for to drink it. The Chalice
which my Father gave me, shall not I drink it?

I will First therefore consider the Sins of Man, that were the occasion of
this Chalice; then the boundless Charity of the Eternal FATHER to us Sinners,
which lay the Command of taking it; and from both descend to give you a view of
the Bitter Ingredients that compounded it.

Mistake me not, and think this to be the division of my present Entertainment;
No, no, it is the latter of the Three must take up that. This Days Discourse
must be (if not wholly) for the greatest part of the doleful Sufferings of our
Bleeding JESUS. Of the Affronts, the Injuries, the Agonies, the Pangs of our
Dying SAVIOR; We must cast our Eyes no other way at present, but on a Bloody
Sacrifice; and such an one, as was not Consummated by one single, though Mortal
Stroke, as in the Old Law, or amongst the Heathens; but by a continued Train of
the most Barbarous Cruelties, that Malice it self could suggest from Thursday
Evening, till Friday Three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

I will speak only a word or two of the Sins that were the occasion of our
Blessed SAVIOR'S Sufferings, that you may not wonder at so Heavy a Load,
charged on the Shoulders of so Innocent a Person; and in like proportion of the
divine Charity toward Mankind, to raise a Gratitude in your Souls, answering
the Love of a Father, that could lay such a Command on such a Son; and the Love
of a Son, that could Embrace so readily, and Execute so effectually, such a
Command of a Father. Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater, non bibam illum? The
Chalice which my Father gave me, shall not I drink it?

My Consideration of the Sins of Men, shall comprehend, First the number of
them, if to be comprehended; and then their Foulness.

As to the number of the Sins of Men, it is a dreadful Account to think on.
From the Fall of our first Parent, which opened the Gate to Sin, to the visible
Appearance of the SAVIOR of the World, many thousand Years were Elapsed;
numberless their Issue, yet none of all those, except particularly Priviledg'd
without Sin: Besides the greatest part; nay, the far greatest part Idolaters,
ignorant of their Creator, trained up from their Infancy, in all sorts of
infamous and vicious Practices, and so continuing to their end.

As for those, who had the Blessing to be Instructed in the Knowledge of one
Deity, infinite in himself, and Creator of Heaven and Earth, either before or
after the Written Law; such was the Corruption of their manners, so great, so
general, and so frequent their Defection from Orders given them, and the
Dictates of their own Reason, that they came but little short of the others.

The Sins of us Christians I dare not name before you, it is the highest
confusion unto me to think there should be any: Yet I must tell you, we are
none of us without them, and so common amongst us, that we see them in the
Streets; see them within our Doors; meet with them in Public; meet with them
in Private; they fly not the shame of the open Air, and every corner seems
thronged with them: if I may not say, they are as numerous as before the coming
of our Redeemer; I will say, and boldly say, they are much more Foul and
Inexcusable.

Which Foulness of Sin in general, is my other consideration; and truly worthy
not a Moment, Hour, or Days Reflection; for our whole life, though never so
long, and full of Days, must be too short to enter into a just meditation of
it; so Dismal and so Dark is its Nature; so Venomous, so Outrageous its Effects.

It spoils and disrobes the Soul, though by Nature an Excellent Creature, and by
Grace a Singular Favorite of the Deity; Of all its Beauty, all its Sanctity,
all its Innocence: it makes it appear in the Eyes of the Almighty, most Ugly,
most Deformed, most Contemptible. It robs the Soul of the Blessed Inheritance
of Heaven; and in lieu of that, secures it of the just Wrath and Anger of his
offended God. In a Word, the proper effect of Sin, is to render the Soul like
unto its self, which being really nothing; for Whatsoever can challenge the
notion of a thing, was made by the Creator of all things; makes the Soul appear
also as nothing. Nothing in the Sight of God, nothing in his Favor, nothing in
his Good Will, nothing in Desert, nothing in any Right, by which it can justly
challenge either Natural, or Supernatural Good.

A Monster I may call it, for Man wrongs and inverts the course of Nature, as
often as he sins; and a Monster of that Malignity, as can hardly find its
equal. For such is its Primogeneous and innate Poison, that it certainly
destroys the Creature that gives it being; nothing under a rational Creature by
nature can be Author of a Sin; and at the same time he sins, he must
renounce his reason.

One only quality it has that can sound commendable, and even that augments the
misery of Man; that is, to be of its own nature eternal; for did not the Divine
Mercy interpose, whosoever sins, would be a Slave unto his sin for ever: But
Blessed for ever and ever, be the Goodness of the Eternal Father, who so loved
the World, that he would send, and not only send into the World his Son to be
charged with all those Sins you have heard me speak of; but to take upon
himself the cancelling of them all: And Blessed, I say, Blessed for ever be the
Goodness of his Son, who would come into this World, and give even the last
drop of his Blod for Man's Redemption.

After the infinity of the Divine Nature, and the incomprehensible excellencies
within himself, I can find no other ground for the immensity of the Divine
Charity toward his sinful Creatures, than the number, the greatness of their
Sins: for could the Divine Charity have been bounded with Limits, the Sins of
Man had certainly surpassed it; but far be it from the God we Christians adore,
to have his Goodness, his Bounty so contracted, as to be equaled or surmounted
by the Malice, by the Sins, though almost Infinite, of his Creatures.

Man's Sins were of themselves able to make him desperate; the desperateness of
his Condition touched unto the quick, if I may so express it; the Bowels of the
Divine Goodness, and that Goodness sent us a Redeemer. This Redeemer being come
into this World amongst Men, waged War with Sin, and at last overcame it in his
own Person, though it cost him dear. Without Drinking the bitter Cup of his
Passion it was not to be done; and from that, neither Peter's Kindness, nor any
other motive could keep him back. Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater non bibam
illum? The Chalice which my Father has given me, shall not I Drink it?

Had thou not Blessed JESUS, signified a dissatisfaction or displeasure at
Peter's forwardness to defend Thee, in my Wishes I should have joined with
Peter. Should I not be unjust unto all Mankind, who were partakers and sharers
of the blessings of thy Passion; or rather unjust to thy Divine Charity, which
made the brightest, and most radiant discovery of it self unto the world, that
it was capable of receiving? what is there I would not have done or suffered to
prevent the drinking of thy Chalice? But I am frighted! dare neither speak nor
wish! Thy reprehension of blessed Peter is always sounding in my ears: The
Chalice which my Father has given me, shall not I drink it? Yes, blessed
JESUS, drink it, comply with thy Fathers order; but teach us to do the like.

Well, the Resolution is taken; the Chalice he will drink, though never so
bitter; his ardent Charity has vanquished and put to flight all resistances, all
oppositions that intervened betwixt him and his Cross. He has nothing more to
act; he must be wholly passive: sufferings, and the most grievous of all
sufferings are the ingredients of his Chalice; which I will take apart, that
you may consider them the better: As a dissection in a solid body, so division
and taking apart the ingredients in others, makes the perfectest discovery. I
will let you see

What he Suffered in the garden of Gethsemani. What in the hands of the Jews.
What from the power of the Gentiles.
Again,

What from Himself. What from his Countrymen. What from Aliens and Strangers to
his Nation.
In a word, the division of my Discourse shall be the division of his Passion.

In the 1st. part I will lay before you, What he suffered precedently to his
seizure by his Enemies the Jews.
In my 2d. What He suffered from them.
In my 3d. What from the power and command of the Roman Governor.
What he suffered precedently to his Seizure by the Jews, may be reduced to
these Three Heads. His sufferings from his Disciples. From his Father. From
Himself.

All bitter sufferings, because from Friends; from such as he loved dearly.
That he loved his Disciples, you will not question. His choice of them, to be
partakers of all his Traversees here, to be sharers with him of his Adversity
and Prosperity, abundantly demonstrate.

That he loved his Father, must be more undoubted, of whom, though infinite in
himself, he received all his being; and to whom he had always paid all the
Honor he could Reverence him withal.

From the Treachery of a Disciple, his Passion was to commence; Amen, dico
vobis unus vestrum me traditurus est. Amen, I say unto you, one of you is about
to betray me. And whether is this Treachery to be? What does it strike at?
Where will be its end? Betray him into the hands of cruel and blood-sucking
Enemies. Into the Hands of such as thirst after his Life, there it strikes: And
who will never rest content until they have it; there it ends.

The manner of this Treachery also involves such unheard of Ingratitude and
Villainy, as can hardly be expressed; for it was meditating and acting in the
very instant that our Blessed JESUS was preparing a Banquet; Nay, What, do I
say a Banquet? when he was laying up a Kingdom for him.

The token by which it was to be executed, was a Kiss; Quemcunquoe osculatus
fuero, ipse est tenete eum. Whomsoever I shall kiss, he it is, lay hands on
him, and hold him fast. Hold him fast! Blind and Perfidious Traitor! Know
thou not he is not to be held, but by his own free will? Can thou so soon
forget how at other times his Enemies had no power over him, because he would
not? or, See thou not now, how all thy Armed Bands lie prostrate at his Feet,
at the very opening of his Mouth?

The unworthiness of this Action was such, to make use of the highest Token of
Friendship, of the very Seal of Peace, to Betray the Best of Friends, to
Commence open War withal, could not but move the Heart of the mildest of Lambs,
and draw from Him this gentle Expostulation; Juda osculo filium hominis tradis?
Judas, (My old Disciple, my Bosom Friend, who were daily Rising and Lying down
with Me: I bury in Silence what I have done More for thee) Do thou betray me
with a Kiss? Can thou be so Deceitful, as to make use of the highest Token of
Endearment, to express the Blackest Malice, and Vomit out thy Poison?

From the Infidelity again of a Disciple, in the midst of His Distress, when
the owning, at least of a Friend, might have afforded Him some small Comfort;
Is his Passion carried on, by a flat Denial; nay, Forswearing of any, though
the least Acquaintance. Coepit detestari and jurare quia non novisset hominem.
From the Tepidity and Negligence of altogether, in the Garden of Gethsemani,
was he deserted, and left alone, void of all Comfort, separate from all
Friends; desolate, distressed, and forlorn.

Such as should have Born up with Him, Confronted all his Dangers, and hazarded
(a Man would have thought) their small Fortunes for Him: Leave Him alone in the
open Air, dark Night, and already Trembling at the Approach of those, into
whose Hands He was immediately to Fall. They unconcerned betake themselves to
Rest, Indulge their heavy Humors; and some of them, though twice desired (by
their Master) for to Watch, still yield themselves up to Sleep and Rest. Non
potuistis una hora vigilare mecum? Well may He Reproach us all here present,
with the same Expression, Non potuistis una hora vigilare mecum? Could not you
watch one hour with me. You all know the Concern of Watching; your Enemy is
vigilant; Circuit quoerens quem devoret, (says St. Peter) He takes his rounds
to find whom he may devour; and for want of vigilance in you, has he so often
surpised you, and drawn you into Sin. Want of Vigilance has been the cause of
all your Treacheries, all your Denials, all your Neglects of my Commandments:
Had you Watched when you ought, you had never Betrayed Me like to Judas, Denied
Me like Peter, nor Quitted and Deserted Me like the rest of my Disciples, whose
Treachery, Denial, and supine Negligence, are the beginning of these my
Sufferings, and make up the Doleful Entry of my Passion.

That He Suffered, and grievously Suffered from his FATHER, His beloved FATHER,
we shall not need to seek far to find: What says the Evangelist St. John?
Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater, non vis ut bibam illum; The Chalice that my
Father has given me, shall not I drink it? His Father therefore prepared his
Bitter Chalice for Him? His Father lay the Injunction for to drink it. Calicem
quem dedit mihi Pater; The Chalice which my Father has given me.

It Is true, we found out the Matter, Our Sins, our Transgressions, our
Wickedness were the occasion; But it was the Eternal FATHER'S Goodness toward
His Adopted but Rebellious Children, that made Him be so Severe unto His Son,
that sent Him into this World, and here laid unto His Charge, whatsoever the
former were guilty of; and which could not be discharged, without His drinking
of the Chalice. Calicem quem dedit mihi Pater, non vis ut bibam illum? But,
What need of examining the Evangelist St. John, about the Point in question, if
there be any such? The Words of our dearest JESUS in the Garden of Gethsemani,
will make all as clear as Noonday. What was his Prayer unto Heaven, when he
parted a Stones cast from His chosen Disciples, which He left Posted at that
distance? What, I say, was his Prayer, but Pater si possibile est, transeat a
me calix iste; Father, (dearest FATHER, whom I never yet disobeyed, whose Will
has been always Mine) if it be possible, let this Chalice pass from me; Lay
not so heavy a Command on the Shoulders of Thy loving Son: Let not thy Anger
exert it self against my innocence. I know, dearest FATHER, Thou have ordered
it, but are Thy Decrees always immutable like thy Self? No, no, I remember thy
Threats, thy Menaces renversed upon Just Reasons; and, why not, at the
Petition, at the earnest Request of thy most Dutiful, and most Observant Son;
If it be possible, let this Chalice pass from me.

If this was his Prayer to his Father, if thus He repaired unto Him to be
Relieved from that Anguish, which began already to Rage within Him, to be
Protected, and Defended from that Storm, which was just discharging its self
upon his Head; it must be his Father's Anger and Severity He lay under, and His
Sufferings be the greater, that they were from such a Father.

Undoubtedly it was grievous to Suffer from Friends, and such were his
Disciples: More grievous to Suffer from a Father, and so Dear a Father; but to
Suffer from Himself, must needs exceed all other Sufferings, if that be once
made out, and nothing is more easy, by a plain Convincing reason; and by the
dire effects which were so terrible, and so surpassing all Belief, if not
delivered by an infallible Oracle; that whatsoever the Jews, the Gentiles cast
after on Him, of Reproach, Scorn, Contempt, bodily Affliction, and the like,
seem but trifles in comparison of them.

The Reason, by which I promised to Convince you of our JESUS Suffering, and
unexpressible Suffering from Himself, I draw from the nature of our Fancy,
whose Operation is so powerful and quick upon the Body, that, in an instant, I
may say, it influences the very utmost, and remotest Parts: We no sooner
apprehend what is pleasing and agreeable to our Humor, but we become all over
lightsom, and every Part of us shares of the Joy. No sooner, on the contrary,
is our Fancy possessed with the Apprehension of what is noxious and prejudicial,
but, in a moment, all our Mirth is dashed, our Joys fly from us, we become
Lumpish, Heavy, and Distracted: Nay, sometimes the power and faculty of Motion,
is by a secret Damp, either for the present seized, or for ever withdrawn.

And if this be the daily Experience of us all, upon airy and volatile
Apprehensions of good and evil; what must be the Operations of our Blessed
JESVS's Fancy, where fully, at large, and to the life, were set forth, all the
ignominious Treatments, all the Painful and Dolorous Expressions of Malice in
his Person, all the Torments in a word. His sacred Body was to run through,
during the whole Course of his Passion, even to His expiring on the Cross.

Nay, which is yet more, and which workt on him more, all the Sins of
unthankful Christians, all their Ingratitude, all their Neglects, and wilful
Omissions of improving their Souls by those his voluntary Sufferings.

I may ask the question, How strong, how violent, how forcing on the Body must
such a Fancy be, but none but He can answer it? So much did it exceed all our
Apprehensions, that we must come infinitely short of the Truth, had there not
been a considerable Discovery made by the Effects; which, as the Evangelists
deliver them, I will expose to your consideration.

When the Passion grows so strong upon us, that with difficulty it is kept in,
a fear or sadness of Mind (for example, Expresses it self in outward Action, in
change or alteration of Body;) it is a certain sign, an infallible Argument, it
touches to the Quick, seizes on the Spirit, begins to daunt and baffle our
natural Courage, which, in our Blessed SAVIOR, had been always exemplary in
the midst of dangers, in the throng of difficulties. At present
notwithstanding, so far is He prevailed upon; so much did the Apprehension of
what was to follow, work upon Him, that He found a real Change within Him. I
will not say, his Fortitude began to leave him, far be it from me to have any
such Thought; for that remained unshaken, till He expired on the Cross; but his
inferior Part began to express an inward Anguish, and a violent Oppression of
those Spirits, which had hitherto made him appear always Inalterable in his
Humor and Constitution. Coepit contristari, says St. Matthew, and moestus
esse; He began to be sad, and very much dejected. Nor was this all, for every
Moment increasing, it came to such a pitch, that Death could not be bitterer?
He gives us the Expression himself; Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem; My
Soul is sad, even unto Death. The Acerbity of my Anguish pinches me so, as the
violent Pangs of Death could do no more.

Blessed JESUS, I believe Thee, it was not for nothing the Angel came from
Heaven to Comfort thee. Appa^uit autem illi angelus de coelo confortans eum.
There was need enough of it, thy Soul was so straightened: Such Ebullitions and
AEstuations in thy Blood, that its Veins are not able to hold it longer; it
must force its way; and were there Walls of Brass or Iron, they could not keep
it within its Channels. Et factus est sudor ejus sicut guttoe sanguinis
decurrentis in terram; And his Sweat became like to drops of Blood falling on
the ground. Let the cause of it be either excess of Fear, or the fortitude of
his Mind endeavoring to repress it, it is all one with me, I am sure his Pains
were never the less. The inward Conflict that could force from him such a
Torrent of Blood, must so reverse and undermine the Fabric of his
Constitution, that nothing less than the Hand of the Almighty, could have
Supported him after such a Sweat, and given him strength to go through one
quarter of the difficulties he was speedily to encounter. I say speedily; for,
behold the Traitor Judas entering into the Garden, at the Head of a band of
Soldiers, Marching up toward Him with Swords, Clubs, and other such like
Instruments, as they could, with speed, gather up to Secure our Sampson, whose
Dalila, that is his Love, had already disarmed, and disabled from making a
Defense. Ecce Judas unus de duodecim venit, and cum eo turba multa cum gladiis
and fustibus. So that it is not long before they Seize him; before they lay
violent hands upon him: Tunc accesserunt, and manus injecerunt in Jesum and
tenuerunt eum; Then they came nearer, cast their hands on Jesus, and held him
fast. And his Sufferings there make up the second part of that Tragedy I
promised to Represent unto you at this present time; and which, because I will
continue my former Method, I will distinguish also into parts,

What He Suffered before his Condemnation. What by His Condemnation it self.
What after.
Before his Condemnation was, the whole Treatment he received from Judas his
Band of Cutthroats, as he was hurrying along to the Palaces of Annas and
Caiphas; as likewise in their Houses, by Violence on his Person, and Infamy of
False-Witnesses, before the Sentence of Death past on him.

Judas had given them a Caution to hold him fast; and therefore, no sooner had
they Seized him, but with Cords and Ropes, they bound his Hands, and with such
force drew them both together, that no small impressions they Engraved on his
tender Flesh; His sacred Feet they loaded not with Irons, but, For what reason,
out of mercy or tenderness to his Person? Nothing less. It was their Malice,
that they might, with greater speed, bring Him before his New-Erected Judges,
sooner to his Trial, with more Expedition to his End. And therefore, instead of
giving their New-made Prisoner leave to walk soberly in their company, with
other Ropes, about Neck and Body, they Forced him along, with much more Have
and Violence, than could be convenient for such a Prisoner, as had not the use
of one Hand left him, to Raise him up again, in case he should stumble in the
Way.

It Is not long before He arrived at the House of Annas, Father-in-Law to
Caiphas, High Priest of that year, whether they first conducted Him, both by
reason his House was in the way, and that he was a considerable Person, as
appears by his so near Alliance with the High Priest: Where, though we read but
little Acted; it is not to be doubted, but his Pride and Arrogance, drew from
him many Impertinent, if not Impious Questions: And the Insolence of the Rabble
continuing, or rather every moment Increasing, they heaped on Him Injuries
answerable to what the Holy Scriptures relate, to have been afterward
expressed from their Malice. But the Seniors of the People, together with the
Scribes, being Assembled at the Highpriests Palace, He was soon dispatched
thither. Et misit eum Annas ligatum ad Caipham pontificem; And Annas sent him
bound to Caiphas the High Priest.

Where He might justly expect all Illegal and Unconscionable Proceeding from
these following Reasons. First of all it was Caiphas, at whose Bar He must now
stand that Prophesied his Death. 2ly. It was he that persuaded them to Seize
Him, and put Him to Death. 3ly. It was at his House, where all the Princes of
the Priests, with the Ancients of the People were Assembled, and on design
Assembled, to use all sort of deceit, and fraudulent ways; both to lay Hold of
Him, and make Him away. Et concilium fecerunt, says St. Matthew, ut Jesum dolo
tenerent and occiderent. 4ly. They had Bought Him of the Traitor Judas, though
they had nothing of Truth to lay unto his Charge. And Lastly, They let Him
still remain in the hands of the Rabble, whose Barbarity was such, that nothing
wanted Execution, that came but into their Fancies, though the most brutish,
and transcendently unnatural Violences.

And as He might justly expect the height of Illegality, and Violence from the
Precedent Heads, so he met with all in the height. He failed not of his
Expectations in the least; His usage was beyond all parallel.

As nothing of Injustice and Invention was wanting in the High Priest, and
those of his diabolical Council; so nothing of Baseness and Abusiveness, was
omitted by his Black-Guard, and such as every Moment flocked thither, to be
either Spectators, or Sharers in his Examinations and Trial.

The High Priest, sitting as Judge, and Paramount above the rest, swelling with
Pride, as well he might, undertaking to Judge the JUDGE of the World; first
asked Him questions about his Disciples, and concerning his Doctrine. Pontifex
ergo, says St. John, interrogavit Jesum de Discipulis suis, and de doctrina
ejus.

But finding not his Advantage there; for, What could he draw from the Mouth of
Truth, whose Accustion was designedly to be built up of lies and falsities?
Blind he was to personate Authority; to usurp upon Innocence, and Him that had
all Power in His Hands, if He had pleased to make use of it; but not so blind,
as to think he could gain any thing upon the answer of his Prisoner; and
therefore, betakes himself to the only means applicable in such cases;
Falsities, Lies, Impostures, Perjuries, and the like: False Witnesses must be
brought; their Allegations must be taken; their Testimonies must run current;
their Oaths unquestionable; the pretended truth of what they delivered, looked
on as sacred; by no contrary Evidence disputed, and abundantly sufficient to
Found a Sentence; nay, a sentence of Death on. Principes autem sacerdotum and
omne concilium querebant falsum testimonium contra Jesum, ut eum morti
traderant.

O Blessed JESUS! How is thy Life searched after! How is thy Innocence traduced!
How do thy Enemies now vomit forth their Malice! For, What greater Malice can
there be, than knowingly and wittingly to make use of the blackest and foulest
of Means, for the Oppression of Innocence it self? Had He been a Malefactor, or
open Enemy to their Nation, there were Eyes enough to have discovered it, and
no Will wanting to have published and made it known: But there is no such thing
as yet alleged, False Witnesses must do the turn, if possible, for True ones,
they are not to be found; none in being, and so not to be Subpoened in: Yet Die
He must, Guilty He is; and since that Judas has received Money for Him, he must
not Escape his doom. To Evidencing therefore they go; upon Interrogatories they
make their Answers: But, upon a sudden, all their Designs are crampt; all
their Endeavors blasted; all their Hopes are dashed. For, so little care had
been taken in their Instructions; so small regard of an Uniformity in their
Lessons, that, what one Asserted, the other Contradicted; what one Avouched, a
second positively Denied. Multi enim testimonium falsum dicebant adversus eum,
and convenientia testimonia non erant.

At which, the Judge enraged, no less unreasonably, than impertinently, demands
of his Prisoner at the Bar, Why He made no Answer to what was alleged against
Him? Whereas, indeed, there was nothing to answer to: For, if the Witnesses
agree not; if there be jarring in the Testimony given, the Accusation falls of
it self, and stands for nothing. Make therefore first thy Witnesses agree proud
Priest, and then make thy Demand; then make use of that, thy Confidence in
asking Him, Why he Answers nothing: But the occasion is now lost; the
Opportunity, even of a shadow-like Conviction is let slip, and their Cause must
fall, if our JESUS himself will not advance one step toward it; and rather
than be cleared, He will advance much father; for the Chalice his Father gave
Him, must not pass without his drinking it. Calicem quem dedit mihi, non bibam
illum?

His Reply to the Highpriests following question, and last refuge, put them
all at Ease; for fretting within himself, and seeing nothing would prevail, he
falls again upon his Interrogatories; and with his Adjuro te per Deum vivum ut
dicas nobis si tu es Christus filius Dei; I conjure thee by the living God,
that thou tell us, if thou art Christ the Son of God: Drew from our Blessed
JESUS, that Tu dixisti, Thou have said it; which put an end to all their
solicitude and doubts; freed them of all their cares and fears of his Escape;
occasioned the Highpriests rending of his Garments; made him presently Guilty
of Blasphemy, in his Judgment; and Blasphemy deserved Death, according to the
Law. Whereupon, the Sentence is pronounced by the Voice of the whole
Assemsembly, Crying out, Reus est mortis, He is guilty of death.

He now stands a Condemned Person, and Affronts will soon be redoubled on Him:
If, before his Condemnation, a stander by, in presence of the Judge, and face
of the whole Court, could be so Insolent, as to strike Him over his divine
Countenance, without the least repremand; I wonder not, if they think all
Things lawful afterward. A Summary I will give you, and the best Account I am
able of their Indignities, Villainies, and furious Assaults on his sacred
Person, after a word or two, of that so unjust, illegal, and precipitated
Sentence.

As nothing, in this world, can be dearer to us, than our Lives, nothing in
equal value with our Being; so nothing can be equally injurious, equally
pernicious, with what robs us of our Being, bereaves us of our Lives. From
whence, every unjust Sentence unto Death, let it be by what sinister means
soever, it values not, is the highest of Injuries, the most execrable of
Malices, the blackest of Inhumanities: And that, in this Sentence, whatsoever
could render it Just was wanting, nothing can be more evident: For the Judge
was wholly void of authority over the Person Condemned; no Crime made out
against the Prisoner; all Witnesses Suborned and Perjured; and even those not
agreeing in their Testimonies, and Judgment given by the Accusers and the
Rabble. Well then may it be asserted, That our SAVIOR'S Sufferings, in his
Condemnation, were very grievous, and beyond Expression.

To conceive it something better, pray imagine with your selves, any private
Person Usurping such Authority over his Neighbor, as upon presumption of his
own Interest, Will, or Pleasure, should force or compel him to the place of
Execution, and there Throttle him with a Halter, Cut his Throat, or the like:
You will take that Man to be a very great Sufferer in the case, and the
Execution to be a heinous, nay, hellish Action: Yet it is no more, than every
unjust Sentence unto death; nor is the Person so Condemned, a less Sufferer:
For, it is all one and the same thing to Condemn to Death, and effectually Rob
one of his Life; and he that gives the Sentence in his Chair, turns the Ladder,
and gives the Blow with the Executioner, in the place, whither the pretended
Criminal is brought to Suffer.

But what need I use so many words about his Suffering in his Condemnation: You
are sufficiently convinced of the enormity of the Action, of the foulness of
the Injury; and therefore, I will now go on, and see what passed after.

The Evangelist St. Matthew, and the Prophet Isaiah, both relate the Injuries;
neither of them, all, nor both together, all; yet both enough to imprint in us
a Sense, if we be not past all Sense, of that dismal Night, in which the Light
of the World was Ecclips't; the Beauty of Heaven defiled; Innocence it self
mocked and derided; Patience exceeding all its common notions, born down and
trampled on.

I will begin with that Divine Face, on which the Angels desire to look; and
which was so coveted by the Ancient Patriarcks, that they longed after it, as
the fullness of Happiness. Ostende faciem tuam and salvi erimus. This same
Countenance, though never so res^lendent in its self; though the seat of all
excellencies and graces, are they so unmannerly and dirty, as to load with
their filthy spittle: Tunc expuerunt in faciem ejus. Of what others from whom
Modesty is not wholly banished, search for corners and private holes to
discharge their stomachs do they make his Face, his Blessed Face the common
receptacle and sink; which when all fouled by their ordures and filthyness, and
become an unfit spectacle to the World, they cover with some beastly or nasty
clout, that he might not see the injuries they were resolved to heap upon him
after: But alas, they are blind, not He; They see not what they do, when with
such outrages they assault the Lamb of God, and contest who shall abuse him
most, who shall show most wit, and forwardness in adding to the Calamities of
our now helpless SAVIOR.

Blind then as they are, do they load his Head with blows; his Cheeks do they
pull and buffet, and at the same time illuding him with Mockeries, and
insulting with Rudeness, cry out, Prophecy unto us CHRIST, who it was that
stroke thee. Tunc expuerunt in faciem ejus, and colaphis eum ceciderunt. Alii
autem palmas in faciem ejus dederunt, dicentes prophetiza nobis Christ, quis
est qui te percussit.

Devout Perusers of the Particulars of our SAVIORS Passion, and such as
delight with the fullest draught of his Sufferings, enquire about the
difference between buffetting with Cuffs, and strokes with the palms of the
Hands; both which are expressed by the Evangelist in our Suffering-JESUS
present treatment: And they resolve Buffetting to be by clinched fists, when
fingers are drawn up together to render the Blow more violent and penetrating;
and those they discharged with all fury on his Head; whereas with palms, is the
same, as with strechtout Fingers, and with those they spared not his Cheeks: So
that what between the one and the other, we may conclude both Head and Face,
with those violent contusions, not only sore to extremity, but even swollen to
admiration.

Whilst their Hands were so busy, you may be sure their Tongues were not
silent; but on the contrary, restless in vomiting out all manner of Calumnies,
nay, even Blasphemies against his Sacred Person: They were so ungrateful, or
rather so ungodly, as to exprobate and reproach him of his former Actions of
Goodness and Charity, of which he had bin so profuse amongst them. The
Evangelists bury most of their expressions in silence; but to assure us that
such passed, and also in abundance, St. Luke commends to posterity these words:
Et alia multa Blasphemantes dicebant in eum: And Blaspheming they spoke many
other things against Him.

The Night thus passing in Abuses from the scum and dreggs of the People,
without any rest or quiet, though for a moment altogether tired and weary, early
in the Morning is he presented again unto the Council, which confirming by a
second Condemnation what had passed over night; he is again bound, and
presently dispatched away, with the whole multitude of People attending, and
ready to run him down with their numbers, if their Judgment should be called in
Question by the Roman Governor; for they delivered him unto Pilate only to see
and order Execution; not to examine, or make inspection into their Sentence, as
St. Leo observes in his eighth Sermon on the Passion.

O Blessed Jesus! How art thou hurried from one place to another! from Annas to
Caiphas! From him again to Pilate! First into the hands of thy People the
Jews, now from them again into the hands of Forraigners; of Strangers to thy
Nation, and who always regarded them as a tumultuous and headstrong People:
So that little mercy can be expected now. If thy own People have been so Cruel,
what can be hoped from a People whose Education and Principles savored nothing
of gentleness, nothing but roughness, and severity?

He is now in the hands of Pilate, and only remains to see what was done by
him, by whose Order was acted the last; and withal, the most Cruel and Bloody
part of all the Tragedy. So that pray arm your selves with patience now to hear
a piece of Cruelty, Infidelity, and Villainy that surpasses all degrees of
moderation; such as neither former days have, nor posterity shall represent
the like: Such as are able to soften hearts molded of Flint or Steel, and such
as an ocean of Tears will not evidence a sufficient and answering resentment.

When you have heard them, I know your hearts will work. I will therefore
particularize these last and mortal Suffering of our SAVIOR; by considering

What He Suffered whilst in the hands of Pontius Pilate. What from the Roman
Soldiers. What upon the Cross.
It Is true, the Roman Governor scrupled at the first to execute what they
pressed; he seemed backward to inflict the ultimate of Disgraces and Torments
on a Person, of whose Faultiness he was no ways convinced; and therefore not
only begged their excuse, till he had thoroughly examined his Guiltiness, and
approved his Demerits; but moreover, stuck not to declare him Innocent and
Guiltless upon Examination; that he found no cause of death, nor such their
deadly malice, and therefore would dismiss him. Ego nullam invenio in eo causam
mortis.

But he wanting courage to persist unto the end, their cries sounding and
redoubling in the Air; their importunities every moment increasing; their
instances, their demands urged and repeated, weaken his Resolutions, invalidate
his first purposes, make him dubious and thoughtful what to do. Howsoever, he
will make experience, if by any means they may be drawn from that their violent
way of proceeding, and by cunning disarmed of their malicious intentions; and
therefore asks them which they would have freed, Barabbas an infamous
Murderer, or JESUS, whom they had lately committed to his custody, as the
custom was to set one free, whom they should demand on such Festival times;
with exactness he examined all their Accusation, discovered it; a whole Fabric
of Malice of the Priest and Ancients, built upon the easiness of the common
People; could find not the least plausible ground for a well-laid Accusation;
and therefore, with difficulty, could believe they should be so shameless, as
to prefer the most noted, and blasted of Malefactors, before the mildest and
most Innocent of Prisoners. But he mist in his design, his project took no
effect; for having now so long run on beyond the bounds of modesty, honor and
conscience, they stick not to petition the discharge of Barabbas; and tremble
not with brazen Faces, to reiterate their impious Postulations of having JESUS
to be Crucified, At illi magis clamabant dicentes Crucifigatur.

Blessed and dearest JESUS! What pass art Thou now come to? or rather, to what
degree of Impiety and Ingratitude are these thy People arrived? Thee, the true
SAVIOR of Mankind; the true Deliverer of thy People from the endless Slavery
of the infernal Tyrant; they Choose and pre-Elect to Torments, to the Death of
the Cross, by preferring a Thief, a Murderer, and vilest of Malefactors before
Thee.

Pilate is not yet quite discouraged, he has one Invention more; he would do
Him a Pleasure, but mixed with so much Gall, that I leave you to judge, whether
the Remedy be preferable to the Disease. He will endeavor to Mollify their
stubborn Hearts with such a Spectacle, as should certainly have the desired
Operation, if any such could be wrought: And therefore, causes the pretended,
though Falsely pretended Criminal to be Whipped and Scourged to that degree, that
All his Body resembled but one Ulcer: It was not only Wounded, but even
Harrowed all over; All was Raw, Bloody, nay, even divided piece from piece; and
in this Plight does he bring Him forth, exposes Him to their View, and then bid
them look on the MAN, they had so grinded their Teeth at. Ecce Homo; Behold the
Man, that must now at least be a greater Object of Pity, than Hatred. Consider
now (says he) if you can desire more; if your Cries be at an end; if this
lamentable Spectacle be further worthy your wrath and choler.

But he comes a far short in this, as in his former Stratagem; they are so far
from Relenting, that their Fury becomes more Fiery; their Rage grows stronger:
And, because he stumbles at their Requests, they begin to storm and threaten:
Si hunc dimittis non es amicus Caesaris; If thou dismissest this Man, thou art
no friend of Caesar's: At which, the Faint-hearted Governor wholly relents; and
though against his Conscience, against a particular Disswasion of his Wife,
against all the Rules of Honesty and Worth, gives way, yields to their Desires,
and Delivers up the Prisoner into the hands of the Soldiers; first to be
treated at their Will and Pleasure, then to be Crucified.

The Soldiers have got Him now into their Hands; and, What Soldiers, but the
Romans? Such as had always Testified, both in Words and Actions, the highest
Hatred against the Jews. So that, no Mercy now to be exhibited from such a pack
of Hell Hounds, who with Eyes rolling, Mouths open, Fury in their looks and
countenance, Assault Him all manner of ways. His yet crude, and, but at most,
half-dry'd Wounds, must be again laid open by a violent Stripping him of those
Garments, which, for a little time, had Defended his torn and ulcerated Flesh;
so that now all Bleeds afresh, and the Dolor is renewed, first rising from so
barbarous a Dilaceration of his Body: But it is not long to remain in that
condition; it must be covered with a Purple Garment, after the manner of Kings,
and great Ones, in Derision of what he had asserted of Himself. And to carry on
the Metaphor to their present Satisfaction, though to his unspeakable Torment,
they will place a Crown upon his Head, and a Scepter in his Hand; but the
Crown, was no other than of Thorns, nay, of sharpest and Iron'd Thorns for
hardness, which was laid on with so great violence, that it pierced through his
Temples, through his Scull into his Brains.

Think dearest Christians! think what now He Suffers in this Condition! What
Pangs, what Agonies he must feel! Now call to mind his Sweat in the Garden of
Gethsemani, and tell me, if all this foreseen, was not a sufficient, nay, an
abundant Cause of such a Sweat. If your Fountains of Water be not dried up,
your Tears must now be visible. Had you but a Father, Husband, Brother, or any
other Friend, but in half so Miserable, so Calamitous a Condition; How would
you wring your Hands, tear your Hair, pour forth whole Floods of Tears, make
your Clamours reach the Heavens, beg, and on your Knees still beg some Redress,
some Relief for this your Distressed Friend? And, Can you do nothing of all
this for your Bleeding JESUS? Can you be Eyewitnesses unconcerned, and not
bewail the heavy Sighs and Sobs of your fainting SAVIOR? Can you All sit here
like Rocks unmoved, and see the Best of Friends, in the most Deplorable of
Conditions, and that out of purest Love for you, and not be ready to sink down
for Grief?

The Scepter they gave Him in his Hand, was no other then a Reed, to express
the Floating, and Tottering condition of his Empire: And then thus Clad, thus
Crowned, thus Sceptered; He must be also Reverenc't and Worshipped with bended
Knee; and accordingly, they bent their Knees before Him, Saluting Him with the
highest of Scorn; Ave Rex Judaeorum; Hail King of the Jews. One only Thing
could then seem wanting, that savours Soveraignity, and that is, Exhibition of
Tribute; but that they paid Him in a Smarting Coin, Multiplying their Blows
upon his Crown, to make it surer and faster on his Head.

Thus Glutted, thus Satiated with their unheard of Cruelty, they go on to
Execute the Tyrants Orders. I know there are many Authors say, That all this
was Acted before his Ostension to the Jews, and Dismission of Pilate; and they
Found themselves on St. John's Relation; but because St. Matthew seems to me
more full than the other Evangelists, I have traced him in point of History:
And besides, it lessens nothing our JESUS Sufferings, whether before or after:
For, Whipped he was, Crowned he was, had a Scepter delivered into his Hand; was
Saluted on the Knee, and received the Tribute of their hard-hearted Malice on
his Head. And then what could remain, but his Fastening on the Cross, to put an
end unto his Sufferings, the Jews Malice, the Tyranny of the Gentiles. To
which, that nothing might be missing, they violently again divest him of his
Purple Robe, by that means, the third time opening of his Wounds; Cloth him
slightly with his own Apparel; and his now altogether Fainting, and almost
Expiring Self, do they Load with that unweildy Beam, that heavy Cross, on which
He was to Suffer, and complete this Bloody Tragedy. When Laden, with Kicks,
Stripes, Spurns, and other suchlike Violences, they Force him along; till
quite overcome by so great a weight he can stir no farther, but must leave his
burden there, if not assisted: But assisted he shall be, though with an
uncharitable assistance; for otherwise they lose their aim, their design is
spoiled, what they all conspired would fall to the ground. Simon therefore the
Cyrenean coming that way, they seize on, and force him to bear the Cross unto
Mount Calvary; our Isaac walking by that was to be Immolated on it.

Where being arrived, the Cross is then laid on the ground; and several of the
Executioners laid violent hands upon this Holocaust; unmercifully again disrobe
him, fit his Limbs unto the Wood, and with force of Ropes stretch them forth to
make them answer the proportion, and distances of the holes they had bored
before; which done, the doleful and dismal music begins to play; the strokes
of the Hammers on the Nails; and the Nails through the Sacred Hands and Feet of
our Crucified JESUS: For now I may so style Him, being now fastened on the Cross.

O Blessed JESUS! Whatsoever may be the sentiments of those that put Thee to
this Torment; howsoever they may undervalue and vilify Thy Person; I adore Thee
with all Humility imaginable; and in my thoughts, prostrate before Thee, tender
Thee all the acknowledgments of a Creature, of a Vassal, of a Slave. The more
vile Thou have made Thy Self for my sake; the greater and fuller in all duty
ought to be my return; and therefore with lower submissions do I throw my self
at the foot of Thy Cross, whilst bearing thy Divine Self, then at the Throne of
Thy Tryumphant Majesty in Heaven.

Anatomists and Chyrurgeons to whom the Mysteries of Humane bodies lie open and
discovered, are harmonious in this Truth, that the Nerves and Sinews do more
abound, and center in the Feet and Hands than in any other part of the Body
whatsoever. Perforations therefore, and all violent Impressions must be much
more quick and sensible in those Parts, the Pain much more Intolerable; yet
were our Blessed JESUS both Hands and Feet pierced, and bored through with Nails
of such a magnitude, as were able not only to secure him to the Wood of the
Cross, but even to bare up and support the weight of all his Body, when erected
into the Air: And where the weight of his own Blessed Self always pressing on
his Wounds, must be a continual widening of them; and so every moments renewing
of the Torment of the Nails first forcing entry.

I omit to tell you, how the letting fall of the Cross into the case previously
made ready in the ground to secure its standing firm, could not but be terrible
and convulsive of the whole Fabric, shaking all that at once, of which not one
part wanted its particular Torment.

And now He is on the Cross, all bloody, all torn to pieces, a frightful
spectacle to behold, is he now free from the malice and fury of his Enemies?
Nothing less. It Is true, he is now no more in their hands to be farther
buffetted and beaten with either open or clinched fists: But they still
prosecute him with what weapons they are able to make use of. For his greater
defamation and reproach, they hang a Thief at each hand of him, and then let
fly their envenomed Tongues against Him. What scurrilous mocks, and sarcasms
do they not make use of? What jeers, flouts and scoffings, do they forbear to
throw at him? Not satisfied with his precedent mockeries and derisions from the
Jews in the House of Caiphas; From Herod and his Battallions; From Pilates
Soldiers after his delivery to them, as if nothing had yet passed in that
kind, they begin a fresh. First the common Jews, with a Vah, qui destruis
templum Dei and in triduo aedificas illud, salva temetipsum. Thou who
destroyest the Temple of God, and rebuildest it in three days, save thy self.
Again the High Priests, Principes sacerdotum illudentes cum scribis and
senioribus dicebant, alios salvos fecit, seipsum non potest salvum facere. The
Princes of the Priests illuding with the Scribes and Seniors said, He has saved
others, himself he cannot save. The very Thieves that hanged with him
Improperabant ei. And the Roman Soldiers would not be out, Illudebant autem ei
and milites. From all sorts and degrees he was pursued to his end, who suffered
and died for Persons of all degrees and conditions.

Much longer he cannot bare their Calumnies and Injuries, his nature is almost
spent; and a drought from the loss of so much Blood seizes him all over, and to
such an excess, as forced from him, Sitio, I am thirsty. He was overcome with a
double thirst; The one Corporal in his Body for want of Moisture: The other yet
more Violent in his Soul, by which he thirsted after the Good and Salvation of
Mankind. Which thirst was the occasion of the other, and of giving up his Life;
as soon after you will hear he did.

The first was but ill Answered; for instead of some comfort for his now
drooping and decaying Spirits, they give him Gaul a^^ (...) Vinegar to Drink,
that his very taste might not lon^ privileged above his other Senses. But I
hope all you here present will supply the latter; be more grateful unto him,
and charitable to your selves. Apply his warm Blood, and scattered Flesh unto
your Souls; they are all Sovereign for your Wounds, and no Balsom like to them.

Having no refreshment nor recruit of Forces from that bitter Potion; a general
failure, and total dejectedness of Spirits work on his inferior part, and
makes it cry out; My God! My God! Why have thou deserted me! And now even
withdrawn thy all-supporting Hand, by the Virtue and Power of which alone, I
have hitherto with courage run through all my now-past Sufferings. After which
finding an immediate dissolution of his Corporal being coming on, he Published
to the World, he had now drank the Chalice his Father gave him, and completed
the Work of Man's Redemption, with a Consummatum est. And then commending
himself to his same dear Father, with a Pater in manus tuas commendo Spiritum
meum; He delivered up the Ghost.

O dearest JESUS, art thou gone from us? Have thou now left us? Could we not
secure Thee to our selves even fastened on the Cross? Our past and daily sins
have bin the occasion of this thy retirement; for our sins brought Thee from
Heaven; cast Thee into a sweat of Blood, and then betrayed Thee. Our sins bound
Thee fast, dragged Thee along to Annas, then Caiphas Palace; there buffetted,
beat Thee, and spit in Thy Face. Our sins produced false Witnesses, and gave
sentence of Thy Death. Our sins farthermore delivered Thee into the Hands o^
Gentiles, there with reiterated Crucifigatures presse^^^^d urged the Execution
of the Judgment rendered: Our Sins Scourged, Crowned, and Derided Thee: Our Sins
so Oppressed Thee, that Thou could no longer support the heaviness of the
Cross: Our Sins afterward nailed Thee fast on the same Cross; drew upon Thee
an excessive Drought, and forced that Separation of Soul and Body, we have just
now taken Notice of.

But most blessed and dearest JESUS, as our Sins have made Thee for a time
withdraw, may our Duty, our Observance soon bring Thee back again; the very
inanimate and dumb Creatures have given Us our Lesson; in their Language they
were not silent. Pray hearken to St. Matthew, behold the Veil of the Temple was
rent into pieces, from the top to the bottom; the Earth did quake, the Rocks
parted asunder: But, Did not the Heavens also Testify their Resentments? Yes,
yes, and that to the Admiration of the World. St. Luke proclaims, for a
certainty, That Darkness overspread the Face of the Earth, and the Sun denied
its Light, willing to Expire, at the same time, with the SON of Justice. When
Men had lost all Sense of what they were doing, the Earth, the Rocks, the
Temple, as if bursting with inward Grief, could contain themselves no longer.
The Sun, the Stars ashamed at their Proceedings, not only hang the Universe
with the deepest Mourning, but covered all the Elements with the blackest, and
profoundest Darkness, that they might not be Witnesses of Man's Actions.

May our hitherto hardened Hearts, like the Rocks and Temple, burst asunder in
compliance with the Desires of our now dead SAVIOVR. May the Old Man of Sin
within us, like the Earth, now Tremble to think, he must part from, so long,
and continued a Possession; let the SON that illuminateth every Man coming into
this World, so Dispell all inward darkness of our Souls, that we may clearly
and distinctly see what He has suffered for us, and what He expects from us.
Let the favorable Influences of Heaven so Dispose us, that we may fully Answer
all his Expectations.

Think, but think seriously, if you can do too much for Him that has done so
much for you. What were all your Lives, though I must confess, you have nothing
dearer, and more precious, if put in Balance with His? Yet He spared it not
for you. He prodigally spilt his Blood, that He might Purchase you a plentiful
Redemption: He abounded in his Mercies, that you might see the Fullness of his
Heart: He has bought you at such a Price, that the World cannot afford the
like. Permit not then such a Purchase to become void; let not such Mercies be
thrown away, nor such a Price be slighted.

Run, run unto his Body, yet hanging on the Cross; Embrace it with all the
Affections of your Souls; Offer up all your Vows; Promise to Crucify Him no
more; Consecrate your selves His most devoted and faithful Servants from this
Moment, and for ever; and you will crown his Sufferings; this his voluntary and
frank Oblation of himself to Death, with a no less joyful than happy
Resurrection.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS, Printed for, and Sold by Matthew Turner.
THe Speeches of all the Priests that Dyed for Religion. Folio.

A Letter to a Baron of England, touching his then Royal-Highness. Folio.

Trial of Mr. David Lewis, a Jesuit, and his last Speech. Folio.

Trial of Mr. Francis Johnson, a Franciscan, and his last Speech. Folio.

An Abstract of the Trial of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Fol.

Mr. Richard Langhorn's Memoires, and his last Speech. Fol.

A Narrative of the late pretended Popish Plot, to the Tune of Packington's
Pound, Engraved and Represented on Copper Plates, in two Parts.

Counsels of Wisdom, or the Maxims of Solomon: Done out of French. Twelves.

Christian Thoughts for every Day in the Month. Twenty-Fours.

The Papist Misrepresented and Represented. Quarto.

Acts of the Clergy of France. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, by the Reverend Bishop
of Meaux; done out of French. Quarto.

A Sermon preached before Their Majesty's, on the Annunciation of the B. V.
Mary, by John Betham, Doctor of Sorbonne; Published by His Majesty's Command.


