A RECORD OF SOME PERSECUTIONS Inflicted upon some of the Servants of the Lord
in SOVTH-WALES, with the sufferings of many for not paying Tithes, not
repairing Steeple Houses, and for not coming to the Steeple Houses.

Also the fruits of some of the Priests who are called Ministers of the Gospel
in South Wales, and Pembrook-shire, where some persecution has been at
Harford-west, which in short is here also mentioned, which has not been
brought to public view till now.

Spoil^rs shall come from the North, which shall spoil Babylon, Jer. 51.48. I
have raised one from the North, and he shall come upon the Princes, and as the
Potter treads clay, Isa. 41.25. Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come
from the North, Jer. 13.20. They have persecuted me, and they will also
persecute you, and take joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves, that you have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance, Jo. 15.20.
Heb. 10.3. These things they will do to you for my Names sake, John 15.21. By
Francis Gawler.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

TO THE READER:
READER,
WIthin these few years the Lord God Almighty was pleased to send many of his
dear and faithful Servants (according to his own promise) to visit his own seed
in South Wales, where were some who had long waited for them, hearing the sound
of the Lords Trumpet, Isa. 41.25. Jer. 13.20. in the beginning of the Lords
work it this Nation by his dear and faithful Servants, who (by the Lord) some
of them were moved to come into South Wales where they were received with joy
and gladness of heart, because the shout of a King was among them, and the
Mighty power of the Lord did carry them on in great strength and boldness to
fight his own battle with the weapons which are not carnal, but spiritual and
mighty through God, to the bringing down of strong holds and immaginations to
the obedience of him who is the light of the World, and lighteneth every man
that comes into the World, John 1 9. John 8.12 the which has been denied by
the chief Priests and false proph^ts who are called Ministers of the Gospel in
South Wales; but are now made manifest in the day of the Lords appearance to be
blind guides and hirelings, who do uphold the worship of the Beast in the
Idols Temple where God dwells not, nor is worshipped with the work of men's
hands, Acts 17.24, 25. and for declaring against such have the servants of the
Lord been imprisoned by the complaint of the Priests, who could not stand in
battle to fight, but (like hirelings) some of them fled before half their
Sermons were ended; so fear surpized the hearts of the Hypocrites, as says the
Scriptures, Isa. 33.14. Pro. 28. 1 John 10 12, 13. The Hypocrite flees when
none pursues, and the hireling flees because he is a hireling.

And such was the fear of the blind guides that they prevailed with the
Magistrates to have a guard upon their Steeple-house doors, that none should be
permitted to come in, but such as have the mark of the Beast in their
foreheads; And for declaring against them, did some of the Magistrates imprison
and chain by the legs, the servants of the Lord, who in boldness did declare
the Word of the Lord, denying the Kingdom of the D^vil, who has cast many of
the children of the Lord into prison in this Nation, and thereby the Scripture
of truth was f^lfiled, Rev 2, 10. And the imprisonments of many in South Wales
is here laid d^wn which is a Record of some S^fferings which has been k pt,
(...) bro^ght to pu^lick view till now, and it is not a thing that w^ have done
hastily, but long have waited in it, and now (having opport^nity) we tho^ght it
good so to do, not in any evil intent against th^^; for we are taught to do
go^d for evil, and the des^re of our hearts is, that this may be a warning into
them that they may do so no more, and so read this over in the cool of their
spirits, wherein is laid down the actings they have acted in their rage and
heat of their spirits, which is condemned by the light, which is the
condemnation of the World, (out of which we are redeemed, and stands on top of
it) ^ohn 3 19 and we count it great joy that we are found worthy to suffer
for the Name of the Lord, who sent his M^sseng^rs among us to preach the
everlasting Gospel freely without money or price, as his Servants, M^ssengers
and Prophets did in former ages, as the scriptures of truth does bear witness,
Jsa 55.12. Luke 10.3. Mat 1^.8, 9. the which is now fulfilled, at which the
Priests, blind guides and hirelings are tormented, whose Gospel is not without
a price in the parish where they preach it, sixty, eighty an hundred more or
less, as they can agree; and they that preach it fight, strike, and p^l by the
hair of the head such as declare against them* And if any deny to pay them
their wages, to the value of ten pence, they cast them into prison, and some of
their wives have learned of them to do the same, as will plainly appear by the
reading this Book.

Written by us who in scorn (by the blind guides and their hearers) are called
QUAKERS.

A record of some sufferings in South Wales, etc.
JOhn ap John being at a meeting in a Cardiff in the County of Clamorgan, by
the command of Henry Griffith a baptist, called Captain Griffith, was brought
before him in the Castl^ of Cardiff, who having no power to commit him to
Prison himself, sent some Soldiers with him to Richard Sheares one of the
Bailiffs of Cardiff, who being a harmless man, it was thought he kept out of
the way; then by the Soldiers he was brought before Roger Sheares, Bailiff,
who had but little desire to persecute him; but the next day by the persuasion
of the Priests, the Bailiffs joined with George Morgan, and committed him to
prison with others, namely, Francis Gawler, John Mayo, Toby Hodge of Cardiff,
where they continued a few days, and afterward let forth and never brought to
trial.

Again John ap John for standing in the Steeple house in Swans^y in the same
County a witness against Evan Griffeth, called a Minister, was haled forth by
the hair of the head by J. Roberts a Minister, and being brought before the
justice, was again struck and pulled by the nose by one Moris Bedwel called
Minister of Swansey, and after this abusing before the Justice the evil doers
were let go, and John ap John committed to the County Goal in Cardiff by
Rowland Dawkins called a Justice, and there was detained twenty weeks, and
after released without any trial.

Margaret Thomas and Rebeckah for standing witnesses against the forenamed
fighting Priests of Swansey were much abused, and imprisoned in Swansey, and
after were released, and never brought to trial, and turned forth of Swansey;
and William B^van of Swansey went with a boat and brought them over the water
again into Swansey; for which he was Imprisoned and chained by the leg, in the
year Lewis Jones being Portriff.

Again John ap John was by the Constables of Swansey turned forth several
times, and still returned bearing witness against them.

Elizabeth Holmes and Alice Burkat for testifying against the Priests called
Ministers, were Imprisoned in the Dark-house in Swansey, and were released and
never brought to trial.

Thomas Holmes and John Brown being in Monmouth Shire at a place called the
Slow, at a meeting where many people were, near Curwent, John Brown was moved
to go to the Steeple-house, at Curwent, where he spoke to the Priest, and was
apprehended by the command of John Nicholas Governor of Chepstow, and William
Bleathin called Justice; Thomas Holmes being near the place where John Brown
was detained prisoner went to visit him, was apprehended and kept prisoner that
night with him, and the next day was brought before John Nicholas and William
Bleathin, who by a warrant sent them from Constable to Constable toward their
own Country

Francis Gawler of Cardiff, in the County of Clamorgan, being in the
Steeple-house in Swansey, standing peaceably and steadfastly looking on the
Priest Matthews, diligently harkning unto him, was suddenly haled forth, though
he did not speak a word to him, which was about the beginning of his Sermon,
and was imprisoned in the Town Hall in Swansey, and after released, and never
brought before the Magistrate, Jews Jones being Portriff that year.

Again Elizabeth Holmes being moved of the Lord, went into the Steeple-house at
Swansey and there did declare the word of the Lord amongst the people, who
diligently did heark^n unto her before the Priest came thither, for which she
was imprisoned in the aforesaid dark-house in Swansey, and chained by the leg a
great distance from the door, least she should see the Priests pass by the
door, who were in great fear of her who was a terror to them, and as they
passed by the prison, though their faces she did not see, their portion they
had, whose cruelty and rage was such, that none was permited to bring her such
necessaries as she had need of, but through a hole of the door with a cane she
sucked some bear, and no law of the Nation had she broken, but for speaking to
the people, and thus was she dealt with by the hands of drunkards and swearers;
these are the fruits of the Magistrates and Ministers of Swans y; like Priests,
like people.

Elizabeth Richard of Cardiff Widow, for speaking in the Steeple-house at
Swamsey to Morris Bidwel called Minister, after he had ended, was by one of
his hearers Jo. Daniels daughter struck with her Bible, and after put in
prison, released and not brought to trial

Elizabeth Holmes meeting with Morris Bidwel in the street in Swansey, spoke a
few words unto him in much moderation for which she was imprisoned a day and a
night in the aforesaid prison, in the year that John Daniel was Mayor, a member
of his Church.

Again Elizabeth Holmes being moved of the Lord to go to the Steeple-house of
Swansey where Marmaduke Matthew called a Minister was, for which she was
imprisoned in the foresaid prison in Swansey and still released in the year
1659 Thomas Williams being Mayor.

Thomas Shaw for testifying against the foresaid Priest in the Steeple-house in
Swansey, was haled forth and imprisoned in the foresaid dark-house, but after
was brought to another prison, and there detained about twenty days, and
afterward released (...), in the year 1659. Thomas Williams now being Mayor,
and the said Priest Matthews said to Thomas Shaw, that he had made his hearers
three fold more the Children of the Devil then they were before, so by the
Priests own confession they are the children of the devil; Therefore the
Magistrates which are persecutors, must needs be of the Devil, who cast into
prison, and chain by the legs, by which the Scripture is fulfilled, which
says Christ, some of you shall the Devil cast into prison, Rev. 2.10.

Roger ^ouldbeth of Swansey, a man who has been a Commission Officer in the
service of the Commonwealth nine or ten years in England and Ireland, and now
his outward being in Swansey, was endeavored to be hindered to follow his
calling, which the Law of the Nation allows, he being a faithful Soldier to
the Commonwealth; but the Magistrates of Swansey have imprisoned him for
telling them the truth, who are time-serving men and through the envy of
William Baily of Swansey, an envious, angry time-serving professor, was lately
imprisoned in the Mayoralty of Thomas Williams this present year, 1659

Again Elizabeth Holmes and Alice Burkat, being at a meeting at Walter Watkins
house in Sher-Newton in Monmouth-shire, were abused by some of that parish,
they lodging there that night, some came by night and made a great stir about
the house, intending mischief, William Bleathin called Justice living near the
place, who was not unacquainted thereof, to his shame, in suffering such
things; the next day the Constables brought them before the Justices, who made
a pass to send them away as vagabonds, but knowing it would be to their shame,
let them go.

Again Elizabeth H^lmes, being moved of the Lord to go to Lanvaches, where
Henry Walter and one Sims of Ch^pstow was, where she was much abused by their
hearers, and after they had ended at their Steeple-house, they went into
another house whether Elizabeth Holmes, went unto them, whom they turned out
and shut the door.

Elizabeth Holms and Alice Burkat, were moved to go to the Steeple-house of
Newport, where Henry Walter was, who were suddenly haled forth, and brought
down to the bridge, and there kept prisoners, and the chief actor was one Henry
Morgan Reece a brutish man, who has his mark in his forehead, one of Henry
Walters Church.

Again Alice Burkat at another time, being in the Steeple-house of Newport
where William Jenkins was a journey-man of Henry Walter, she was haled forth
and abused, and pricked with a pin in her arm by William Williams of Newport.

Francis Gawler going for Bristol, was moved to go to a Steeple-house at Magor,
where Thomas Barns called Minister was, he having ended, Francis Gawler asked
him a question, and three Constables were ready to hale him forth, who being
not very hasty, Edward Herbert called a Justice thrust him, and led him in much
rage out of the Steeple-house, and then gave him to the Constables with much
threatening words to bring him to the Alehouse to prison him, which they did
accordingly, and afterward brought him to the house of one John Walter of
Magor where Edward Herbert and William Packer and Barns the Priest were; Then
Edward Herbert said to Francis Gawler, he did go about to distract the
Ministers, and said, he did not follow his calling, in which he proved him a
liar, for he did follow his calling, and met him the day before on the road
going to Bristol about his calling, then Edward Herbert said he could commit
him to prison for telling him he did lie, though it was so; and in great rage
commanded to bring F. G. and accordingly they did bring him forth of Mago^,
this is the fruit of Priest Barnes and his chief member Edward Herbert.

Again, Francis Gawlar was moved to go to the Steeple-house at Newport where
Henry Walter was, who made a sign to some of his hearers (as some took notice
of) and suddenly (...). G. was haled away, and could not have the liberty to
clear his conscience to his former Pastor, which lay upon him to do; and after
he had ended in the yard, he came something near to Henry Walter, and asked him
whether he did own the men in haling him away; his answer was, why would he not
let him, alone? and suddenly (according to his mind) before him Henry M^rgan
Reece, one of his Church, who is formerly mentioned, haled him away, and
brought him down to the Town, and then up again the Hill, turning him out of
the Town, charging him he should not come again there, saying, the Mayor James
Young had given him that order, but had none under his hand for so doing, these
are the fruits of Hen Walter who was formerly Fra. Gawlars Pastor, who was
called before the Church for denying them, and that which he had to lay to his
charge was, that he turned people from the Steeple-house, and said he was
bewitched, and so was afraid that Fra. Gawler would bewitch him, and so went
away and would talk no more with him.

Again, Edward Edward, Eliz. Holmes and Fr Gawlar of Cardiff being at a meeting
in Shere-newton in the county aforesaid, were taken out of the meeting, and
brought before John Nicholas, William Bleathie, and Robert Jones, called
Justices, in William Bleathins house in the Parish aforesaid, where this
following discourse was.

I. N. R. I. W. B. You have broken the Law in meeting together under the tree
so near the Steeple-house, and we have several times warned you of it before
this, therefore we must deal with you according to the law.

Answ. We have broken no law of the Nation in meeting together, for the Law of
the Nation gives liberty to all for to meet together in the faith of Christ,
in the which we meet together; therefore we have broken no law.

J. N. The law says, the Minister should not be disturbed going to, or coming
from his exercise.

Answ. That law we have not broken now, for we did not see the Minister, nor
spoke to him.

J. N. Though you did not see the Minister nor speak with him, yet you know he
was di^turbed by your meeting, being in the way so near the Steeple-house where
the people did go forth; so by this there was a disturbance.

Answ. We believe the Minister and you were troubled because the people came
forth of the Steeple-house to our meeting, yet we have not broken the law, for
the law says it must be proved that such came wilfully, maliciously, and of
set purpose to to make disturbance, and if such an Oath were taken before thee,
I think thou would hardly believe it.

J. N. We shall ^o nothing but what we have proof for, some did hear the voice
of one of you in the Steeple-house, and so it must be a disturbance

Answ. It must be proved that such a one did maliciously and wilfully make a
disturbance; therefore let it be proved.

J. N. Walter Jenkins voice was heard in the Steeple-house, and therefore it
was a disturbance.

Answ. Walter Jenkins was not here this day; therefore believe them not who
inform thee against us.

J. N. Walter Jenkins was here the last time, and his voice was heard then.

Answ. That which thou do question us for, is for meeting together now, and
that we have made a disturbance, which cannot be proved; therefore what Walter
Jenkins did is past, and he is ready to give an account for what he has done.

J. N. Do you own the Scriptures to be the word of God, yea or nay?

Answ. If thou say the Scripture is the word of God, prove it, and produce
one Scripture that says the Scripture is the word of God.

J. N. I will do so.

R. Jones, We will not prove it till you first deny it.

Answ. It lies upon the Governor to do it, whether we deny it or no, because he
said he would prove it, therefore let him.

R.J. We shall not prove it tell you first deny it.

Answ. The Governor said he would prove it, so we may refuse the answer till he
proves; yet notwithstanding for the sake of the simple-hearted people here, if
you will take an answer according to the Scriptures of truth, we shall answer
you which we know may satisfy you.

R. I. We are willing to receive an answer according to the Scriptures of truth.

Answ. The Scriptures we own to be the words of God which are a declaration of
the Word of God, which was from the beginning, before Scriptures were written,
and is as a hammer and a sword dividing asunder between the marrow and the
bones, and to this the Scripture stands a witness for us, Joh. 1 1, 2, 3. Heb.
4.12.

J. N. You have given us more satisfaction then some of your friends have done,
and you speak very well to own the Scripture to be words of God, which indeed
is truth, and we are glad to hear you say so.

R. I. But how is it you call our Ministers deceivers, and some of you never
saw their faces before, which is a strange thing to us, I pray you tell us?

Answ. It is an easy thing to know a Deceiver and a false Prophet, for they
are marked with the mark of the Beast in their foreheads, and you may read in
the Scripture so many hundred were marked with the mark of the Beast in their
foreheads, and they were those that upheld the worship of the Beast in the
Idols Temples, where the beast is now worshipped in this generation, by which
mark the false prophets are known to be deceivers, though their faces we never
see; and take heed how you uphold them, least you be partakers of their plagues.

R. J. Indeed we read in Scripture (as you say) that so many hundreds were
marked with the mark of the Beast in their foreheads, but it is a strange thing
to us that you know our Ministers by that mark

Answ. I believe thee friend; where thou art, that is a strange thing to thee;
but if thou will come down to Gods witness, the light which shines in thy
heart, thou will come to see it as plain as we speak it.

J. N. Yea, but do you not know that you have profited by our Ministers, and
that the presence of God went with them? I pray you honestly confess.

Answ. I shall honestly declare unto thee, there was a time that the presence
of God went with some of them, and in that time they did bear witness against
Tithes, Types, figures and shadows, saying, Christ was come, and has set an
end to Tithes; and some of them durst not receive them for conscience sake, the
which now they receive and plead for, and receive hundreds by the year by it;
therefore the presence of God is withdrawn from them whom we deny, and by their
fruits they are known.

J. N. We will let them alone to plead for themselves.

Answ Do so; and let them fight for their God, and our weapons shall not be
carnal, but spiritual.

R. J. You say the ^ight shines in the heart which gives the knowledge of God
in the face of Jesus Christ, and in so doing you add to the Scriptures.

Answ. We say the light shines in the heart which gives the knowledge of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, and if thou denyest it, it lies upon us to prove it.

R. J. The Scrip ure does not say it shines in the heart, therefore you add to
the Scripture.

Rob. Jones and the Governor took a Bible and sought the place, and they had
the words of the place without book; but the words, the light shines in the
heart, so they missed to find the place; then Fran. Gawlar took the book and
concluded with Rob. Jones, that if it was not so as he said, he must own his
error before the people, to which he said, very good, he would do so; then F
Gawlar turned to the place of Scripture, Cor. 2.4. and gave it him to read,
which he did, and honestly confessed his error before the people, and said, you
are in the truth, and we are in the error

Answ. We shall not make thee an offender for a word, but if thou had had
such advantage against us, thou would hardly have past it by, but we are
taught to do for thou^and the Governor have asked us many questions which have
b^^n answered, and you cannot say you are unsatisfied in any one particular.

Now we would ask you one question.

Quest. Did Peter or Paul speak one thing and mean another when they spoke?

R. Jones. Answered Nay, they did not speak one thing and mean another.

Reply, Then do not thou make meanings to their words.

R. Jones. Answered I shall not do it.

Then the Governor and he went out of Will. Bleathins house where many people
were, a great room full, who said one to another, the Quakers are in the truth,
and the Justices are in the error, so Eliz. Holmes and E^. Edward, were brought
to the Alehouse and there kept prisoners; but people had liberty to come unto
them, and the room could not contain the people that were there, very
diligently hearkening unto them, who (after the Priest had done his exercise)
were released by J^. Nicholas and Robert Jone^, the forementioned men called
Justices with whom this discourse has been which we now bring to public view,
finding it upon record, the which may shame Edward Herbert and other Justices
of Glamorgan-shire, who have acted contrary to the law of the Nation which is
here laid down.

Again, Frar. Gawlar several times has been haled out of the Steeple-house in
Cardiffe, and in the streets much abused by Drunkards, swearers and scolding
women, namely Anthony P^wry Shoo-maker, Thomas Wi^iams, James Evans, Guy the
Fisher who has been in actual Arms against the Commonwealth, and many more;
and such as these are the Priests guards in the Steeple Houses and streets and
by those have we (who have been faithful in our places and trusts in the
service of the Commonwealth) been much abused, to the shame of the Magistrates
and Priests of Cardif^ be it spoken, who suffered their former friends to be so
dealt with, only for clearing their consciences to their former Teachers,
namely E. El^^, and Josuah Miller, who did in Cardif^, boast in the
Post-masters house at one time, that if any of the Quakers would come to their
meetings, he would dispute; accordingly Francis Gawlar was moved to go to the
Steeple-house in Cardiff, where hundreds of people were expecting some things;
then Francis Gawlar spoke unto him, to which he returned and said, Go stitch
thy hats, and so like a hireling fled before half his Sermon was ended; and the
next day he did endeavor to Imprison Francis Gawlar, who by a warrant was
brought before the Bailiffs who cleared him, understanding how the Priest had
boasted before, and would not stand, but fled before half his Sermon was ended,
the which tormented him, and his shame was so great, that he endeavored to
clear himself by a book called Antichrist in (...) man the Quakers Idol, which
was answered, read the book entitled Antichrist in man. Christ's enemy, wherein
his lying is made manifest, and damnable doctrine, who says, Its an error, if
not damnable, to say that Christ is the wa^ to salvati^n; this he affirms in
his book page 13. line 5. and 6. So its little matter what such a man as this
protests before angels or men, who holds such a doctrine, and says, Lying is
^^s^^, but a change of the mind; this has been charged upon him, and is ready
to be proved by witnesses, and for this he stroke Francis Gawlar with his kane,
with his two hands in Cardiff.

Again, Francis Gawlar for asking Benjamin Flower Priest, a question in Cardiff
in the Steeple-house, where the Judges of the County were present, a warrant
was given forth with John Gibbs a Lawyer, John Herbert, Rice Davis and John
Fennels hands to it, and according to their warrant F. Gawler was apprehended
and brought before them in the Town Hall in Cardi^, where the Constables were
commanded to take off his hat, but they were not willing to do it; but fearing
their threatenings with a fine, took off his Castor from his head, which was
never brought home to him to this day, and by them he was committed to prison,
which was a breach of their Sabbath and the Law of the Nation, being done on
the first day of the week, the which was not proved against him, yet by them
was he kept prisoner for many months; and at one time he speaking to Priest
Flower in the street passing by, he was that night set up close prisoner, about
the ninth or tenth hour of the night by the Sergeants, who as they said were
commanded so to do by Reece Davis, who was in the Priests house that night, and
a time after N. S. wife went to Reece D^vis unknown to F. G. and asked him if
he would give F.G. leave to go to a meeting; his answer was, If F. G. would
promise to let Mr. Flower (as he called him) alone, he would let him forth of
prison, but no such promise F.G. could make, and so was kept close prisoner a
long time, and after was released and never brought to trial. So J. H. being
dead and J. F. being since convinced of the evil of his ways; we shall ask John
Gibbs Lawyer, and Riece Davis Baylie, whether they did do as they would be done
by, in taking F.G. Castor which was worth a great deal of money, and whether
they sold it we know not, but we know the Lawyer loves money, which is the root
of all evil, and F.G. his Castor is not brought home yet, therefore the Lawyer
and Laylie stands guilty at the Ear.

Again, Alice Burkat, and Francis Gawlar being moved by the Spirit of truth to
go to Landaff near Cardiff, where Benjamin Flower the aforenamed Priest was,
being the day they call Easter Monday, where many people were with this
day-observing Priest, to keep up the Idol-day, and they coming to one part of
the Steeple-house, the door was fastened, and John Jones the Constable would
not let him go in: but those who had the mark of the Beast in their foreheads,
who would fight for the Priest and the Idol-day, were willingly let in; but
very watchful was the Constable, fearing Francis Gawlar and Alice Burkat should
come in among them; but after the Priest had ended the Idol-day (...) Sermon,
Alice B^rkat met the Priest in the yard, and some of his hearers did
exceedingly abuse her, and beat her with stones in the Priests sight, and tore
her clothes from about her: and this is the fruit of Priest Flower at his
first coming, who has made a very good bargain at Cardiff, where he has a
Tithing barn; and that would not serve his turn, but about 80 l. he must have
from another place yearly, and if it should fail, it is to be feared the Priest
would be gone to England again, where such wages as he has in Wales he could
not have; and for providing such great wages for him, the children of the
Drunkards, Swearers and Devourers of the Creation, are washed in the
Steeple-house with water, in a filthy popish manner; and for these Jesuitical
practices which he does contrary to Scripture, is this man cried up by the
enemies of the Commonwealth, and his house is enlarged for him, thinking his
Trade will hold. And his Clerk Thomas Wells, one who sings Idle songs, got out
of Ballads, says Amen to his evil way: and he says, he must have his due from
the Devil; and for asking this Priest, Was he not ashamed to come from England
into Wales to covet peoples goods? His wife said, they came from England into
Wales among Devils, and violently came with the Key of her husbands
Tithing-barn in his fight, and struck Francis Gawlar, which he felt a long time
after; It is a just reward for them to be called Devils, for maintaining of
him, who of late began to gather a Church; and to help him in the work, his
Brethren fighters, takers of Oxen, Cowes and Sheep, are called some of his
Church Members, namely, I.M. I.F. E.E. who are such

Again, Thomas John and Toby Hodges of Cardiff, were committed to prison, for
calling Richard Simmons and Edmund Ellis dumb dogs and hirelings, as their
commitment expressed, and there they were detained about six weeks, by George
Morgan Bailiff of Cardiff, but his Brother Bailiff one Jenkin Williams had no
hand in it, which he did well, knowing that they were such men, and Edmund
Ellis is found guilty, for taking two Oxen worth about twelve pounds, which is
set down in this Book more at large.

Again, Toby Hodges and Dorcas Erberry of Cardiff, were committed to prison,
and there detained many months, for speaking to B njamin Flower Priest in
Cardiff, and they were once released, and brought in again by the order of
Reece David Bailiff, and after released, and never brought to Trial, in the
year 1658.

Again, Thomas John Rensham of the Parish of Lavishion in the County of
Glamorgan, for standing a witness in the Steeple-house of Whitchurch, against
Lewis Roger called a Minister, formerly a journyman to Henry Walter, who
learned him his trade, and now he receives great wages about Monmouth, for
which he was imprisoned and sent to the County Goal in Cardiff, and there
detained a few days by Robert Thomas, Henry Morgan and Reece Powel called
Justices, who released him, and was never brought to Trial, in the year 1658.

Again, Merridith Edward being moved, went into a Steeple-house called
Trevening in Monmouth-shire, where he stood a witness against Henry Morgan
called Minister, for which he was apprehended by Thomas Jones, who abused him
much, and struck him athwart the face, and commanded him to be brought to
Abergueny^, before Henry Baker called Justice, who committed him to the County
Gaol at Vske, where he was detained about five weeks, and at the quarter
Sessions was released, in the year 1658.

Again, Merridith Edward being moved to go to a Steeple-house called the Vay^or
in Brecknock-shire, where Jenkin Jones, who is accounted a high Priest, was,
and by his hearers he was haled forth of the Steeple-house, and was much abused
by Jenkin Jones himself, who enviously did accuse him falsely, but could not
prove it, therefore he is a false accuser.

Matthew Gibbon of Molton in the County of Glamorgan, formerly a Captain in the
service of the Commonwealth to the ha^ard of his life, with the loss of the
use of one of his Arms, for the Good Old Cause, the ^iberty of Conscience; and
for the clearing of his Conscience was moved to go into the Steeple-house at
P^nmark near Molton, where Edward Morgan was, a time-serving greedy Priest, for
which he was apprehended and brought before Robert Thomas called Justice, who
commanded his hat to be taken off his head before him, and committed him to the
County Goal in Cardiff, where he was detained about five days, and after let
forth, and never brought to Trial; No Law of the Nation had he broken.

Again, By a Warrant from the said Robert Thomas called Justice, was Merridith
Edward brought before him, who endeavored to stop his mouth with (...)
handkerchief, and took him by the throat, and one in the room endeavored to
hinder him in so doing, the justice struck him and committed him to Bridewell;
the foresaid M. E. for calling Griffith David, called Minister of the Gospel,
Thief and Hireling, and denying the Lords Supper, as it is expressed in the
commitment, for which he was released once, but the Priest being tormented, got
him again to Bridewell by the same commitment, where he was whipped, and it is
like he had been dealt more cruelly with, had not Major Golar, called Justice,
prevented^t who was a means for his releasement; and as for the Priest Griffith
David, whom they call Minister of the Gospel, ^e is well known to many to be a
greedy hireling, and (...) marking his Neighbors sheep, has been brought
before the Justices, where he was found faulty; but least the rest of the Trade
should come to shame, it was let pass. Therefore this man is not fit to be
called a Minister of the Gospel; and his Brother Henry Nichols, called
Minister, went to Bridewell, it is like he went to give evil Council to the
Keeper, who is one of his Church. And Evan Morgan late Bailiff of Cowebridge,
being there, visiting the prisoner, some words passed between him and Priest
Nichols, who violently struck him twice in the Bridewell, for which he gave
just cause to be corrected, and not Merridith Edward, who was whipped for no
transgre^sion, in the year 1658.

Again, By a Warrant with Edmund Thomas and Henry Morgans names unto it there
were taken from Llewelyn Jones, Philip Lewis, Evan Philip and William Pierce of
the Parish of Radree in Glamorgan-shire these goods following: From Llewelyn
Jones one pot to boil meat in, from Philip Lewis one pot to boil meat in, from
William Pierce three pewter platters, all these goods being taken from them for
half a crown a piece, for not coming to the Steeple-house: but the pot taken
from Evan Philip a time after was restored, but the other pots and platters
have not been restored yet. Therefore least those that were the causers of it,
have forgotten it, this may bring it to their memories; and because some of
Harry Walters Church, namely Edmond Thomas and William Thomas have been chief
actors in these things, being Constables, who took away the goods, it is to be
feared H. W. is not clear of these things, and if he be, let him cause his
Members to restore the honest men's goods, and tell them so; this was done in
the year ^658.

David Jones of Cardiff, who has been an Officer in the Commonwealth, for the
Good Old Cause, Liberty of Conscience, and for Conscience sake could not pay 4
d. for a Garden, and 6 d. for a fleece of wool, for which he was arrested by
Benjamin Flower Priest in Gardiff, his Farmers, and was kept in prison many
weeks, for the ten pence by them sworn, who said, they had a hard bargain of
him, and it is like it was so, from such a greedy man, and it is like had he
sworn himself, it would have been more large, if not treble damage: and
although this Priest has such great wages, he was loath to loose ten pence of
David Jones carnalls, though he never sowed Spiritual to him; who was let out
of prison to the great shame of the Priest and his hearers, who would not part
with ten pence to pay their Priest to cover his shame; in the year 1658.

Again, Morgan Robin of Penarth in the County of Glamorgan, was arrested in
Cardiff, and kept in prison about 5 weeks, for about the value of eleven
shillings and six pence Tithe, by Farmers, and afterward released by them, and
then took from him a Steer worth thirty shillings, which they brought to Pound,
and prized it, and shared the money betwixt them, not returning the overplus.

Again, Taken away from Edmund Thomas of Molton in the County of Glamorgan, two
Cowes worth six pounds, for John French Priest of Wenvoe, his demand being
about three pounds, never proffering the overplus; in the year 1658.

Taken from John David of Molton in the same County, nine sheep worth about
three pounds, for the said Priest John French of Wenvoe, his demand being about
twenty four shillings; in the year 1658.

Taken from Matthew Gibbon of Molton for the said Priest four Lambs worth
twelve shillings, having but three acres of land in his parish, 1658.

Again taken from Matthew Gibbon two sheep worth ten shillings by Edward
Richard farmer, his demand being but two shillings, and never returned the
overplus.

Taken from Evan Leonard of Melton, one Ewe worth eight shillings, he being a
poor man having six children, by Edward Richard of Llancarvan, his demand being
but four shillings, and never returned the overplus, in the year 1658.

Taken from Edmund Thomas of Molton four sheep worth twenty shillings by the
said Farmer, his demand being about two shillings, and according to the custom
of the parish, there was no Tithes due.

Taken from Morgan Gibbon of Fagan in the County aforesaid two Oxen worth about
twelve pounds, for Edmund Ellis Priest of that Parish, his demand being about
three pounds, and about six months after sued him again for Tithes, in the
year, 1658.

Again taken from Daniel Hopkins, and Thomas Hopkins of Llandilo in the County
aforesaid a cow, and a Mare, for Gregory Jones called Minister of that Parish,
the demand being about seven shillings, and the Cow and Mare were worth about
four pounds, and this Priest was a persecutor of the honest party in Charles
Stuarts time, and is an envious lying man, and a devourer of the Creation, yet
is allowed to take four pounds for seven shillings Tithe, which is a great
shame to South Wales to call such men Ministers of the Gospel.

Again taken from Joan Reed widow of the parish of Wilstone in the County of
Munmo^th, a Cow worth about four pounds by William Catchmay, for the Tithe of 6
acres of wheat, beans and oats, and no overplus offered, though she is a poor
widow woman, in the year 1658.

Walter Watkins and his wife of the Parish of Shere-newton in the County of
Monmouth, were both committed to the County Goal in Vsk for about twenty
shillings Tithes demanded by Richard William Priest of Shere-newton, whose men
in the field did exceedingly abuse Walter Watkins wife, and one of them, Paul
Blethin laid the pike to her breast, saying, he would run her through for
denying the Tithe to feed the Priests God, which is their bellies; Therefore
their enmity was against her and she was committed to prison with her husband,
which was against the Law of the Nation, that a man and his wife should be
committed both for Tithes, this was in the year, 1658.

John Thomas of G^ldelift in the County of Munmouth was committed to the County
Goal in Vsk by Edward Herbert called Justice for not swearing to be a
Constable, though he did not deny to serve the office, because he refused to
swear, which is contrary to the command of Christ, Mat. 5 33, 34, 35, 36. he
therefore was committed to prison and detained there four months by Edward
Herb^rt called Justice, but little Justice was done by him in keeping the
honest laboring man in prison so long from his wife, and family, whom he
maintained by his industry, this was done in the year, 1658.

Taken from Walter Watkin of the Parish of Shere-newton, in the County of
Munmouth, two pack saddles for three shillings rated upon him toward the
reparation of the Steeple-house, there by Philip Lewis Constable in the year
1658.

Taken from John Thomas of Goldelift one brass kettle worth ten shillings for
three shillings, rated on him for reparation of the Steeple-house there, and no
overplus offered him; William Dapwell was the man that took it, who is one of
Thomas Barns his Church, Priest in Magor, and if Priest Barns be clear of this
thing, let him cause William Dapwel to bring John Thomas his kettle home, and
tell him so; this was done in 1658.

Taken from Edmund Thomas of Molton, in the County of Glamorgan a brass pot
worth about 50 s. for 13 s. rated upon him toward the reparation of the
Steeple-house of VVenvo^, where John French a greedy Priest is called Minister
but by his fruits is made manifest, and no overplus is proffered to Edmund
Thomas done in the year, 1658.

Taken from Matthew Gibbon of Molton, one pewter tankard toward the reparation
of that Steeple-house; in all taken for that greedy Priest French, toward the
said rep^^^^^i^n twelve pounds and more in sheeep, Cows, Lambs, brass, pewter,
and the demand hardy amounts to five pounds.

Again Mary Richard and Mary Moss of Pennarth in Ci^^y for clearing their
conscience to John C^tts Priest, were haled, and beaten, and drawn up a pair of
stairs, and there set in stocks by the Constable and Priests man, Cradock
Griffith, Walter Rayland, John Lewis, William Lewis, John M^y^, John Fabarn.

Again, E^iz beth Holme according to the leadings of the spirit of truth, went
into Pembrookshire, where large meetings she had, and in a meeting at Thomas
Ba^rats house in Tenbigh in the aforesaid County, where Adam Hawkins Priest
came with two Bibles under his arm, Joel 2.28. Act. 21.9.2.17. Romans 16.3
and standing till the meeting was ended, and there spoke to Elizabeth H^lmes,
saying, Paul said a woman was not permitted to speak, the which she cleared
unto him, as it is plain according to Scripture, How P^isci^a was ^aul,
fellow-helper; and that one had four daughters which did declare the word of
truth, and the Lord said he would power of his spirit on all flesh, and sons
and daughters should prophecy in his name; so it is very clear the spirit of
truth is permitted to speak in male and female, to which this Priest Hawkins
could little object, but said, he did believe that Elizabeth Holm^^ was a woman
that did convert many souls to God, and it was truth she spoke, and if she
would come to Hart^ordwest, where he was going to be Minister, he would give
her way to speak to the people, a time after she went to Hartfordwe^^,
according to the leading of the spirit of truth, and another friend with her,
Alice Burkat which was about the beginning of the second month 59. where they
had a large meeting in William Batemans house, the which tormented the
Magistrates and Priest, that officers came and brought Elizabeth Holmes, and
Alice, Burkat, and William Bateman, before the Mayor, and Thomas Davis called
Justice, and by them Elizabeth H lmes and Alice Burkat, were committed to the
house of Correction, and by the master of the house of Correction, at first,
was threatened to set bolts on them, but he did not do it, so afterward became
very loving, and suffered meetings in the prison, where they were detai^ed
about fourteen days until the Quarter Sessions, Priest Adam Hawkins came unto
them, endeavoring to clear himself that he had no hand in the Imprisonment, but
they would not believe him, but told him the contrary; so to the quarter
Sessions they were brought, where the Mayor and Thomas Davis, and more men
called Justices were, and Priest Hawkin^; so unto them Elizabeth H^lmes
declared what passed betwixt the Priest and her in ^enbig^, and how he came
unto them to clear himself of having any hand in the persecuting of them, then
Thomas Davis one of them that had committed them, said in open Court, that he
would not let them be quiet until they were imprisoned, and so reproved the
Priest, and said unto him, that if he would not be more watchful of his words,
he was not fit to be their Minister; and by the Court in the Sessions was
Elizabeth Holmes and Alice Burkat cleared, and by it were Lewis Barron Mayor,
and Thomas Davis made manifest, who had committed them as vagabonds and
wanderers, but from being so they are clear; and the salse accusations atop of
them was cast, and by truth judged into the pit of darkness, from whence it
did arise with their enmity who committed William Bateman at first for receiving
them, a man all along well affected to the honest party, and suffered much loss
by Charles Stuarts party, and now some of the Magistrates of Hartford-west
formerly adhering to Charles Stuart, has an enmity against him as plainly does
appear, who endeavored with Priest Hawkins to lay blasphemy to his charg, so
under that color committed him to prison, there to remain to the great assizes
for the County; and Humphery Wi^^iams with him both expressed in the same
commitment; so some of William Batemans relations gave bail to answer
accordingly, if they would bring the matter before the Judge of the Assizes
without fainting it would be well, for if they do so, it is like the
Magistrates enmity, and the Priests shame will be double made manifest.

And after Elizabeth Holms and Alice Burkat were releast by them at the
Sessions, about a day after Alice Burkat meet with the Mayor in the street, and
spoke a few words unto him, for which he sent her to Bride-well, and about two
days she was kept there, and after made a lying pass, intending to send her to
Card^ff, so forth of Harford-we^t she was brought with it, but the Constable
having less enmity, and more wisdom then the Magistrates, let her go where she
would; and these are the fruits of L^wis Barran called Mayor of Hartfort-we^t,
and Thomas Davis called justice, and Adam Hawkins called a Minister, who was
proved in open Court a notorious liar in Hartford-west in P^m^r o^-shire
commonly called Little England beyond VVal^s where this Priest is called a
Minister, who violently struck John ap Jones in the house of William Bateman
witnesses, Henry K ly, and VVil Bateman with others, this is a great shame to
Hartford-w^^t to suffer such a man to be called their Minister.

Again J^nnit Jones of Hartford-w^^t for standing before this Priest Ad^m
Hawkin^ in the Steeple-house of Hartford-west, the Magistrate, and the people
were amazed as they relate in the Commitment, for which she was committed to
the house of correction, till the quarter Sessions by Lewis Barran called Mayor
of Hartford-west, about the 1^ of the 2 month, 1659.

Again William Thomas of Llanducy in P^mbrook-shire for standing witness
against Stephen H^ges called Minister in the Steeple house of Llandevil^, for
which he was apprehended and brought before John El^iot called Justice, who
committed him to Goal, and there to remain until the general Sessions to be
holden for the County of P^mbrook, this was done in the name of the Keepers of
the Liberty of England the 23 day of the third month, 1659.

Though this man Stephen Hughes be accounted such a great Priest in P mbrook
and Carmarthen shires, yet here he is made manifest to be a persecutor, and a
striker, who struck Evan John of the Parish of Landeny in the County aforesaid,
in the presence of William Thomas, and G ^rge H^wel of the said parish

Again ^lizabeth Holms being moved of the spirit of truth, and. Alice Burkat
with her to go to the Steeple-house called Christ-Church, in Munmouth-shire
where Walter Cradock was, who haled Alice Burkat down, and said get thee
behind me Satan.

Again the first day of the week, being the eighth day of the third month,
Elizabeth Holms was moved of the Lord to go to Walter Craddock in the same
place above mentioned, and after he had ended, she proposed a Question unto him
in much moderation, and required him to answer her, in answer, he bad the
Magistrates do what they would unto her, and so fled like a hireling, and the
Magistrates did not persecute her, but were very moderate, and some of them
with much people hearkened diligently to the word of truth which she spoke
which is more commendations for them, and shame to the chief Priest Wal.
Craddock who uttered forth such words to the Magistrates

Again the first day of the week being the 5th of the fourth month, 1659.
Elizabeth Holms and Francis Gawler of Cardiff, going to a meeting in
M^nmouth-shire, beyond the place called Christ-church according to the leading
of the spir^t of truth, was made to return back to the Steeple-house above
mentioned, and let Elizabeth Holms go to the meeting, and for standing before
Walter Craddock above mentioned about the beginning of his Sermon, Craddock
said to his friends, Let me have peace, and Francis Gawler did not speak a word
to him then so suddenly one Th^mas Jon^s a chief man, sometimes a speaker for
the Priest; hastily leads him away, and in going forth, Francis Gawler asked
Walter Craddock, whether he did own him in haling him forth, to which he
answered nothing; but the man Thomas Jones said, he did own him in so doing; so
accordingly did bring him forth of the Steeple-house, and fastened the door,
and none should be permitted to come in, but those that had the mark of the
beast in their foreheads, and many of the people came forth of the
Steeple-house, then the man Thomas Jones came forth also, and brought Francis
G^wler away from the people, and gave him to the constable, and charged him to
keep him, but the Constable being a harmless man let him go, and a time after
Francis Gawler met Walter Craddok coming from the Alehouse where he had bin
at dinner, going to the Steeple-house to his afternoon Sermon, so spoke a few
words to Wal. Craddock to which he gave no answer; but presently complained to
captain Bl^^thin called Justice, said if he would not take some course with
him, he would take his horse and go away, so according to his complaint,
Bleathin led him away and gave him to the Constable, and charged him to keep
him prisoner.

Then suddenly one Henry Williams called a Lieutenant did much abuse Francis
Gawler and called him a Vagabond, though he knew he had been a Commission
Officer, in the Garrison of Cardiff in the same Regiment with him; Yet such was
the man's enmity and Malice against Francis Gawler, for the chief Priest that he
called Francis Gawler a Vagabond, and charged the Constables to keep him
Prisoner; so according to Captain Bl^athins Order, was F ancis Gawl^r kept
Prisoner that day and night, the next day by the Constable was he brought to
Newport, and there Bl^athin in Priest Jenkins house Ordered the Constable in
the name of the keepers of the Liberties of England, to keep him in custody,
and bring his body before him and his associate Justice, to Lla^melin the
Governer of Ch^pstowes house, the 7. day of the 4 month, so accordingly the
Constable brought him before them, and in the way met with Bleathin and the
Priest, John Howell going to the Governors house, so the Priest having Guilt
on him, endeavored to clear himself, saying he was sorry to see Francis
Gawler brought from one place to another, and that he had no hand in it, but
before the Governors and the Justice, his treachery and double-mindedness, was
made manifest and hypocrisy, who endeavored to Imprison Francis Gawler, with
Walter Craddocks Informers, Namely Edmond Morgan of Newport, who informed the
Governor that Walter Craddock, said unto him on the word of a man, and as he
was a minister, that he was never so disturbed in all his life time, and if
some course might not be taken with Francis Gawler, he would never come there
more; and Priest John Howel informed and said Francis Gawler would not let them
alone, but spoke to them in the way, and called them deceivers, and that they
had the mark of deceivers in their foreheads, and so the Governor and Justice
would have Francis Gawler to promise them to meet them that day month, and
they would give him liberty till then, but he would not make no such promise,
but required them that he should be tried, for he had been several days in
prison already, and so required the Law to be proved he had broken, and he was
willing to suffer for declaring against deceivers, then Francis Bleathin said,
they could keep him six days before they committed him, then the Governor
would have him promise to leave Walter Craddock and his former pastor and the
rest of the Ministers alone, and not speak to them, and they would let him go;
but no promise he would make, for he stood not in his own will, but as the
spirit of truth led him, he must speak to them, who has the mark of deceivers
in their foreheads, and so a time after by the aforementioned men, Francis
Gawler was released, and the Constable which kept him Prisoner said he was
disturbed; and these are the fruits of Water Craddock and John Howel called
Ministers, who struck Thomas Holms twice with his horse Rod, till the Rod
twined about him; and Walter Craddock near Newport in the aforesaid County,
meeting Francis Gawler, cried unto him, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, I
have hearkened to thee, but now do deny thee, thou do torment me day and
night, I speak not to thee Gawler, but to the devil in thee; So Francis Gawler
made a reply unto him, his answer was, I will not hearken to the Devil; So
Francis spoke to him in much moderation; Then he called Francis a flattering
Devil, and violently struck the beast that Francis rode on, endeavoring to get
F. G before him, but Francis Gawler having not the freedom to pass, stopped the
beast, then his man (or one that rode with him) came and helped him till they
brake their weapons upon the beast, and at last passed away before Francis
Gawler; and Walter Cradock in Newport called for the Magistrates, and said he
would have Fran. Gawler fast, and Francis Gawler went with him till he
alighted, about the middle of the Town, and there left him, where he was going
to preach over Hen. VValters wife, which was then going to be buried, and it
was ordered according to the leadings of the spirit of Truth, that Elizabeth
Holmes and Alice Burkat came to Newport, and they went into the Steeple-house
in Newport, where Walter Craddock was, who said in his delivery, the wicked was
tormented night and day, and a little before he did acknowledge he was
tormented night and day, therefore by his own words he is a wicked man, who
then fled like a hireling, and would not stand fearing torment, and this man is
taken to be the chiefest Priest in South Wales, who deceives many simple
hearted people, going under the name of receiving no Tithes, but pleading for
Tithes deep in the Mystery of iniquity, with his brethren Henry Walter, and
Thomas Barns, with others who goes under the name of receiving no Tithes; but
when the day of account comes their judgment will be great for Tythes-guilty,
and others of their evil deeds when they are brought to the bar of Justice to
account, which will be sooner then they are aware of, and these men aforenamed
are called Ministers of the Gospel who are out of the doctrine of Christ, who
says if one smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also, and if
any man sues thee at the Law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also, Mat. 5.39.40 Now these men are fighters and strikers, false accusers,
pullers by the hair of the head, evil speakers, drivers away of Oxen, and Kine,
and Mares, and Lambs, suers at the Law, and imprisoning for the value of ten
pence, exceeding their Brethren the false Prophets, greedier then they, seeking
their gain from their quarter, and dawbing with untempered M^rtar, preaching
peace, peace unto them that put into their mouths, and prepareing war, and
imprisoning those that will not put into their mouths, and one of their Clerks,
saying, they must have their due from the Devil, whose Ministers they are;
therefore we deny them, and cannot pay them wages.

Edmund Elis aforenamed taker of Oxen, who threatened to strike Francis Gawler
of Cardiff over the head, lifting up his cain so to do in the rode to Bristol,
and at another time in the Posthouse in Cardiff, took up a chair above ground
thinking to strike him, but another being in the room, hindered him of his
wicked purpose.

John Robert Priest about Swanzie, who came from New England aforementioned,
and haling by the hair of the head, who also struck Lieutenant Colonel Bowens
sister for theeing and thouing him.

Again Marmaduke Matthew Priest of Swanzie, who came from New England, an
envious persecutor, who was one with the Magistrates of Swanzie to chain
Elizabeth Holms by the leg, and pinchd Alice B^rkat till her blood came forth,
and said to Roger Co^lbech of Swanzie, were it not for a constraining power he
we would box him, and so thrust him away; and again the ninteenth day of the
fourth month, he thrusted Francis Gawler of Cardiff in Swanzie against William
Beavon, and called for the Constable, and William Beavon asked him why he did
so, and this because F. G. would not hearken unto him, and this Priest
endeavored with the Magistrates of Swanzie, that they might take some course
with them that kept meetings in their houses, and it is like he would have
dealt with them as wickedly as his brethren did in New England, who is of that
spirit if he had power.

James Jones Priest about Swanzie one in persecuting, greedy of filthy lucre, a
gamer at bowling, having his mark in his forehead, who pleaded for his bowling
with Fran. Gawler f Cardiff.

Again Thomas Quarr l who is called Edmund Thomas chaplain, who goes under the
name of receiving no Tithes, but at the Bar of Justice, guilty with his
brethren, who is a false accuser, and an evil reporter of the truth, and called
Francis Gawler, a new found Papist, a man well known from his childhood always
against such, but this Priest being a false accuser, it little matters what he
says, who is found with his brethren, one with the Papists in their practice,
whom we deny root and branch, Priest and hirelings and all their adherents,
with their Clerks, and cannot pay them wages, least we partake of their
plagues; therefore peaceably we suffer imprisonment, and the making havoc of
our goods, counting it great joy that we are found worthy to suffer for
righteousness sake, and in so doing we have peace and joy which no man can
take away, and we see the fighters and strikers before mentioned, who are
devourers of the creation, in torment and great trouble, fearing their great
trading will fail, which has been a shaking this long time; and now it is high
time for it to fall which we patiently wait for, knowing the Lord God Almighty
of Heaven and earth has heard the cry of the oppressed, and in his due time
will remove all oppression, and all that burden, them that stand in his fear,
who are a terror to evil deers, whose practices is here in short land down, and
if occasion he, we may be more at large hereafter if required from us, who in
scorn are called Quakers in South Wales.

Again about the beginning of the 4th month, 1659 was taken away from Arnold
Thomas of Lanughanh, Llantinam in Munmouth-shire, One Cow worth about four
pound, for about two and twenty shillings for Tithe, this Cow was taken by
Arnold Williams a farmer, a Papist, and William Davy a Bailiff, both Papist;
who took away the Cow, and sold her, and proffered no overplus Now let the
Priests be ashamed to accuse us to be Papists, and they one with the Papists in
their practices, and taking away our goods, double and treble damages, like
Papists, like Priests, and as troops of robbers wart for a man so the company
of Priests murders by consent, Hos. 6.9.

written in Cardiff in Glamorgan-shire the 4th month, 1659. South Wales. By me
Francis Gawler

THE END.

