a roman soldier surrounded by a flag, drum, cannon, an axe, and spear

THE ART OF WAR, And the way that it is at present practiced in FRANCE.

TWO PARTS.

Wherein the Duties and Functions of all the Officers of Horse and Foot,
Artillery and Provisions, from the General of the Army to the Private Soldier,
are treated of: With the Method of Conducting Armies, Encamping, Besieging and
giving of Battle: As also an account of all Offices and Charges; and the Names
of the Towns, Places, Citadels, Castles and Forts where the most Christian King
keeps Garrison; with the general and particular Terms of War.

Written in French by Louis de Gaya an expert Officer of the French Army, and
Dedicated to his most Christian Majesty.

Translated for public Satisfaction and Advantage.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhil near
the Royal Exchange, 1678.

THE Author's Preface TO THE READER.
IN all Ages there has been War, and according to the manner of making it, the
Rules and Maxims thereof have heen changed: those that are in use at present
are different from what was in practice in former Ages, and all the Authors
that have treated of that subject, are almost of no use at all. You have here a
short instruction of the manner how it is made at present, according as I have
seen it practiced in these last Campagnes, which I present to all the Nobility
and Gentry, who have always reckoned it their honor to carry Arms for the
King, and the glory of their Country: if they who begin that glorious
profession can learn any thing thereby, I shall think my time and pains very
wel^ employed.

THE Translator's Advertisement TO THE READER.
THey who best understand the Art of War, know that the way which the French
take at present, is in very many things different from the practice of other
Nations, and especially of England; particularly in the Names and Offices of
the Commanders of an Army, and the way of Training and Exercising of Soldiers.
The design of the Translator then being to give in English the Art of War as
it is now practiced in France, which an expert and industrious Gentleman of
that Country thought fit to observe, and digest into a Book Dedicated to the
King; he hopes that those who understand the Military Art, will not take it
amiss if they meet with several Names, and Words of Command which are not truly
English; his purpose being to Translate intelligibly what the French observe,
and not to instruct the English in their own Trade. For that end, that he might
not step ul^ra crepidam, he has taken care to inform himself both by Gentlemen
who have served in the French Army, and by skilful Soldiers of this Nation, of
several terms of Art, which they thought fit should be turned as near to the
French Idiom and Way, as possibly could be done, without rendering them obscure
or insignificant to the intelligent Reader.

The more difficult terms of Fortification and War, which are for the most part
originally French, are found explained at the end of the Book; and if at this
time the Gentlemen and others who may have occasion to serve their own or any
other Prince in the illustrious Trade of War, may by this small labor reap any
advantage, the Translator has the same kindness for his Country, that the
Author has for his; not to think his time and pains ill bestowed.

THE CONTENTS Of the First PART of this BOOK.
Chap. First. OF an Army in general. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the General of an
Army. p. 5 Chap. III. Of Lieutenant Generals. p. 11 Chap. IV. Of Mareschals de
Camp. p. 13 Chap. V. Of Brigadeers. p. 16 Chap. VI. Of Aides de Camp. p. 17
Chap. VII. Of the Major General. p. 18 Chap. VIII. Of the Majors of Brigads. p.
19 Chap. IX. Of the Quartermaster General of an Army. p. 25 Chap. X. Of
Ingeneers. p. 27 Chap XI. Of the Captain of the Guides. p. 29. Chap. XII. Of
the Intendants, Commissaries, and Treasurers. p. 31 Chap. XIII. Of the
Safeguards. p. 33 Chap. XIV. Of the Provost Marshal of an Army, and of his way
of Justice. p. 34 Chap. XV. Of the Hospital. p. 36 Chap. XVI. Of Provisions. p.
37 Chap. XVII. Of the Artillery, and it is Officers. p. 40 Chap. XVIII. Of the
March of an Army. p. 47 Chap. XIX. Of Encamping. p. 50 Chap. XX. Of Sieges and
Attaques. p. 53 Chap. XXI. Of the Officers of a Place. p. 61. Chap. XXII. Of
the Guard of places. p. 64 Chap. XXIII Of Battles. p. 76
THE CONTENTS Of the Second PART.
Chap. First. OF the Officers General of the Light Horsemen. Page 1 Chap. II.
Of the Masters de Camp, and Majors of Horse. p. 4 Chap. III. Of the Captains of
the Light Horsemen. p. 6. Chap. IV. Of Lieutenants and Cornets. p. 8. Chap. V.
Of the Quarter Masters, and Brigadeers of the Troops of Light Horsemen. p. 10
Chap. VI. Of the Colonels of Foot. p. 14. Chap. VII. Of the Lieutenant Colonel.
p. 19 Chap. VIII. Of the Majors, and Aide-Majors of Foot. p. 21 Chap. IX. Of
the Captain of Foot. p. 27 Chap. X. Of the Lieutenant, and sub-Lieutenant. p.
34 Chap. XI. Of the Ensign. p. 35 Chap. XII. Of the Quartermaster of a Foot
Regiment. p. 39 Chap. XIII. Of the Provost Marshall of a Regiment. p. 40 Chap.
XIV. Of the Sergeants. p. 41 Chap. XV. Of the Corporals, Lanspassades and other
inferior Officers of a Company. p. 45 Chap. XVI. Of the way of forming a
Battallion. p. 49 Chap. XVII. Of the way of Exerciseing. p. 53 Chap. XVIII. Of
Detachments. p. 72 Chap. XIX. Of the March of a Regiment. p. 75 Chap. XX. Of a
Council of War. p. 79 The Charges of the Troops of the Kings Household. p. 83
The Charges of the Light Horsemen. p. 87 The charges of the Dragoons. p. 88 The
Charges of Foot. p. 89 The Towns, Citadels, Castles and Forts, where the King
keeps Garrison. p. 93. The explication of the terms of War. p. 106 The
explication of the terms of Fortification. p. 111
The end of the Contents.
MOdern Fortification or Elements of Military Architecture, Practiced or
Designed by the latest and most Experience^ Ingeneers of this last Age,
Italian, French Dutch and English; and the manner of Defending and Besieging
Forts and Places With the use of a Joint Ruler or Sector for the speedy
description of any Fortification. By Sr Jonas More. Master Surveyor of his
Majesty's Ordnance. Printed for Robert Harford at the Sign of the Angel in
Cornhil near the Royal Exchange.

ERRATA. First Part.
Page 21. line 19. for Serjenats read Sergeants.

Page 26. line 15. for Pack read Park.

THE ART OF WAR.
The First Part.
Wherein the principal charges of an Army, and their several Functions and
Duties are discoursed of.

CHAP. I. Of an Army in general.
AN Army is made up of Horse, Foot, Dragoons, Artillery, and Provisions. The
Horse are commonly the third part in number to the Foot.

An Army is divided into Brigads, commanded by Officers named Brigadeers. The
Brigads of Horse contain twelve Squadrons a piece; and the Squadrons a hundred
and fifty Troopers. The Foot for the most part consist of five thousand men,
that is to say of six Battallions. The Battallions of the Regiment of Guards
contain five Companies; and the Companies an hundred and fifty Soldiers.

The Battallions of the other French Regiments consist of sixteen Companies;
and the Companies of fifty Soldiers, three parts Musketeers, and the fourth
Pikes.

The Swisse Battallions have only four Companies, but every company contains an
hundred and fourscore men.

Every French Battallion besides the sixteen Companies that compose it, has
likewise a Company of fifty Granadeers, which marches always twenty paces
before the Commander.

The body of the Horse is divide^ into the Gensdarms, and the ligh^ Horsemen.
The Gensdarms are the Troops of the Kings household, of the Queens, and of other
Princes, whereof the members have still retained the name of Gensdarms, because
heretofore they were armed Cap-a-pied, and their Horses Caparisoned. The
Light-horsemen ^re that which now a days we call the Regiments of
Light-horsemen, which consist for most part of ^ix Troops; every Troop of fifty
Troopers; commanded by Masters-de-camp, by whose names the Regiments are
sometimes called.

The Dragoons are soldiers, armed with Firelocks, Swords and Bayo^ets, or
Daggers, who fight sometimes on foot and sometimes on ^orseback, according as
occasion requires. They are employed in the ^eizing on Passes; and therefore
they ^re not ranked in the body of the Army, but march either on the front, ^r
wings, according as the General ^hinks fit.

The Artillery is a Magazine, or Store of all the Arms and Instrument necessary
for the War, under the command of the great Master of A^tillery, who has under
him Lieutenant Generals, Commissaries, an^ many other Officers, of whom we
sha^^ speak in the following Chapters.

We call Provisions, the stores ^^ Bread, Corn, and Meal appointed for the
sustenance of the Forces; under the conduct of the Commissary General of the
provisions, who hat^ private Commissaries under him.

An Army is only to be commande^ by one Head, who is called the General, and
has under him Lieutenant Generals, Marshals de camp, Brig^deers, and many other
Officers. ^^ being now my design to speak of ea^^ Charge severally, I shall
begin wi^^ that of the General.

CHAP. II. Of the General of an Army.
THE General is to an Army what the soul is to the body: and as nothing acts in
this but by the motions of the soul; so also that great number of Regiments
ought to do nothing but by orders from their head. And therefore that charge
requires not only a person who is brave and expert, but also who by birth,
conduct, liberality, and civility has rendered himself conspicuous. His Valor
makes him terrible to his Enemies; and his Experience begets so great
confidence in his soldiers, that they seem almost assured of Victory before
they fight: but his Birth increases his Authority and the respect that is due
to him; his Conduct preserves his men and renders them victorious; his
Liberality procures him friends and favorers, and by his Civility he gains the
hearts of his Officers and Soldiers.

On the prudence of the General depends the safety of the Army; and in my
opinion that quality is more necessary to him, than courage. The bravery of
Leaders wanting conduct, has sometime reduced things to extremities. And
therefore he to whom a Sovereign has entrusted the command of an Army, should
well forecast his measures, before he go into the Field: that is to say, place
his Magazins in the most commodious places; take good information of the
Country which he intends for the seat of the War; not to advance therein so far
with his Troops, but that he know how to make their retreat, and by what means
to make them subsist; and above all things to post himself so advantageously
that he may always be master of giving or avoiding Battle. Before he undertake
any thing, he should always consult the chief Officers of his Army, but never
acquaint any with his resolution; to consider well his occasion in giving
Battle, and not to hazard all his Forces in the fight, endeavoring to overcome
his enemy as much by industry as by force; as in surprising him in disorder, his
soldiers straggling, weary, wet, starved with hunher, cold, or any other bad
accident.

He should the rather addict himself to liberality, that we have several
examples of affairs ruined and Troops discomfited, by the sole avarice of
Generals who withheld the soldiers pay, cut off one half of what was
necessary, and were at no expense in entertaining Pensioners and Spies. The
reward that is given to them is of so great consequence, that without that a
General can never know any thing of the designs of his Enemies; he will remain
still ignorant of their force, and shall never have account of their
enterprises; in a word, frugalitie is of no use in War but in husbanding the
lives of soldiers.

It ought to be the chiefest care of a General to procure the love of all men,
and especially of his Officers; that is to be done by treating them civilly,
hearing their reasons, praising and recompencing good actions, and punishing
the bad. A General never succeed^ well if he have drawn upon himself the
aversion of his Army, by rugged, hasty and fantastical carriages; and if that
be his humor, he may very well say that he has two Enemies to deal with.

The Vicecount of Turen had this advantage, that he had acquired the universal
love of his Soldiers; and there was not an Officer nor Soldier in his Army,
who would not with all his heart have sacrificed himself for him: and it may be
said that his mildness and civil way of carriage, have contributed to his
conquests as much at least as his courage.

But yet a General should not be so mild and civil, as not to be rigorous when
need requires, and cause his Orders most severely to be obeyed; otherwise
Military discipline would become licentious: and therefore he should dis-charge
his soldiers to disband and leave their ranks, to go plunder in a friends
Country, nor yet in an Enemies without permission; causing such as trespass to
be severely punished; and obliging the Commanders to look to it under the pain
of being called to an account for their neglect.

The duty of a General is to order the March of the Army, and the place of
Camping; to visit the Guards; send continually out Parties to skirmish, that
they may bring him news of the Enemy; to give every evening the word to the
Lieutenant Generals, Mareschals de Camp, Major General, and appoint what is to
be done in the night time, or next day. On the day of battle he is to seize on
the most advantageous post, choose his ground, and order his battle; he is to
post his Artillery; command the Baggage to retire, and send off his
detachments. At the Siege of a Town, Fort, or Castle, he is to order the
investiture to be made, mark the Camps, the lines of circumvallation and
contravallation, he is to view the place, and cause it to be attacked where he
has observed it to be weakest, he is to visit the works, hinder any relief to
enter, and provide that the Convoys may arrive with all imaginable security. In
a word, the Office of General is of a large extent, and requires a most strict
care, because on him does a Sovereign repose the care of all his Army.

The King allows the General a certain number of Aids de Camp o^ Adjutants,
whose Office is only to carry about his orders wheresoever there is occasion;
with a Troop of Horse Guards: and the first Regiment of Foot in the Army,
furnishes him every day with a Guard consisting of a Captain, a Lieutenant, two
under-Lieutenants, or an Ensign, two Sergeants and fifty Soldiers.

CHAP. III. Of Lieutenant Generals.
AS the General is the soul to the body of an Army, so the Lieutenant Generals
are its noble parts, and these being Offices of greatest importance, require
persons, whose courage, capacity and fidelity have been rendered conspicuous by
signal services. They ought not only be capable of their own charges; but
likewise of that of the General, because it happens often that they are
entrusted with the command of some Camps volans or Flying Armies, yea and with
some bodies of the Army which they command with an equal Authority to his.

The number of Lieutenant Generals is not limited; they are more or less,
according as the Armies are great or small. When there are several in one and
the same Army, they have every one of them their day of command. For example,
in a siege, there is one Lieutenant General who commands the Attacque of the
place, and who continues in the Trenches twenty four hours, he is called the
Lieutenant General for the day; the twenty four hours being over, he that is to
come next takes his place, and so do the rest successively.

The duty of their charge, is to do all that is commanded them by the General,
who assigns to every one of them Quarters to Command in, and employs them as
occasion requires: some to lead a body of Horse, others to march at the head of
Foot, sometimes for a Convoy, sometimes for the Van or Reere guards, and
sometimes for Camps Volans. They ought not to fail of being every day with the
General, that they may receive his Orders, and afterward give them out in the
Quarters and Posts that are entrusted to them, being very careful to give him
incessantly notice of all that passes there. For that as well as for other
occasions the King allows them Aides de Camp or Adjutants, and Horse Guards.

Every Lieutenant General has daily at his door a Foot Guard, consisting of a
Lieutenant, a Sergeant and thirty Soldiers.

CHAP. IV. Of the Mareschals de Camp.
THE charge of Marshall de Camp being of no small consequence, nor the least
painful of the Army, he that discharges it ought to be brave, judicious and
expert, that he may remedy many accidental things. There are more or fewer of
them created, according to the greatness of the Army, and they succeed to one
another as the Lieutenant Generals do: when two Attacques are to be made in the
siege of a place, the Lieutenant General for the day, commands that on the
right hand; and the Marshall de Camp the other on the left.

The chief duty of that charge is to go daily and receive orders from the
General. Upon the march of an Army, he that is for the day, goes the evening
before they move with the Quartermaster, to receive orders for the way and
Encamping. He ought to know the Passes, that he may be assured what way is best
for the Troops to march: for that effect he is to give notice the evening to
the Squadron that is to mount the Guard for the night following, to be in
readiness against next morning before break of day; with whom he is to march,
and the Quarter masters of all the Regiments, of the Artillery and Provisions
are to wait upon him, that they may go and mark out the Camp in the place
appointed. In his march he is to send some Scouts before and on each side, to
beat the rode: and if there happen an Alarm, he is to inform himself of the
nature of it, and send intelligence to the General, that he may receive
assistance, and that the Army may have time to draw up. Being come to the place
of Encamping, and having chosen the most pro^er and convenient ground, he is
himself to place the great Guard half a League or more, beyond the ground which
he has marked out in general to the general Quartermaster of the Army, who
divides and assigns the several portions of it, to the Regiment
Quarter Masters: that being done he acquaints the General with the state of the
Camp, from whom he receives orders for the Guards, Convoys, Escortes and
Parties, which he distributes amongst the Majors of the Brigads. In a word, the
Mareschals de Camp should lodge the whole Army, and be always present at their
movings, being the first on Horseback and the last to alight. They have Aides
de Camp, and Horse Guards as well as the Lieurenant Generals, with a Court de
Guard of Foot at their door, consisting of a Sergeant and fifteen men.

CHAP. V. Of Brigadiers.
IT is not long since the Brigads o^ the Army were commanded by the eldest
Masters de Camp, an^ Colonels; and there was no talk o^ Brigadiers: but since
the King has made them places with the title of a^ Office, he chooses commonly
for these charges, those Colonels, Masters d^ Camp, and Lieutenant Colonel^
whom he knows to be most experienced in the matter of War. Their duty is to
march at the head of the Brigade whereof they have the command, and to lead
them whithersoever the General has ordered; having a special care that no
Soldier leave his Rank; and giving most expres^ orders to the Commanders of
Regiments to see that obeyed. They command amongst themselves according to
Seniority: the Brigadiers of Foot mount the Trenches by turn, and relieve one
another at the end of four and twenty hours. And the Guard that is appointed
for them consists of a Sergeant and ten Soldiers.

CHAP. VI. Of Aides de Camp or Adjutants.
THE charge of Aid de Camp is a most gentile employment for a young person of
Quality; fit to make him appear; and wherein he may easily learn and improve
himself: ^t is requisite that he who undertakes ^t, be prudent, vigilant and
strong. The duty of the Aides de Camp, is to be always near the General
persons that they may carry their orders where there is need.

CHAP. VII. Of the Major General.
THE charge of Major General o^ the Army, is late in France and invented by the
King, who hat^ found the advantage of it, and wh^ will have him that enjoyes it
endo^ed with as much conduct and vigou^ as experience. He has access to the
General at all hours, and ought t^ lodge near him. His duty is to g^ every
evening and receive orders from the General, or Lieutenant General for the day;
to write down what he is commanded in his Table-books, that ev^ry thing may be
punctually put in e^ecution; and to distribute them amongst the Majors of
Brigads ^^ Horse, Foot and Dragoons; reg^lating with them the Guards, Co^voyes,
Parties and Detachments; a^^ appointing an hour and place of Re^dezvous for
those that are Detache^ where it is his care to go himself an^ receive them:
and to tell the Comman^ers what they are to do, appointing Guides to conduct
them whither they ^re ordered to go.

He should have a list of the strength of every Brigad in general, and of very
Regiment in particular, with a ^oll of all the General persons, Bri^adiers,
Masters de Camp, Colonels, ^ieutenant Colonels and Majors, ac^ording to their
seniority and the ^ank of their Regiments: In fine, he ^^ in the whole Army,
what a private ^ajor is in a Regiment.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Majors of Brigades.
THe Majors of Brigades do in their Brigades, what the Major Ge^eral does in
the whole Army. For ^^ese places the most skilful and ex^ert Captains of
Regiments are cho^^n. Their duty is to be always near the General, or General
Persons, ^^ go every evening and take orders fr^^ the Major General, who tells
th^^ what is to be done either for the sa^^ day or the next, as I have said in
^^^ foregoing Chapter. When they ha^^ received the orders, and word (whi^^ is
commonly the name of a Saint a^ a Town, as Saint Lowis and Par^^ they carry it
first to the Brigadie^ or the Commanders of their Briga^^ and then distribute
it amongst the M^jors or Aide-majors of every Re^^ment. They together regulate
t^^ Guards, Parties, Detachments, Co^voys, and give them an hour a^^ place of
Rendezvous at the head ^^ the Brigads, where they take care ^^ come and receive
them, and to c^^duct them to the Major General. F^^ instance.

The General of the Army in t^^ evening gives Orders to the Maj^^ General, to
have in readiness n^^^ morning by the break of day, a C^^voy of three thousand
Foot, and thousand Horse, to be command by a Marshall de Camp and a Brigadier.

The Major General having given notice of this to the Marshall de Camp for the
day, calls together the Majors of Brigades to impart to them the Orders which
he has received from the General, and to regulate the Detachment with them, in
this man^er.

If the Army consist of four Brigads of Foot and as many Horse, he divides the
three thousand Foot amongst the four Brigads, and according to the division
which he has made, he appoints the number which every Brigade of Foot is
obliged to furnish: which is seven hundred and fifty Soldiers, fifteen
Captains, as many Lieutenants, as many Sub-Lieutennats or Enseigns, and thirty
Serjenats. The thousand Horse divided amongst four Brigads of horse, come to
two hundred and fifty Troops a Brigad, five Captains, as many Lieutenants, as
many Cornets, and as many Quarter Masters. And because to a Detachment of three
thousand Foot there are required three Colonels, an^ three Lieutenant Colonels;
and to ^ thousand Horse three Masters d^ Camp: the Majors of Brigads should
examine together, who are the Brigadiers, the Masters de Camp, the Colonels,
and Lieutenant Colonels, whose turn it is to March, and to what Brigade they
belong. The division being made, every one returns to his Brigade, where he
calls together the Majors or Aide-majors of the Regiments, to acquaint them
with the number of Officers and Soldiers which the Brigade is obliged to
furnish against next morning. And as we have said before, that according to our
computation every Brigade of Foot should furnish seven hundred and fifty
Soldiers, fifteen Captains, fifteen Lieutenants, as many Sub-Lieunants, and
thirty Sergeants: the Majors are to divide that number amongst them, and
supposing that every Brigade consists of six Battallions, it would come to a
hundred and twenty five Soldiers for every Battal^ion, two Captains, two
Lieutenants, ^wo Sub-Lieutenants, and five Ser^eants: but because there would
be ^ut twelve of every kind of Officers, and that there needs fifteen; the
three ^emaining must be again taken out of the three first Battallions. The
same way is observed for the Horse: a Brigade consisting of twelve Squadrons,
must furnish two hundred and fifty Troopers, which come to one and twenty
Troopers the Squadron, and by consequent to seven men the Troop.

The Majors return to their Regiments, where having assembled the Quarter
Masters and Sergeants, they command them to have in readiness against next
morning, so many men out of each Troop or Company, as have been rated by the
sub division they have made, and name the Officers who are to March. The
Quarter Masters and Sergeants carry that Order to the Officers, and put in
Execution what is commanded them.

Next morning, the Majors of the Regiments come to the head of the Camps to
receive those that are Detached from each Company, where having counted them,
they draw them up, distribute amongst them necessary Ammunition, and lead them
to the Majors of the Brigads, who send them back to the Major General, and the
Major General to the Marshall de Camp appointed to Command them, who afterward
leads them in order of Battle whither the General has Commanded him. And this
is the way of making Detachments in an Army.

The Majors of Brigades ought to have a List of the Regiments of their
Brigades, know their strength and weakness, and keep a Roll of the Commanders,
Majors and Aide-majors according to their seniority and the Rank of their
Regiments.

CAAP. IX. Of the Quartermaster General of the Army.
EVery Army ought to have a Quartermaster General: but that is a charge which
requires a judicious knowing man, and one who is well experienced in
Geographie: and because it is wholly his duty to mark out the ways for
marching, and the Camps; he ought in general to be acquainted with all
Countries, know the Rivers and Plains of them, the Woods, Hills, Passes, narrow
Passages and Lanes, the Bogs and Marish places, and even the smallest Rivolet.
To be perfect in that charge, he ought to be like to the Sieur de Chanlay who
is at present Quartermaster to the Kings Army; who though he be but still
young, yet to his praise it may be said, that forty years service could not
make him either more skilful or of greater experience than he is.

The Quartermaster General should go daily and receive orders from the
General, know of him the way the Army must March; and go to the place of
Encamping with the Marshall de Camp for the day, where being arrived he sets
out the Ground, and divides it among the Quarter masters of the several
Regiments; he chooses a place for the Kings Quarters, there he marks out the
Lodgings of the General persons, and of those who ought to lodge there, he
assigns a commodious place for the Pack of Artillery, another for the
Provisions, and appoints a place for the Hospital, in such a manner that all
the Quarters be near the Army and covered by it.

Upon a March he is to give the General an account of the Passes and narrow
Lanes, to the end that if they meet with any that are troublesome, he might
have time to remedy that by sending Pioneers to clear the ways.

CHAP. X. Of Ingeneers.
INgeneers are very necessary as well for Attacking as defending of places. But
the chiefest care that is to be taken, is to choose such as are not only
skilful, but who are as brave as knowing; the meaning is, that these
employments require expert and undaunted men.

When the Ingeneers have viewed the place that is to be Attacked, they make
their report of it to the General, and tell him the part which they think
weakest; and to which approaches may be most easily made. When an Attacque is
resolved, it is their duty to mark out the Trenches, the places of Arms, the
Galleries, the Lodgings on the Counterscarp and Half Moon, and to bring on the
Works just to the Walls, by the favor of Musketshot; setting out to the
workmen that are appointed them, the Works that they are to finish in one
night. I have said that they ought to be experienced and undaunted men, because
all that cannot be performed without great danger to their persons. And besides
an Ingeneer who is ignorant or fearful, many times does but little mind his
business, and makes entangled works which must be begun a new again with the
loss of many men.

They ought to take orders from the General or the Lieutenant General for the
day, about what is to be done in the Trenches: give them a faithful account of
all; demand a sufficient number of Laborers, and instruments, provide every
thing that may be needful to them, and secure them at the Rear of the Trenches,
or in a place appointed for that end. As Faggots, Pick-axes, Gabions, Shovels,
Spades, Hatchets, Sacks full of Earth, Planks, Tuns, Joists, and many other
things which cannot be wanting in an Attack. It is their part also to mark out
the lines of circumvallation, with Redoubts and Angles of fit distances.

There are more or fewer Ingeneers, according as there is need of them;
commanded by a Chief, such as is at present the Sieur de Vauban, Marshall de
Camp, and Governor of the Citadel de L'isle, and who has given sufficient
marks of his Courage and skill on many occasions, not only in the Attacking of
places in Holland, Flanders, and the Franch Comte, but likewise in the
Fortification of Towns and Citadels in France, which his Art has rendered
impregnable, and put in a condition not to fear any attempts.

CHAP. XI. Of the Captain of the Guides.
GUides are so necessary for the March of an Army, that they cannot be wanted:
for that end a Captain of Guides has been established, who is always obliged
to have some in readiness to be employed as need shall require: as in
conducting Convoyes, Parties, the Vanguard, Baggage, Artillery, the
Detachments that March on the Wings of the Army, and the Army it self.

It ought to be his first care so soon as he comes to the place of Encamping,
to demand some Troopers from the Marshall de Camp, with whom he may go and
summon in the Kings name the Castles and Forts of the Neighboring Villages,
instantly to deliver him a sufficient number of Guides, which the Communalty
must furnish: and when they are delivered to him, he is to tie them together
for fear they make their escape, and bring them into the Kings Quarter, where
he must have a care to lodge them under Guard. He is to send them from Quarters
to Quarters, but never to dismiss them until he be provided of others.

This is an Office not to be discharged but by one who is skilful in many
languages, and especially in the language of the Country where the War is made.

CHAP. XII. Of Intendants, Commissaries, and Treasurers.
IT being my design to treat of all the employments which are at present in use
in Armies, I thought it not fit to pass by the Offices of Intendants,
Commissaries and Treasurers: and though they be no Sword Employments, and that
they require the Pen more than the Hand, yet I shall glance a little at them by
the by, because there is no Army without Commissaries, an Intendant and
Treasurers.

The Intendant is to have a care of the Policy, the paying of the Soldiers,
the regulation of Contributions, the establishing of Safeguards and Hospitals,
and of the Execution of the Kings orders.

The Commissaries at the beginning of each Month Muster the Troops, or
otherwise when the General pleases; they keep a Roll of the Regiments, of the
several Companies, and the Officers that are present; they give the General a
Copy of their Muster Rolls and send them to Court.

The Treasurers pay the Army according to the Commissaries Musterrolls, and
deliver according to the General Intendants order what money is necessary. There
is always a Foot Guard placed at the Treasury, which is commonly in the Kings
Quarters near the Intendants Lodgings.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Safeguards.
HEretofore the Safeguards were private Troopers of the Guards of General
persons, placed in Buroughs, Villages, Forts, Abbeys and Castles, to prevent
Plundering and Fire: but the King whose Prudence has provided all things
necessary, has erected a Troop of two hundred Horsemen, commanded by a
Captain, Lieutenants and Quarter Masters.

These Troopers wear Blew coats, whereon are embroydered two Flower-de-luces,
the one on the breast and the other on the back, with this inscription over
head, THE KINGS SAFEGVARD: to the end that they may be generally known by all,
and that none disturb them upon pain of death, in the execution of their Duty,
which is to continue at the entry of places whereof the Guard is committed to
them; and by that means to hinder the straggling Soldiers who go a Pillaging to
commit any disorder there.

The due of every Safeguard that is employed, is four Crowns a day besides the
ordinary allowance.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Provost Marshall of the Army, and of his way of Justice.
JUstice ought to bear rule every where, and especially in Armies, it is the
only means to settle order there, and there it ought to be executed with as
much exactness as in the best governed Cities of the Kingdom, if it be intended
that the Soldiers should be kept in their Duty and Obedience. The Provost
Marshall has been established for that end, and has a Troop of Officers on
Horseback, with ^ Lieutenant, Exempts, a Clark to Record his Processes, and an
Executioner to punish those that offend against the Orders of the King and
General.

The duty of the Provost Marshall is to March with his Troop sometimes on the
Wings, sometimes at the Head, and sometimes at the Reere of the Army, that he
may hinder the Soldiers to Plunder places that are spared; he brings in
Accusations, executes the Sentences, has the Administration of Justice over the
Merchants and Sutlers of the Army, he sets a price upon their goods, and
decides the differences that happen amongst them.

There are likewise public Notaries who follow the Army, for the benefit of
private persons who may stand in need of them.

CHAP. XV. Of the Hospital.
WAR was never more commodiously managed than it i^ at present in France; the
cares of ou^ Monarch are inconceiveable, and hi^ prudence has so well provided
for every thing, that it may be said nothing is omitted which may be necessary
for Men. The Hospital is ^ great relief for the sick and wounded they are as
well used there as in those of the best Cities of the Kingdom through the care
of Phyficians, Apothecaries, and Monks affigned the^ under the conduct of a
Director.

It follows the Army constantly until that there be a proper an^ convenient
place found to setle it in to which all the sick are carried; an^ there is left
in the Camp but a Detachment of the Hospital for the mo^^ urgent necessities.
All sorts of Med^cines and Instruments necessary for sicknesses and wounds are
in great abundance provided: and at present the Fathers Recolets wait on the
sick in the Hospital, and go to the Trenches to confess the wounded.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Provisions.
IT ought to be the chiefest care of the General of an Army to see that
Provisions be never wanting; otherwise he may assure himself that it will not
last long without melting away and diminishing. And therefore the King has
established Commissaries General of Provisions, who ought to know the number of
the men whom they are to provide for; choose a fit place for their stores; know
when they are to begin to distribute them, and how long it will continue, to
the end they may provide a sufficient quantity of Corn and number of Bakers.

Ammunition Corn consists of two thirds of Wheat and one third of Rye: the
Bushel of that grain weighs about eighteen pound weight; whereof there is made
three pound weight of Bran, and fifteen of Flower, which is knead with ten
pound weight of Water, and whereof the Dough weighs five and twenty pounds:
eleven ounces of Dough make ten of baked Bread: every Soldier has given him
for two days a Loaf weighing three pound weight. When he Marches by any
public Storehouse, or place of Provisions, he is allowed a pint of Wine of
Paris measure and a pound of meat. In an Army bread should never be wanting to
the Soldiers, and the General persons should have a care that what is given
them be neither musty nor stink; that proves very many times the cause of their
Distempers.

Every Ammunition Wagon is drawn by four strong Horses, and carries fifteen
hundred Loaves; there must be three times as many Carriages as are necessary
for bringing one days Provisions; one third part to go fetch them from the
Towns where the Storehouses are kept; another to come with them, and the third
to distribute and unload them. There is commonly added to the Provisions of one
day a fourth part of Bread more than is necessary. The General should never
suffer these Carriages to March without a very strong Guard, that they may
arrive with all security.

The Commissary General of the Provisions receives orders from the General for
the March of his Convoys, and the places of his Provisions: he has private
Commissaries under him, who are always with the Convoys of the Wagons, and
keep a punctual account of the Provisions which they deliver to the Majors or
Aide-majors of the Regiments according to a Copy of the Musterroles of the
Commissaries of War.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Artillery and its Officers.
THE Artillery is a Provision of all Arms and Instruments that are necessary
for War, such as are Canons and their Carriages, Bullets, Bombs, Mortar pieces,
Petards, Granado's, Cartridges, Barrels of Powder, Ball and Match, Saucissons,
red hot Bullets, Godrons, pitched Faggots stuffed with Granado's, all kinds of
Arms, Hatchets, Sawes, Shovels, Pick-Axes, Wedges, Ladders of wood and ropes,
Beams, Joysts, Planks, Tuns or Hogsheads, Ropes, Pontons or Boats for Bridges,
and all sorts of Artificial Fire: all these things are not drawn after an Army
without a great many Carriages, horses and men appointed for the conduct of
that Train. The place where it is Encamped is commonly called the Park of
Artillery, where there is a foot Guard set, at more than thirty paces distance
from it, and the Sentinels stand there, only with a Pick or Halbard, it being
most expressly enjoined them, to suffer no man whosoever to approach with
lighted Matches or Pipes of Tobaco, by reason of the Accidents that have been
many times occasioned thereby.

The Artillery has at present for its Guard and service a Regiment of
Firelocks consisting of two Battallions, under the Command of the great Master
or General of Artillery, whereof the four first companies are made up of
Carpenters, Cartwrights, Joyners, Smiths, Lock-smiths, Hatchetmakers,
Quarry-men and Miners.

Of the great Master, or General of Artillery.
The chief charge, is that of great Master, or General of Artillery, possessed
by the Duke of Lude, he has an absolute power over all the Artillery, and his
Officers own none above him but the King and General: and serving in Quality of
Lieutenant General of the Army, he keeps and account and inventory of all the
Pieces, Powder, Bullets, the Equipage of Pieces, and of all the Officers of
Artillery in the Kingdom, whose capacity he ought to know, that he may be ready
to inform the King thereof, when his Majesty has any design to be put in
Execution, as the besieging of a place, giving of Battle, and Fortifying of
Fronteer Towns. He ought to know what Provisions and preparations must be made;
how and in what places the Pieces should be planted, how far they can carry, of
what nature is the wall wherein a breach is intended to be made, and what is
the force of his Artillery.

In the Situation of places he should have a care that the seat of his
Artillery be commodious and easy to be defended by the Soldiers; that in case
of necessity the Pieces may be easily drawn off; that they may discover,
command, shoot straight and level, and that they be not too far distant from
one another.

The great Master presents yearly to the King the Account or List of the
Officers of the Artillery, he fills up the empty places with the names of such
as he thinks fit; afterward the King confirms or alters them at his pleasure;
signs the Roll and causes it be subsigned by a Secretary of State. That List is
delivered up to the Treasurer General, who fulfils the appointments, and pays
the Officers therein contained. The Officers are four, a Lieutenant General, a
Store-keeper General, two Controllers General, one Treasurer General, who pays
out money according to the Orders of the great Master, a Quartermaster, and a
Provost Marshall, with Commissaries, Store-keepers, Gunners and Saltpeter-men
who serve as well in the Army, as in the Towns, Arsenals, and public
workhouses of France.

The great Master receives orders from no Officer but the General, and gives
them out in his Park. The Bells of the Towns that are taken by Assault or
Composition belong to the Artillery, and the great Master sends Officers to
make inventory of what is found in the Magazines.

Of the Lieutenant Generals.
The Lieutenat Generals Command the Artillery and its Officers in absence of
the great Master. The duty of their charge is to go view the ground for the
Batteries, to mark them out, cause them be raised with all diligence, and put
in condition of Battering the place and Enemies; they have the care of causing
to be brought into the Trenches, all the Arms and Instruments that may be
needful; and there to appoint Officers to distribute and deliver them out.

Of Commissaries.
Every Piece in a Battery, has its Commissary, and Officers to serve it: a
Commissary must be bold, skilful, and experienced, because he it is that levels
the Piece by means of the Viser and Wedges, which he causes to be raised or
lowered as much as he thinks convenient, according as he knows how the Pieces
carry, and what their burden is.

When a Cannon is fired, the Commissary is to observe if the Bullet works the
effect that he desires, to the end he may retain or change the manner of
levelling it.

Of Gunners.
Every Piece in a Battery ought to have its Gunner, as well as Commissary; the
duty of the Gunner is, so soon as the Piece has fired to cool it with a Sponge
dipped in Vinegar or Urine, without losing of time to put in the Powder, Wad
and Shot. Two of those that serve the Gun take care to place the Piece again
into his place; the Commissary levels it and gives order to fire.

A Gunner who understands his Trade well, has special care not to put the
Powder into a Piece that has just fired, until he has first cooled it, because
of the heat that remains long in the Metal. Every Piece ought to have its men
to serve it, its Store of Powder and Bullets of size, with a provision of Hay
for Wads; but in such a place as no sparks can fly to.

The Instruments necessary to a Cannon are the Sponges to cool it, the
Cartridges wherein the Powder for charging is put, the Rammer which serves to
Ram it, and the Wedges for levelling.

Of Miners, and Fire-work-men.
Miners and Fire-work-men are also members of the Artillery: the former are
commanded by a Captain of Miners, and serve to Undermine Walls, dig holes which
the French call Fourneaux under the Lodgings, and Mines for blowing up the
Bastions and Works of a place.

The employment of the others is, to throw Bombes, and to make all sorts of
Artificial Fire, to be cast into the place that is Attacked, or from the walls
of that which is defended.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the March of an Army.
IT is the Generals prudence to order the March of his Army, according to the
commodiousness of the Country, and the knowledge he has of the Enemies Forces.

A great Army marches commonly in three great bodies, the Artillery and Baggage
in the middle: but the Country must not be traversed with Marshes or Rivulets,
and there must be an easy communication between one body and another. If the
Enemy be on the right hand, and the left covered by a River, the Equipage
should march on the side of the River, and the Army in a body or two on the
side of the Enemy, having always Detachments of Horse or Dragoons in the
Vanguard and on the Wings.

When an Army has long narrow passages of Woods or Mountains to pass through,
the General sends of immediately some Regiments of Foot, and lines his
Squadrons with Battallions, leaving Foot in the Woods or on the heights to
facilitate the passage of the Artillery and Equipage; and as his Troops get
through he draws them up in Battle array, and keeps them so until all the Army
have passed the Pass.

When an Army Marches in a Country where there is no fear of any powerful Army,
and where the General would have them live more at their ease; he divides them
into several Bodies, which he sends by several ways, under the Command of
General persons, appointing to all of them a general Rendezvous.

The Army in a March is divided into the Vanguard, the body of the Battle, and
the Reer-guard; the Van and Reer-guards are Commanded by Lieutenant Generals
and Mareschals de Camp; the General abides commonly in the body of the Army,
from whence he sends his Orders to all places where there is need of them, by
his Aides de Camp or Ad^utants, or by his Majors of Brigads. The Cavalry is
divided into two Bodies and the Infantry march in the middle betwixt them: the
first Brigades have the Vanguard and Reerguard by turns; that is, that they
who have the Vanguard to day, have ^he Reer-guard to morrow: that is lone by
making the Army File off one day to the right and the other to ^he left.

CHAP. XIX. Of Encamping.
IT is the business of the Marshall de Camp, to lodge the Army; for that end
he should go view the Country, and choose the most convenient and fit ground for
a Camp, which ought not to be far from water, possessing himself as much as can
be, o^ the hills and heights. It is commonly the practice to Camp an Army in
two lines, the latter distant from the former five hundred Paces, the Hors^ on
the Wings, and the Foot in the middle, in such a manner that it always look
toward the Enemy, an^ be covered behind by a River, Broo^ or Marsh. Every
Squadron have threescore Foot of Ground allowe^ them, and Battallions fourscore
an^ ten for their Encamping; which ^^ divided amongst the Companies an^ Troops
as well for the Huts and Stables which ought to be on a streigh^line, The way
of Encamping
Horse first Line Foot Horse Second Line Park of Artllerie Park of ye
Provisions Kings Quarters


diagram using icons to represent troop organziation as for the Lanes. The void
that separates the Camps should contain thirty Paces.

The Huts of the Quarter Masters and Sergeants, are always at the head of the
Troopers and Soldiers, and the Officers Tents behind.

The Camp of the first Brigade of the Army is on the right hand of the first
line; that of the second on the left; the third is posted on the right of the
second line, the fourth on the left, and the rest in the Center according to
their seniority: this is observed among the Horse as well as Foot. The Dragoons
are never Encamped in the Body of the Army, but have their Camp at the Head or
on the Wings, in that side where the greatest danger is, serving always as an
out-Guard for the Army.

Every Regiment ought to have a Guard at the head of their Camp, and the
Marshall de Camp for the day takes care to place the great Guard half a League
beyond the Army toward the Enemy, choosing for that effect a place where all
the Avenues may be discovered: there it continues during the day, and at night
draws off near the Army, at the head of the Foot.

When an Army Encamps near the Enemy; and there is no River to divide them; the
General Entrenches his Camp, and makes his men pass the night in Arms.

The Master de Camp that mounts the Guard, is to send off an outGuard (which is
commonly called in French, La Guard folle, the foolish Guard) consisting of
twenty four Troopers, Commanded by a Lieutenant, whom he Posts a Musket Shot
beyond his Squadron, in a place from whence the Country about may easily be
discovered. The duty of him that commands the great Guard is, to let none
whosoever pass without an order, to look every where about, and to send notice
to the General whensover he discovers any forces, because the whole Army trusts
in him. All other things are disposed in the manner Page 53. 1.st part.
The way of Encamping Lines of Circomvallation Lines of Contravallation The
Trenches The River Artillery Bridge The Kings Quarters Guard


diagram using icons to represent troop organziation for camping near a river
that I have before mentioned, in the Chapters of the Marshall de Camp, and of
the Quartermaster General of the Army.

CHAP. XX. Of Sieges and Attaques.
WHen a General intends to Besiege a place, he causes it first to be invested
by a Body of Horse, under the Command of a Lieutenant General, and a Marshall
de Camp, to hinder all succors from entering it, whilst he himself is
expected with the rest of the Army.

The manner of Encamping at a Siege is quite different from that of a March.
Here the Army ought to Environ the place in such a manner that nothing can
enter it, endeavoring as much as may be to keep the Camps without Cannon-shot.

If the place stand upon a River, there is a Detachment made of one part of the
Army which takes its Quarters on the other side with Bridges of communication,
where Redoubts are made wherein are placed strong Foot-guards. If it be
encompassed with hills, the heights are to be possessed from which the Enemies
might extremely incommode the Besiegers, if they are once become Masters of
them.

In a Siege the Army Encamps with their back to the place, the Battallions
lined with Squadrons. The Ingeneers mark out the lines of Circumvallation and
Contravallation with Redoubts, and Angles in fit distances; and every Regiment
works at them in the place of its Quarter. The line of Circumvallation is that
which is beyond the Camps designed only to hinder any relief to enter. The line
of Contrevallation is between the Camps and the place, which cures the Besiegers
from Sallies.

When the General has ordered his Camps, placed his Guards as well on the side
of the place, as of the Country about, and that he has appointed Lieutenant
Generals to Command in each Quarter, with orders what to do; he goes with his
Ingeneers to view the place, and orders the Attaque to be made at the part
which he thinks to be weakest: for that end he commands the first Regiments of
Foot to be in readiness in more or less number according to the strength of the
Besieged, that he may open the Trenches; and orders as many Squadrons as he
thinks convenient to mount the Guard of them, and to beat back the Sallies of
the Enemies; the Regiments which are to open the Trenches make their
Detachments, before they draw out of their Camps; they furnish the number of
Laborers that the Ingeneers have required, with Officers to lead them: and the
time of marching out drawing near, the Majors draw up the Battallions, the
Chaplains make the accustomed Prayers with a short exhortation, at the end
whereof they give a general Absolution, and the Soldiers cry, God save the
King, throwing their Hats in the Air.

The Regiments draw off in good order, Drums beating, the Officers with Pikes
in hand, the party Detached at their front; and come to the place of working,
where they receive Orders what to do from the Lieutenant General for the day,
or the Marshall de Camp. So soon as day ends, all the Cavalry of the Army,
except those who have the Guard, go and bring Faggots to the Reerward of the
Trenches; they who are appointed to defend the Laborers, lay themselves on
their Bellies some paces beyond the Counterscarpe, and part of the Soldiers
commanded to work, begin to dig and cast up the earth, according as it has
been marked out to them by the Ingeneers, whilst the others bring them Faggots
and Mattocks.

The Trenches ought to be six foot and a half high, and four broad, with
Banquets for the convenience of the Musketeers; and the Ingeneers should carry
them on in such a manner that they be not open to the place: when it cannot be
otherwise, that part which is open is covered with great Faggots or Planks of
wood called Madriers.

When two Attacks are made, the first Regiment has the right, and the second
the left.

The great Master or General of the Artillery carries on the works at the
Batteries, and brings thither the Cannon, with a sufficient Provision of all
that can be useful to the Trenches.

If there be no Rideaw, Shelter, nor Bottom or Depth at the Rear of the
Trenches to cover the Horse-guard; there are Earthen works (called Espaulments)
cast up, which must be Cannon proof, behind which they place themselves.

So soon as day breaks, the Lieutenant General causes all the men draw back
within the lines of approaches called the Boyau, where every one betakes
himself to his Post that they may incessantly fire against the place; whilst
the Pieces of Battery do all they can to dismount the Enemies Guns, and spoil
their works.

All the Guards of the Trenches are relieved at the end of twenty four hours,
at the same hour that they were mounted; and the Regiments that enter the Guard
should continue the works as far as the Palissadoe. They who come after Attack
the Chemin couvert the Covered way; they drive the Enemies from thence with
Grenades, whilst others pluck up the Palissadoes, and make there a lodging
with Gabions, Faggots, and Sacks full of earth, into which a Captain and
Musketeers are placed for its preservation. If the Ditches be full of water,
they are filled with Faggots, stuffed with Stones. When the halfmoon which is
to be carried is invested, they blow it up with Mines, and having driven the
Enemies from thence, they lodge themselves on it. From thence they make a
Gallery into the Ditch which joins to the Bastion whereto the Miner is to be
set, whilst ^^ the mean time the Batteries are ad^anced as far as the Covered
way. If ^he Gallery were in a dry Ditch; the ^ieutenant General should not omit
to ^ake Provision of several Hogsheads ^f water, which is made use of to ^uench
the Artificial fires that the Be^eged might throw from the Rampart upon the
Gallery; the Miner being ^odged at the foot of the Bastion, he ^akes a Mine
there and Charges it. And when every thing is ready to give the Assault, the
General causes ^he Besieged to be summoned to ren^er before the Mine play,
promising them all good conditions, if they had ^ather Surrender, than abide
the As^ault; Hostages are sent from either ^ide, whilst the Capitulation is
frame^ng, which is no sooner Signed but that the General Commands the two first
Regiments of Foot with a Lieu^enant General, to go take possession of the
Place; and establish Courts of Guard wheresoever there is need. If the
Capitulation bear that the Forces that were in Garrison should be P^^soners of
War; they are disarme and shut up in some convenient plac^ to which a strong
Guard is put. B^^ if it be agreed upon by the Treat^ that they shall march out,
with B^^ and Baggage, Drums beating, Colo^^^ flying, lighted Matches, and so^^
pieces of Cannon; the General ha^ing put his Men in Arms, comes ^^ see the
Enemies Garrison march o^^ the Officers at the head of their Companies who
ought to salute him wi^^ their Arms, and the Governor at t^^ Rear of all; and
sends with them Guard of Horse to Convoy them ^^ the place that has been
grant^^ them by the Capitulation.

It is the right of the first Foot-R^giments of the Army to take possession of
all Conquered places, to make t^ themselves places of Arms, to Gua^^ the Posts
of them, and there to continue until there be a Commander an^ Garrison
established therein. An^ the Army never decamps from before them, till the
breaches be first repaired, the Works refitted, the Lines and Trenches filled
up, and the Mines uncharged; that ought to be ^he care of the General, as well
as to ^ill the Storehouses with Provisions and necessary Ammunition.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Officers of a Place.
THE Officers which the King places in a Town of War, are ^ Governor, a
Lieutenant of the King, a Major, Aides Majors, and Captains of the Gates.

It is the Governors part to have continual care of the preservation of ^he
place which has been entrusted ^o him, because his head must answer for it;
his Office is to appoint the Guards, Rounds, and Patrouils: ^o give the word
every evening; vi^it the Posts, keep the Officers and Soldiers to their duty,
charge them to be diligent, and to send oft^^ out Parties as well to learn new
of the Enemies, as to raise contr^butions from the neighboring Country.

The Kings Lieutenant comman^ in the place and Government in a^sence of the
Governor with the sa^^ Authority.

The Sergeant Major sees the Guar^ mounted, the Rounds and Posts a^signed: he
regulates the Sentinel^ goes every evening to receive the Word from the
Governor, and giv^^ it about upon the place of Arms, ^^ the Quarter Masters
and Sergeants ^^ the Garrison; he goes his Roun^ major: he visits the Courts of
Guar^ the Escouades and Arms of the Sou^diers; he causes necessary Ammunit^on
to be distributed amongst them he orders the Gates to be opened an^ shut, and
gives the Governor an e^act account of all that passes in the place.

The Adjutants or Aides-Majo^ are more or less in number accordin^ to the
greatness of places; they go ^he Rounds with the Major by turns, and the duties
of their charges differ nothing at all from his.

The care of the Captains of the Gates is to go evening and morning to the
Governors House to receive the Keys of the Gates, that they may open and shut
them.

There is no Frontier place wherein there is not a Commissary of Artillery, a
Store-keeper, who keeps an account of all the Ammunition, and distributes them
according to the Governors order; Gunners, whereof there is always one on the
Guard at the Batteries; and a Commissary of Provisions who has the charge of
the Corn, Flower, and of all that may serve for the sustenance of a Garrison.

The Officers who are in Garrison in a place owe all kind of obedience and
respect to the Governor, and they cannot go out for what reason soever without
a permission from him in writing, or from the person that Commands there in his
absence.

In Garrison Towns that are well ordered there are some men placed at the
Gates, whose care is only to observe Forrainers that come in and go out; and
according to the comparing of the Memorials which they and all the Innkeepers
of the Town bring every evening to the Major; it is known how many strangers
are every night in the place, what they are, and where the lodge.

The Governors, Kings Lieutenants, Majors, and Aids-majors, have all almost at
this time free Companies of Firelocks or Dragoons, who do nothing else but make
Inrodes upon the Enemies Country.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Guard of places.
THE hour of mounting the Guard is different in Garrison Towns according to the
inclination of the Governors. Some do it at the break of day, because at the
time when the gates are opened, which is the usual hour of surprises, two
thirds of the Garrison are in Arms; others mount it at ten of the Clock in the
morning, or toward the evening: but the usual time of almost all the Garrisons
of the Kingdom, is at two of the Clock Afternoon.

Whilst the Drums beat to the Guard, the Corporals ought to go to the Majors
house, who makes them ^ast lots for the Posts and Rounds, and writes them down
in a Register ^ept for that purpose. Having done ^o, they return to their
Escouades, who gather together before the Captains ^odgings, and the Sergeants
lead them ^n good order, Drums beating, as far ^s the place of Arms, to that
part where the Guards of the Post which ^as fallen to their share ought to
meet. When all the Escouades are gathered together, and drawn up; the Major ^r
Aide-major makes the Officers ^raw lots for the Posts and Rounds, beginning by
the Captains and ending at the Sergeants.

At the places which are weakest, and where there is greatest dange^ there is a
stronger Guard put, Commanded by a Captain with a sub Lieutenant or Ensign, and
two o^ three Sergeants.

The Guard being set and the O^ficers having taken their Posts, the Major
begins to make the Guard ^^ the place of Arms draw off: th^^ those of the Gates
and Bastions, an^ lastly, those that are without. While the Guard is mounting,
the Office^ of the Guard that is to be relieve put their Soldiers in Arms, and
dr^^ them up in Hay on the side of t^^ Court of Guard, that they may lea^^ the
place to the Guard that is to ^^lieve them, and post themselves o^^^ against
them. This is the Comma^^ that is given on that occasion.

Soldiers take heed.
Advance your Pikes. March... H^
To the Right Hand about.
The Officers of the Guard that mounts file off their Soldiers, and ^ut them
in Hay by the side of the Court of Guard: the Officers of the Guard that is
relieved deliver to them ^he Orders if there be any new; the Corporals do the
like to their Com^ades; they charge them with the Furniture of the Court of
Guard, and ^nform them of the number of Senti^els that are to be set as well by
night ^s by day, and of what they have to ^o extraordinarily. The Consigna^ions
being made, and the Sentinels ^elieved, the Officers of the Guard that is
relieved, make their Soldiers File off, and lead them to the place of Arms,
where having put them in ^attallia, they thank them. The Of^cers of the Guard
that has mounted ^ommand the Soldiers to lay down their Arms, making them
march three steps, by this word of Command.

Soldiers take heed to lay down your Arms.
Advance the Pikes. March.... Halt.
To the Right (or) To the Left.
Present your Arms. March.
So soon as the Arms are laid down the Officers and Corporals should look if
they be in condition to fire, ^^ the Bandeleers be provided of Powder and
Match, and give strict orde^^ to the Sentinels that are at the gates, never to
suffer any stop ^^ Wagons or Carts upon the Bridge^ charging them to stop
those th^^ come in or go out, until they kno^ that no others are coming to m^^^
them.

When a stranger on horse or fo^^ offers to come into the Town; ^^^ out
Sentinels ought to stop him, th^^ call the Corporal, who gives not^^^ of it to
the Officer; and the Offi^^^ sends one or two Musketeers w^^^ him to the
Governors lodging.

At what distance soever a Senti^^^ perceives any Troops, he oug^^ to give
notice thereof to the Co^^^ of Guard; and the Officer causes i^mediately the
Barier to be made fa^^ or a Bridge to be drawn, letting no body in, unless the
Major or Aide-Major bring orders for it from the Governor.

When it is time to shut the gates, the Alarm-bell is Rung to call in those
that are abroad in the fields, and the Aid Majors or Captains of the gates
attended by some Musketteers of the Court of Guard of the place of Arms, come
^o the Governors house for the ^eyes; and so soon as they come to ^he gates
the Officers command the ^ouldiers to light their Matches, and ^aving Ranked
them in two Files, or^er them to present their Arms; and ^end the Pikes to help
to draw up ^he Bridges. After that the gates ^re shut, one half of the Guard is
^rawn off that they may pass the ^ight upon the Ramparts, in the ^ourts of
Guard of the Courtines or Bastions: the Corporals send some of the Soldiers of
their Escouades for Wood and Candle: and the Sergeants go to the place of Arms
to receive the Word, which is no sooner given but that the Drums beat the
retreat, and the Sergeants of Guar^ carry the Word to their Officers, an^ give
it about amongst the Corporal^ who command the Sentinels to suffe^ no body any
more to pass upon the Ramparts without commanding the^ to stand, and giving
notice of it t^ the Court of Guard.

When the Major goes the Round the Officers of the Guard go and receive him by
two Musketteers, an^ give him the Word onceonly, th^^ is, at his Round-major.

When the Governor or King Lieutenant go the Round, the Office^ having Ranked
their Soldiers ^^ File out of the Court of Guard an^ without Arms, send four
Muskettee^^ to receive them ten paces off; an^ give them the Word as often as
the^ please to demand it. All other Roun^ without exception ought to give the
word to the Corporals or Lansp^sades of the Courts of Guard, wh^ receive it
with the point of their ^^^ked Sword at the heart of him th^^ gives it. In
Garrisons that are well guarded the Rounds go every quarter of an hour, to the
end the Rampart may never be unfurnished.

The Rounds are always made with light, and so soon as a Sentinel perceives
any, it is his duty to cry, Who comes there? so loud that he may be heard by
the next Courts of Guard. He that goes the Round should answer, the Round, or
the Roundmajor, or the Governors Round.

The Sentinels by whom he passes shall always present their Arms, and never
permit any whomsoever to approach them. When he draws near a Court of Guard,
the Sentinel before the Arms shall ask him very loud, who comes there? so soon
as he answers, the Round; he is to bid him Stand. Corporal come forth.
Thereupon the Corporal comes immediately out of the Court of Guard, draws his
Sword, and asks, Who comes there? when he is answered, the Round. He says, let
him that has the Word advance.

The Round advances and gives the Word into the Corporals ear, so low that he
can be heard of no body but of him alone: but if perchance one should give
another word than what was the true, he ought to stop him that goes the Round,
and acquaint his Officer, who orders him to be kept in the Courts of Guard all
the night long.

The out Courts of Guard make Rounds about the covered ways, in French, les
chemins couverts; but they give no word, they are only made to hearken, and
every Souldie^ goes the Round by turn.

The Patrouilles are made in the streets of the Town by a Sergeant and six
Musketteers of the Guard of the place of Arms, to make the Soldiers retire to
their Quarters, the public houses shut their doors, and to hinder the
disorders that may be committed by night, stopping and carrying to the Court of
Guard all that are found in the streets without light and order.

At what hour so ever the Alarm is Rung, all the Companies ought with diligence
to gather together before the Captains Quarters, who leads them to the Posts
that have been appointed them by the Major.

At the break of day, the Drums beat the Reveillie, which the French call the
Dienne, the Alarm-bell is rung, the Aide-majors and Captains of the gates come
to the Governors house for the Keys, and the Officers of the Guard bring off
the Soldiers who passed the night on the Ramparts, Rank them in two Files, and
make them present their Arms whilst the Gates are opening: the Majors send a
Sergeant with some Musketteers, to scoute in the Suburbs, and in the hollow
ways about the Town, and draw a Bridge upon them until they come back; when
they bring account that there is no danger, the rest of the Bridges are let
down, the Corporals place the out Sentinels whom they inform of what they have
to do; the Majors and Captains of the Gates carry back the Keys to the
Governors house, and the Officers make the Soldiers lay down their Arms.

In Towns where are many horse, the Governor places daily fifty Troopers in
Guard, and sends every morning an Officer with some Horsemen to beat the Rode
half a League round the place.

Every Officer of Guard must answer for his Post, and no man not so much as his
Colonel can command him in any thing, except the Governor of the place or he
that commands in his absence.

All Governors or Commanders ought to have a Sentinel at their door: and as
often as they pass by any Court of Guard, the Officers are obliged to draw out
their Soldiers, put them in Hay without Arms, and stand at their head.

If the Commander of a place be a Lieutenant General, he is to have a Guard at
his door, consisting of a Lieutenant, Sergeant, and thirty men, who are to be
in Arms as well as the other Courts of Guard every time that he passes: but the
Drums are not to beat the March.

When a Commander is Marshall of France or Governor of a Province, he is to
have a Guard of fifty men commanded by a Captain, Lieutenant, a sub-Lieutenant
and two Sergeants, and all Courts of Guard are obliged to be in Arms when he
passes by, and the Drums to beat the March.

When the Princes of blood, the Mareschals of France, and the Generals of an
Army pass through any Town, the Governors furnish them with a Foot-guard, and
at their entry and departure salute them with some Volleys of Cannon.

CAAP. XXIII. Of Battles.
THough Battles be not so frequent now a days as heretofore, yet the knowledge
of them is not to be slighted. A good General is always the Master to give or
avoid Battle; and when he judges it convenient to hazard a Battle, it is
prudence in him to use all his circumspection beforehand: Seizing on the most
advantageous Posts, and exposing his Enemy to all the inconveniences of weather
and seasons. He chooses at first a field of Battle fit for the quality and
number of his Forces: if the number of his Horse exceed the Foot, he covets
Plains; and when he has more Infantry than Cavalry, he possesses himself as
much as possibly he can of narrow and covered places. He Posts his Artillery
The way of Drawing an Army into Battalia. page. 76.1.st part
The Left Wing First Line Second Line The Body of Reserve


diagram using icons to represent troop organziation Another way of Drawing an
Army into Battalia. page. 76.1.st part
first Line second Line The Body of Reserve


diagram using icons to represent troop organziation on the Front of his Army,
he draws up his Troops into two Lines, placeing the Horse on the Wings of the
Foot, or lining his Squadrons with Battallions according to the order of the
Enemies Army.

The General makes a body of reserve of some Brigads of Horse and Foot, whom he
Posts at the Rear of the lines: and commands all his Dragoons to alight that
they may first fall on with the Forlorn hope, posting them for that end at the
Front of his Army. Afterward he visits his Regiments one after another, and
places General persons at each Post; the first Lieutenant General at the right
Wing, the second at the left, with Mareschals de Camp; others at the second
Line, and some with the body of Reserve, where he continues himself during the
Fight, after that he has given his orders in all places; and from whence he
sends assistance to the weakest posts.

When all things are rightly disposed, he observes the Enemies countenance, and
their order of Battle: he begins the Charge at that side where he finds himself
to be strongest; making his Troops to good purpose fight the one after the
other, and not all at the same time, and ordering them to observe their
distance so well, that the former being overthrown, may not fall back on those
who are to second them.

If the first Line be so warmly charged by the Enemies, that it is forced to
give ground; the second is in all readiness to engage, whilst the disordered
Troops Rallie again and return afresh to the Charge; and therefore a General
ought to have many good Officers under him, to remedy all the Accidents that
may happen during the Fight.

It being impossible that he can be in all places himself, or give orders any
where but in the side where h^ is; when his Army has got the better, he should
never suffer his men to Plunder or pursue, unless the Enemy be wholly broken;
and though it be good to pursue vigourously, yet he must still keep some Troops
in good order, who leave not their Ranks, that so they may prevent all
inconveniences.

The end of the First part.
THE ART OF WAR. The Second Part.
Which treats of the particular Charges of Horse and Foot, of the manner of
conducting and of exercising Soldiers.

CHAP. I. ^f the Officers-General of the Light Horsemen.
HAving in the first Part discoursed of Charges, and of what concerned an Army,
and pla^^s in general; I shall in this, treat of particular Officers, and of
all th^^ they are obliged by their employments.

The first charge of the Light Hor^^men is that of the Colonel General whose
power is to command them ^^ all places, to send them out in Part ^^ give them
the order of fighting, tak^ inspection of the Officers to see they do their
duty, if the Troops ^^ in good condition, to casheer insu^^cient Troopers, and
turn off bad Ho^ses. He serves commonly the Ar^^ in quality of Lieutenant
General, a^^ the new Officers are obliged to app^^ themselves to him. This
Charge at present possessed by the Cou^^ d'Auvergne; who on many occasio^^ has
given proof that he was not u^worthy to succeed to the Offices his Uncle,
Monsieur de Turenne.

The Master General de Camp commands in absence of the Colonel, w^^^ the same
Authority; as at pres^^^ does the Marquess of Renel, Lieu^^nant-General of the
King's Armi^^

The Charge of Commissary-General is the third, possessed be Monsieur de la
Cordomere, Lieutenant General of the King's Armies. He keeps a Roll of all the
Light Horse men, musters them when he thinks fit, obliges the Captains to keep
their Troops full, casheers bad Troopers and little Horses, and gives the King
an exact account of the strength of Companies, and of the Conduct of all the
Officers.

The Light Horsemen have their particular Quarter Masters; whose duty is to go
to the place of encamping with the Marshal de Camp for the day; and to receive
from the Quartermaster General of ^he Army, the Ground that is appoin^ed for
the Horse: And they are a^ongst the Light Horsemen, what ^he General
Quartermaster is to the Army. And therefore it is necessary ^hey should be
able and experienced, and that they be perfectly acquainted ^ith the Countries,
Woods, Rivers, ^asses and narrow Passages. They take Orders from the Colonel
General, or from him who in his absence Commands the Horse.

CHAP. II. Of Masters de Camp, and Majors of Horse.
IT is not very long since there was no talk in France of Regiments of Light
Horsemen; there were none but Troops of Ordinance, which have been since made
into Regiments; the Command whereof has been given to Officers who have been
qualified with title of Master de Camp, which is the same thing as a Colonel of
Foot.

A Master de Camp ought to be a man of Authority, that he may absolutely
command his Captains. His chief Charge is, to march at the head of his
Regiment, and to lead them into Fight to the place that the General has
appointed him in the Vanguard, Battle, or Rere-Guard. It is his duty to visit
his Troops, to cause the Guards to be well ordered, changed and relieved,
hinder his Troopers from leaving their Ranks, see if the Captains take care of
their Troops, if they be well furnished of Men, Arms and Horses, and to command
the Officers to do what they ought. He should render all obedience to the
General, Lieutenant Generals, Marshals de Camp, and to the Brigadeers; yea, and
to the General persons of the Horse. When he marches at the head of his
Regiment, it is his Post to be four paces before the Captains.

The Regiments of Horse who are strangers, have Lieutenant Colonels, but the
French have only Majors; who are always the eldest Captains, and who command in
absence of the Masters de Camp. When a Regiment consists of several Squadrons,
the Master de Camp marches at the head of the first, and the Major at the head
of the second.

Every Regiment of Horse has an Aid-Major; whose Charge is to appoint the
Quarters, to place and relieve the Guards, to make the Detachments, to take the
Word from the Major of the Brigade, carry it to the Commander, and give it
about amongst the Quarter Masters of the Troops.

CHAP. III. Of the Captains of the Light Horse.
A Captain of Light Horse ought to be Brave, Experienced, Diligent; and above
all things, very Careful. His duty is to lead his Troop whithersoever he is
commanded by his Master de Camp, or by the General: He ought to have a care of
his Troopers, often visit their Horses, see if they be well kept, and that they
want for nothing. His place is always to be before his Company some paces,
unless it be in the day of Battle; and then he puts the puttocks of his Horse
into the first Rank of the Squadron. When he is ^n Quarter, he ought to
instruct his Troopers how to use their Arms, ride their Horses, form a
Squadron, put themselves again into Battel-Array when they are broken by a
Halt, or by the way; and above all things, to ^each them the Quarter Wheeling
(in French, le Quart de Conversion) which is the principal motion of the Horse.
The Captain has power to ^reate in his Troop a Quartermaster, and three
Brigadeers; and the King ^upplies the Charges of Lieutenant and Cornet.

The Command amongst Captains ^^ quite different in Horse from what ^t is in
Foot: In Foot they command according to the Seniority of their Regiments; but
in Horse they follow ^nly the date of their Commissions: ^^at is observed
amongst the Masters ^e Camp, and the other Officers of ^orse.

CHAP. IV. Of Lieutenants and Cornets.
THe Lieutenants ought to be as capable as the Captains, because in absence of
them they have the same Charge and Authority. They should procure the love and
fear of the Horsemen of their Troops, visit them often, recommend to them the
care of their Horses and Arms, and give the Captains an exact account of all
that happens. They must not be severe to the Troopers without ground, that
occasions running away and desertion; but especially in the presence of the
Captains, because they have no Authority then; but in their absence they are to
exact punctual obedience of them, and no^ to spare those who fail in their
duty, and in the service of the King. It is their part to observe the actions
of the Quarter Masters and Brigadeers, that they may keep them to their duty,
and make them provide what is necessary for their Troops. Their Post in a March
is at the left hand of the Captains.

The Charge of a Cornet is a gentile and handsome employment for a young man,
who begins the profession of a Horseman, and desires to learn it. He ought to
have as great care of the Troop as the Lieutenant, seeing he commands it in his
absence. His duty is to carry the Standard whithersoever the Troop marches, or
to have it carried by a stout and faithful Horseman whom he is to pay for that
Office; but at a Muster, at the Guard, or in a day of Battle, he is to carry it
himself; and should rather be killed than forsake it, because to lose it is a
dishonor to himself and his Troop.

His place in a day of Battle is at the fifth File in the first Rank of the
Squadron: when the Troop files off, he marches alone after the third Rank; and
when he carries not his Standard, he takes the left hand of the Lieutenant. The
Cornet must know that in Detachments the Standard is never carried, but only
when all the Troop marches.

There is no talk of a Cornet in the Troops of Gendarms, but of an Ensign and
Guidon; and every Troop carries both.

CHAP. V. Of Quarter Masters, and Brigadeers of the Troops of Light Horsemen.
THe Creation of a Quartermaster of a Troop depending absolutely on the
Captain, he ought always to choose amongst his Troopers him whom he shall judge
most capable of that charge, because he commits to him the care of his Troop;
and besides that he ought to be stout and vigilant, it is necessary that he
should read, write and cast Accounts. His duty is to keep a List of the
Troopers, and of their Quarters; to visit often the Stables, cause the Horses
to be dressed in his presence, examine if the Saddles and Bridles want nothing,
have a care that the Troopers sell not their Forage, to go to the Captain's
Quarters evening and morning, and especially when he pays the Troop. It is his
part take the care of the Arms and Ammunition, set Guards at the places
appointed by the Major, and often to visit the Vedetes. When the Troop marches,
his Post is at the Rear, that he may hinder the Troopers from quitting their
Ranks, or staying behind. In the Field or Garrison, he receives the Provisions
and Forage at the Storehouses, and delivers them to the Brigadeers, who divide
them among the Troopers. And he is to be every evening at the Circle, there to
receive the Order and Word from the Major, which he carries to his Captain and
to the officers of the Troop. When there is any Detachment he commands the
Troopers whose Rank is to march, and conducts them himself to the place of
Rendezvous.

A Troop of Horse is divided into three Brigades, and over each the Captain
places a Brigadeer, to take care of them. He chooses commonly for these Offices,
the most ancient, stout and discreet men of the Troop. Their duty is to give
the Captain and Officers notice of all that passes amongst them, and to hinder
disorders and quarrels. When they are upon the Guard, their function is to set
the Vedetes in the places appointed to them by the Major, to place none there
but sufficient men; for otherwise they might give the Alarm often without
reason: instructing them in what they have to do, visiting them frequently for
fear they fall asleep, and taking care to relieve them every hour. They
distribute amongst the Troopers the Provisions and Forage which they have
received from the Quartermaster: And their place in a March is in the first
Rank.

Every Troop of Horse should have a Trumpetter, who is commonly quartered near
the Captain, or with his Equipage. He takes his Orders from the Quartermaster;
and sounds to Boots and Saddle, to Horse, and to the Standard at the hour
appointed him: And every evening he sounds to set the Watch, so soon as the
Word is given. The place of the Kettle-Drums and Trumpets in a March is at the
head of the Squadron, six paces before the Commander. In the day of Battle they
are upon the Wings, that they may sound the Charge or Retreat, according as
they are ordered by the Majors or Aid-Majors of the Regiments. At the sound of
Trumpet all the Troopers are to put themselves in an Equipage of War, and to
make haste to the Captain's Quarters or to the Quarters of those who command
their Troops.

CHAP. VI. Of the Colonels of Foot.
THe Charge of Colonel General of the French Infantry has been extinct ever
since the death of the Duke of Espernon. It gave an absolute power over all the
Foot; Justice was executed upon them every where in his name; he named
Officers, and had a Company in every Regiment, which was called the Colonels:
and the Commanders of Bodies had no other name but Masters de Camp: but since
the suppression of that charge, they have left that Title, (which is still
retained amongst the Horse) and taken the name of Colonel.

The Charge of a Colonel requires a Person of Quality that is rich, and who
commands his Captains absolutely. And that his Regiment may be good and well
entertained, he is to oblige them to take care of their Companies, and to make
choice of good inferior Officers.

His duty is to lead his Regiment whithersoever he is commanded, and to march
at the head of it, with a Haussecol or Gorget, and a Pike in hand. When he is
in a Battle his Post is with the Pikes, three paces before the Captains. He
ought to see in what condition his Companies are, and have them filled with
good men well armed and accoutered with all that is necessary. And as there is
nothing that makes a Soldier so active and dexterous as exercising; he should
command his officers to exercise their Companies an hour every day, and the
Major the Regiment twice a week.

When the Regiment marches alone in an Enemies Country, he should as much as
possibly he can, avoid Plains, and seek out covered ways, forbidding his
Soldiers upon pain of death to quit their Ranks. He is to order one half of the
Captains to march on the Front, and the other at the Rear, the Lieutenants and
Sub-Lieutenants in the Divisions, the Sergeants on the Wings, a Lieutenant with
thirty men in the Vanguard, and another with the like number for the
Rear-Guard. When he finds himself in a Plain, and cannot avoid it, he is to
fraise his Battalion; that is, to encompass the Musquetteers with Pikes, that
he may defend himself against the Horse that might attack him. The only means
to make the Soldiers assiduous in the Regiment, and prevent Licentiousness, is
to commaed all the Officers to abide by their Posts, and to make every
Lieutenant responsable for his Division.

In the Siege of a place, the day that his Regiment is in the Trenches, he is
to make a prohibition to his Soldiers not to go out of the Camp: and having
made his Detachments, he is to lead his Regiment to the place of Attack under
as good a covert as possible he can; where he is to receive Orders from the
Lieutenant General, or the Marshal de Camp for the day: afterward he is to
relieve the Posts, visit the Works, cause the Orders that have been given him
to be punctually put in execution, and take care of the wounded Officers;
assisting them with all his power, and rendering justice to every one without
emulation.

All the Regiments of Foot have their Justice, and their State-Major, made up
of the Major, Aid-majors, Chaplain, Quartermaster, Provost-Martial, his
Lieutenant, Clerk, Surgeon Major, six Archers or Officers, and the
Executioner.

When the Question is of trying a Soldier that is criminal, the Provost-Marshal
brings in the Indictment, and the Council of War is held at ^he Colonel's
Quarters.

The Colonel has power to sus^end and arrest the Officers of his Re^iment when
they have offended against the Service, but he ought im^ediately give notice
thereof to Court. In the Army he has no Court of Guard before his Tent, unless
he be a Brigadeer; but only ^ Sentinel of the Guard of the Camp The same thing
is always observed in a place where he lies in Garrison, unless he be Commander
of it in absenc^ of the Governor, the King's Lieutenant; or of the Major, who
h^^ Commission to command.

Colonels among themselves command not according to the priority of their
Commissions, as is in use among the Horse; but according ^^ the Rank of their
Regiments. F^^ example, the Colonel of the Re^^ment of Picardy being but of o^^
day's standing, will command the Colonel of the Regiment of Cha^pain, who has
carried the Charg^ twenty years; because Picardy is t^^ ancientest of all the
Regiments: a^^ so of the rest. The same thing is observed amongst the Captains
and ^ther Officers of Foot.

CHAP. VII. Of the Lieutenant Colonel.
EVery Regiment of Horse and Dragoons has its Lieutenant Colonel, who in
absence of the Colonel commands with equal Authority: But because most part of
the Colonels are young Lords who want not courage, but have not all the
experience that is necessary; the King has reserved to himself the liberty to
choose wheresoever he pleases Officers of Service, whose Valor, Conduct and
Capacity has been manifested on many occasions, to place ^t the head of his
Regiments as well Horse as Foot; and the chief Ca^tains are to take no
exceptions ^hereat.

A Lieutenant Colonel ought to be ^ man of Service, who has passed through all
the degrees of Command, ^ho has signalized himself in dan^erous occasions, who
knows the way of attacking and defending a place, leading on a Regiment to
fight, making a noble Retreat, and entrenching himself in a Post that he may
not be baffled. The duties of his Charge are like those of the Colonel, who
ought never to undertake any thing without consulting him. It is his part to
see to the Discipline of the Regiment, and to know the worth and valor of
every particular Officer: He should moreover endeavor to know all the Soldiers
of the Regiment, to make himself both beloved and feared by them; that may be
done by hearing their complaints, causing their Officers to do them justice
when they are wronged, and ordering them to be severely punished when they have
done amiss.

The Post of a Lieutenant Colonel is on the left hand of the Colonel, three
steps before the Captains, when the Regiment consists but of one Battalion: but
when it is of more, the Colonel commands the first, and he the second. The
Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, and Commanders of Battalions are exempted from
mounting the Guard when they are in Garrison in a fortified place.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Majors, and Aid-Majors of Foot.
THe Charge of Sergeant-Major is another thing in Foot than what it is in
Horse, though the duties be not much different. A Major of Horse is always the
first Captain of his Regiment, and commands it in absence of the Master de
Camp; but the Major of Foot has no Company, and can pretend to no Command but
after all the Captains, unless he have a particular Commission for that purpose.

It is the Major's duty to go every evening, and receive the Word from him that
commands; and being in an Army, from the Major General, or Majors of Brigades:
afterward to carry it to the Camp to his Colonel, and to assemble the Sergeants
of the Companies into a circle, that he may give it about amongst them. If
there be any Detachments for Convoys, Guards and Parties; he is to command
every Company to have in readiness the number of Soldiers that have been
demanded of him. He is to give notice to Officers, whose turn it is to march;
and shall appoint them an hour and place of Rendezvous, where he is to be
first, that he may receive them, and lead them whither need shall require. It
is his part to give the Order how and what hour the Companies should march; and
if his Regiment must be in the Van Guard, Main Battle, or Rear-Guard. Being
ready to depart, he is to command the Drummers to beat the Troop, he is to
advertise the Captains, cause the Colors be brought out, draw up the
Battalion, and is to give every Officer the Post that he must keep that day.
And having drawn out all his Companies, he is to see them depart, that he may
know if they march in good order: Before the Regiment come to Quarters, he
ought to go and visit it, then return and draw them up, detach his Courts of
Guard, give order to the Sergeants of what they are to do, and order the
Companies to go to Quarters. If the Regiment encamp in the Body of an Army, he
is to give each Company the Ground that has been marked out to him, and make
them place their Arms in form of a Pyramid, the Pikes apart from the Muskets,
six large paces before the Huts; he shall post the Guard of the Camp about
fifteen paces beyond the Battalion, and detach the other Guards which the
Regiment shall be obliged to furnish. If the Regiment lodge by it self in a
Quarter where there is danger, he is to barricade, entrench, or enclose it with
Carts and Wagons; afterward he is to place his Guards about the Quarters, and
the Sentinels so near together that they may hear one another speak: and is to
set without the Entrenchments Sentinels, Perdues, who in case of an Alarm,
having fired, are to retreat to the Court of Guard. When an Alarm is given to
the Camp, the Major must come to the place of Arms of the Regiment, form his
Battalion, send to double his Guards in the place where the Alarm is given,
give notice to his Colonel, and acquaint the General with what occurs. No
Company should enter or come out of its Post without leave from the Major, and
no Order is ever altered but by him, because it is always given by the
appointment of the General or his own Colonel,

Whatsoever Ammunition is allotted to the Regiment, is delivered to the Major,
who divides it among the Companies, and he has the charge of providing all
things necessary; as of sending the Sick to Hospitals, commanding the Provosts
Marshal to furnish Wagons.

At the Attack of a place it is his duty to give notice to the Regiment of the
day when it is to mount the Guard of the Trenches, to cause the Drums beat, to
command the Officers according to their rank to send off Laborers, and Men to
defend them. Being come to the Attack, he is to relieve the Posts, take Orders
from the Lieutenant General, or Marshal de Camp, what the Regiment is to do; go
to the Artillery, and see the Instruments and necessary Ammunition delivered
out, lead the Laborers to the appointed places, and give his Colonel an
account of all that passes.

In day of Battle, he is not to be on Foot in the Rank of the Captains; but on
Horseback, sometime on the Front, and sometime on the Rear, to give the
Command, and execute the Orders of his Colonel.

The Major is to keep a Roll of the Rank of the Officers and Companies, must
know the number of their Soldiers according as they have past Muster, and
exercise all the Regiments twice a Week, and especially the Officers; teaching
them the way to salute gracefully with the Pike.

It is his right to make an Inventory of the Movables and Equipage of the
Officers of the Regiment that die, and to sell them at auction by beat of Drum:
His dues are the Sword, the Pike, the Corselet or Gorget, and a shilling in the
pound of the sale of their Movables. He is present at the Council of War, and
gives his conclusions to the Process, after the same manner as the King's
Proctor.

The Functions of the Aid-Majors are nothing different from the Majors; and
their name explains their charge. The Regiments of Foot have as many Aid-Majors
as they have Battalions.

All Majors and Aid-Majors cease from Duty so soon as they enter into Garrison
in a place where there are others established by the King.

CHAP. IX. Of a Captain of Foot.
THe Infantry has in all times been the School of War, and they that have been
desirous to perfect themselves therein, have always begun that way. It is far
more graceful for a young Gentleman to carry a Musket, than to serve on Horse;
great Lords have shown us the way. The Marquess of Humiers, Son to the
Marshal, began; First, Ensign-Colonel of the King's Regiment, and is now a
Captain in it. The Marquess of Vxel, Colonel of the Dolphin's Regiment, has
served as a Captain in the same Regiment. The Marquess of Feuquiers, Colonel of
a Regiment of Foot; the Marquess of Crevam, Colonel of the Queen's Regiment;
and the Marquess of Nesle Colonel of the Regiment of Monsieur the Prince, have
served as Lieutenants and Captains in his Majesty's Regiment. The Count of
Bourlemont, Colonel of the Regiment of Picardy, was also a Captain in the
King's: the Son of the Duke of Gesvres is Ensign Colonel of it still. The
Marquess of Genlis is Colonel of the Crown Regiment, having first been a
Captain in it; the Marquess of Frowsle was slain at the Battle of Consarbrick,
carrying the Ensign Colonel of the Regiment of Vermandois: and several others
whom I could name still in actual service in the Infantry, besides those whom
this profession has raised to greater employment. I heard Monsieur de Turenne
say, when he was at the siege of Scheinkin-scance, that he wondered to see the
Hollanders defend their places so ill, being that heretofore all Persons of
Quality sent their Children to them to learn the Art of War, and that he
himself did first begin to carry a Musket there.

It is not enough for a Gentleman, if he would learn somewhat, to be at the
head of a Company of foot, unless he apply himself closely to his employment in
the manner following.

He ought always have a numerous Company of good and vigorous Soldiers, well
kept in Arms and Clothes, knowing them all by name, and understanding what
every one of them in particular is capable of: it is no dishonor to him to go
and visit them often in their Quarters, and to see if they be careful to keep
themselves neat.

A Company every five days has the King's Pay complete, except a penny which
the Captain keeps from them, to furnish them with Clothes, Linen, Shoes and
Hats: it is not amiss if he lend them money himself; he thereby observes better
what they want, and obliges them to keep themselves neat, and to have a care of
their Clothes: neatness is of great advantage to them, and prevents many
Distempers. When there are any sick or wounded, the Captain ought to separate
them from the rest, and cause them be carried to the Hospital.

The Captain has power in his Company to make two Sergeants, three Corporals,
and five Lanspassades; but he cannot by his own Authority casheer them,
whatever their fault may be: that depends on a Council of War. He has no power
to punish a Soldier with death, unless he rebel; and then he may kill him: but
for any thing else, he can only imprison him, and deliver him to the Justice
that is set over the Regiment.

His duty is to lead his Company whithersoever his Colonel commands him,
Marching himself on their head, with his Corselet, and Pike in hand. The
Assiduity of Captains keeps the Soldiers in Duty: There are some now a days,
who thinking it a breach of honor to march at the head of their Companies,
leave them to be led by their Officers, and make their Lackeys carry their
Arms. A good Captain should himself order the March of his Company either by
two or four; placing the Pikes in the Rear, or in the Center in form of a
Battalion, taking his own Post at the Head of them, the Lieutenant at the Rear,
the Sub-Lieutenant or Ensign at the head of the Pikes, and the Sergeants on the
Flanks. And to lead them to the Rendezvous in this manner, with Drums beating.

He should exercise his Soldiers to use their Arms, teach them to put
themselves into Battel-Aray, and to rally again as they were when they are
broken, and to instruct them in all the motions necessary to Foot; to make
their Huts or Lodgings in the Camp, and all other Exercises of War.

At the Siege of a place, when he is in the Trenches, he is to abide in the
Post that has been entrusted to him, until he be releived; defending it
vigorously, and making the Soldiers that are committed to him fire continually.
When he has the Command of the Laborers, it is his duty to make them hasten to
put themselves quickly under covert, to take heed that none leave their Ranks,
or lie on their bellies for fear, or that they may not work.

In a Garrison he is to mount the Guard at his turn in the Post that shall fall
to him by lot, and not to leave it until it be relieved; often visiting and
making his Rounds exactly. When he marches with the Regiment, his Post is one
day on the Front, and the other on the Rear; never leaving it without his
Colonel's leave, and taking special care that no Soldier leave his Rank without
his permission.

When he marches with his Company single, he is in a morning to send his
Lieutenant before to their Quarters, make his Soldiers march all the way in
good order; and about midway cause them to halt for the space of two hours,
hindering them from straggling that they may not go pillage in the Villages. A
Captain should never be too rough with his Soldiers, nor yet too indulgent; the
one makes him hated, and the other slighted.

He must know how to make his Men fight singly, and in company; be acquainted
with the advantages of Places, Arms, Time and Occasions, that he make use of
them. He must apply himself to the knowledge of Fortifications, the manner of
attacking and defending a place, how and in what manner the Works are to be
carried on; to the end, that when it comes to his turn to carry on or defend a
Work, he may not commit the escape of a Prentice. A Captain who understands his
Profession well, ^^ capable of all great Employments; And the charges of
Governor, King's Lieutenant, and Major of a place are commonly given only to
good Foot-Officers whom the King intends to reward.

CHAP. X. Of the Lieutenant, and Sub-Lieutenants.
THe Charge of a Lieutenant is ^^ the same nature in Foot as ^^ Horse; and
seeing he commands the Company in absence of the Capt^i^ he ought to be as
capable as himself It is his duty often to visit the Sol^^ers, to make them do
their Exe^^^ses, and train them daily. W^^^ he marches with the Company, the
Captain being absent, he leads it but if the Captain be present ^^ keeps at the
Rear, to bring it (...) When the Regiment marches in ^^^tel-array, every
Lieutenant takes ^^^ Post in a Division according to ^^^ Rank; hindering the
Soldiers from disbanding.

It is the Lieutenant's part to h^^^ an inspection into the Actions of ^^^
Corporals and Sergeants, that he m^^ hold them to their duty, and make them
provide what is necessary for the Company: And therefore he is not to fail to
be always at the Colors at the hour that the Soldiers mount the Guard, to
exercise them, and see if their Arms be clear and neat, and in a condition to
fire, and if their Bandeleers be provided of Powder, Bullets and Match.

The Charge of a Sub-Lieutenant is new in France; formerly there were none but
in the Regiments of Guard: But since the Suppression of Ensigns, the name of
Under-Lieutenant or Lieutenant Reformed has been given to the third Officer of
a Foot Company. His Function differs in nothing from that of a Lieutenant, but
in the Command and Post, which is usually at the Division of Pikes.

The Officers of a Company ought to procure themselves the friendship of the
Captain by visiting him frequently, rendering him all kind of honor and
respect, and taking special care of his Soldiers: He is reciprocally obliged to
love, serve and assist th^^ with all his power.

The Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenan^s and Ensigns of the same Regiment, command
amongst themselves according to the Priority of their Recep^^on, and not the
Rank of their Companies.

CHAP. XI. Of the Ensign.
BEfore the Peace of Aix la Ch^pello, there was not a Foot-Company in France
without an E^^ign; at present there are none b^^ in the Companies of Guard, and
tw^ that are retained for every Reg^ment; one for the Colonel's Company, and
the other for the Lieut^nant Colonel's. However, there ^^ no Battalion without
three pair ^^ Colors, but they are carried b^ Lieutenants-Reformed.

The Charge of an Ensign is gentile and proper for a young Person of Quality
who begins to carry Arms; and therefore he ought to get into Intimacy with the
Lieutenant of his Company, that he may always learn of him something of the
Trade. It is his duty to carry the Colors whithersoever the Company goes;
whether it be to an Attack, or Battle; having no respect to danger, but only to
the means of acquiring Honor and Glory. Entering into a place, mounting the
Guard, passing in Muster, or going to a Fight, he ought himself to carry his
Colors on the left Shoulder. Upon a March he may give them to be carried by
one of the ^^outest Soldiers. His Usual place is at the head of the Pikes; and
in a Battle the Serjeant-Major places him ^n the Rank where he ought to march;
suffering himself rather to be knocked on the head, than to for^ake or lose his
Colors. If his Regiment be worsted, and he obliged to give ground, he is to
tear off his Colors, clap them up in his pocket, and throw away the Staff; but
that is not to be done but in greatest extremity, and when there is no more
Relief. In the day of Battle the Ensign-Colonel being killed or wounded, it
belongs to the first Captain of the Regiment to take up the Colors.

Colors are never carried in Detachments, nor when the Regime^^ goes down into
the Trenches: They are to be kept with one of the gen^ral persons.

Heretofore the place of Arms of Company was before the Ensign'^ Quarters, that
is not in use now ^days; the Soldiers gather together before the Captain's
Quarters, and the Colors are carried to the Qua^ters of the Commander of the
Regment.

CHAP. XII. Of the Quartermaster of a Foot-Regiment.
THere is no Foot-Regiment without a Quartermaster, whose Charge is to lodge
the Regiments, and to assign the Quarters to the Fouriers or
Under-Quarter-Masters of every Company. He goes daily to the
Quarter-Master-General of the Army, to receive the Order of the Locality and
Rendezvous of the Companies, and gives notice thereof to his Colonel.

When the Marshals de Camp depart, for encamping the Army, all the
Regiment-Quarter-Masters ought to ^ttend them: And so soon as the
Quartermaster General has allot^ed them the ground for their Camps, ^hey
divide it by Companies, and deliver it to the Fouriers. When the Regiments ^^e
quartered in Towns or Villages, they first appoint the Quarters of the
Colonels, the^ of the Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Aid-Majors, of the rest of
the State-Major, and their own; afterward they appoint as many Quarters as
there are Companies; and make the Fouriers or Under-Quarter-Masters draw
Billets for them; who choose the best Quarters for the Captains, Lieutenants,
Sub-Lieutenants and Ensigns.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Provost Marshal of a Regiment.
THe Charge of Provost Marshal is to pursue and apprehend Deserters and
Delinquents. He has under him a Lieutenant, a Clark, six Archers or Officers,
and an Executioner. He it is that sets Rates on the Provisions of his Quarters,
and they cannot be sold without his permission; He appoints Flesh Markets and
Slaughter houses, he has the charge of causing the Camp be made clean; he
brings in Inditements, interrogates and confronts the witnesses, and the
process being drawn up he carries it to the Major, who gives the conclusions,
afterward the Colonel and Captains judge it.

On a March, the provost Mars^al has the charge of bringing up the Baggage of
his Regiment, and of keeping them in Order; it is his care also to furnish
Wagons for carrying the Sick to Hospitals.

CHAP. IV. Of Sergeants.
IT being in the Captain's power to make Sergeants in his Company, he ought to
choose such of his Soldiers as he knows to be stoutest, most discreet and
vigilant to fill those charges. It is the Sergeants place to have a Roil of the
Soldiers and their Quarters, and go thither Morning and Eevening to visit
them. They ought to know the number of the Pikes and Musketeers, and rank their
Companies, putting the best armed and strongest in the first Rank, making them
observe Military Discipline, and all commands given them by their Officers, in
the Field and in Garrison they teach the Soldiers to handle their Arms, to keep
in Rank and File; And are to receive the Provisions and Ammunition from the
Commissary, distribute them amongst the Corporals, set the Courts of Guard and
Sentinels at the places which the Majors have appointed, and visit them often.
When the Company marches, their place is on the Flanks, to keep the Ranks and
Files even and straight, and hinder the Soldiers from straggling or going out
of order, setting them right again with the Staff of their Halbard.

Every Evening a Sergeant of each Company should be at the place of Arms, to
receive the word from the Major, and carry it afterward to the Captains and
other Officers. And in this manner the Order or Word is given.

So soon as the Major is come upon the place, the Sergeants draw near him and
make a Circle according to the Rank of their Companies, beginning at his Right
hand and ending at the Left. The Major puts on his Hat, and having recommended
to them what is to be done extraordinarily, he gives the word as low as can be
to the first Sergeant on his Right hand, who gives it about to the next and so
successively until it come to the last, who gives it back to the Major, that
he may see if the word be right, and not changed.

When there is any detachment, the Sergeants acquaint their Officers with it,
they command out of every Company the number of Soldiers, which the Major has
demanded; they take care to visit the Arms, distribure amongst them necessary
ammunition, and to lead them to the Rendezvous. In a Garrison, every Sergeant by
turn should go to his Captain's Quarters, to see if the Escouade commanded for
the Guard be complete, and furnished with all things necessary.

After the Retreat or Tattoe, the Sergeants should go through the Lodgings to
see if all the Soldiers be come in, give an account to the Captain of the
absent and sick, and to acquaint the Major that he may cause them be carried to
the Hospital.

The Sergeants of the Regiments of Guard being in Garrison with other Regiments,
have the privilege to make a Circle apart to receive the Word, because of the
honor they have in serving in the King's Guards.

CHAP. XV. Of Corporals, Lanspassades, and other inferior Officers of a
Company.
THE King entertains in every Company, three Corporals, and five Lanspassades.

The duty of a Corporal is to command his Escouade, to teach his Soldiers all
that is necessary for them to know or do, to hinder Quarrels and Disorders, and
acquaint the Captain with them, because he cannot beat, but only punish them by
keeping them long at their sentinel post. He is to have a Role of his Escouade,
tell the Soldiers what day they are to mount the Guard, view their Arms and
Bandeleers, give them out the Provisions and Ammunition which the Sergeant has
delivered to him, and to know who are best experienced that he may place them
Sentinels and set them on the most important duties. When he is on the Guard,
it is his duty to set the Sentinels in the places which the Major has showed
him, and to relieve them himself; To send Lanspassades to visit them, and to
expect the Rounds and Countertounds, who are to give him the Word: He ought to
charge the Sentinels to suffer no body to approach them, though it were the
General of the Army himself, without presenting the Pike, or Musket with a
cocked March; nor to leave their Post unless relieved by the Corporal, or
forced by the Enemy, then they may retire to the Court of Guard, and the Court
of Guard being forced may retire to the Camp.

The Corporal is to cause respect to be paid to the Court of Guard, and
command silence whether it be at the Gates or on the Walls, that the noise may
not hinder the Advertisements of the Sentinels from being heard. He is to walk
before his Court of Guard, or appoint a Lanspassade to do it, he is always to
keep fire for Lighting the Matches, and take care to have the Court of Guard
furnished with Wood, Coal, and Candle. In a Garrison whilst the Drums beat to
Guard, all the Corporals go to the Majors Quarters, that they may there draw
lots for the Posts and Rounds.

Heretofore the Lanspassades were dismounted Troopers who were made serve in
the Foot during the Campain, until their Captains gave them other Horfes; they
ease the Corporals and are as their Lieutenants: In times of danger they go the
perilous Rounds, and are Sentinels Perdues, otherways they are freed from duty.

The Fourier ought to have a List of all the Soldiers of a Company, and make
the distribution of Quarters. He takes his Quarter from the Regiment Quarter
Master, then he marks out the Quarters of the Captain, Lieutenant,
Sublieutenant. Ensign, Sergeants, the Drummer's and his own, and puts all the
rest into Billets, which he makes the Corporals draw by Lot, who distribute
them amongst the Soldiers.

Every Company should have a Surgeon, commonly called Frater, to dress the Sick
and Wounded, and shave the Soldiers, being as a Mate to the Surgeon Major of
the Regiment: He ought to make Provision of Medicaments proper to stop
Bleeding, hinder Inflammation and ease Pains.

There is no Company but has one or two Drummers, and a Drum-Major over all,
who has the care of instructing the rest, and guarding the Enemies Drummers
that come into the Camp. He can with his Baton punish those that fail in their
duty, and goes Evening and Morning to the Major to receive his Orders. The
Drummers duty is to beat all Points, as the General, the Call or Gathering, the
Dernier, the March, the Allarm, the Parley, the Answer to Parleys, the Reveilly,
the Tattoe and the Bans.

The Soldier ought to be stout, strong, a good Husband, and obedient to all his
Officers, from the Captain to the Lanspassades. He should study to keep himself
neat, to make his Arms bright and clean; to know how to use them, the Soldier's
duties, the motions of his Company, its March; to lodge himlelf in the Field,
keep his Guard and Sentinel-Post, to understand the Beat of Drum, and to be
diligent to come to his Colors. His eating and sleep should be regulated
according to his leisure, and not his pleasure.

CHAP. XVI. Of the way of forming a Battalion.
WHen a Colonel on any occasion would have his Regiment to be in Arms, he sends
his Major to the place of Rendezvous, to draw up the Companies as fast as they
arrive there; who puts first the Colonel's Company in Battalia, six men deep,
distant three large paces from one another, and places the Pikes on the left
hand of the Musketteers. The other Companies draw up according to the first.
All being posted the Major commands silence, and orders fix Sergeants to mark
the half Ranks, that he may make the Pikes enter into the Center of the
Musketteers, by this word of Command.

The way of forming a Battalion. Page 51, in the Second Part.
diagram using letters and icons to represent troop organziation

The Explication of the present Figure.
THis Figure represents a Battalion of sixteen Companies with the Officers at
their Posts.

A, The Colonel. B, The Lieutenant Colonel. aaa, etc. The Captains. bb, The
Lieutenants. CC, The Lieutenants-Reformed, and Ensigns. DD, The Sergeants. EE,
The Drummers on the Flanks. F, The Major. G, The Aid Major. ooo, The
Musketteers. III, The Pikes.
Soldiers, take heed to form the Battalion.
To the Right and Left, Musketteers and Pikes.
Form the Battalion. March.
The Musketteers of the Colonel's Company stand still, the right hand half Rank
of Pikes turn to the Left, the Musketteers to the Right; the left hand half
rank of Pikes, turn to the Right, the Musketteers to the Left, and march both
together through the Intervals of the Ranks, till the Pikes come to the Center
of the Battalion separated from the Musketteers, and the Musketteers on the
Right and Left separated from the Pikes. When they have performed that Motion,
the Major reduces them as they were by this word of Command.

As ye were.
They that turned to the Left, turn to the Right; they that turned to the
Right, to the Left; and by this means every one faces the Major, and so the
Battalion is formed. This is a far shorter way than that which was in use not
long ago.

CHAP. XVII. Of Exercising.
WHen the Regiment is in Battalia, if the Colonel intend to see them exercise,
he gives notice to the Major; who makes them open their Files one pace, giving
thereby the Soldiers the liberty of the arm to handle their Arms. This is the
word of Command he gives, Soldiers, take heed to open your Files.
The right hand File stands still.
Open your Files to the left a paces distance. March.


All the Soldiers turn to the Lest, the lest hand File begins to march, and the
others move not from their places, until they see those that go before them at
a paces distance. The Soldiers in marching are to have care to keep in a
straight line by their Right hand-man and File-leader. When the Major perceives
that the Files are sufficiently opened, he says to them,

Halt. As you were.
Even your Ranks, and straighten your Files.
All things thus disposed, the Major gives the word of Command to the Sergeants.

Sergeants take beed.
To the Right and Left by half Ranks; form Files upon the Flanks of the
Battalion. March.
Then he gives this word of Command to the Officers who are at the head of the
Battalion.

Gentlenten Officers, we are going to Exercise.
To the Right and Left; take your Post on the Flanks of the Battalion. March.
The words of Command in Exercising.

Soldiers take heed.
Silence.
Carry your Arms well.
The Soldiers are to have a care to make no motion until the word of Command be
given and ended, to the end that the handling of Arms and the motions may be
done at the same time.

Join the Right hand to the Musket.
^oise your Musket.
Join the left hand to your Musket.
Take your Match.
Blow your Match.
Cock your Match.
Try your Match.
Cover your Pan with your two fore singers.
Open your Pan.
Present.
Fire.
Recover your Arms.
Take your Match.
Return it into its place.
Blow your Pan.
Take your Primer.
Prime.
Close your Pan.
Blow off the loose Corns.
Cast your Musker about to your swords side.
Take the Charge.
Open it with your teeth.
Put the Powder into the Barrel.
Draw your scouring Stick.
Hold up your scouring Stick.
Shorten it against your breast.
Put the scouring Stick into the Barrel.
Ram.
Recover your scouring Stick.
Hold up your scouring Stick.
Shorten it against your breast.
Return the scouring Stick into its place.
Join the right hand to your Musket.
Poise your Musket.
Shoulder your Musket.
The Exercise of the Pike.
Whilst the Pikes are exercising, the Musketteers are made to order, or rest
upon their Arms by this word of Command;

Rest your selves upon your Arms.
Pikes take heed.
To the Right, to the Right, to the Right, to the Right.
To the Right about.
As ye were.
To the Left, to the Left, to the Left, to the Left.
To the Left about.
As ye were.
Advance your Pike.
To the Right charge four times.
Charge to the Right about.
As ye were.
Charge to the Left four times.
Charge to the Left about.
As ye were.
Advance your Pike.
Shoulder your Pike.
Charge to the Right.
As ye were.
Charge to the Left.
As ye were.
Charge to the Left about.
As ye were.
Comport your Pike.
Charge.
As ye were.
Charge.
Trail your Pike.
As ye were.
Push your Pike three times.
Advance your Pikes.
Charge to the Horse.
Draw your Swords.
Put up your Swords.
Advance your Pike.
Ground your Pike.
Rest upon your Arms.
The Pikes as well as Musketteers ought to have a care when they turn to the
Right or Left, not to clash their Arms one against another; for that clattering
is most unpleasant to the ear.

Take heed all the Battalion.
Shoulder your Muskets.
The Pikes at the same time advance their Pikes.

To the Right four times.
To the Right about.
As ye were.
To the Left four times.
To the Left about.
As ye were.
Musketteers make ready.
The Muskeetteers make ready in the same manner as if they were going to fire,
and hold their Muskets in a readiness to present; and at the same time the
Pikes present their Pikes, or charge.

To the Right four times.
To the Right about.
As ye were.
To the Left four times.
To the Left about.
As ye were.
Take your Match.
Return it into its place.
Shoulder your Musket.
The Pikes advance their Pikes. After the handling of their Arms the Major
makes them double their Ranks on the Front and Rear.

To the Right (or) to the Left, double your Ranks on the Front. March. The
second Rank enters into the first, the fourth into the third, and the last into
the fifth; but that should be done in such a manner that no Soldier go before
another, and that the motion be performed all at the same time, moving always
the left foot first.

To reduce the Ranks as they were.

Ranks that doubled, as ye were. Or in another manner.

Ranks that doubled, take heed.
To the Right about. March. Halt.
As ye were.
The Ranks that doubled return to their place, and the Soldiers turn to the
Left about, to put themselves as they were.

To double their Ranks on the Front by half Files.

To the Right (or) to the Left by half-File-leaders.
Double your Ranks on the Front. March.
The fourth Rank, which is the half File-leader, doubles into the first Rank,
which is the File-leader; the fifth into the second; and the last, which is the
Bringer up, into the third. They are put again as they were in this manner.

Bringers up, to the Right about. March.
As ye were
Or as is abovesaid.

To double the Ranks on the Rear.

Soldiers, take heed to double your Ranks on the Rear.
The Ranks that doubled stand still.
To the Right (or) to the Left, double your Ranks on the Rear. March.
The first Rank turns to the Right about, and enters into the second, the third
into the fourth, and the fifth into the last; to put them as they were.

Ranks that doubled, as ye were. March. To double on the Rear by Bringers up of
half Files.

To the Righe (or) to the Left, by Bringers up of half Files, double your Ranks
on the Rear. March. The three first Ranks turn to the Right about; and the
third Rank, which is the Bringer up of the half File, doubles into the last;
the second into the fifth, and the first into the fourth: and face about as the
other Ranks which they have doubled by turning to the Left about.

To put them as they were by Fileleaders.

Ranks that doubled, as ye were. March. The Files are doubled and put again as
they were, after the same manner as the Ranks to the Right or to the Left, by
half Rank, or quarter Rank, by Front or Rear; according to the pleasure of the
Commander.

The Quart of Conversion, or Wheeling, is one of the most necessary Motions to
the Fort.

When a Battalion is attacked on the Flank, the Major gives this Word of
Command.

To the Right (or) to the Left Wheel March. If the Wheeling be made to the
Right, the Right turns insensibly, and the Left double their pace until the
Battalion make Front to the side where the Right stood. If the wheeling be
commanded to the Left, what was done to the Right is done to the Left.

Soldiers should be exercised to fire all manner of ways; in keeping of ground,
gaining of ground, and losing of ground.

To make them fire in keeping of ground, this word of Command i^ given.

The five first Ranks, kneel:
Bringers up, make ready.
Present. Fire.
Fifth Rank, stand up.
Musketteers make ready.
Present. Fire, etc.
And so of the rest; whilst the first Ranks discharge, those on the Rear who
have fired charge again, and are in readiness against the first word of Command.

A Battalion is sometimes forced to give ground when it is beset with the
Enemy's Horse in the middle of a Plain: When it is so, the Major ought to make
a square Battalion, which fronts every way, and which is fraized with Pikes,
serving as Walls to hinder the Horse to break in whilst the Musketteers fire.

The Battalion of the Count de Fontaine at the Battle of Rocroy, the first of
so many Victories obtained by Monsieur the Prince; stood firm against the
Horse, and could not be broken but by Cannon.

To fire in gaining of ground, the Battalion is commanded to advance as fast as
the former Ranks discharge; ordering them to fall off to the Rear so soon as
they have fired, by this word of Command.

To the Right and Left by half Ranks,
Fall off to the Rear of the Battalion. March.
When they would fire in losing of ground, the first Rank discharges, and falls
off to the Rear of the Battalion, and so the rest successively.

To make all the Musketteers of a Battalion draw their Swords; after they have
fired, whilst their Muskets are still on the Sword side, the Major gives this
word of Command, Draw your Swords.
To the Right four times.
To the Right about.
To the Left four times.
To the Left about.
As ye were.
Put up your Swords.
Join your right hand to your Muskets.
Poise your Muskets.
Shoulder your Muskets.
Rest upon your Arms.
Lay down your Arms.
Take up your Arms.
Shoulder your Muskets.


After the handling of Arms, and the Motions, if the Colonel would have the
Battalion to march, he is to tell the Major; who shall give this word of
Command to the Officers.

To the Right and Left, Gentlemen. Officers; take your Posts on the head of the
Battalion. March. Then he shall make the Soldiers close their Files in this
manner.

Soldiers, take heed to close your Files.
The right hand File stand still.
To the Right, close your Files. March.
As ye were.
When the Files are closed, the Colonel gives order in what manner he would
have the Battalion to march; and the Major divides the Captains, one half for
the Front, and the other for the Rear: he places the Lieutenants at the head of
every Division of Musketteets, the Sub-Lieutenants and Ensigns at the Divisions
of Pikes, and the Sergeants on the Flanks: he divides his Drummers into three
parts; one third part on the Front, another before the Pikes, and the last on
the Rear; and in that order he makes his Battalion file off, commanding the
Sergeants to even their Ranks as they march.

The Major makes the Regiment march in all Figures; in Battalia, all the
Officers on the head; making all the Battalion present their Arms, a^ when they
are to charge an Enemy: by a March, a half March, a quarter March, and by a
half quarter March.

If the Colonel command the Companies to be dismissed, the Major shall draw up
the Regiment in Battalia, i^ the same place from whence it marched; and shall
begin by making the Pikes draw off from the Center of the Battalion, to the
Rear.

Pikes, to the Right about.
March. Halt.
As ye were.
Then he makes the two Bodies of Musketteers join.

Page 70, in the Second Part. The way of Filing off a Battalion, the Officers
being at their Posts.
diagram using letters and icons to represent troop organziation

The Explication of the present Figure.
THis Figure represents a Battalion which files off by Division of six a front,
to teach the Soldiers to march aright.

A, The Colonel at the head of his Regiment. B, The Lieutenant Colonel on his
left hand. a a a, The half of the Captains on the Front, and the other on the
Rear. b b b, The Lieutenonts at the head of every Division of Musketteers. C C
C, The Sub Lieutenants at the head of the Divisions of Pikes. D D, The
Sergeants on the Flanks of the Divisions. E E, The Drummers on the Front, at
the Center, and on the Rear. F G, The Major and Aid-Major make the Battalion
file off. o o o, The Divisions of Musketteers. I I I, The Divisions of Pikes.
Musketteers, to the Right and Left. March.
The Right hand Body turns to the Left, and the Left to the Right; and both
Bodies march until they meet: To put them as they were,

As ye were.
They that turned to the Left turn to the Right, and they that turned to the
Right, to the Left. Afterward he gives this word of Command to the Pikes,

Pikes to your Companies. March.
The Pikes separate, and come on the Rear of the Musketteers of their
Companies. The Major sends the Companies back into their Quarters, making them
file off in good order, the one after the other, Drums beating, and the
Officers at their usual Posts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Detachments.
A Detachment is a certain number of Officers and Soldiers which the General
makes every Regiment furnish, to be employed as he thinks convenient. The
detachments are made by Companies that the Fatigue or Loss which may happen may
be divided amongst them.

Two or three Thousand men detached from an Army, are commanded by a Brigadeer,
and other Officers proportionably.

To Eight hundred men there is required a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel an
Aid-Major, sixteen Captains, as many Lieutenants, as many Sublieutenants or
Ensigns, and thirty two Sergeants.

A Lieutenant Colonel has four or five thousand men allowed him; with other
Officers and Sergeants proportionably.

A Captain never marches in a Detachment without fifty Soldiers, a Lieutenant,
a Sublieutenant or an Ensign and two Sergeants.

A Lieutenant has but thirty men and one Sergeant. A Sublieutenant Twenty five
men and a Sergeant; and the Ensigns march not but with Captains; a Sergeant is
usually commanded out with ten or twelve Men, and sometimes he is allowed
fifteen.

The detachments which are commanded by Masters de Camp consist of three or
four hundred Troopers: Those of Captains of Light Horse of fifty, those of
Lieutenants of thirty, those of Cornels of twenty, those of Quarter Masters of
fifteen, and those of Brigadeers of ten or twelve Troopers.

When an Entrenchment is to be forced, a close or covered way carried, a Half
Moon gained, or an Assault to be made; there is a Detachment made out of
several Companies of good Soldiers, who are commonly called the Forlorn Hope,
because they ought to fall on first, and make a Passage for the rest. An
Attacque is always begun by a Sergeant with ten men, seconded by a Lieutenant
with thirty, backed by a Captain, A Lieutenant, a Sublieutenant or an Ensign
with fifty, who are followed by all the Regiment.

Detachments of many Officets are always made by the Front and Rear: For
instance if a Regiment be obliged to furnish four Captains, the Major shall
command two from the Front, and two from the Rear: The same is observed in
respect of Lieutenants, Sublieutenants and Ensigns.

Detachments for the Guard of General Persons are never made by Brigades, but
by every Regiment in particular to which that honor belongs. The first
Regiment of the Army furnishes the Generals Guard; the second the Lieutenant
Generals, the third that of the General Person who comes next, and so the rest
in Order.

CHAP XIX. Of the March of a Regiment.
WHen a Regiment is to leave a Quarter, the Major gives notice of it to the
Sergeants of Artillery and gives Orders to the Drummers to beat the Troop or to
March next Morning two Hours before day, that the Soldiers may have time to
make ready.

The Regiment Quartermaster goes and receives Orders of the Commander, and
departs with the Fouriers or Company-Quarter-Masters, two or three houers
before the Regiment, to take up the Quarters in the place where the Regiment is
to lodge.

The Provost Marshal gathers together the Baggage and sends it away before the
Regiment, when there is no danger of an Enemy, taking upon himself the care of
conducting it.

The Major ought over night to command a Sergeant with ten men to depart next
Morning by Break of Day, and Post himself on the Rode by which the Regiment is
to March, to hinder any Soldier from going before the rest without an Order
from his Officer in writing.

When all things are disposed and the Major is informed by the Commander of the
hour when the Companies should March, he commands the Drummers to beat the
Gathering or Call. At the bea^ing of the Call the Soldiers should assemble
before their Captains Lodgings; and so soon as the Dernier is beat, the
Officers command the Soldiers to their Arms, and lead them in good Order to the
place of Rendezvous, where the Major takes care to receive them, and draw them
up in Battalia according as they come, the Battalion being formed, he causes a
Proclamation to be published in the Kings name, whereby the Soldiers are
forbidden to leave their Ranks on Pain of bodily Punishment; then he makes a
Detachment of ten men commanded by a Sergeant, which he leaves for a Rear Guard
to bring up the Straglers; and having put the Officers in their Posts, he makes
the Regiment file off by four or six at most, by reason of the ways, there
being no necessity to make them march cross the Fields.

The Drummers march about twenty Paces before the Battalion, with their Drums
on their Backs, except one that beats, who is to be relieved every League.

The Lieutenants and Sublieutonants should have a care that no Soldier go out
of his Division, unless it be for the necessity of nature, if so, he is to
leave his Musket or Pike with his Comrade, and a Sergeant is charged to wait on
him, and place him again into his Rank.

About mid way the Commander shall make his Regiment halt for the space of two
hours, choosing for that purpose a place were there is Water, and at a distance
from Villages.

When the Regiment is near their Quarters, the Quartermaster who ought already
to have lodged the equipage, comes with the Fouriers to meet them, and gives
the Colonel an account of the condition of the Quarters. The Major commands the
Colors to be displayed, and the Matches Lighted, he divides the Drummers, and
makes the Regiment enter in good Order into the Quarter as far as the place of
Arms, where he draws it up in Battalia: He establishes a Court of Guard to
hinder disorders in the Night time, he causes the Colors to be conveyed to the
Commanders Quarters, and sets a Sentinel at his door; he orders next the
Sergeants to come and receive the Word at a certain hour in the Evening, and
the Drummers to beat the Tattoe; he sends off a Sergeant to guard the Magazin,
where Provisions are distributed; and having provided every thing, he sends the
Companies to the Quarters allotted them. The Commander every Evening gives the
Major Orders for the next day's March.

CHAP. XI. Of a Council of War.
THe Council of War of the Army meets always at the General's Lodgings or Tent;
and none are called to it but the Lieutenant-Generals, the Marshals de Camp,
the Brigadeers, and sometimes the Colonels or the Commanders of Bodies, when
the matters concern their Regiments.

Private Councils of War are held at the Governors Quarters in a place of
Garrison; in a Camp, at the Colonel of the Regiment his Tent, who gives notice
to the Captains to be present. When all are met, the Governor, or Colonel, or
he that Commands, takes his place at the head of the Table, the Captains sit
about according to their Seniority; that is to say, the first Captain on the
right hand of him that presides, the second on the left, and so of the rest;
and the Major, who discharges the Office of the King's Proctor or Soliciter,
sits at the lower end of the Table. The Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants and
Ensigns have right to enter into the Chamber where the Council is held; but
they stand at the Captains backs with their hats off, and have no Vote.

If the Council be called to deliberate on some matter of consequence; the
President having opened it to the assembly, asks their Opinions.

The youngest Captain begins and gives his, and the rest in Order till it come
to the President, who pronounces last. The Clark having set down the opinions
of every one, draws up the result conform to the plurality of Votes, which he
gives to be signed by the President and Captains.

If the Council be held to Judge a Criminal, the Officers that are called to it
should come fasting, and having first heard Mass, if they can; Every one having
taken his place; and the Clark having read the Informations, Reexamination,
Confrontation, and Interrogatory; The President causes the Criminal to be
brought unto the Council, where he makes him sit down on the Footstool,
questions him about all the Facts whereof he is accused, and sends him back to
Prison. Then the Clark reads over the conclusions of the Major, and every one
Judges according to his Conscience and the Ordinances of the King. The Sentence
is framed conform to the plurality of Votes, and is pronounced to the Criminal
in the name of the Council of War.

When the Criminal is condemued to any Punishment; the Provost Marshal causes
the Sentence to be put in Execution, and the Major calls together the Companies
to be Present thereat. Before a Soldier be delivered to the Executioner to be
punished for any Crime that carries infamy with it, he ought to be publicly
degraded from his Arms by the Major.

The Council of War should never consist of fewer than seven Officers: When
there are not Captains enough to make up that number the Inferior Officers are
called even to the Sergeants.

The Charges of the Troops of the King's Household.
The Guards du Corpse.
THe King has four Troops of Horse-Guards, commanded by four Captains, who
Quarterly serve and wait on his Majesty's Person.

There is in every Troop two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, and twelve Exempts.

One Major, and two Aid Majors for all the four.

The Troops of the Guards du Corpse are

The Troop of the Duke of Noailles. The Count Dayen, his Son, has the Reversion
of it.

The Troop of the Marshal de Duras.

The Troop of the Marshal de Luxembourg.

The Troop of the Marshal de Lorge.

The Gendarms.
The Troops of Gendarms have for their Captains the King, the Queen, and the
Princes, whose name they bear; one Captain Lieutenant, one Sub-Lieutenant, an
Ensign, a Guidon, and two Quarter Masters.

The Troops of the Gendarms are,

The King's Troop of Gendarms, commanded by the Prince of Sowbise.

The Troop of the Scottish Gendarms, commanded by the Marquess of Livourne.

The Queen's Troop of Gendarms, commanded by the Marqness du Garo.

The Dolphin's Troop of Gendarms, commanded by the Marquess de la Trousse.

The Troop of the Gendarms of Anjou, commanded by the Marquess of Genlis,
Marshal de Camp.

The Troop of the Gendarms of Burgundy, commanded by the Count of Broglia.

The Troop of the English Gendarms, commanded by --.

The Troop of the Gendarms of Flanders, commanded by the Count of Marsin.

The Troop of the Gendarms of Monsieur, commanded by the Marquess de la Roque.

The Light Horsemen.
The Troops of the Light Horsemen have for their Captains, the King, the Queen,
and the Princes whose name they bear; a Captain-Lieutenant, a Sub-Lieutenant, a
Cornet, and two Quarter Masters.

The Troops of the King's Light-Horse-men are,

The Troop of Light Horsemen of the King's Guard, commanded by the Duke of
Chevreuse.

The Queen's Troop of Light Horsemen, commanded by Monsieur --

The Dolphin's Troop of Light Horsemen, commanded by the Count of Mirainville.

The Troop of the Light Horsemen of Monsieur, commanded by the Marquess of
Valsemay.

The Musketteers.
The two Troops of Musketteers, who fight sometimes on Foot and sometimes on
Horse, have the King for Captain, a Captain-Lieutenant for each Company, a Sub
Lieutenant, an Ensign, a Cornet, and six Quarter Masters.

The Troops of Musketteers are,

The Troop of Gray Musketteers, commanded by the Chevalier de Fourbin.

The Troop of Black Musketteers, commanded by Monsieur de Louvel.

The Charges of the Light Horsemen.
THe Colonel General, the Count of Auvergne.

The Master de Camp-General, the Marquess de Renel.

The Commissary-General, Monsieur de la Cordonniere, and two Quarter Masters.

Every Regiment has its Master de Camp, a Major, and an Aid-Major; and every
Troop has its Captain, a Lieutenant, a Cornet, and a Quartermaster. The
Regiments which pass for Strangers have Lieutenant-Colonels.

The chief Regiments of Horse are,

The Colonel's Regiment.

The Master de Camp's Regiment.

The Commissary's Regiment.

The King's Regiment of Cuirassiers.

The King's Regiment.

The Royal Regiment.

The Queen's Regiment.

The King's Regiment of Cravates.

The Royal Regiment of Rousillon.

The Dolphin's Regiment.

The Regiment of Monsieur, the Duke of Orleans.

The Prince's Regiment.

The Regiment of Monsieur the Duke.

The Charges of the Dragoons.
THe General of the Dragoons, the Marquess de Ranes.

In every Regiment there is a Colonel a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, an
Aid-Major; and there is no Troop without a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Sub
Lieutenant, a Cornet, a Quartermaster, and two Sergeants.

The chief Regiments of Dragoons are,

The King's Regiment, commanded by the Marquess of Tilladet.

The Royal Regiment, commanded by the Marquess of Boufflers.

The Queen's Regiment, commanded by Monsieur Denonville.

The Dolphin's Regiment, commanded by the Marquess of Longueval.

The Charges of Foot.
THe Officers of the Regiment of French Guards are, a Colonel, a
Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, four Aid-Majors, and a Quartermaster; and every
Company has a Captain, a Lieutenant, two Sub Lieutenants, an Ensign, and six
Sergeants.

The other French Regiments have each of them a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel,
a Major, two Aid-Majors, a Quartermaster, and two Enfigns; and in every
Company there is a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Reformed Lieutenant, and two
Sergeants.

The Suisses General is the Duke of Main.

Every Regiment has a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, two Aid-Majors,
and a Judge-Advocate; and every Company a Captain, a Sub-Lieutenant, an Ensign,
four Sergeants, a Provost-Marshal, a Judge, a Captain of the Arms, a Fourier or
Quarter Master, a Secretary and an Ensign-bearer.

The chief French Regiments.
THe Regiment of Guards, commanded by the Marshal de la Feuillade.

The Regiment of Picardy, commanded by the Count of Bourlemont.

The Regiment of Champagne, commanded by Monsiieur de Boisdavid.

The Regiment of Navarre, commanded by the Marquess D'albert.

The Regiment of Piedmont, commanded by Monsieur de Maqueline.

The Regiment of Normandy, commanded by the Count of Guiscar.

The Regiment de la Marine, commanded by Matthew de Castenas.

The King's Regiment, commanded by Monsieur de St. George.

The Royal Regiment, commanded by the Marquess of Pierre fite.

The Dolphin's Regiment, commanded by the Marquess d'Vrel.

The Regiment of Anjon, commanded by the Count of St. Geran.

The Queen's Regiment, commanded by the Mrquess of Crenan.

The Royal Ship Regiment, commanded by the Count of Breast.

The Crown-Regiment, commanded by the Marquess of Genlis.

The Royal Regiment de la Marine, commanyed by the Marquess de Nangis, etc.

The Chief Regiments of Strangers who serve in France.
THe Regiment of the Suisse-Guards, commanded by Colonel Molondin.

The Scottish Regiment, commanded by my Lord Douglas.

The Royal Regiment of Rouissillon, commanded by Monfieur de Ximenes.

The Regiment of Alsatia, commanded by the Prince Palatin.

The Royal Italian Regiment, commanded by the Count of Magalotti, etc.

The Towns, Citadels, Castles, and Forts where the King keeps Garrison.
In Picardy.
The Citadel of Laon.

The Towns and Castles of Guise, on the River of Oise.

La fere. on the River of Oise.

Saint Quentin, on the River of Sum.

The Town and Castle of Ham, on the Sum.

The Town and Castle of Peronne, on the Sum.

The Citadel of Amiens on the Sum.

The Town and Citadel of Doulens, on the River Autti.

The Town and Citadel of Monstreuil, on the River of Canche.

The Castle of the Town of Boulogne, on the Sea, at the Mouth of the River of
Liaune.

The Fort of Mont Huli^^, on the Liaune.

The Fort Niolet, near the Sea, half a league from Calais.

The Town and Citadel of Calais, and the Fort of Richeban in the Entry of the
Port.

Ardres.

In Flanders.
The Town of Graveling, near the Sea, on the River of Aa.

The Town and Citadel of Dunkirk, a Seaport.

The Fort of Bois, in the Sea, betwixt Dunkirk and Gravelin.

Bergue Saint Vinox, on the litttle River of Colme.

The Fort of Linck, on the River of Colme.

The Fort Lowis, and the French Fort on the Canal that goes from Dunkirk to
Bergue.

The Town and Citadel of Lisle.

The Town And Citadel of Courtray, on the River of Lis.

Oudenarde on the Escaut.

Ath on the River of Ander.

The Town and Citadel of Tournay, on the Escaut.

Orchies.

The Town of Douay, and the Fort of Scarpe, on the River of Scarpe.

In Artois.
The Town and Citadel of Arras. on the River of Scarpe.

St. Venant, on the River of Lis.

Bethune.

Hesdin, on the River of Canche.

Bapawme.

The Town of Air, and its Fort, on the River of Lis.

In Hainault.
Avesne, on a little River that runs into the Sambre.

Landreci, on the Sambre.

Le Quesnoy.

Bouchin, on the Escaut.

Philipeville.

Charleroy, on the Sambre.

Beaumont and Binch.

In the Duchy of Limbourg.
The Town and Castle of Limbourg.

In Liege.
The Town of Mastricht, on the Meuse.

The Towns and Castles of Huis and Divan, on the Meuse.

In the Duchy of Luxemburg.
Montmidy.

Thionville, on the Moselle.

In Lorrain.
The Town and Citadel of Stenay, on the Meuse.

The Town and Citadel of Verdun, on the Meuse.

The Town and Citadel of Metz, on the Moselle.

Thoul, on the Moselle.

Nancy, on the River of Meinthe.

Marsal, on the River of Seille.

Sarbourg, on the Sarre.

Phalesbourg.

The Town of Deux Ponts, in the Palatinate, on the River of Bithe.

In Alsatia.
Brisack, on the Rhine.

Saverne.

Hagueneaw.

Beffort.

Slestat, on the River Dille.

In Champagne.
Rocroy.

The Town and Citadel of Meziers, on the Meuse.

The Mont Olimpe, on the Meuse, and Charleville.

The Town and Castle of Sedan, on the Meuse.

The Castle of St. Menehoulde, on the River of Aine.

The Castle of St. Disier, on the Marne.

In Burgundy.
The Gastle of Dijon, on the River of Ouche.

The Town and Castle of Aussonne. on the Saone.

The Citadel of Chalons, on the Saonue.

In the Franche Comte.
The Town and Citadel of Besancon.

Dole, on the Doux.

Saling.

Gary, on the Saone.

The Fort of St. Anne.

The Fort of Loux, on the Doux.

In the Lyonnois.
The City of Lion, on the Saonue and Rhosne.

In Dauphiny.
The Citadel of Valence, on the Rhosne.

The Fort Baraux, on the River of Lisiere.

The Citadel and Arsenal of Grenoble on the Lisiere.

The Fort de la Perouze on the Entry into Italy.

In Provence.
The Citadel of Marseilles, a Seaport.

Nostre dame de la Guard, near Marseilles.

The Castle of If, and the Tower of Planier, in the Sea.

The Tower of Bove, near Martignes, on the Sea Shore,

On the Frontiers of Italy.
The Town and Citadel of Pignerol, on the Frontiers of Piemont.

The Town and Principality of Monaco, a Sea Port on the Frontiers of Genoa.

In Languedock.
The Citadel of Pont St. Esprit, on the Rhosne.

The Citadel of Mont-Pellier.

The Castle of Sommiers.

Aigue Morte, on a Branch of the Rhone, at the Mouth of it.

The Fort Peccay, on a Branch of the Rhosne, at the Mouth of it.

The new Town of Avignon, on the Rhosne.

The Fort of Brescon, in the Sea, a league from Agde.

In Roussillon.
The Castle of Salses, on the Cut of the Sea.

The Town and Citadel of Perpignan, on the River of Later.

The Town and Citadel of Colieuvre, on the Sea shore.

Ville Franche, on the River of Later.

The Fort of the Bains d'Arles, toward the Pyrenean Hills.

The Castle of Bellegard, in the middle of Col de Pertuis, in the Pyrenean
Hills.

In Basse Navarre.
The Town and Citadel of St. John Piedport, on the River of Nive.

Navarsin, on the Gave d'Oleron.

In Gascogne.
The Castle Trumpet of Bordeaux, on the Garonne.

The Citadel of Blay, on the Garonne.

The Tower of Cordovan, at the Mouth of the Garonne.

Test de Buch, on the Haven of Arachon.

The Castle of Laictonre, on the River of Gers.

In Xaintonge.
Brouage, on the Sea side.

The Castle of the Isle of Oleron.

St. Martin, in the Isle of Re.

In Bretagne
The Citadel of Belle-Isle.

Blavet, or Port-Lowis, at the Mouth of the River of Blavet.

Breast, a Sea Port on the Bay of Breast.

The Castle of Nantes, on the River of Loyre.

In Anjou.
The Castle of Angiers, on the River of Loire.

The Castle of Saumur, on the Loire.

In Normandy.
The Citadel of Havre de Grace, a Sea Port at the Mouth of the Seine.

The Fort of St. Michael, in the Sea.

The Castle of Caen, on the River of Orne.

The Citadel of Dieppe, a Sea Port, at the Mouth of the River of Eaune.

In Sicily.
The Town of Messina, a Seaport. Augusta.

An Explication of the terms of War.
CAmp volant is a little Body of an Army that keeps the Field to oppose the
inrodes of Enemies, incommode their Country, hinder their Convoys, and to
throw themselves into the places which they have a design to Besiege.

Brigade is a Division of the Army.

Vanguard is a part of the Army that keeps in the Van when it is on a March.

The main Body, is the gross of the Army which marches between the Vanguard
and the Rear-guard.

The Rear-guard is a part of the Army which marches after the main body.

Colonne or Pillar is the File of an Army when it Marches.

Lines are several Regiments ranked in Battle away.

The body of reserve is a part of the Army which the General Posts behind the
Lines in time of Battle, to succor the weakest Posts.

Parties are commanded out to Skirmish, to oblige the Enemies Country to
contribution, make Prisoners, and to learn News.

Convoys are Guards to conduct the necessary Ammunition of the Army.

Camp, the place where an Army lies in the Field.

The Kings Quarters, is the place where the General, general Persons, and all
their Train, lie.

Park, the place where the Artillery Encamps.

Squadron, several (...) ranked in Battalia in three Ranks.

Battaliou, several Foot ranked in Battalia A B^ttali^^ ^^^sists of two
Divisions of Musketeers, and a Center of Pikes.

Defile, a close and narrow Passage through which the Army cannot march but by
Files.

To File off, is to march an Army by four or six a Front; by a whole Body, half
Body, or Quarter Body.

Division, six Ranks of Soldiers when a Battalion Files off.

To make a halt; stop at some place.

The great Guard, is a Squadron posted half a League behind the Camp, toward
the Enemy, to secure the Army.

A Court of Guard. Soldiers sent out to Guard a Post-under the command of one
or more Officers.

Sentinel, a Soldier placed at some distance from the Court of Guard, to
hearken and give notice.

Vedette: A Horseman sentinel.

To be in Faction or Duty, the same thing as to be Sentinel.

To go the Round, is to go round the Ramparts and Trenches in the Night time,
to hear from without, and to see if the Sentinels do their duty.

To go the Pratrouille, is to visits the Quarters and Streets in the night
time, to hinder disorders.

Evolutions, Motions and Figures, which a Battalion is made perform.

To mount the assault, is to mount a Breach, Scale, and enter into a place with
Soldiers.

Ambuscade, a place where Soldiers lurk to surprise an Enemy in passing.

Detachment, a certain number of Officers and Soldiers which are furnished by
the several Regiments.

To seize the heights, to get possession of commanding places.

To block up a place, is to seize on the Avenues.

To make Fire, is to shoot uncessantly.

Enfiler to draw out in length from whence comes o^vrage enfile or a Work
drawn out in length which lies open.

To lie in Bivonac, is to pass the night in Arms.

Fair main Bass, is to put all to the Sword.

To Attacque on the Flank, is to attacque on the sides.

An Explication of Pieces, Names, and Terms proper to the Art of Fortification.
PLan, the representation of a Work in it is length and breadth. Profil, the
delineation of the same Work represented in it is heights and Latitudes. Redout,
a little Work four Faces and a single Parapet, or casting up of the Earth of a
Ditch round about it. A Star, a work with many Faces made up of parts which
Flank one another. To Flank, is to defend on the Flank or side. To be Flanked,
is to be defended on the side. The flanking Angle, is that which looks and is
drawn into the Face called therefore the entering Angle. The Angle Flanked, is
that which juts out, called therefore the Salleying or pointing Angle. Parapet,
a casting up of Earth to cover the Defender. Banquette, a Degree or step of
Earth or Turf to shoot over the Parapet. Entrenchment, a place Entrenched and
covered to be secured in. Reduit, a turning by way, to catch the Enemy on the
Flank, or when he advances. Epaulement or Shoulder work, is a Face of a Wall or
Earth which covers the Defendants. Enceinte, the Works round a place made up of
Bastions, and Courtins. Bastion, a Bulwark made in form of a jutting Angle;
with two faces and two Flanks, furnished with a Parapet and Banquet. Cavalier,
a place of earth raised to place the Canon upon, and to command the Enemy.
Rideau, a place fit to cover men until they approach to the foot of a place; as
a Hillock, or little Hill. Orillon, a little Advance made at the point of the
Shoulder of a Bastion, to cover the Flank. Circumvallation and Contravallation,
is a Composition of Redoubts, little Forts, and Angles with Trenches, and Lines
of Communication from one to another round a place that is besieged. A Trench,
a casting up of Earth by way of Parapet, with a Ditch or Fosse on the side of
the Enemy. The In-lines, the Ditch toward the place to hinder Sallies.
Out-lines, the Ditch toward the Country, to hinder relief. Lines of
Communication, which go from one Work to another. Approaches, Trenches of
Approach toward the place to attack it, (otherwise called) the Boyau, Gut.
Contre-Approaches, Works of the Besieged to hinder the Besiegers Works. Redent,
a Reduit made up of Faces and Courtins. Escarpe, the Foot of the Wall.
Contrescarpe, the side of the Ditch toward the Outside. The Way of Rounds,
upon the Wall, betwixt the Rampart and Parapet. Fausse braye, the low Works
round the place, between the Rampart and the Fosse or Ditch, for the defense of
the Fosse. A Traverse, a casting up of earth to cover men, that they may not lie
open. The Low Flank (or) Casemate, a place prepared in the Flank, to lodge
Canon in, and to defend the Fosse. Merlons the Parapet and Covering of the
Cannon. Embrazures, Openings through which the Cannon fire. Cuvette, a little
Ditch made in the middle of the great Fosse. Coridor, the covered Way, which is
on the Counterscarp round the place, between the Fosse and the Palissade.
Couronnemeut, or a Crown-work, is a Work made beyond the Horns to gain Ground,
and force off the Enemies. A Half Moon, a Fort or Work with two faces over
against the Courtins, environed with Fraizes to hinder ascending or descending.
Palissade, Stakes planted straight upright upon the Parapet of the covered Way.
Fraizes, Stakes that stick out under the Parapet of a Work, bending downwards,
and parallel to the Horizon. A Lodging, a place covered. A Gallery, a covered
way cross the Fosse. The Dehors, Pieces made in and beyond the Fosse. Gabions,
great Baskets full of Earth, to cover and secure Men with. Mantelets, a
Portable Covering to make Approaches with. Embarras, Horse of Frize, a piece of
Wood stuck full of Stakes. A Mine, Fourneau, Fougade, to blow up Works.
Citadel, a strong Castle to keep a Town in awe; which has its Gate on the side
of the place, and another to the out side, called the Gate of Relief. Donjon, a
place of Retreat in a Town or Place, to capitulate in with greater security in
case of Extremity.
page 116. 2.d part.
ground level view of the silhouette of a fortification above two bird's-eye
views of the bastion and half moon style fortifications

The Explication of the present Figures.
A Prosil of Fortification.
A The Rampart. B, the Banquet. C, the Parapet of the Rampart, with its Talus
or sloping part. D, the Fausse-braye at the bottom of the Courtin, which
de-fends the Fosse. E, the Escarpe. F, the Fosse. G, the Counterscarp. H, the
covered Way. I, the Parapet of the covered way, and the Glacis.

A Bastion.
A A, the Angle of the Bastion, and its faces. B B, the Flanks. C, the neck of
the Bastion. D D, the end of the Courtins. E, the Fosse. F, the covered Way.

A Half Moon.
A A, The Point of the Half Moon, and the face. B, the Neck. C. the Fosse of the
Half Moon, the half or third part as broad as the great Fosse of the place. D,
the Contrescarp. E, the Angle of the Contrescarpe.

FINIS.
THe so well entertained Work, The new World of Words, or a General English
Dictionary; containing the proper Significations and Etymologies of all Words
derived from other Languages, viz. Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack, Greek Latin,
Italian, French, Spanish, British, Dutch, Saxon, etc. useful for the Adornment
of our English Tongue. Together with the Definitions of all those Terms that
conduce to the understanding of any of the Arts or Sciences, viz. Theology,
Philosophy, Logic, Rhetoric, Grammar, Ethics, Law, Magic, Physic,
Chyrurgery, Anatomy, Chemistry, Botanicks, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy,
Astrology, Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Navigation, Fortification, Dialling,
Surveying, Music, Perspective, Architecture, Heraldry, Horse-manship, Hawking,
Hunting, Fishing, etc. To which are added, The Significations of Proper Names
in Mythology or Poetical Fictions, and Historical Relations: with the
Geographical Descriptions of the chief Countries and Cities in the World;
especially of these three Nations* wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most memorable Passages are mentioned; as also all other Subjects
that are useful, and appertain to advance our English Language. A Work very
necessary for Strangers, as well as our own Countrymen, or for all Persons
that would rightly understand what they discourse, write or read. Now newly
Reprinted; and in this fourth Edition, are added above five thousand Words more
than was in the former Editions.

Printed for Robert Hartford; and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1678.


