Sapientia Iustificata, OR, A Vindication of the fifth Chapter to the ROMANS:

And therein of the Glory of the Divine Attributes, and that in the Question or
Case of Original Sin, against any way of Erroneous understanding it, whether
old or new.

More especially an Answer to Dr. Jeremy Tailors DEUS IUSTIFICATUS,

By John Gaul, Minister of great Staughton in the County of Huntingdon.

LONDON, Printed for N. Paris and Tho. Dring, and are to be sold at the George
in Little Britain, and at the George in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstans Church.
1657.

DIcitis nos asserendo Peccatum original^ -- Deum crimine iniquitatis arguere
-- Nos ergo dicimus, nec iniquus est Deus cum peccatis sive originalibus sive
propriis digna retribuit, magisque aut iniquus, aut infirmus ostenditur, si
jugum grave super filios Adam a die (sicut scriptum est) nativitatis eorum,
usque in diem sepulturae in matre omnium; sub quo jugo Imago eju atteritur, aut
ipse (nullo originali vel pro prio precedente peccato) aut quilibet aliu ipso
imponit invito. -- Deus autem justus s^ tanta parvulis mala (quanta nunc dicere
non sufficio) nihil peccati trahentibus irrogerat, magis appareret injustus.

Aug^ cont. Julian: Pelagian. lib. X. To his much honored and most worthy
Friend JOHN BALDVVIN Esquire.
Noble Sir,

HOw often, how much in our serious discourses upon more than one of this Authors
works, have we honored him for his learning; affected him for his piety;
admired him for his industry; applauded him for his eloquence; and condoling
him, pitied his sufferings, among many other godly and learned men his like?
and thereupon it was that we studiously labored, not so much to reconcile
within our selves many a particular phrase and passage (dispersed here and
there) seeming not only to be borrowed from, but as bordering too much upon the
expressions, if not opinions of the Inorthodox; but rather to salve them up to
others understandings, who began to take more scandal at them, than we our
selves did; and this we endeavored in a candid interpretation of his
intention, as one who meant only to make use of the Adversaries manner of
speaking to no other purpose, but to cause (I say not his, but) their forms and
affectations to speak (as near as possibly could be) to the tenor of the
Orthodox Truth and Faith in general, and to that of the Church of England in
more especial.

But truly, Sir, this little piece of his, which you were lately pleased to
send me; puts me utterly to a loss; and sets me so quite beyond the seeking for
an excuse; that it forces me altogether to fall upon a dissent. I could
heartily have wished, that instead of answering his Friends (learned Friends)
objection, he would rather have sat down by their advice; For were the thing
that he principally aims at, true, yet was it not so necessary to be brought to
light, especially not under the notion of a charge or challenge; For he may
well assure himself all the reformed Divines (men Orthodox and moderate, both
for Doctrine and Discipline) cannot chose but take themselves stricken at
through the Presbyterians sides: And therefore, notwithstanding he entitles it
( Deus justificatus) against them only, yet I am much afraid he will not
therein prove Homo justificandus, neither in their judgment, nor of many
others, and they his friends and fellow workers, and fellow sufferers too,
whether more or less made known unto him.

And now (judicious Sir) though your own judgment (both in Divinity, and for
other good learning) be such as come short to few of your quality; and so well
known (as I need not speak) to the Gentlemen of your Country and others; yet
forasmuch as I am your Minister, I know you expect my mind; for therefore I
received it at your hand. And verily I shall (by Gods Grace) dissemble it
neither with him, nor you; yet I would have both him and you think, I dare not
presume to propound any thing here upon my own mind alone, but as I am enabled
to go along with the Scriptures and the Church of God. Because it is a hard
matter in (such a hard point as this of Original Sin) for a man to go alone,
and not to err. Nevertheless I know (through the gift of God) a man may be
enabled and enlarged to speak newer and clearer; but then he must be sure that
his ground for the Point be old, and good; For it is a Fanaticism for any man
to conceit that God concealed such a main Principle of his Truth from his whole
Church, till now that he revealed it to himself alone.

A VINDICATION OF THE Fifth Chapter TO THE ROMANS.
FIrst let me begin with his Title and his Scope, and compare them both
together, that so we may see how answerable they are each to other; For let me
tell you, Sir, (and you shall observe it in all the ridiculous, senseless,
fanatical factious, heretical and blasphemous Pamphlets of these our evil days)
that fair Titles are taken up only to palliate false and foul intents, neither
is there any shorter or surer way of refuting an Error, than in searching
directly how all the intended scribbling agrees little or nothing with the
pretended superscription. For let truths be spoken, yet they are not so there,
unless they be according to the main purpose to which they are entitled. This
Authors Title or superscription is ( Deus justificatus) now I pray God it prove
so the whole work throughout; For I greatly suspect that the main intention of
this discourse will but work to frustrate the title that is given to it,
because I perceive his principal Scope and Conclusion is, to make Original sin
to be a sin so called by a Metonymie only, for he very often denies it to be a
sin, properly, really, formally, and inherently, and contends mainly to have it
no more but a Metonymical Imputation to certain purposes, which are very
involved words, and are so studiously covert, as if he were afraid or ashamed
to speak plainly outright. But this is as much as to say, That where Original
sin is called sin, it is not so literally and properly, but only is called so
(by a figurative form of locution) by a Metonymie of the cause for the effect,
namely, sin put only for the punishment of sin, and the imputation of this sin
by God, is no more, but the infliction of the punishment; And this punishment
is with limitation to certain purposes, and those purposes are no further, but
to Temporal misery and Death. Gather all these together, and you shall so come
to plain speaking, viz. That Original sin is no such thing, but has only the
name or appellation of sin in a translated sense, but directly it is either no
sin, or another, and not ours. And therefore the Divine imputation is not of
the guilt and corruption to us, but all is an infliction only of the punishment
and suffering on us, yet so as that it is confined to a temporal death: If this
be not the summary drift, let the whole book speak, but if this make to the
Title, now give me leave to speak. How invective is this Vindicator of the
Divine Attributes against the Sublapsarians, and yet, (this I Will say for them)
they do not, they dare not include any under the severe Decree of the Divine
Justice, till they have considered all as born under the lapse and guilt, and
defection and infection of Original sin; Whereas he himself will not have
Original sin so much as properly so called, neither will he have any to be so
considered under the lapse as really under the guilt or fault; yet
notwithstanding he will have the Divine Imputation or Decree to descend even
upon all, for matter of Temporal infliction, Now judge whether of these two
Sentences or Executions can more prejudice or impeach the Divine attributes of
Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. viz. That of Gods imputing the whole and utter
punishment unto some, together with the real imputation of the sin, or that of
Gods imputing but part of the punishment, even unto All; and that without any
real imputaon of the sin at all? Certainly the Divine Justice is made to labor
more under this charge for punishing all (though but Temporally) where he takes
none to be faulty; than it can under that for punishing but some (although
eternally) where it finds all guilty. Thus forcing at his own aim, and yet,
forgetting the mark prefixed, he miserably impinges upon the same Rock himself,
which he would insimulate others for to dash upon.

Would he verily and indeed have vindicated the glory of the Divine attributes
in the question of Original sin, he should not have proposed to do it only
against the Presbyterian way of understanding it, (who had they no more
disturbed the wholesome Discipline of the Church of England, than they have of
late directly publicly, and with one consent) opposed her in her sound
Doctrine, she had never been thus widowed to such disorder and distress, but
might have sat still a Queen of Reformed Churches, flourishing in her Peace and
Truth: Neither will they all yield, that their way of understanding it should
ever be pointed out for a way a part, or singular from the Church of England,
and other Reformed Churches, but he should rather have taken such a kind of
Vindication in hand against the Pelagian, the Manichaean, the Samosatenean, the
Socinian, the Pontifician, the Pighian, the Flaccian, the Arminian, the
Supralapsarian; yea the Judaical, the Philosophical, the Scholastical, the
Synergistical, and the Anabaptistical way of understanding it; all which
Heretics and Sectaries have here (would a man go about to make an exact
Catalogue or Computation) in more than sixteen times sixteen famous (that is
infamous) questions, opinions, errors, trench'd too palpably and grossly upon
the glory of the Divine attributes indeed. As, be pleased to take here a taste.
What but their own way of understanding it caused the Jews to run into some
error about Orignal sin? as that some are born in sin, and others not; again,
that some are wholly so born, and others but in part, else how is it they say,
Thou wast altogether born in sin? Ioh. 9. 34. objecting this scornfully to
another in an Exemption of and difference to themselves? and again, That a
Typical, a legal or an external Covenant was sufficient to free them from it,
without the truth of Christ, and his Gospel of Grace, otherwise, why said they
within themselves, We have Abraham to our Father? Mat. 3. 9. and boasted before
others, We be Abraham's seed, we be not born of Fornication. Ioh. 8. 33, 41. and
why does Christ (in convincing them) bring them to the Original of sin? Ye are
of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do, for he was
a Murderer from the beginning, etc. v. 44. if Original sin was not here
intended? What but their way of understanding it induced the Heathen
Philosophers, some to extol Nature as a noble Mother, and simply virtuous, some
to depress her as an obscure step-dame, and absolutely vicious: Some to lament
at the immerited evils of birth; some to laugh that it should be thought a man
could be born with any vice or crime about him? for this was part of that which
unto the Greeks seemed foolishness, 1 Corinthians. 1. 23. That one should be saved
by another man's merits, that one should be just with another man's
righteousness, that one should suffer and satisfy for another man's offenses,
and that one should be accounted wicked for another man's sins; And in very
deed, the Greeks seeking after wisdom, or men curiously Philosophizing and
laboring in the Objections and answers of natural reason, has been the main
thing that has invented and maintained all the opinions and errors about
Original sin; Neither in truth is this natural reasoning of men any other than
every man's own way of understanding it. But let us go on to take further
notice of what notorious errors (or heresies rather) that have been not only
broached but stiffly maintained thereby ( scilicet) that Original sin, name, and
thing, is nothing. That no sin from Adam passes upon Men either at their
conception, or at their birth, neither so much as imputed to posterity, that
Adams sin hurt none but himself, and that Infants are born in the same state
Adam was in before his praevarication. That no man is liable to damnation
because of Adams sin. That Adams sin passes no other way upon his Posterity but
by example or imitation only: That Original sin is not remitted to Infants by
Baptism, because there is no such thing in them; so the Pelagians, and
Coelestians. That sins (both Original and actual) were created by an evil
Principle, that is an evil God. That no sin is caused by Free will, but by the
evil Principle aforesaid, That sin is the very nature and substance of Man.
That some were so born in sin that Christ could not save them; so the
Manichees. That Original sin is in no sort to be ascribed unto Man, but either
to God, or else to the Devil; so the Hermogenians, and Valentinians. That
Original sin is the least of all sins: That it is in the Body, and not in the
Soul, or that it is in the inferior faculties of the Soul only, and not in the
superior. That Original sin is called sin equivocally, abusively,
figuratively, or by a Metonymie, either as the Cause of sin, or as caused by
sin. That after Baptism it is no real viciosity, but only a penalty. That the
whole, and all of it, is not only not imputed, and remitted, but quite taken
away and blotted out by Baptism. That Concupiscence remaining in the regenerate
is no sin. That there is no Law against the loss of Original righteousness.
That notwithstanding the worst of Original sin, there will remain in us much
both moral, civil, pious, and Spiritual good. That it is only a guilt binding
over to punishment, but no fault of sin properly defiling, so the Pontificians,
and especially their Scholasticks. That it is neither defection, depravation,
corruption, nor truly and properly a Sin, but only an affliction or punishment
descending upon posterity through the guilt of Adams transgression, like as to
be born a Slave or a Bastard is his shame only, and not his sin. That nothing
was born in us, and with us which was not good, and the very work of God. That
Adams disobedience was in no wise ours, neither were we therefore in any wise
obnoxious to eternal death; so the Pighians and the Catharinians. That we
become infected by Original sin, not by way of Generation or Propagation, but
only by way of imitation and outward occasion. That the death of the body is
the sequel of Nature, and no punishment for sin whether original or actual; so
the Socinians and Racovians. That Original sin is not a vicious accident or
adjunct, but is become our very Nature, Essence, and Substance; the very heart,
and flesh, and body, and soul; so the Flaccians, and Substantialists. That a
man's mere pure naturals (notwithstanding the Fall) are good and perfect. That
Original sin is but like a little spot upon the skin, or light wound, for all
which there remain still in a man his natural capacities, dispositions, powers,
and forces to Good. That Men from their Mothers womb, are as fully endowed with
Liberty and Freewill, as Adam was before his fall. That Original sin to a man's
Freewill, is but like Garlic to a Loadstone, easily wipt off, and so it falls
to work as fresh as at the first. That the Adamical will, or will from Adams
fall, has it self not merely passive in the act of Conversion; but is
thereunto actively cooperating together with God; so the Erasmians, the
Sunergicts, and Arminians. That Original sin was but St. Augustins dream and
Puppet. That Infants under the New Testament are not born in Original sin. That
there is no necessity to baptize Infants, with respect to any benefit they thus
can have against it. That Original sin and all other is to be remedied only by
revelations and raptures of the Spirit, without any use either of Word or
Sacraments; so the Swenckfeldians, the Enthousiasts, Anabaptists, Fanatics,
and Familists. That Original sin is not properly a sin, but a Disease, or a
Condition, or else figurative form of speaking ( viz. by a Metonymie) may be so
called; so Zwinglius, and some of the Zwinglians. That God reprobates, God
damns men absolutely because it is his will and pleasure, without any respect
or condition whether of Original or Actual sin; so the Supralapsarians. Thus
you see, Sir, what a crowd of Errors have obtruded only through men's leaning to
their own understandings, amongst which, more than once, this Author may find
his own, which to me (at first view) seems so like to diverse of the aforesaid
Errors, that taken up in strict syllables, I begin to suspect it would not only
appear so, but appear so, and much more. But I look not upon him in a likeness
to them, but in some unlikenesse to the Holy Scriptures, and the Church of
England, taking his way of understanding it to be another, both to what the
first teaches to understand, and in what the last would be understood. And let
him not think I speak this as one that would revile him, but as one that
(according to his understanding) must dissent from him, using my liberty (which
I wish may be mutual) but keeping my Charity nevertheless; my understanding I
do faithfully, and in all humility submit to those two witnesses, neither will
I oppose him in any thing but what I receive from them (they that will
undertake him in other passages, that fall not directly within this compass,
let them do it as they shall find themselves concerned in it, or called to it.)
This I take to be the safest way to begin, and (if he will keep his own word)
the readiest way to make an end. For taking the 5 Chapter to the Romans to be
objected against him; If it be so (says he) I have done, if it be not so (say
I) I have nothing to do. Let me be believed both by him and you in this: I have
looked again and again upon his Paraphrase with a single eye, only to find out
truth, and proper truth, if there explained, hoping he will do likewise with
this Exposition, when it shall come to his sight; In which (I make his own
words mine) if I use any violence I can easily be reproved.

For the Scripture.
Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.
(...), Wherefore, therefore, for this cause] I begin with the search and
examination of the letter, for it is the Grammatical sifting, that must render
the plain Construction, and then the Rhetorical glossing may come in to adorn
with a certain circumlocution; and therefore a broad Paraphrase if it be not
unsuitable, yet it is untimely, when it shall presume in place, before a
narrower Exposition have done its part. For this canse, so I am bold to render
it, because I find it mostly so rendered in this Epistle to the Romans, chap. 1.
26. and 13. 6. and 15. 9. which very inference serves to show plainly the
principal reason or cause why it pleased God to permit the Entrance and Passage
of Original Sin, viz. For this cause, even for the reconciliation and
attonements sake immediately before spoken of, verse: 10. and 11. Therefore God
suffered this sin to enter into the world, The Enmity, or heinous aversion, the
wrath or dreadful desert of Original Sin can never be more truly and fully
considered and measured than in and by Christ's death and satisfaction, which
who so contends to lessen either for Fault or Guilt, such endeavors to
extenuate the virtue and merits of Christ's reconciling and attoning. Gods great
end in the Fall was to manifest and magnify the infinite perfection of his own
Son; who then would not labor earnestly, that Wisdom might principally, be
justified in the point? Does not God herein commend his love toward us, verse.
8. How then can we imagine there should be the least prejudice upon the Divine
Attributes in such an Ordination or Permission, upon such a motive or
intention? But was this inferential motive heedlesly escaped or not rather
purposely pretermitted to usurp a more uncontrouled license in the wanton
daliances of words, that I may not call them petulancies of profanation? It is
no reputation to a Phisician to say he has cured us of an Evil which we never
had, and shall we accuse the Father of mercies to have wounded us for no other
reason, but that his Son may have the honor to have cured us? I understand not
that; he that makes a necessity that he may find a remedy, is like, etc. The
sufficiency and excellency of our Savior (in this case) is a thing that both
he and we all are bound to understand and seriously believe, and not only that,
but Gods ordination and dispensation to such an end, as the manifestation of
his honor and glory: But why such playing with a thing so sacred? As here is
nothing to provoke his spleen to indignation, from an horrible decree of
absolute necessitating and damning; so neither can I see any thing that should
move it to laughter or levity; the Apostle himself defines what affection it is
that should hence be raised, We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, ver.
11. and well we may, since the sufferance or entrance of Sin is here referred
to the gracious purpose of Reconciling, attoning, and saving. Is this the way
of vindicating the glory of the Divine Attributes, to make no more but a light
jest at Christ's honor in this kind? still I say Wisdom is justified of all her
Children, Luke 7. 34, 39. this he himself spoke when men imputed to him a
carnal Dispensation with our actual Sins; and so much may we say when any man
will deprive him of that honor is due unto him from his spiritual dispensation
in our Originals. Neither let him say to us, That the honor of our blessed
Savior does no way depend upon our imaginations, and weak Propositions, we
will say so too, and peradventure might say so more justly against him; only we
let him know right inferences are no imaginations, neither are strong
deductions weak propositions. And if what I have drawn hence be not directly
from the Text, let him but be pleased to take the illative along with him, and
then infer what he can otherwise, or to the contrary. I confess I would not in
any wise have this illation thought redundant, for that were to make the
Scripture either impure and corrupt, or or else idle and superfluous; yet
should I not have excepted at all, if any (following my Siriack Transletion)
had omitted it upon this consideration; That it is a hard matter (especially in
a comparison betwixt Adam and Christ) to define a cause, or give a reason for
Original Sins entrance into the world, or descent upon posterity. But then this
should be observed withal, if such a thing be hardly rendered, it should not be
rashly inquired into, because our inquisitiveness (in this case) tends more to
the dishonor, than all our Resolution can to the honor of the Divine
Attributes.

As by one Man] Whom we may (not amiss) understand in an unity of name, order,
person, nature, sex, action, and Type. 1. Of name, Adam, which appellation
comprehends also both the person, the sex, and the kind. 2. Of Order, sc. the
first man Adam. 1 Cor. 15. 45. and so the very Hebraism, or Grecism (of the
cardinal for the ordinal) would give it if need were. 3. Of Person, sc. in the
individual, in number singularly and precisely taken, and so Original Sin
properly derived from the prime, and not from the proximate Parents, or
according to their pluralities, 4. Of sex, the male and not the female, who
though she was first in the transgression, yet some will have him to be solely
understood in this propagation. But, for my part, I confess I can see no cause
for such an exception, but that they may be understood one Flesh, one in the
Image, one in the praevarication, and so one in the Propagation. 5. Of Nature,
as one not only in individuo but in specie, one comprehending and representing
the whole root and stock and seed and generation, and nature and condition of
Mankind, so Adam is taken for the whole species of Men, and the Beast
singularly for the whole species of Beasts. 6. Of Act, namely, one in the
Dis-obedience or Offense. For it was not the simple or mere nature that was the
means of such a derivation, but the offending and disobedient Nature, by which
(causally and instrumentally) this privation and depravatiou, this stain and
guilt descended upon all; yea not only the Offense of one, but one offense; for
it was his first Act that was imputed to us, and none of the rest. 7. Of Type,
for Adam is here said to be the Figure or Type of Christ, under this notion (
of one) as much as in any thing else, he whole Comparison throughout.

Sin] No great matter how many and various soever be the acceptions of Sin in
the Scriptures, since in this place it is defined by the Apostle to be Sin in
the singular, and not said plurally Sins, as if he would precisely determine it
of that one root of Sin, distinct from those many following fruits. Yea, it may
be thus rendered the Sin, very Emphatically, and is understood by almost all
(from ancient to modern) for no other but Original Sin simply so accepted, as
the only Sin which came by one Man singularly, and entered into all the world
universally, whereas actual sins are by many men, neither enter they into all
the world in general, but rather into these and those particulars therein; yea
it is Sin simply, absolutely, properly, formally: For (as himself grants) this
Sin had its beginning by the disobedience of Adam, and disobedience is a
transgression of a Law, and that is the very formality of Sin; and that law was
the law of the Image, or of perfect Nature. Now see Sir I beseech you! what is
here (but in the least show) whereby to collect this sin to be Metonymically so
called? or what kind of Metonymie would he have it? is it a Metonymie of the
cause put for the effect? So it seems he would have it, because it is the
effect of one sin: Surely that one sin was a proper and real cause; how strange
is it then, That it should beget an effect like to it in no thing, but in a
Tropical or Tralatitious, an equivocal and abusive name? if by the cause for
the effect be meant Sin but for the Punishment, how contrary is that to St.
Paul's express words. Sin entered into the world, and death by Sin, so far is he
from confounding them, that in most express manner he distinguishes between
them, both in name and signification; For should his words be made to signify
thus, Death, (that is the punishment) entered by Sin (that is the punishment)
Death the punishment of the punishment, I beseech you what sense were this? yet
we grant (though it is not so to be argued from the word in this place)
Original Sin is both a Sin and a punishment too: A sin, from the humane
injustice perverting, a punishment, from the Divine Justice deserting: Or will
he have it a Metonymie of the Effect put for the Cause? for so his other words
intimate, because it is the cause of many sins, and those many sins, (without
doubt) he means properly so called; then seems it so much the more strange, and
almost prodigious, that so many real effects should proceed from a poorly
equivocal and transnominated cause. Rhetoricians observe that such kind of
Metonymies are usual in external causes and effects only: that an internal
cause then should be put for an external effect must needs be most unusual.

Entered into the World.] We may understand this Entrance of Sin in diverse
senses, and that very Orthodoxally. 1. Sin was not in the beginning: for it had
no being before the Entering, and therefore was no eternal evil principle, but
only the issue of some inordinate and irregular Act. 2. It entered not as a
creature or substance that had some existence in it self, but as a vicious
accident that could not subsist without a Subject, in which it must inhere: And
therefore though it entered into our Nature and substance, yet our nature and
Substance it was not. 3. It entered not of it self, but by means, by one man,
by a second cause. Therefore (himself grants) Sin had its beginning, and thence
let the fault and guilt be fetched causally, what need is there to seek further
than the beginning? why then is there such prying into the first cause? such
disputing, such laboring to entitle hereunto his Decreeing, his ordaining, and
permitting, disposing, dispensing, etc. For so indeed the most we do is bus to
disparage and dishonor him in his glorious Titles and Attribut. It is enough
for us to believe him to be just, wise, good, etc. in all things, because he
cannot possibly be otherwise, although in some dispensations it is not possible
for us to comprehend him. 4: If entered into, Lo! the Apostle speaks plainly of
an ingression, not as of an accession of a thing inward, and not outward only,
doubtless then it must needs be something inherent and not imputed only. 5. It
entered into the World (...) it came into, even the reduplicated praeposition is
a note of more intimate and peculiar manner of introduction, namely by way of
Generation and Propagation, not by Temptation nor by Imitation; not by
Temptation, for so it came from the Devil to Eve; not by Imitation, for so it
came from Eve to Adam; but by Propagation, for so it came from Adam to us all.
Had it been otherwise than so, Sin could not (in any adaptness or propriety)
have been said to have Entered into the world; but the world must then have
caused it, and called it, and sought it, and brought it, and taught it to it
self.

And death by Sin] that is to say, by the same Sin which came into the world by
one Man, namely the Original: So then death it is, that cannot be denied: But
now men must be Judges, and take upon them to determine what kind of death,
albeit the Apostle speak it never so indefinitely. He must mean temporal death,
says he; well and thus he may infer it, because St. Paul speaks of such a
Death as entered into this world, and that is but temporal: But then he ought to
observe withal, that St. Paul speaks here, not only of Deaths first Entrance,
but of Deaths through passage; now such a passage is out of the world, and
beyond it, and so must be eternal. But he objects, eternal death did not pass
upon all men. That Is easy to be answered from some of his own words. The
Sentence did, though the Execution did not; in the one was the Divine Justice
to be magnified, and his Mercy in the other. Thus the Divine Attributes know
how to save, and to exalt themselves on either side: if men would not seek to
make them seem to clash, by humbling those high things to their low and weak
apprehensions.

And so Death passed upon all men] sc. Death entered by Sin; and so (by Sin)
Death passed: So that (whether we consider the terminus a quo, or ad quem) we
may directly hence collect, that Death (even the coporal as well as the
eternal) was not the sequel or necessity of Nature, but even the penalty and
wages of Sin, because death is a separation quite contrary to the natural
union, especially to that of Nature in her integrity and original perfection.
But say that (because of a composition, and that of contrary Elements) there
might be nevertheless some kind of mutation, migration, melioration; yet this
was far from separation, dissolution, confusion, and that dolorous and
ignominious, execrable and damnable. This makes me I cannot so well brook or
digest those passages of his. His Sin left him to his Nature, -- we returned to
the state of mere nature -- of our prime creation -- thrust back to the form of
Nature -- was remanded to his mortal natural State, -- means he to a corrupt
state of Nature? that was not the former, or from the prime Creation; or means
he by the form of Nature that of Natures first forming? why that was after the
Divine Image and similitude; or means he by mere Nature those they call Pure
Naturals? which indeed are nothing, because Nature cannot be so abstractly
considered, but either in the state of Integrity, or in the state of
Corruption, a third state (before, between, of after those two) never was, and
therefore is not to be imagined. Ever since the Fall, and Original Sin we aptly
conceive that there is a difference still to be made betwixt the substance of
Nature, and the corruption of Nature: But that this Nature and this corruption
was ever separated in any (Christ only excepted) we believe not, or that there
shall be a State of pure Naturals again till the Resurrection of the Dead. We
all know and believe Adam by his disobedience defected and fell from what he
was before, sc. from the Image and Original Righteousness, but that by his Sin
he fell into a Nature or state which he had before, or without original
righteousness, that we understand not, not yet of any remanding, obtruding or
returning thither. Indeed we read, God said, Dust thou art, and to Dust thou
shall return, Genesis 3. 19. but that noted only some materials in part, but no
certain state, neither had that dust returned to the dust, but that the Image
and righteousness was forfeited and lost. For we see it was so not by a natural
propensity, so much as by a provoked Commination. Besides this, methinks he
says something to oppose himself in this part, when he says, our Nature is of
Gods making, and consequently is good, -- or Nature is almost the same, etc. --
What good? and yet punished? nay and we remanded to it for a punishment? What
almost the same in goodness? and yet nothing the same in immortality and the
blessing? Thus here again Gods Justice is brought upon the Stage; nay and upon
the rack too, especially by our scanning betwixt the two Terms of Death entering
by one man, and Death passing upon all men. -- For we cry, why the punishment,
and how, of all, for one, and so forth? Mean while it is not considered by us
(Nay not believed) how we were all in the lump and loins of that one, which
remains hereafter to be demonstrated, only thus much is now to be said, That
while the Divine Attributes are pretended for, saved harmless by us, either we
our selves do it, or else give occasion for others to quarrel at them.

For that all have sinned] This clause thus translated was greedily snatched at
of old, to extenuate and excuse the severity of Deaths universal passing; and
not only so, but to alter and divert the cause and guilt, from the Original Sin
to the Actual. For this cause the Ancients did either reject this Translation,
or did not so well accept it: But I am to speak of this our Paraphrast, whose
words (by reason of this Translation) are imposing on the Apostle, if he means
eternal Death, he must not mean that it came for Adams sin, but in as much as
all men have sinned, that is, upon all those upon whom eternal death did come,
it came because they also have sinned; and again in passing on us, For that all
have sinned, that is, the sin was reckoned to all, not to make them guilty like
Adam, but Adams Sin pas'd upon all imprinting this real calamity on us all; but
yet death descended also upon Adam's posterity for their own Sins, for since
all did Sin all should die. His ( also) once and again seems to admit of
original sin for her share in this reckoning; but his ( in as much) quite
thrusts it out, and brings in actual sin in its stead; Actual sin I say is
obtruded and Original sin excluded; at least for propriety, for guilt, for
imputation, for likeness, for equality: Yet I shall not therefore reject this
Translation, because I see our Church has accepted it, and shall hope to make
it stand good in this sense, For that all have sinned, that is, sinned
Originally although not Actually, sinned naturally in Adams Sin, although as
yet not personally, or in their own, and am confident he is not ignorant I can
find Abettors for this exposition amongst the reformed and Orthodox Expositors
far before him: But, Sir, if you will be pleased to look upon the Margin (which
I suppose he winked at) know it is pointed at by our Church as a note of equal
indifferency and authority, and there you find in whom all have sinned, this
speaks plainly of sinning not actually in our selves, but originally in Adam;
and this Translation is every whit as much, and rather more congruous to the
Original Text: for my part I rather embrace this latter Translation, with most
Translaters or Interpreters old or late. And with them conceive it to be the
safer, as not giving such way to the Errors of the Pelagians old or new: Nay I
hold it to be the sounder, and more consonant to the very Letter; for why
should ((...)) be translated so flatly in the Neuter Gender, when it is found so
Emphatically in the Masculine? being it may with so close and so apt Concotd be
referred to the One Man spoken of before; for construe it in the Masculine, and
the Relative fairly agrees with the proximate and eminent Antecedent; but take
it in the Neuter, and then the Relative is without any Antecedent at all, or
else must be turned into some obscurer and less significant part of speech.
Erasmus (who labors like a Critic to draw it this other way) would not allow
of St. Augustines referring it to Sin; because of the different gender, though
he confesses it to be the same in sense to say, in which Man, or in which Sin.
As for Erasmus, (whom all have occasion to honor, from the Cradle to the Crown
of learning) him this Author recommends to us more precisely to be reckoned
amongst the greatest and the best Expositors of Scripture that any age since
the Apostles, and their immediate Successors has brought forth; (as for the
learned Grotius, whom he reckons with him, I only say thus much; As he was a
most eminent Adversary to the Socinian, so he was sometimes a not approved
Advocate of the Arminian, both which are reproved for their opinions about
Original sin) But on Gods name let him add all he can to Erasmus, yet I would
not have him detract any thing from St. Augustine (which thing was sometime
charged upon Erasmus himself) both are to be mentioned with honor as the
Worthies of their Ages. And therefore all he has said (had it been more)
should have past for me without exception, had he spoken it at another time,
and upon another place: For upon on this place (he cannot but know) That
Erasmus has not only been suspected but taxed (even by learned men of his own
time and religion) for more than I now think fit to express: only as to the
clause, nay and whole verse in hand Erasmus is much contending for a Tropologie
(and peradventure hence it was that he hinted his Metonymie) But for all his
Rhetoric he turns Grammarian, and plays the Critic betwixt, (...) and (...)
and will hardly be persuaded of (...) for (...) in the Dative Case, yet at
length acknowledges, Because the use of Greek Prepositions are so various, I
dare not affirm that (...) is no where joined with a Dative Case, where one
thing is declared to be in another, like as the Tree is in the seed. A most apt
similitude to illustrate our being in Adam, and our sinning in him too. Were it
not for this his confession, places of such construction were easy to be
produced, but I spare them, as likewise his propter unum, his pervasit, his
quatenus peccavimus, which also might be of a facile connivence, were it not in
case of dangerous consequence and contention; besides my task is to pursue, not
his but this Authors paraphrase.

Verse 13. For until the Law Sin was in the World, but sin is not imputed where
there is no Law.
FOr until the Law Sin was in the world] That is, from the beginning, of the
world, all that time which went before, until that very period wherein the Law
was externally promulgated: Sin was nevertheless (even all that while) in the
world: For the Apostle so speaks now, with intent to occur to a certain
objection, (an Objection not so much of men's Mervail or Scruple, but rather of
their Petulancy and Cavillation) an objection that indeed has been always but
too much inculcated by the Adversaries of Original Sin: Thus, Where there is no
Law, there is no transgression: But there is no Law given against Original Sin.
Ergo. This is it which the Apostle here prevents, by saying. Sin was in the
world during all that space of time which went before the giving or promulging
of the Law of Moses, notwithstanding it was not a Sin without a Law, but so it
was by virtue of the Law of Nature; the rule of original righteousness, the
dictates of right reason, the eternal moral Law; the Law written in Men's
hearts, before it was written in Tables of stone: For Original sin was not so
much forbidden, convinced, condemned by the promulgated Law that followed it,
and was directed chiefly to persons and actions: as by the internal law of the
Image which went before it, with a perpetual obligation of integrity to the
whole Nature; of such a Law speaks the Apostle in this Epistle, When the
Gentiles which have not the Law do by Nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another. Romans 2. 14, 15.
And this certainly was Law sufficient both to convince men of this Sin, and
condemn them for it. Say the Law of Nature be greatly obscured, and the
conscience thereupon blinded; yet for all that it is usually making this
argument, upon any pecrancy: Something now is which ought not to be, and
therefore by consequence, something is not which ought to be, and thus by the
exorbitances grows conscious of the defects, and this Collection is enough for
conviction of the want of natural goodness, and that is a divine apprehension
of the loss of original righteousness, wherefore then speaks he thus? Nature
alone gives rules, but does not bind to penalties; -- if by Nature alone he
means fallen, corrupted nature, now in her defections, she gives neither rules,
nor binds to penalties; but only lies bound both to rules and to penalties. But
to speak of Nature in her integrity and perfection, she does them both
directly, for she were not perfect without a rule, neither were her rule
perfect without a penalty upon the violation of it; his other words (in my
judgment) as they are little to the Apostles meaning, so they are less to
common Truth, Death (he says) d^d presently descend upon all Mankind even
before a Law was given them, with an appendant penalty, viz. with the express
intermination of death; was not that Law expressed enough? In that day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Genesis 2. 17, I need not ask him whether
this Law did concern the man alone? for he confesses it did presently descend
upon all Mankind; But what? death without a Law? and a Law without a penalty?
He that contended so before to vindicate Gods attributes in regard of a
Sentence without Execution, how will he extricate himself from impinging
thereupon, in talking thus of an Execution without a Sentence? certainly the
Divine Attributes are much more out of question, in pronouncing utterly upon
all, and yet sparing some, than in executing upon all (although but in the
least degree) having not yet denounced against any. As for his next words, let
him look well to what he says, it is impossible they should pass even
moderate men without a censure, or some scanning at the least; with him, (that
is with Adam) God being angry (was he provoked against the person only, and not
against the whole Nature) was pleased to curse (was not that pleasure in a
manner absolute, that had no more but an improper respect to curse all for the
Sin of one?) To curse him also in his posterity (nay was it not rather to curse
his posterity in him? for he but little felt his curse in them, but they were
long to feel their curse in him?) and leave them also in their mere natural
condition (was this natural condition any kind of state before the Fall? then
could it not be cursed or miserable; was it that after the Fall? then was it
not mere or pure natural, but altogether depraved and corrupted) But God was
pleased to leave them: (So then Gods great and easily justifiable action, was
the good pleasure of his desertion, wisely, justly to leave them destitute of
the forfeited Image, and to let them alone to themselves in that corrupt
condition to which they betrayed:) But he says more, To which yet they disposed
themselves. To what? to their mere natural condition, to which God cursed them,
in which he left them. But how disposed themselves hereunto? I hope he will not
say 'twas any personal disposition of ours, for that goes far beyond all that
has been said of our natural inclination; but if he intend it only of our
actnal and following sins, they did not dispose us to our fallen estate, and
corrupt natural condition; but only confirm us in it; what can be spoken more
against Order than that following actions should dispose to a foregoing
condition? we use to say, the first person corrupted our Nature; but in all
else it is the nature that corrupts the persons; personal sins are no whit
disposing to the Nature, but aggravating to the person only: Original Sin,
though it do not act alike in all, yet it is but one and alike in all, be the
personal actions more or less. He concludes, yet for the anger which God had
against Mankind he left that Death which he threatened to Adam expressly by
implication to fall upon his posterity. Now I demand but this, Was the anger of
God with Adam, and against Mankind, the same? well then it had the same
provocation: Nay, but he will have this last to be upon our own evil
Commissions and deserts; Then I must demand again why was that Death the same?
is it righteous that should be the same penalty, and not the same provocation?
But he left it to fall by Implication, that is an implicated word, and may imply
Error, as well as truth: If he implies our Original defection, that is a truth;
but if our actual Commissions only, that is the Error: But I will take (by
implication) as he here contradistinguishes it to Expressively threatened, and
so it draws near, nay comes home to the truth of my Text: That before Moses Law
sin was in the world, even Original Sin, and the Sin of the first Parent, and
that by a Law of its own, which Law though it was Expressively threatened but to
Adam only, yet by implication (of Sin and corruption in the whole nature) the
punishment (through that implying Law) justly fell upon the whole posterity.

But Sin is not imputed where there is no Law.] In these words St. Paul's
intention is not so much to prove the being of Sin, from the being of a Law;
but rather the being of a Law, from the being of a Sin: And therefore he thus
argues, Sin was in the world before the promulgation of Moses Law: but that
could not be unless there was a Law to convince it so to be. Ergo A law there
was. And again Sin is not imputed when there is no Law; but it was imputed.
Ergo there was a Law. And this is the more certain and infallible way of
arguing, because the being of a Law does not necessarily, and always argue the
being of a Sin, but the being of a Sin does necessarily and always argue the
being of a Law; For a Law may be a Law, though no sin be yet committed: but a
Sin is no Sin till the Law be imposed; now the Law was always, as being the
eternal Law, and eternally existing in the divine mind, yea, and more or less
imprinted in the minds and consciences of Men from the beginning. The Law
therefore being before the Sin, there was no time of the world after Sin,
wherein Sin was not imputed. But much ado is here made by the means of
distinguishing or diversifying Questions, viz. whether this imputing of Sin be
by God, or by men? whether it be of Original Sin, or of actual? whether it be
by the eternal and natural, or by the written and published Law; whether it be
of the fault and corruption, or of the guilt and punishment, whether it be to
penalty temporal or eternal? whether this imputation be of our own sins or
another? Whether this imputation be distinguished or divided from inherence?
Thus we trouble our selves and one another, and the Truth betwixt us with many
a Fallacy of Division; whereas much error were to be avoided by taking both
together in a conjoined sense, and the Truth were easily determined in all
those questions, or in most part of any of the questions; by accepting both
parts indifferently, even the one as well as the other. As to speak only to
this Authors words or divided Propositions: The Apostle (he says) speaks
here of Sin imputed; therefore not of Sin inherent. Not so by his leave, for
the Apostle speaks not here of any distinction at all, betwixt imputed and
inherent sin; but of Sin indefinitely and universally, and that imputed only by
a Law; now the Law properly imputes Sin, be it never so properly inherent, as
in actual sins, though they be inherent; yet the Law properly does but impute
them: So in Original Sin, the Law does impute it, yet so as it is inherent. So
that in one or other the Sin is nevertheless inherent for being imputed; nor
imputed for being inherent: And if imputed to such purposes as he here speaks
of, viz. to Temporal Death: then it is neither a Sin properly, nor yet
imputable so eternal; so far as is or can be employed by the Apostles words.
Yes, yes, the contrary to all his in every purpose is not only employed, but
apparent from the Apostles words. For the Apostle speaks of Death indefinitely
(without any limitation to these or those purposes) and that is an universal
implying all kinds of Death: Besides Death here by Adam must so be taken as
proportionably extending to the-life by Christ; otherwise wrong is done to the
whole comparison, and consequently to all our Saviors Attributes; Now the life
we are here said to gain by the Excellency of Christ, is not only a corporal
life, opposite to a temporal death, but a justification of life, opposite to a
spiritual Death, and a reigning in life, opposite to an eternal Death:
Whenever another man's sin is imputed to his relative, therefore, becaeuse it
is another, and imputed, it can go no further, but to effect certain evils to
afflict the relative, but to punish the cause, not formally to denominate the
descendant or relative to be a Sinner; So he says again, to which thus much is
to be said; That what perhaps may be congruously spoken betwixt one particular
man and another, is very inconsutile to be said betwixt Adam and all Mankind.
Betwixt Man and Man, we know the Descendants of Traitors and Vassals, in
relation to their progenitors offenses, are punished, though they were not
formally the Offenders: And therefore such words may say something, in respect
of proximate Parents, and of relatives yet living, upon whom their condition
may reflect, and to whom their example may be useful; but in relation betwixt
the prime Parent and us his descendants, they say nothing at all; For he was
not punished for our Sins, but we for his; neither was he punished in our
punishment, but we in his; neither was his simply another man's sin, but ours
also; neither was it imputed only, but inherent also; neither were we Relatives
only, but accessories only; neither were we Descendants only, but participants
(all this is to be understood of the Common nature, union, and representation)
and therefore here was enough to denominate us formally to be Sinners. But I
cannot but wonder at such a restrictive largness in the saying, Another man's
sin imputed, therefore because it is another and imputed. For the Sin or the
crime to be imputed, therefore because it is imputed, and for the evil or
punishment to be inflicted for another man's sin therefore, because it is
another; this is horrid to think of even in Men, what is it then to urge in
such a case as this, where it cannot but reflect even upon God himself? But
(about this imputation) he yet urges, Nor Reason, nor Sciptures, nor Religion
does enforce, and no Divine attribute does permit that we should say that God
did so impute Adams sin to his posterity, that he did really esteem them to be
guilty of Adams sin, equally culpable, equally hateful: though this latter
part be said but by few; yet this Scripture in hand inforces us to say, That
God did really esteem them to be guilty of Adams Sin [ in whom all have sinned]
that is, really sinned, and by whose disobedience they were made Sinners, sc.
really so made; if he did so only impute, as not really and verily esteem
guilty; what kind of imputation (I pray) was that? imaginative, opinionative,
suspicious, pretensive, presumptive conjectural, fantastical, equivocal,
abusive, or, (as are his own words) figurative, Metonymical, collateral,
indirect? this we are sure no Reason, no Scripture, no Religion, no Divine
Attribute will permit to say so; But because he will have us say equally
culpable, equally hateful, etc. we will say it in the most convenient sense,
we may be equally culpable in our common nature, equally hateful in our
Natural Sin, the same Malice of our Nature, the same action of our Nature, as
much guilty as he, according to that universal nature wherein he comprised and
represented us all; and so much, he is not unknowing all Religions (primitive
and latter, Protestant and Papists) have said, not without reason and
Scripture, nor is any Attribute of God to be objected there against. But to
suppose that we have sinned (take us truly as in our Nature, union, mass, root,
stock, etc.) less than he, or That God imputed this Sin less to us than to
him; this (say we) is but supposition, and that is far from probation; and
therefore we would fain learn that Analogy of Faith, those Words of Scripture,
that proportion, and Notice of the Divine Attributes, that would enforce us to
suppose so much. But I return to the Apostles supposition, who here supposes
that there was no time of the world since the First man's fall, wherein there
was not a Law, and sin and the imputation: How is it then that he says of
Mankind? They did do actions unnatural and vile enough, but yet these sins were
not yet so imputed -- were they indeed unnatural and vile, and yet not so
imputed? upon what ground then does he censure them for such? that cannot be
but a calumnious aspersion, that prae-occupates the Law, and precedes the
Divine Imputation; let him say how were they unnatural? but because done
against the Law of Nature; and why vile enough? but because that pure and
perfect law was sufficient so to convince them: Original Sin could never have
been called so, but that there was a Law of Original righteousness, that went
before it; how then can actual sins be said to foregoe a Law? For they did do
actions, personal, actual Sins, even these done, and yet not imputed? Oh, what
an imputation were this to the eternal Law, the Law of Nature, of right reason,
and true Conscience? But will this salve it to say, they were not yet so
imputed? that will not do it; if he so means that nothing was imputed from the
first upon their Original account, to the eternal and internal; but afterward,
upon the external publication of the Law of Moses, these things were imputed to
them upon their personal account; nor will that do it, if he pretends these
things were not imputed even unto death: For it is out of question, that Moses
Law (as to the morality of it) added no new virtue, goodness, truth,
obligation, imputation or penalty, which was not in force before from the
eternal and internal Law of God and Nature, of which Moses Law was no more but
the External publication; but to speak of actual Sins being in Men, and yet not
imputed by God, and of Origiginal Sin deputed to deadly punishment, and yet not
imputed by a Law, I say, to speak to such purposes, is such an imputation to
the Divine Attributes, as I need not now to say.

Verse 14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses even over them that
had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure
of him that is to come.
NEvertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses] But for all that the Law of
Moses was not yet given or promulgated to a peculiar people; Death
notwithstanding reigned throughout the whole world: For all that time
(comprehensively and inclusively) from Adam his Fall, his deprivation of the
Image, and depravation of Nature; Till Moses his publication of the Law written
in Tables of stone; and so during that whole Oeconomie or dispensation, even
until Christ and the Gospel of his Grace; by whom alone all that believe are
justified from all things (both Sin and Death) from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. And therefore till then (terminally and
exclusively) Death reigned, and Sin likewise; because the dominion and tyranny
of these two always go together; Now after the duration, the main thing
remarkable is the domination or Deaths reigning, which cannot exactly be, but
as she is understood in her whole law and power, and in their full latitude or
extent; sc. in the forcible denunciation, and infliction of Death temporal,
spiritual, and eternael; For where she is so restrained as to go no farther
than the corporal only, so far is she then from any thing like to reigning,
that she is now, as it were, swallowed up in Victory; but take her in her
utmost Tyrany, and she reigned from Adam to Moses, that is, for Original, as
well as for actual sin: for consider her subjects, and her power and authority
was,

Even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, That is over Infants, whose reason and discretion, will, and
affections, had not yet made them ripe enough for action and imitation; and
therefore they had not sinned actually, or in their own persons, but
Originally, or in their first Parents loyus. Adams similitude, likeness, or
Image, in which he begat his Posterity ( Genesis 5. 3.) was that of Original sin,
because it was contradistinct to that image, likeness, or similitude in which
God had made him, ( Genesis 1, 26, 27.) which was that of Original Righteousness.
And to Sin after the similitude of Adams transgression, is, to imitate him,
follow him, make him our example, and our selves altogether like him; and
therefore not to have sinned after that similitude, is, not to have done so.
Now then to construe it (with this Author) of sinning not so grievously, or of
sinning less than he did, is to make it come little near to, nay, make it fall
very much short of sinning after the similitude of his Transgression, or
according to the proportion of his prevarication; To sin less, is, not to sin
according to the aequallity: But a man may sin less by much, and yet sin after
the similitude nevertheless: He that ere this started this very notion ( non
peccaverunt ad illius similitudinem; hoc est non tam capitaliter -- non perinde
graviter peccaverunt arque ille) applies it rather (as others besides him do)
to the Gentiles than to the Patriarks, (and indeed in such a construction, the
Gentiles should sin less than the Patriarks, as not having the Law, or the
like means they had) But if the same Man had been taken up, or followed in his
other suggestion ( regnavit mors in simitudine) the reigning of Death had so
been made as vain a semblance, and as light a shadow, as some would make that
of Original Sin. But they who suggest that this sinning after the similitude,
is neither to be understood of sinning after an internal principle; nor yet
after an external example; but only upon and after the direct expression, and
express direction of a precept; These (ere they are a ware) do take from the
Actual and add to the Original; while they thus exempt all before the written
law, as likewise all Heathens, to this day, from sinning after Adams
similitude, or rather do thus deny to most men Sin both Original and Actual;
but though we may make Adam a Sin similitude to our selves in matters past; yet
it has pleased God to propose him, as a comfortable type for the future.

Who is the figure of him that was to come] Behold! here is a typical promise,
sufficient to satisfy all querulous complaining, and to prevent all
quarrellous charging God foolishly, in calling any of his Articles to question
in the case, Since Adam, who received Gods similitude, not for himself alone,
but for all his posterity after him, had now forfeited the same both for
himself and them all, and had now begotten them in his own similitude of
prevarication and defection; and in that very similitude they were now found,
and so lest; left (and that justly) to the Tyranny of Sin and Death, yea even
those, who had not as yet (according to all actual circumstances) sinned after
the similitude of Adams transgression; Nevertheless they were yet in the
estate of Natural corruption, and by that Nature, worthily born Children of
wrath; but what if they had already sinned after that similitude, and had now
made him their Example to sin, and to die by? yet has God (of his good
pleasure) made him the Type or figure of Christ, intimating that they who are
elected by him, and believe in him, shall not die by the one, in whom they
sinned; but shall live by the other, in whom they believed; For as the First
man Adam, was the head and principle of Nature to us, and after that of Sin, so
is this second Man Adam ( Christ the Lord) the principle and head of Grace to
us; and after that of Glory. Behold then (each one) the goodness and severity
of God; On them which fell severity; But toward thee goodness if thou continue
in his goodness: And thus indeed are the Divine Attributes to be magnified by
us on either part.

Verse 15. But not as the offense so also is the free gift: for if through the
offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is by one Man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.
BUt not as the offense so also is the free gift] The Comparison is now not
interrupted, but pursued with a correction; For he confesses that in the
Analogy there lies a great deal of disparity. There may be a (...), or some
resemblance between the persons; as each of them being the First, the Author,
the Head, the Root, the Foundation, the Representative of his kind but there is
a (...), an utter difference of the things; as betwixt Sin and Grace, Death and
Life: And therefore though there may be comparing of the persons, with an
infinite preferring on the one part; yet there can be no conferring of the
things, but with an utter differing, both for account, and effect; because
there may be some Typical proportion betwixt Adam and Christ, with the due
honor reserved to the Great Reconciler; but betwixt the offense of one, and
the Free gift of the other, remains an utter disproportion, never to be
reconciled: For the one both is from, and is the Image of the Earthly, the
other is from, and is the Image of the Heavenly; the one is naturally
transmitted, the other supernaturally conferred; the one from Free Will, the
other from Free grace; the one tending to Death, but the other to everlasting
life.

For if through the offense of one many be dead, etc.] In this part of the
collation, this is one main instance of prelation from the disparity of power
and effect, as if he had thus said, suppose the worst that followed Original
Sin, that innace offense; yet forasmuch as the remedy propounded so far
exceeded the propagated malady, what cause is here to complain or challenge any
of the Divine Attributes? since wisdom herein manifests and magnifies her self
so excellently, so exceedingly, (both for substance and measure) why should not
her children herein seek to justify her herein above all? what if it was
through the offense of one, ought that to offend? were we not one Nature, one
Species of Men, both he and we? In the participation of that Species, all men
were to be reckoned as one Man, the sundry persons of men being to that one
Man, but as the several Members are to the same body: Moreover this may be
enough to satisfy all minds, and stop all mouths; The Grace of God, and the
gift of Grace, (both his liberal favor, and our competent measure) is also by
one Man Jesus Christ: And why then should we set our selves to wrangle so, with
God, with our selves, and one another, because of the Justice and Severity
which descends to us but duly from the one in one way; and not rather rest our
selves contented, and greatly rejoice, for the Grace and Mercy that most freely
and superabundantly proceeds toward us from that one man Jesus Christ another
way? Oh! what peevish things we are! to vex our selves in thinking, how we were
made subject to the punishment on the one hand; when we might sweetly satisfy
our selves, in believing how we are made capable of the exceeding recompense of
reward on the other. And grant again by the first one, and through his one way
many be dead, understand it withal emphatically spoken (...); the many, that
is All; for it is not many comparatively, but absolutely; not so spoken as to
except some, but to intimate All; All (I say) collectively, and inclusively,
and not so sparingly or seemingly (as he speaks) even as it were all, Enoch
also (contrary to his mind) not excepted: how much less those few more, of whom
peradventure mention is not made? The first is a fond conceit, but the next a
vainer crotchet: For take Many (as he would) in the restrained way, and Dead,
but for corporally so; yet even Enoch was among that many, and so is dead; For
it is not his peculiar and abstruse way of dying that can hinder to say truly
he is dead; For Heb. 11. 7. though he was translated by an extraordinary power,
that he should not see Death, after the common way; yet for the verity and
reality of Death, it was said of him together with the rest; These all died,
verse. 13. But taking it (according to the Apostle) in the largest sense. I must
say more, All are dead, namely, though not effectually, yet virtually; though
not naturally, yet deservedly; according to a just sentence, though not
according to the fearful Execution; But notwithstanding all this, and all that
can be said of the offenses worst, and Death's utmost; how would it appease our
consciences, and comfort our spirits (even in all wherein the Divine Majesty
has been pleased to reveal, either himself, or our selves to us) to conceive
rightly, and heartily consider the grace of God, which is to be understood his
good will and pleasure, free goodness, everlasting love, exceeding favor,
with all his beloved Sons merits, and Holy Spirits efficacies, and the gift by
Grace, sc. our measures of Sanctification, with the duties required, the
comforts promised, and the benefits received? And all this by One man Jesus
Christ, sc. by his life and actions; by his death and passion; by his merits
and mediation alone. To whom we had no natural, or necessary relation (as we
had unto the other) but as he was made Man, and so freely and graciously gave
himself to us, and for us. And thus the grace of God has much more abounded in
pardoning all kinds and measures of sin, and in preventing the same, as
concerning punishment: But the Free gift has abounded also, we being made both
more holy and more happy in Christ than in Adam, we were made corrupt, and
miserable, yea and this abounded unto Many, that is All again, and that in
sufficiency, though not in effect, else the excess here spoken of should fall
short; inasmuch as Sin and Death passed upon All.

Verse 16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the Free gift is of many offenses
unto justification.
ANd not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift] It is partly a
repetition of the first words in the former verse; only there was the Disparity
and excess betwixt the Sin and the Grace; here betwixt the Gift, and the person
sinning: There it was said to be more plentifully abounding, here more
powerfully effecting; There by what Authors, here to what Ends; There the Free
gift was opposed to the Sin, but here to the Judgment.

For the Judgment was by one to condemnation] By the Judgment we understand
not only the Decree on God's part, but also the desert on our own; In as much
as the word in Scripture notes both the Act and the power of Judgment, as
likewise the cause and thing judged: And if we did but truly consider this,
then durst we not be so bold in questioning the Divine Attributes, in regard we
are taught to apprehend it as a thing not only of his severity, but of our own
impiety also: So by Condemnation we understand both the Sentence and Execution;
the threatening against, as well as the inflicting on; likewise we take the
((...)) in the Neuter; as we do the ((...)) in the Masculine; yea and from
the diverse preposition, we note some distinction, namely of the matter and
subject, as well as of the cause and instrument: and thereupon we do not
confound them (as he does) by One Man sinning one sin; but somewhat more
distinctly, by one sinning, or that sinned, we understand the Act with relation
to Adams person; but by the one sin we understand the thing it self with
relation to our whole Nature, even Original sin it self, to note that one sin
(original sin) in us, is under the same judgment unto condemnation, as was
that one sinning in Adam; and that in the very Act of his sinning, we sinned
(as he seems to grant) very much: And moreover to that, sinned (which he grants
not) as bad as he and that not only because of the likeness of Nature, and of
sin (as he says) but because of the very identity and sameness thereof, in the
main substance, though not according to every circumstance; For we Descendents
from Adam, were perfectly like him in nature, his own real, natural production,
and so we sinned, as himself says well; and now if he himself thinks there is
so great a parity of reason that the evil (he means this judgment unto
condemnation) should descend upon us; then in all reason he ought to yield not
only a likeness, but also a parity of Sin. Yet whereas he says, the evil was
threatened to Adam, and not to his Children: Then was it not judgment unto
condemnation, for judgment implies the Sentence and Commination, as
Condemnation does the Execution, or effect. But what? not threatened, and yet
descending? will the Lord strike before he warns? I say no more, but (for Gods
sake) what kind of Vindication call you that? to urge the evil or punishment so
often, and admit so little of the fault or sin, is (I think verily) the wrong way
to a Vindication of the Divine Attributes.

But the Free gift is, of many offenses unto justification] To prevent all our
murmuring and censuring, that judgment should be to condemnation by one man or
person, the Apostle bids us construe him rightly, and says he means it by one
Sin or offense; for we shall never think Gods ways equal in this case, till we
can look upon it with a right Eye, not only as the Sin of one man, and so the
Sin of another; But as one sin of all men, and so our own: But the Sin of one,
and one Sin, if this satisfy not; yet this makes amends for all abundantly;
that the Free gift is of many offeuces unto justification. For mark how it
answers to every opposite, the Free gift to the offense, many to one, and
justification to condemnation. The first shows how benignly, the next, how
bountifully, the last how beneficially the recompense is vouchsafed; as it is
the Free gift to the offense; so it signs Grace in us not to be natural, as the
sin is. As it is many to one; so it betokens a liberal condonation of many
actuals, as well as that one Original. As it is Justification against
condemnation; so it signifies a making holy as well as happy, against both the
sin and the punishment. Since then what God in Christ has here done, is to
justify; let God in Christ be justified by all, and in all.

Verse 14. For if by one man's offense Death reigned by one, much more they who
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in
life by one Jesus Christ.
FOr if by one Man's offense Death reigned by one] It is of no small note, that
a mutual construction is here to be made of one Man's offense, and one offense:
The diverse reading shows a coincidence; and however the repetition seems as
the note upon their narrow conjunction; nothing has done more prejudice to the
truth of this point, and to the Divine Attributes, as they are therein
concerned, than a dividing, separating, or over-severe and too nice
distinguishing between the one man, and the one offense; For though the natural
corruption may be distinguishd from the personal Act; according to some
circumstances, yet in substance they are to be considered as one, and the same,
because it was (for the main substance) the same sin that Adam committed, that
entered into the world by him; and well might the same sin pass from the whole,
or head, into all the parts, and members; though not in the particular Act, yet
in the universal guilt; so that in his very sin we might (not amiss) be said to
sin originally, although not actually. The Apostle more than once expressly
intimates it to be translated indifferently, either the Sin and offense of one
man, or one sin and offense. We should do well therefore to accept it so
equally, as he has been pleased to express it: But we look askew upon it, in
the personal Act only; as that one man's sin, and no more; and so we ascribe and
impute all to him most presumptuously; and seek in like manner to shake it off
from our selves. Strange it is! we dare not deny that God imputes it to us; and
yet we dare be bold to impute it solely to him. For so the Paraphrast seems to
do: The Sin of Adam alone, whereas (in truth) we ought humbly to conceive, and
consider it as one Sin, both in him, and us; one Sin in our Nature, one Sin in
our kind: and so coming to be but one Sin even in the persons of us all. They
that go the first way, are quite out of the way to vindicate the Divine
Attributes; For how is it possible to make it another sin alone, and not our
own in any proper respect, and yet not give occasion to murmurers and repiners
at the imputation, to any purpose whatsoever. Whereas if instead of imposing it
altogether upon another, we would be convinced and content to take what is our
own, unto our selves, That heavy yoke which is upon the Sons of Adam, from the
day that they go out of their Mothers womb, till the day that they return to
the Mother of all things, would not be so grievous, or so unequal to their
apprehensions; But they would soon be convinced to lay their hands upon their
mouths; yea would be content to say every man for himself, This is my Yoke (the
image of the earthy) and I will bear it; I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him; which is never to be brought to pass
if we once go about to unyoak our selves of the Sin: But whether we will do so
or no, God will be true when all men are found Liars; his ways will be proved
equal, when our ways are reproved for unequal; and wisdom will be justified and
cleared, when she is judged, though no flesh living can be justified in her
sight. The very punishment and infliction from God, is sufficient to argue the
sin and guilt in us: For Death reigned by one, not only by one man, in the
Masculine (as he spoke immediately before) but by one in the Neuter, one Sin;
for death could never so have reigned by the one Man, had it not been by the
one sin: Yet see how he would labor to bring the Original punishment on our
heads, that will not admit us to bring the Original Sin so much as upon our
Shoulders: For so he supposes it: If the sin of Adam alone could bring death
upon the world, who by imitation of his transgression, on the stock of their
own natural choice did sin, against God, though not after the similitude of
Adams transgression. How says he? no Sin but in imitation? no punishment but
for imitation? he knows full well whose exploded heresy that was, and
therefore shall do very well to renounce both name and thing at once. But how
agree his own words to themselves? sinning by imitation, and yet not after the
similitude of Adams transgression? (which cannot genuinely, no nor conveniently
be interpreted but of sinning actually, and by imitation; yea let it be
understood of sinning less than he did, yet so it is by imitation.) Again,
Sinning on the stock of their own natural choice, and yet, not sinning after
the similitude of Adams transgression? Why how sinned Adam but out of the stock
of his own natural choice? And how sinned we in him, but out of the stock of
his natural choice? for indeed he was our natural stock, and we were the
branches thereof: And it was he that received the whole stock of Natures
choice, liberty, Free will, and consent for himself, and likewise for us all;
and out of this stock of natural choice and liberty it was, that we sinned not
only by him, but in him, and with him; wherefore I heartily wish him to be wary
how he exempts sinning after the similitude of Adams transgression, and sinning
on the stock of our own natural choice, each from other, lest he imp^ir that
stock, and overthrow that Rock of liberty, and Free will, which (against both
Supralapsarians, and Sublapsarians) he labored ere while so earnestly to
establish, and so prove to strike upon them, and himself, and the Divine
Attributes, all at once. But (to remedy all this) here it is not only by one
Man, who had his personal choice, but by one sin, wherein was our natural
choice; and therefore let us go on to see what the Apostle inferrs, and
preferrs in such a case.

-- How much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life by one Iosus Christ] sc. Though Death
reigned much both by one man, and by one sin; yet by one Christ they shall
reign much more. But then they must be duly qualified, for it is They which
receive, and that argues no capacity, no ability in them, notwithstanding the
blemish of Orginal sin, for thereby they were under Death's reign, which was
spiritual and not corporal only; and held under the power, and utter slavery of
Sin as well as Death; rather it convinces them of their privation and
impotence, as not having but as they receive; yet notwithstanding such
emptiness and unaptness, being prepared and embled by Christ's abundance, they
must receive (that is rightly apply) Grace, sc. the grace of justification by
Faith, and likewise the Gift of Righteousness, sc. the sanctification of the
Spirit to holy walking: And both these they shall have, both in their kinds and
measures, sc. abundance, namely, for sufficiency, but not to supererogation:
And so they shall reign in life; sc. from Vassals under Sin and Death, become
Freemen, nay Kings in life, both of Grace and Glory. And all this not of
themselves, nor for any worthiness of their own, but by the sole merits and
mediation of one Jesus Christ, who is God all-sufficient, and besides whom
there is no Savior. All these Excellencies of Remedy put together, serve but
to set forth the destituteness and desperateness of the Disease.

Verse 18. Therefore, as by the offense of one Judgment came upon all men, to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness, of one, the Free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life.
THerefore as by the offense of one man judgment came upon all men, etc.] This
18 verse, by the illative, seems (to me) rather to refer to the 16 verse than
to any of the rest, and may thence more expressly and peculiarly be supplied.
Howbeit the Comparison was there with more precise respect to the Things; hu^
here to the persons. Therefore then (the illative is a reduplicate, and
concludes so much the stronger) as by the offense of one man, or by one offense
(whether the primordial Act of his person, or the original stain of our Nature)
judgment (of the Divine Decree, so wise, so just) came upon all men (all
common men, and born after the ordinary way of Nature, not the blessed Virgin,
none but Christ himself excepted) unto condemnation (at least from his
sentence, and according to our desert) even so by the righteousness (of his
person, natures, offices) the Free gift (of grace and salvation; came upon all
men (sufficiently, yea, and effectually too upon all the faithful, For he is
the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe) unto justification of
life, sc. that life which only the justified, or which by justification only,
all men attain unto. And here I have only those words of his to except against:
The proportion and comparison lies in the mayn emanation of death, from one,
and life from the other. That certainly it does not, if we look at the
Comparison no further than as it lies in the present verse; for here the main
proportion and comparison is betwixt the offense of one and the righteousness
of one, both here and throughout the whole Comparison Sin and Grace, the
offense and the free-gift, these are the main opposites; as being the principal
causes: The other two Death and Life are but secondarily set opposite, as being
but the consequents or effects: And this I note that Christ's excellency might
appear much more in remedying the cause, than in removing the effect only.

Verse 19. For as by one Man's disobedience many were made Sinners: so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.
FOr as by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners] here concludes the
comparison betwixt Adam and Christ; and he says well, this is the sum of all;
for it is the principal scope of the Holy Ghost, to prefer Christ making
righteous, to Adam making sinners. And therefore he says yet better, we are
made much more righteous by Christ, than we were sinners by Adam; and yet best
of all, the graces we derive from Christ shall be more and mightier than the
corruption and declination by Adom; because the excess and excellency of Christ
appears much more in taking away the Sin and corruption, than in a delivering
from the misery and mortality of Original Sin; And therefore the Apostle (in
this case and comparison) concludes it for his greatest glory in making Sinners
righteous; above that of making the miserable happy, or bringing those that
were subject to Death, to reign in life, saying thus, as the sum of all, as by
one man's disobedience ( Adams prime and personal Act, with all the affections
and circumstances) Many, (...) the many (that is all; for none that ordinarily
proceeded out of his loins are to be excepted) were made Sinners (from and in
that very Act, not only imputed and accounted, but constituted, and really so
effected) And so the very word is used both by St. Paul in this place, and by
St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 8. and by St. James, Iam. 4. 4. to signify the very being
of the thing, and not the bare reckoning only: And we may take his own
construction of the word, put into the order of sinners; but then we understand
it of the humane and natural order, as by generation and propagation, and the
like, but not of the divine and eternal order, as made such by Gods
appointment. It stranges me still, that he who even now was so vehemently
invective against both Supralapsarians, and Sublapsarians, upon the account of
the horrible and necessitating Decree, in this case of Original Sin, as
reproving their supposition, if it be by the Decree of God by his choice and
constitution, that it should be so, etc. -- and again, -- if God may ordain men
to Hell for Adams Sin, which is derived to them by Gods only constitution, etc.
-- And now for all that that himself is here, saying, many were constituted or
put into the order of sinners; they were made such by Gods appointment; to
speak altogether so like them: Is this the way (I pray you) to vindicate the
Divine Attributes against them? nor will such an exception salve it at all, to
say, not that God could be the Author of a Sin to any; but that he appointed
the evil, which is the consequent of Sin to be upon their heads who descended
from the Sinner: For though Sin and the Sinner may be put for the punishment
and the punished in some other places of Scripture, yet can neither be so
understood or accepted in this to the Romans; because the Sin and the
punishment both are here noted again and again in their proper, plain, and
distinct expressions and comparisons. Neither is there truth (much less safety
to the Divine Attributes) to speak in such a sense, as, that God appointed (by
his Decree) the evil (of punishment and misery) which is the consequent of Sin,
(another, and not their own) to be upon their heads (outwardly and temporally,
though the pravity was never in their hearts) who descended from the Sinner
(and yet descended not Sinners themselves) For thus (though he labors not to
speak out) a man of any strict observation, or narrow search, must needs accept
him, and the rather, because of former passages to this purpose not a few;
besides what necessity is there to wrap in here the divine constituting (either
for sin or suffering) where the humane constituting is so evident, so
sufficient? It is but asking by whom or by what were many made sinners? and the
answer is here already made to our hands, by one Man's disobedience, to bid us
satisfy all our curiosity in that; and to seek no further for a constituting
cause; nor indeed will the whole Analogy endure it; For the total comparison
is not betwixt God and Christ, but betwixt Christ and Adam; neither is all this
excess, or excellence of State (wherein Christ constituted us, above that
wherein Adam destituted us) spoken with any respect to God; but in a direct and
complete respect to Adam only.

So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous] By the obedience
(both active and passive) of one (Lord Jesus Christ, who alone is sufficient to
satisfy for all sins original and actual) shall many, even all the Elect, all
that believe) be made righteous, made (as himself says well) and constituted
righteous: And we hope he means really righteous (by the Spirits imparting as
well as Christ's imputing) else where were all this contrariety of the
Comparison? For what excess or excellency were it, to make a thing really
righteous, if it was not really sinful and corrupt before? and righteous, that
is, not only happy, but holy withal; And therefore the Sinners must needs be
understood, not only as miserable and afflicted, but as declined and corrupted;
and so signifying, we join with him (as we have already approved him) in what
he says to the end of the Paraphrase; Nevertheless we may not do so as
touching the Consequents or Antecedents thereof; Therefore.

1. As to the Antecedents.
HIs Position which he intimates in opposition to the Objection is, That to
deny original sin to be a sin properly, and inherently, is not expressly against
the words of St. Paul in the 5 chapter to the Romans. And for this he has
these sayings; (For as for reasons, he has more reason than to call them so)
1. He supposes, the words are capable of interpretation, otherwise than is
vulgarly pretended. Now I suppose that the interpretation of the Primitive
Churches, Councils, Fathers, Papists, Protestants, Lutherans, Calvinists, (and
the most learned and moderate of them) is of other account with him, than
either as vulgar, or as pretended. Yea a reason (or the Mayor of it) is
propounded by him. For any interpretation that does violence to right reason,
to Religion, to holiness of life, and the divine Attributes of God, is
therefore to be rejected, and another chosen. True! but then it remains on his
part to be proved, That such an Interpretation (as is contrary to his
understandiug) does so in all, or in some one of them at least: And withal,
that an Interpretation of his own understanding be not such in all or any one
of them. 2. Sin in the Scripture is taken for the punishment; what then? it is
not so here, nor in more than hundreds of places besides. For as life and death
go all along the Antithesis throughout for the express reward and punishment,
so do Sin and Righteousness, the offense and the Free gift distinctly, as the
vile anomie or obliquity; or as the holy virtue or efficacy. 3. The word
Condemnation is by the Apnstle himself limited to signify Temporal death; no
such matter by his favor, for most certain it is condemnation is here opposed
by him, to the Justification of life; and that signifies life, both spiritual
and eternal; and to take away the extent on either part, is rather to make the
Apostle limit the excess on the best part. He must mean Temporal death, for
eternal death did not pass upon all men. Yes, that it did even pass upon all
men, from the just sentence; though (as he knows who said) it did not invade
all men, to an uttermost Execution. And if he means eternal death, he must not
mean that it came from Adams sin, but in as much as all have sinned, etc. well
corrected of himself, but ill restrained by him. Yea, indeed but he must; and
very well he may; not only, in as much as, but in whom all have sinned: Even
originally, in his loins; although not actually in themselves. If all have
sinned in him, an eternal death is little enough: But if not, even a Temporal
death is too much. 4. The Apostle here speaks of sin imputed, therefore not of
sin inherent; why not one as well as the other? imputed and inherent, though
they may be of some diverse consideration, yet are they not of such
contrariety, that they may consist together, and that in every kind of sin. As
actual sin is inherent, and yet nevertheless is imputed; so original sin may be
imputed, and yet inherent nevertheless; will the imputation, which is in
respect of a Law, take away the inhaesion of the fact or crime, which is with
respect to the person? Neither does the Apostle speak here directly of Sin
imputed but of Sin not imputed. And he knows that has been construed by many,
for man's not so reputing it, (through want of knowledge, or conscience of a
law) although it was never so much inherent. 5. The Apostle says, by the
disobedience of one man many were made Sinnere: so that it appears, that in
this we have no sin of our own; neither is it at all our own formally and
inherently. Whatsoever the appearance may be to us; yet this is of no
consequence from the words: Because Adam is here often called one, and one man;
not so much to distinguish, or to divide him from us; but to compare and
parallel him with Christ: And though it be called one man's disobedience, in
regard of the individual, and circumstantial Act; yet in regard of the
specifical Act of the Common Nature, the common union, comprehension,
representation, it was indeed all our act. For so all have sinned and are made
Sinners, sc. inherently. The Formality of Sin (whether original or actual) is
anomie and obliquity to the Law of God, and so it is imputed; but with all it
is ataxie and deformity of our nature, and so it is inherent; Neither was Adams
Sin efficiently his persons only, but his natures also, and so it was ours. And
for Original Sin Adam's person was but the External efficient; but the internal
efficient was that law of corrupted Nature, whereby a corrupt thing deserted,
did beget a corrupt thing like it self, so that, that which is born of flesh,
is flesh: But for him to make it effectively ours as to some purposes of
imputation. Alas! this is to bring God into the business; whose wisdom and
justice (no doubt) was efficient to some sad effects of punishment; but then to
say, That it could not be a Sin in us formally: and notwithstanding the Divine
Justice both imputing and effecting such fearful purposes, as the dreadful
and direful effects of Adam's and our Original Sin, oh, Divine Attributes!
What Is now become of your Vinditation? I have heard of deputation to
punishment, but not of imputation without the crime or fault. And if it be so
that the sin ran in no sense be properly ours; how stands this with the Divine
Justice, that the punishment should be ours in any sense whatsoever? since even
we our selves (such is our natural and humane Justice) kill or destroy not
poisonous Serpents, noisome vermin, savage Beasts, ravenous Birds; or pestilent
weeds; but for some natural vitiosity, seminally, innately, hereditarily,
intrinsecally, inherently, formally and properly in them. 6. To his sixth
saying I have spoken before particularly, and say now moreover in sum, That
it is not our punishment that can redound to Adam, but the guilt of his sin
rather that redounds upon us. That in actual, external, and particular Sins, it
may be just to afflict the relatives; not only to punish the cause, but (for
terrors sake) to prevent the example; but in this original, internal, natural,
and universal Sin, it cannot be for terror or prevention to any; since all are
guilty, all are punished: That in our relation to Adam, we are not only
descendants from him in our persons, but participants with him in our Natures,
and so may be formally denominated Sinners as well as he: And if there be no
more contradiction in it, than for every man to say thus, if I am formally by
him a Sinner, then I did really do his action: that may be easily said, and
not so easy to be contradicted. For what hinders but that a man may say, nay,
that he ought to say; I did really do his action, though not in the personal
and external circumstance, yet in the natural and internal substance of doing,
I did really do his action in his loins, and as a member of of the whole body
of Nature; Now if the Member of a man's body may formally be denominated sinful
from the sin of the whole man: why then may not every man be so denominated
here, being an included Member of the whole body of Mankind? 7. He says, there
is nothing in the design or purpose of the Apostle, that can or ought to
enforce any other thing, than what? than that we sinned less than Adam, and
therefore sinned not in him, and that God imputed this sin less to us, than to
him. I confess I can see no such purpose in the Apostle, and doubtless his
design (throughout the whole contraposition) is not to lessen our sin to Adams;
but to lessen both Adams sin, and the sin of us all, to Christ's
righteousness; yea and to lessen the Death which both he and we deserved, to
the life that Christ had merited for us; and so indeed, to heighten his Acts
and Attributes in all. But thus he argues, If we have sinned less, then we did
not sin in him. To which it may be thus answered, the hand sins less than the
mind, did it not therefore sin in the body? but we see no reason why we should
not still say; we sinned in him (naturally though not personally) and as much
as he, neither do we look that our sin in him, should by him be lessened to us,
but by Christ only, both to him, and to us all.

2. Now for the Consequents of this Paraphrase.
THe consequent of this discourse (he says) must needs be this at least. If it
be consequent to his discourse so: but it stands us in hand to examine, whether
it be consequent to the Apostles words: but since he will needs impose them on
us as Consequences, he will not be angry if I take them up as Inconsequences:
For whether so or so, I refer them, Sir, both to yours, and every able and
indifferent man's judgment (Conseq.) That it is impossible that the greatest
part of mankind, should be left in the eterternal bonds of Hell by Adam.
Inconsequ. nothing is impossible with God, nothing is impossible that is justly
done, and past; we say, not only the greatest part, but the whole race of
mankind was so left; and yet all that aggravates it not to an impossibility.
For why should it be thought an impossibility, That all by Adam should be left
in the etetnal bonds of Hell; since all in Adam had a possibility to be brought
to the eternal Throne of Heaven? ( Conseq.) For then quite contrary to the
discourse of the Apostle, there had been abundance of Sin, but a scarcity of
Grace; and the excess had been on the part of Adam, not on the part of Christ.
(Inconseq.) The abundance, or excess, which the Apostle here contends for, is
not with respect to numbers or to multitudes of persons, on either part, but in
regard to Grace abounding Sin, and Life excelling Death, and Christ's merits
infinitely exceeding both Adams and our own deserts. (Conseq.) So that the
Presbyterian way is perfectly condemned by this discourse of the Apostle.
(Inconseq.) Though he tell them never so often, yet they will hardly believe
him on his own word, till he can convince them from the Apostles words
perfectly and indeed. (Conseq.) Nay, and yet more particularly convince them,
when their way of understanding in this point, is singular from the Church of
England, or other reformed Churches Suffrage; the other m^re gentle way, which
affirms that we were sentenced in Adam to eternal death, though the Execution
is taken off by Christ, is also no way countenanced by any thing in this
Chapter; (Inconseq.) No? these words ( death passed, death reigned, the
judgment was to condemnation) these (I say) countenance and confirm the
sentence. Again ( the Free gift came to justification of life, they shall reign
in life by one Jesus Christ) these countenance and confirm the taking off the
Execution; were it not thus both for the sentence and for the Execution, where
then were all those excesses on Christ's part? what excess were it to make
those righteous, that were not made Sinners before? what excess were it to
justify those to eternal life; that were never condemned to eternal death? let
him look to it, either Christ must be preferred in these Acts and Excesses, or
else his Attributes are but impaired. (Conseq.) That the judgment which came
from Adams sin, unto the condemnation of the world, was nothing but temporal
Death, is here affirmed. (In conseq. so far is it from being affirmed that upon
right deduction, it is more than once denied. For it was Death entering by Sin,
and that was something more than temporal death; It was Death reigning, and
that was something more than death temporal; It was death opposed to the
justification of life, and that must be something more than temporal death; It
was death opposed to reigning in life, and therefore must needs be more than
temporal death. (Conseq.) It is in no sense imaginable, that the death which
here St. Paul says passed upon all men, and which reigned from Adam to Moses,
should be eterual Death. (Inconseq.) Will he allow no man a sensible
imagination, besides his own understanding? or rather a sensible understanding
besides his own imagination? Death passed upon all men, that is eternal death
passed upon all men, according to the justice of the sentence, and their due
desert, There Is one sense. That Death which reigned from Adam to Moses, was
eternal death; for if you take the time of Deaths reigning to be betwixt them
two, terminally and exclusively, then was it not so much as a tempotal death
passing upon all men; But death reigns not but from an eternal Law, and in and
to eternity. There Is another sense, yea Death reigned from Adam to Moses, and
so onward until Christ, and would have reigned eternally over all men, had not
Christ taken it off. There Is another sense. ( Conseq.) the Apostle speaks of
that death which was threatened to Adam. ( Inconseq.) rather of the death which
was threatened to the world in Adam, but take it as directed to Adams person,
dying thou shall die, Genesis 2. 17. The sacred idiom serves to note the
continuity, as well as the certainty of Death: and that was an intimation of
the eternity. (Conseq.) The Apostle means such a Death which was afterward
threatened In Moses Law. (Inconseq.) well, but who takes a temporal death only?
nay, who takes not an eternal death chiefly to be threatened upon the breach of
the Morral Law? (Conseq.) and such a death which fell even upon the most
righteous of Adams posterity. (Inconseq.) True it fell upon them in part, not
that the other part was not due unto them, but that it was taken off by Christ.
(Conseq.) Upon the most righteous of Adam's posterity, who did not sin after
the similitude of Adam's transgression. (Inconseq.) Such righteous ones of all
his posterity were never yet known. Abel, Seth, and Methusala were certainly
none such; for they and their like (even all the holy Patriarks) were sinners,
as well by imitation, as by propagation; and sinned as well actually as
originally. To say that those holy men sin not after the similitude of Adams
transgression, in that they sinned less, alas! that is but poor; for so even
wicked men are said, not to sin after the similitude of one another. (Conseq.)
Because in proportion to the evil, so was the imputation of the Sin, it
follows, That Adam's sin is ours metonimycally and improperly. (Inconseq.)
Here Is nothing at all which follows aright: for even the first part of his
argument is preposterous: By evil he intends punishment, and then the
consequence is quite contrary, because the sin was not imputed in proportion to
the punishment; but indeed the punishment was deputed in proportion to the Sin.
And therefore it must follow (by reason of contraries) That Adams sin was not
tropically and tralatitiously, but even literally and properly ours. But
consider what he says in effect; That God did measure the sin according to the
punishment. Now good Lord! how can the Divine Attributes stand safe to such a
saying? for what Justice is that, that regulates or proportions the sin by the
punishment, and not the punishment by the Sin? In the imputation of God or men,
who makes the sin to follow the punishment, and not rather the punishment to
follow the sin? But say his rule stood upon some right foot; yet how follows
his argument from it? The Sin was imputed in proportion to the punishment; but
the punishment was proper and real, not figurative and equivocal; and therefore
so must the Sin be too: else who can tell what is become of all this proportion?
(Conseq.) God was not finally angry with us, nor had so much as any designs of
eternal displeasure upon that account. (Inconseq.) The way to vindicate Gods
Attributes, is, not to pry into them too curiously; nor to determine upon them
too peremptorily: nor to aggravate them too severely, nor to extenuate them too
indulgently, but to believe them and justify them, and magnify them, so as
they are revealed. God indeed was not finally angry with us (his Elect) neither
upon our original, nor upon our actual account: And why? because his wrath was
so appeased by Christ, satisfaction. But was he not therefore so at the Sin
simply and absolutely considered? if he had no design of eternal displeasure,
upon that account, then he sent Christ to die in vain. For Christ died to
prevent, not the temporal, but the eternal death; Nor was that to redeem us
from the mortality and condition of our Nature (for he suffered it himself, and
left us to follow him in a conformity) but from the depravation and damnation
of it. (Conseq.) This anger went no further than the evils of this life; and
therefore the imputation was not of a proper guilt; for that might justly have
past beyond our grave, if the same had past beyond a Metonymie or a juridical
external imputation. (Inconseq.) O rare consequent! the punishment was but
temporally inflicted, and therefore the Sin was not properly imputed. As if
temporal punishments (whether from God, or men) were the arguments of improper
Sins only. But O wonderful virtue of a bare Trope, or figurative locution! to
qualify such a pravity, extenuate such a provocation, divert such a desert,
yea to regulate such a Justice, or to restrain and limit such a power. If his
Metonymical imputation be the same with Iuridical and external, then (me
thinks) this proportion should be observed in the proceeding, That as the Sin
is imputed but only as it were in some shadow or resemblance of words; so
should the punishment be inflicted, and not in any deed or substance. For he
that is found guilty, but only in an imaginary Idea or picture, ought not to be
executed, but only in conceit, or as it were in effigy. But I am forbidden to
smile, since it is a matter of fighing, in regard the Divine Attributes are so
stricken at: For what provocation can there be for Gods universal and continual
anger (for such it is against the Fall and original sin) without an, mputation
of a proper and participating guilt? where the sin is properly imputed, there
(he grants) the punishment may justly go beyond our Graves, that is even to
Hell. But if there be no such imputation, no such propriety, no such
participation; I can see no cause why those evils should pass so far as this
present life. Eternal death is little enough, if sin be properly and
particularly imputed: but if it be not so, I cannot see but that even a
temporal death to all mankind, must be too much. (Conseq.) That as no man ever
imposed penance for it (for original Sin) so God himself in nature, did never
for it afflict or affright the Conscience. (Inconseq.) By penance surely he
understands not private Repentance, but public Discipline, or that of the
Churches imposing; say it were so, the Churches power is to impose the penance
for public, notorious, scandalous and exemplary Crimes and offenses: it cannot
take cognizance (as no external Law or administration can) of an inward,
secret, unsearchable, (though worthily suspected) Sin, such as the Original is.
Besides, whose should be the authority in such a cause or case, where all are
concluded, and confessed guilty alike? As for the other part, I ask of him, did
not God himself afflict and affright Adams Conscience for it, when he was
forced to say; I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, because I was
naked, and I hid my self. Genesis 3. 10. And we all feel and must confess, this
afflicting this affrighting was not of his person only, but in his and our
Nature also; as woeful experience convinces us all to this very day. (Conseq.)
And why, the conscience shall be for ever at so much peace for this sin, that a
man shall never give one groan for his share of guilt in Adams sin, unless
some or other scares him with an impertinent proposition. (Inconseq.) What the
conscience shall be for ever, is hard for him to say; And for what it has been
hitherto, he knows a Conscience is not always to be argued for pure and free,
because it is quiet and still. But what says he to David? did not he groan for
it in that Poenitential of his? Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
has my Mother conceived me, Psalm 51. 5. And to St. Paul, is this no
groaning,? Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Romans 7. 24. Nay shall we not believe what he but lately said of
himself? For my part I cannot but confess that to be which I feel and groan
under, and by which all the world is miserable. Let him look to his Conscience,
and see how his words agree first and last; I hope he will not now say it was
some impertinent proposition that scared him thereunto. ( Conseq.) Why the
Conscience should not naturally be afflicted for it, nor so much as naturally
know it, I confess I cannot yet make any reasonable conjecture, save this
only; that it is not properly a Sin, but only Metonymically and improperly.
(Inconseq.) Such a conjecture is not reasonable; for if to deny a Sin to be
such, were sufficient, because the Conscience naturally smiles not for it, nor
yet convinces of it: so many actual sins might easily come to be denied. A
strange conjecture for a figurative appellation to save a Conscience. I know
the Conscience can Syllogize, but I never knew that she could ever so
Rhetoricate with her self: such a conjecture is so far from being worth the
sole preferring, that it is not worth the naming, where better reasons are
brought forth. As namely, That Original sin her self has blinded and bedulled
the Conscience, as touching the true and full apprehension of her self, and of
Original sin. That the law and light of nature is exceedingly obscured to all
Consciences since the Fall That most men's Consciences are insensible even of
their actual and sensual sins; how much more then of the Original and
invisible? That men have pulled and seared both their own, and others
Consciences, as touching the true sense of Original Sin, by daily hatching and
broaching such heresies and errors about it: No marvel then that men are here
so insensible; we see it may easily come to pass through natural ignorance and
ill habits, without this diminishing glass of a Metonymical spectacle.
(Conseq.) there are some whole Churches which think themselves so little
concerned in the matter of Original Sin, that they have not a word of it in all
their Theologue. (Inconseq.) That they have not a word of it, their Theologue
is defective to them, that they think themselves not concerned in it, they are
defective to their Theology. I could tell him of some Churches that in their
Theology make no mention of the Decalogue; do they therefore think themselves
but little concerned in it? again some Churches think themselves so much
concerned in Original Sin, that they believe Souls, as well as Bodies, to be
propagated from Adam. I spoke this of the Ethiopians and the Russians, no
Church but is bound to have such a body of Divinity as may comprehend the whole
principles of Faith and Religion; yea, and to unfold them, and confess them so
far as they are revealed in the word of God; but what is it to object some
obscure and confused Churches, to the Catholic universal, and to the most
orderly and eminent Churches of the World? (Conseq.) The height of this
imagination has wrought so high in the Church of Rome, that when they would
do great honor to the Virgin Mary, they were pleased to allow unto her an
immaculate conception, without any Original Sin. (Inconseq.) So far as the
Church of Rome seemed to join with the Primitive Churches in the point of
Original Sin, so far also have the Reformed Churches joined with them, as
namely, That Original Sin is, That it is properly and inherently a Sin. That it
descends by natural propagation, not by imitation. That it has in both a
stain and guilt. That it subjected to misery and death in all senses and
significations: That we are redeemed therefrom by the merits of Christ: These
are heights indeed, but not heights of imagination, but sound Doctrine. And
these she pretended to hold forth against all those who affirmed, That Adam
lost Original righteousness only for himself, and not for us his posterity:
and that by Adams disobedience sin descended not upon Mankind, but only a
bodily death or punishment. Indeed here she has also some heights of
imagination, as, That Original sin is not only remitted by Baptism, but utterly
abolished and quite taken away. That the concupiscence remaining in the
regenerate, is no sin. That Original Sin is only in the inferior, and not in
the superior faculties. That the blessed Virgin was conceived and born free
from Original Sin, yea, and many more heights of imagination they have much
disputed on among their Scholasticks, so that they owe their errors, not to the
simple profession of Original Sin, but to their subtle disputation about it.
As for their opinion of the blessed Virgins immaculate conception, it arose
from no other height, but that o^ their own superstition, which is too
notorious, in all they can feign or imagin^ for her, say of her, or do to her.
But I pray God this low imagination, o^ slender and slight conceit of a
Metonymical, juridical, external collateral, nay, equivocal, abusive,
fantastical imputation, serve not to be get a conceit or presumption of an
immaculate conception in us all. I have read of one that would needs deny the
immortality of the Soul, with intent to disprove the Popish purgatory; but
there are other ways to refute this Error of the immaculate conception, than by
abating the truth or utmost truth of Original Sin.

One thing more (he says) I am to observe before I leave considering the word
of the Apostle. This one thing is not so much a consequent of what he would say
for himself, as an argument against all such as would argue against him. The
ground betwixt both is laid in these last words of the Apostle, As by one man's
disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous. Some (says he) from hence suppose they argue strongly to the
overthrow of all that I have said, Thus, As by Christ we are made really
righteous, so by Adam we are made really sinners. This we acknowledge not only
to be our Argument, but our way of Augmentation; and if this standing good be
sufficient to overthrow all that he has said, then it is easy to be observed
to what purpose he has spoken all this while, but to this he has spoken in
his Addresses, and to them we can say nothing till we see them. But besides
(says he) I have something very material to reply to the form of the Argument,
which is a very trick and fallacy. Strong reason may be spoken very often
without a formal Syllogism; and where the matter cannot be denied to be true
and good, it is but a kind of sophistical fallacy to stand too pedantically upon
the form. -- But to argue from hence, (as by Christ we are made really
righteous, so by Adam we are made really sinners) is (says he) to invert the
purpose of the Apostle. The reciprocation or conversion of propositions is no
inversion of their purpose, where they may truly praedicate either way. Neither
is the inverting of words in their order, always a perverting of them in their
intent. But the Apostle argues from the less to the greater. Indeed the
Apostle in his comparison proceeds after such a manner, as from Adam to Christ,
from Sin to Grace, from Death to Life: now Comparates ( Ianus-like) look (...),
forwards and backwards, and may argue mutually from one to another, Nay they
must do it, else could they not be Comparates; now though the Apostle argue
from the less to the greater, by way of Amplification: yet he forbids not to
argue from the greater to the less, for matter of reallity, and that is all
our Argument. But we (says he) make it conclude affirmatively from the greater
to the less, in matter of power. Will he allow us to do it negatively? why
that will serve our turn sufficiently. Thus, As Christ's righteousness was not
imputed only: so neither was Adams sin; or thus, As our righteousness by Christ
was not a Metonymical righteousness; so our sin by Adam was not a Metonymical
Sin. But (by his leave) we may take liberty to argue affirmatively, as before,
and yet offend against no Logical Law, or Canon of Comparates, nay and the
consequence shall be of great force, even affirmatively, as Thus. As Christ did
and suffered his Fathers will; so ought we to do and suffer the same. As God
charged his Angels with Folly, how much more may he us mortal men? and from the
Apostle in this place. As the Life was a real life, so the Death was a real
Death: As the Grace was real Grace, so the Sin was real Sin. But he now assumes
the trick or fallacy himself, taxing us for concluding affirmatively from the
greater to the less in matter of power (as what a Man can do, a Child can
do; What God is able to do, etc. the Devil is able to do, etc.) Whereas our
manner of arguing is not in matter of power and prevalency; but for matter of
being, and reallity. Now betwixt the greater and the less, though there may be
a disproportionate action, yet there must be some proportionate being. And what
is affirmed of the greater, may likewise be affirmed of the lesser, and that in
the same kind and manner, although not according to the same measure or degree;
yea very Opposites and and Disparates if they come to be compared, are accepted
as opposite and different only in their proper forms and adjuncts, but alike,
and agreeing in their common Attributes, according to which they are compared;
and without which there could be no ground for comparison. And where there is
no ground for Collation; there can be no cause for prelation; as here in the
Apostles worlds; Take away the reallity of Sin, and the Proper being of the
offense, and in such a comparison, with what excess, or excellency, can the
Grace, the Free-gift, Justification, and the righteousness of Christ be
preferred thereunto? There Is nothing now remaining, but to put it into an
Hypothetical Syllogism, and so to leave it concluding without all Fallacy,
according to his own condition, viz. If we be made really righteous by Christ,
then we were made really Sinners by Adam: But we are made really righteous by
Christ, Ergo

And thus (worthy Sir) though I cannot presume my self to be one of those wise
persons he speaks of; yet this I presume, that I am not unwarily persuaded by
this way of arguing; neither can I (out of my simplicity) observe that it is
this way, but rather his own whole way of arguing that appears unconcluding.
But let it be with your own judgment how we either of us appear to you, from
what we have said.

2. For the Church.
TO this objection, That his Doctrine is against the 9th. Article in the Church
of England. He says, I have already answered it in some additional Papers,
which are already published. I would I might have had the opportunity to have
seen them, supposing they may contain some kind of Apology, which might have
saved me the labor of an Additional in this latter part. But for what I here
see he must give me leave for to speak, as that he may see, That (in judgment,
though not in Charity) we are Two. His zeal for the Church of England, seems to
be such and so much, that he is protesting before hand, against all that shall
but seem to suspect it. But he is indigning him in especial that shall take
upon him to tax him for it, in the least degree. I hope this will not
overprovoke his patience, only to entreat him; First to reconcile his own
understanding to his subscription; and then, his own words, to the words of the
Article.

( First) A faithful subscription of a dutiful Son of the Church, is to
submit his understanding, and consent simply unto her suffrage. And to
underwrite (with hand and heart) her Articles and Canons, accepted in their
plain literal sense; And not to bring to them, nor yet reserve from them, any
other understanding or intention of his own. Laws (we say) are to be
interpreted and accepted, according to the mind of the Lawgivers; and a
promissary Oath ought to be performed, according to the intention of him to
whom the promise is made. Now for him to say, I have oftentimes subscribed that
Article, and, I am ready a thousand times to subscribe that Article, and yet to
say again: I do not understand the words of that Article, as most men do, but
I understand them, as they can be true, and as they can very fairly signify,
and as they agree with the word of God, and right reason, What kind of
subscription call you this? with such a liberty or reservation a man might have
(without all scruple) taken the Protestation, the Covenant, the Engagement, or
an Oath of Abjuration. But whom means he by those most men? certainly not the
Adversaries of the Church, who refuse to subscribe them: But the Sons of the
Church, his brethren, who have subscribed them as well as he. The Adversaries,
though they consent (for the most part) to the Doctrine, yet they refuse to
subscribe the Article, merely because it is our Churches. But as it is the
Churches, so, we that are Sons and Brethren, do (with one understanding)
simply subscribe it, nor do we make our own conditions, by way of exception;
but we take them all in an undoubted concession. For we also understand the
words of the Article, as they can be true, and as they can fairly signify, and
that is even in their literal and grammatical sense. And likewise as they agree
with the Word of God and right reason, for so we suppose them in the sense
aforesaid. And although we confess, with him, that the Church used an
incomparable wisdom and temper in composing her Articles, both with respect to
New-reformists and Non-conformists too, notwithstanding we believe her Prudence
and Piety was such, that she intended not so to secure the outward Peace of the
Church against either, as that the Truth of it (in either part) might be
prejudiced thereby, much less that she contrived any thing in such a charitable
latitude, as to give license to any, for passing the rectitude, and arctitude
of Verity, or that any one should presume upon his private and dissentaneous
opinion, notwithstanding her public and unanimous Judgment. It was
discovered by some of themselves, that when the Council of Trent completed her
Canons of Original Sin, and many particulars of them appearing so consonant to
the Scriptures, and to Orthodox Antiquity; yet they studied to compile the
whole with such Artifice, as that notwithstanding they might leave to their own
Scholasticks a liberty of disputing and opining what they pleased: But I trust
the like shall never be said of the Church of England, either as touching this,
or any other of her Articles; and for my part, I conceive it to be a truer part
of a Son of the Church, rather to restrain his sense, to her words, than to
strain or enlarge her words, to his own sense.

( Secondly,) As concerning this Article of Original birth, or Sin, or
Birth-Sin, in as much as he says, if I had cause to dissent from it, I would
certainly do it in those just measures which my duty on the one side, and the
interest of truth on the other would require of me. Hereupon I am very willing
to believe him on his own word, as liking exceeding well of his ingenious
Confession: I have no cause to disagree, and not much misliking his resolution,
I will not suffer my self to be supposed to be of a differing judgment from my
dear Mother, which is the best Church of the world. Wherefore I shall do no
more (which is the least that can be done in an appearing difference) but set
down the words of the Article, and then his own words in the Antithesis, And so
leave it to himself (according to his own promised temper and measure) to
reconcile them. Neither will I so much as once imagine, that he has less zeal
for our Church than my self, that so I may spare him the labor of a fruitless
vow; in being all his life confuting me. Let him but show how his own sayings
are conformable, or not repugnant to what the Article says (which to me and
many others seem so contrary) and we two have done, nay are (as we were) in
Faith and love of Christians, one. But if he go otherwise to work, I must take
the confidence to tell him; he may be all his life confuting, and not confute.

Article.
-- Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam, as the Pelagians do
vainly talk.

Antithesis.
All actual Sins do not proceed from this Sin of Adam, page 47. -- liberty and
not Adams Sin is the cause of all our actual, page 49. -- From the first Adam
nothing descended to us -- but an evil example, page. 80. not direct Sins to us
in their natural abode, -- but principles of Sin to us in their emanation, page
81. who by imitation of his Transgression on the stock of their own natural
choice, did sin against God.

Article.
But it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man that naturally
is engendered of the offspring of Adam.

Antithesis.
The guilt of this Sin being imputed, the same is conveyed to all their
Posterity by ordinary generation -- this heap of errors page 29, 30. --
Naturally it cannot be, page 32. -- not that we bring it upon our shoulders
into the world with us, page 78. -- if God has given us a Nature by derivation
which is wholly corrupted, etc. page 96. -- that Adams Sin is ours
Metonymically and imprope^rly, page 127.

Article.
-- Whereby man is very far gone from Original righteousness; and is of his own
nature inclined to evil, so that the Flesh lusts always, contrary to the
Spirit.

Antithesis.
The evil did so descend upon us, that we were left in powers and capacities to
serve and glorify God, page 16. -- That by this Sin our first Parents fell
from their Original righteousness, etc. this heap of errors, etc. page 29, 30.
I can by no means approve that by this we are disabled and made opposite to all
good, and wholly inclined to all evil, page 39. -- his nature was not spoiled
by that Sin, he was not wholly inclined to all evil, page 40, 46, 47.

Article.
And therefore in every person born into this world it deserves Gods wrath,
and Damnation.

Antithesis.
Original Sin does -- in its own Nature bring guilt upon the Sinner, whereby he
is bound over to the wrath of God, etc. -- this heap of Errors, page 30. It
cannot be just for God to damn us, for being in a state of calamity, to which
state we entered no way but by his constitution and decree page 38. -- if it be
intolerable to damn Children for the Sin of Adam, then it is intolerable to
say it is damnable, page 59. -- Is it against Gods goodness that Infants should
be damned for Original Sin? etc. page 67. -- It is against Gods Justice to damn
us for the fault of another, page 63. Children born in Christ, and not in Adam,
etc. page 74. -- born beloved, and quitted from wrath, etc. page 75. -- born in
the accounts of the Divine favor, page 77. -- if God decrees us to be born
Sinners, etc. if God does damn any for that, etc. page 94. -- if God does cast
Infants into Hell for the Sin of others, etc. page 96. -- It is impossible that
the greatest part of mankind should be left in the eternal bonds of Hell, by
Adam, page 125. -- The Judgment which for Adams Sin came into the condemnation
of the world, was nothing but temporal death. page 126.

Article.
And this infection of Nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated,
whereby the lust of the flesh, etc.

Antithesis.
The corruption of nature remains in the regenerate, etc. this heap of errors,
page 29, 30. -- I can by no means approve that our natural corruption in the
regenerate still remains, and is still properly a Sin. page 39. -- That our
natural corruption in the regenerate still remains, and is still a Sin, and
properly a Sin, I have (I confess) heartily opposed it, etc. page 49. 52.

Article.
And although there is no condemnation for them that believe, and are baptized;
yet the Apostle does confess, that concupiscence and lust, has of it self the
nature of Sin.

Antithesis:
This will follow, that Adam's Sin has done some mischief that the grace of
Christ can never cure, though it be pardoned and mortified, yet still remains,
and is still a Sin, is perfect Nonsense, page 51. -- we are rescued from Adam
before we were born, else Adam's Sin prevailed really in some periods, and by
some effects for which God in Christ had provided no remedy, page 74. -- It is
a Sin Metonymically, and just so in Baptism it is taken away, page 103.

Qui Ecclesiae renititur, et restitit; in Ecclesiase esse confidit? Cyprian de
simp. Praelat.
SIR,
BE pleased to know that all the errors which have been about Original Sin,
have risen chiefly through want of a perfect Definition, or complete
Description of it, some (and they not the least Heretics) have contended
against all definition; others have been so various in defining, and so
incomplete in describing, that they have administered but matter unto more
contention. I am persuaded that out of this place in the 5 to the Romans; a
perfect Definition, or very complete Description might be made, and that such
as might comprehend both the name and nature, and subject and derivation, and
cause and effects, and remedy; My short time, and shorter abilities will not
now suffer me to venture upon it. I have done my Task; and (I hope in some
part) answered my Title, and your expectation, such as I could, or could so
suddenly make it. I send it humbly to your hands, and through them (if you
think meet) to the world. All that I will now say of this Author is this, That
he has erred learnedly, far unlike the many senseless and scurrilous
Heretics and Schismatics of this our exulcerated age. And I hope his own
learning will let him see his Error. Otherwise, he must think others are not so
unlearned, as for him to impose upon them. Rather than so, I could most
heartily wish one more learned in the Truth than my self may yet more
particularly undertake him. To you, Sir, I need say nothing, you are known. And
for my self I need say as little to you; you know,

Sir, Your Minister Friend, and Servant, JOHN GAUL.

FINIS.

