THE FRAUDS OF ROMISH MONKS AND PRIESTS, SET FORTH In Eight LETTERS.

Lately Written By a Gentleman, in his Journey into ITALY; And Published for the
Benefit of the Public.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the
West End of S. Paul's, 1691.

IMPRIMATUR,

Nov. 5. 1690. C. Alston, R. P. D. HEN.
Episc. Land. a Sacris.
TO THE Right Honorable THE EARL OF NOTTINGHAM, HIS MAJESTY'S Principal
Secretary of State, etc.
My Lord,
IT would be a great Presumption in me (who am a Stranger in this Country) to
appear in Public manner without the Protection of some Great Name. That of
Your Lordships is deservedly such, seeing to the Greatness of Your Birth, You
have added the highest Qualities of Wisdom and Virtue, and discharged the
Public Trusts of Your eminent Station, so much to the satisfaction of all good
Men.

I find (wheresoever I go) great Numbers of those who highly Honor the Memory
of Your Lordships Father, and speak of him as of a Friend and an Ornament of
the Church, a Pillar of the State, an Oracle of the Law, a Judge and Patron of
Learning and Learned Men, an Encourager of Persons of Sound Principles and good
Lives; a Bountiful Support of those of our Country, who have fled hither for
mere Conscience sake; and a Worthy Example of Sobriety, Justice, and Charity.

Your Lordship following so Excellent a Father with equal Steps, I presume to
make this my Humble Application to You, in behalf both of my Self and of this
Book, which with an honest Design I have Written and Published, resting secure
under Your Lordships Patronage, and resolving (by the Blessing of God) always
to make good the Character of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, G. D. E. E. A.
P.

TO THE READER.
IT must be granted, That the Public have been just in the kind Reception they
have given to the LETTERS of Dr. Burnet, now the Right Reverend Bishop of
Salisbury, concerning his Voyage to Italy. The Truth of his Relations has been
owned by all those who have had the Curiosity to Visit those Countries, and
given occasion to the Learned, to make curious Reflections upon them. But above
all I have observed, That the Passages He has inserted by the By (about some
of their Religious Practices) have particularly pleased the English Nation, who
(above all) abominate Popery. It Is this Consideration at first, that begat a
Desire in me to publish many other Particulars on this Subject, especially upon
the Lives and Practices of Romish Priests and Monks, which were known to me, as
having been a Secular Priest of the same Church, and could not come so easily
to the Knowledge of others.

The Reason why I was so Inquisitive, is set down at the Beginning of my First
LETTER: I shall only add, That those who are acquainted with the Spirit of
Rome, will find no difficulty to believe the Matters of Fact here related, and
much less to venture their Credit in denying them, since they are still exposed
to Public View; and as many as go thither, may be so many Witnesses of them.

If at any time I make use of some Expressions which may seem to have too much
Lightness in them, I desire my Reader, to attribute this to the Subject; and to
consider, That as Serious Things ought not to be expressed in a Jocular Style; so
neither is it possible, to utter Ridiculous Matters with a Becoming Gravity.

Nor do I believe, That the Papists will have any reason to Complain of me, as
they commonly do of those that Leave them; saying, That they make it their
chief business, to Expose them without Bounds or Measure. For the Truth is, I
have still Matter enough in store, to fill another Volume as big as this, which
might serve for a Second Part: But I choose to stop here, and give them an
occasion rather of Commending my Moderation, than of Complaining of my doing
Too much.

Lastly, Forasmuch as those Observations made in my Travels, have much conduced
to the Change of my Religion; so (I trust in God) the Publication of them will
have a good effect upon others, by Opening the Eyes of the People of the Roman
Church; by Discouraging those that Seduce them; and by putting Protestants upon
Rendering hearty Thanks to God, for having delivered them from so Miserable a
Slavery.

This ( Candid Reader) is the principal Aim I had in Publishing this Book.
Farewell.

G. D. E. E. A. P.

ERRATA.
Page 38. lin. 31 read many Fir-trees, p. 63. l. 17, Navona, p. 155. l 11.
miseri, p. 174. l. 15. Vicenza. p. 237. l. 20. chastest, p. 246. l. 3. seipso,
p. 264. l. 14. Cielo, p. 298. l. 5. four years, l. 14. two years p. 326. l. 4.
covered again, p. 399. l. 5. who, l. 7. dele h^ (...) with afterward.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Principal Relations Contained in the Ensuing LETTERS.
The First LETTER. p. 1
OF Relics, and the ill Use that is made of them in the Church of Rome, to
deceive the People. 2 Some curious Relations on this Subject. 5 A description
of the Famous Abbey of Citeaux; and of the Great Chartreuse of Grenoble, 23 The
Disorderly and Voluptuous Life of those Monks; and the Artifices they make use
of, to advance their Temporal Profit, by abusing the Credulity of Seculars, 36
The Second LETTER, 42
OF the Corrupt, Ambitious, and Revengful Spirit of the Roman Clergy, 43 The
Inquisition is a ready Means, to satisfy their Cruelty and Revenge, 57
Dreadful Examples to this purpose, 62 The Doctrine of the Reformed Churches
little known in Italy, 73 Protestants represented to the People under the Name
of Infidels, and No Christians, 76 The English Church more proper to convince
the Papists of their Error, than any other Reformed Church, 80 The great
Caution the Pope takes, to prevent the Importation of Protestant Books into
Italy, 82 The Government of Priests, insupportable, 84
The Third LETTER, 86
OF the Hospitals and Pilgrims of Italy, 87 The Monks and Priests have
converted the Revenues belonging to them, to their own use, 90 Superstition of
the Italians at Luca, Pisa, and Florence; and more particularly of the Famous
Devotion of the Annonciade, or Picture of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin, 109 The Description of some Famous Monasteries; viz. the Great
Camaldule, Valombrosa, and Averne, seated on the highest Mountains of the
Apennine, 119 The Spirit of these Three sorts of Monks, 124 The Great Jubilee
of our Lady of Portcuncule, 136 A Story concerning the Bodies of S. Dominick
and S. Francis, at Assise, 138 The Old Franciscan Convents, compared with those
of this Time, 140
The Fourth LETTER, 143
OF Journying to Loretto, 144 The manner how Gentlemen and Ladies go in
Pilgrimage to this place, 150 Ridiculous Fables about the Chapel of Loretto,
156 The Cheats that are in vogue there; and the vast Gain the Popes and Jesuits
draw thence, 157 What properly an Italian Miracle is, 165 Many curious
Relations to this purpose, 172 The Mystical Life, and the Humor of those
Persons who Profess it in Italy, 196
The Fifth LETTER, 204
OF the Italian Festivals and Confraternities; 205 And the Scandalous use the
Priests and Monks make of them; 208 As likewise of the Doctrine of Purgatory,
and Masses, 244
The Sixth LETTER, 267
THe deplorable Abuse of Preaching in Italy, 268 The Priests and Monks have
entirely converted the Ministry to their Temporal Advantage, 276 Preachers of
the Public Places, 288 Children-Preachers, 295 Preachers with the Red Cap, or
Missionaries, 301 Horrid Profaness of Easter Day Sermons, 307 The Blessing of
Easter Eggs, 310 Grate Preachers, or Preachers to Nuns, 312
The Seventh LETTER, 317
OF the Processions of Italy, 318 Ridiculous Follies practiced at them, 324
Images Veiled for several years together, and to what end, 326 Cross-Bearers
and Disciplinarians, 335 Jesuits going in Procession at Venice, choose rather
to associate themselves with Cobblers, than with the Clergy, 342 Mangers made a
Show of at Christmas, 363 Of Exorcists, and Possessed Persons, 366
The Eighth LETTER, 371
THe Corruption of Italian Priests and Monks in their Doctrine and Morals, 372
The Use they make of their vast Revenues, and the Scandalous Lives they lead,
185 Pleasant Histories of their Amors, and how they abandon themselves to
Fornication, Adultery; Incest, and Sodomy; instead of the Sacred-Tie of
Marriage, which they condemn and abhor, 397
ABUSES OF RELIGION, AND Cheats practiced by Romish Monks and Priests, In Eight
LETTERS.
The First LETTER, Of Relics, etc.
YOU have not forgot, Sir, that in the last Conversation we had together in
France upon the account of Religion, I made you acknowledge, That the
Protestant Religion was more suitable to Reason, than the Romish, which you
profess. It is true, that by an evasion, more subtle than solid, you was
pleased to call that Reason, Human Reason, supported by Sense, which you said,
was the Rock on which the purity of Faith commonly splits and suffers
Shipwreck; and that you desired Faith to be the Foundation of your Religion,
with exclusion of every thing else; and as you, with your Divines, freely owned
an hundred several Miracles in Transubstantiation, you were pleased to tell me,
That that was a Mystery of Faith, which ought rather to be humbly adored, than
rashly pried into. Whereupon, when I took the liberty to tell you* That in the
mean time, forasmuch as my Reason was given me by God, to make use of it in the
searching out the Truth, I could not but think it hard, to reject the Light it
offers, seeing that without it I was like one, who being fallen into a deep
Water, and finding no bottom to foot upon, is drowned and lost. You Replied,
That if I inclined to follow Reason, you would soon furnish me with Guides able
to satisfy an honest Mind; and that I needed only to cast my Eye on so many
Learned Men, both Monks and Priests, who are the Light of the World, the main
Props and Pillars of the Church, who by the Integrity of their Life, and the
Purity of their Doctrine, uphold the Temple of God here upon Earth; That it was
morally impossible, that so many Learned Men should all of them be involved in
Error; and that the agreeing Consent of so many Excellent Spirits, appeared to
you a sufficiently firm Foundation to establish and fix a Reasonable Mind. You
proceeded to speak to me with earnestness, of the Modesty that becomes those
who have only a mean Capacity; which you know, I was so far from being offended
at, that on the contrary, as being better than any one else acquainted with my
own Mediocrity, I thanked you for your Advice; adding, That how useful
otherwise it might be, yet ought it not to stop me in my search after Truth.
And forasmuch as some time after, partly out of Devotion, and partly out of
Curiosity, I happened to undertake a Voyage into Italy, and upon that occasion
calling to mind, how in my Scruples about Religion you had referred me to your
Priests and Monks, I made it my business, more than otherwise I would have
done, to examine their Life and Conduct, to try whether I could find them a
sufficient and rational Foundation, as you pretend, to assure and confirm a
person, who already began to doubt of the truth of your Principles. And it
seems indeed, That God took a particular care, to dispose all things toward my
full and satisfactory Information herein during the whole course of my Travels.

At my setting forth from Paris, I associated my self with a Benedictin Monk of
a Reformed Congregation, a Man of sufficient Learning, and whose Wit and other
good Qualities, had so far recommended him to the Religious of his Order, as to
send him a second time in quality of their Procurator, and Solicitor General,
to the Court of Rome. His Person and Port were very advantageous, and he had a
subtle Wit, very proper to humor the Cardinals, and to insinuate himself with
the Pope; and on this design it was, that he now undertook this Journey. We
took our Way through the Country of Brie, and so through Burgundy; and upon the
Road we called at several Monasteries of his Order, where we were received and
treated very civilly; and where I had an opportunity of making some
Observations, which I thought not unworthy of your knowledge; and therefore
have made them the Subject of this Letter, after which, I intend with the first
occasion, in case I find, Sir, that these prove welcome to you, to impart some
other Matters I have observed since my entering into Italy.

We arrived, the 13th of July, at a little Town on the Confines of the Country
of Auxerre, called Flavigny. It is a place of little consideration at present,
though very famous by reason of a Pilgrimage which has been continued there a
long time since, in honor of a certain Saintess called Reine, and very
infamous for the Contests and Impostures which were in their vigor when we
passed that Way. The History in short is this: An holy Woman, named Reine,
suffered Martyrdom about Alise, a little Village a League distant from
Flavigny; and the Ground of that Country generally abounding with Mineral
Waters, some considerable time after the Monks of Flavigny made a search for
the Body of this Saint, and informed the People, That when she was Beheaded, at
the very place where her Head lighted on the ground, a Spring (known by
Experience to be much conducing to the Healing of the Sick) bubbled up at that
very instant, for a perpetual Miracle, in witness of Gods approbation of the
Confession of Faith made by his Handmaid. This Error being afterward carried
on for many Ages in the Minds of the People, and become the more incurable for
its long standing, it happened some years since, that the Fathers, Cord^liers,
who are Religious of the Order of St. Francis, a sort of People subtle and very
crafty, obtained leave of the Bishop of the place, to build a little Chapel
about the said Spring, whereof they took possession, to the great regret of the
Monks of the Order of St. Bennet, who had been all along the ancient and
peaceable possessors of all the Relics of St. Reine, who soon found how
dangerous it was, to have such sly Fellows for their Neighbors; and the false
Step they had made, in neglecting to make themselves Masters of a Spring of
Water, so fruitful in Blessings, and which was not above a League distant from
their Monastery. Indeed the Cordeliers knew much better to improve this
Advantage, than the Benedictins had done; insomuch that the Devotion very
sensibly increased, in a short time, to the considerable profit of these good
Fellows, who not contenting themselves with being the Masters of the Miraculous
Spring, but resolving to draw to themselves the entire Devotion of that
Pilgrimage, they pretended to have a considerable part of the Body of that
Saint; and accordingly they exposed to public View, as they pretended, a whole
Arm of her; by which means, within less than a Leagues space, the monstrous
sight was to be seen of a Saint with Three Arms, to the great astonishment and
scandal of the People thereabouts, and of an infinite number of Travelers and
Pilgrims, who resort thither from all Parts. Would to God that this Imposture,
as well as so many others every whit as strange, had the power to open the Eyes
of those poor People, to discover once for all, how these wretched Monks do
abuse them; how easily then would they perceive, That not only the Bones they
adore are very uncertain, as resting only on the Faith of persons, who indeed
have none at all; but besides, that that Spring never was Miraculous, but only
an excellent Mineral Water, as may be ^ather'd from the nature of the Soil, and
by the consent of many Famous Naturalists and Physicians, who have learnedly
treated on this Subject. I could, Sir, have heartily wished you present, when
the Father (Guardian of that Convent) who took the pains himself to show us the
fair Buildings and Gardens, which were the product of the Moneys brought in by
that Devotion, entered upon the discourse of his pretended Relick, which he had
the impudence to show us; for I assure my self, you would have soon recovered
of the too favorable Opinion you have conceived for this kind of Men. He
protested, not without an horrid Blasphemy, That for his part, he did not more
firmly believe the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, than he was convinced of the
truth of his Relick; notwithstanding that the Bishop of the Place had
absolutely forbid them, to expose it any more to public View. It would be too
ridiculous to give you a relation of the way and manner by which he assured us
this Arm had been found by them, so far as to mingle with it the Revelations of
his Brethren the Cordeliers, and the Ministry of Angels, which is the ordinary
way made use of by the Church of Rome, for introducing and authorizing their
Superstitious Worship. The only Reflection I desire you to make on this
occasion, is, That certainly it is a pitiful and lamentable thing, to see that
the Roman Catholics, who do not want Men of Wit and Parts amongst them, are
yet so obstinate, that they will not be disabus'd, notwithstanding they see
every day many things sufficient to withdraw them from their Error: So that we
have reason to believe, That by a just Judgment of God, because they render to
Saints and Saintesses a Worship that is only due to God, they are suffered to
give the same to those things, which in their own Consciences do not deserve
it. The most part of their Divines maintain, That when a Devotion is once set
on foot, notwithstanding that the Subject in which it terminates should be
afterward found to be false and superstitious, and so unworthy of such
Worship; yet that in Conscience the course of it ought not to be stopped; because
(say they) the Scandal which by this means must needs be occasioned, would be a
much greater Evil, than that which we design to take away; and because the
Simplicity of a deluded People, whose intention is always right and pure, is
much more pleasing to God, than a too great cautelousness and fear of being
deceived, which might in the end engage them to call in question all manner of
Relics and Miracles, which they look upon as a very great Evil. But the naked
Truth is, This would give a great Stroke toward the diminishing of their
Temporal profits, there being never a Pilgrimage which does not afford them
very considerable ones by the infinite number of Prayers and Masses, which are
there procured, and are all ra^ed at a very high price. I can give you on this
Subject the Result of a Conference, at which I was present my self, some time
ago, at Blois in France, upon occasion of several^ Relics kept in the Parish
of St. Victor, two Leagues distant from that City. These Relics were much out
of order, in old Wooden-Cases, all Worm-eaten and rotten with Age, which
hindered them from being carried in Procession, and exposed to public View. The
concern therefore was to have them more modishly accommodated, and transported
into New Cases. To this end the Bishop of Chartres was petitioned to perform
the Translation, who presently sent his Order to the Archdeacon of Blois for
that purpose; who assembled several of the Clergy, to consult with the Curate
and Priests of St. Victor, about the Precautions to be observed in that
Translation. The Resolution was, That to avoid the Scandal that might happen,
if nothing should chance to be found in the Old Cases, and to prevent the
declining of the good Opinion and Devotion of the People, in case only some few
Bones should be found in them, the transportation of them into the New Ones
should not be done in public, but as private as possibly might be, in the
presence only of some prudent Persons, who might be ready to remedy all sorts
of Accidents upon occasion: I was desired by some Friends of the Archdeacon, to
be present with them; and I can assure you, Sir, that the Resolution was taken,
if it should chance that nothing were found in the Cases, to maintain
peremptorily, That the Bodies of the Saints were there whole and entire. And to
allay somewhat the Scruples, that might start by occasion of this proceeding, a
Canon of St. Saviors Church of Blois, a Man resolute and of small Conscience,
maintained in the Face of the Assembly, That no difficulty ought to be made of
asserting such a thing, though altogether false; that in a case where the
Interest of the Church was concerned, all manner of Respects and Sentiments
whatsoever, were to be sacrificed and given up; that the Mysteries of the
Catholics were not to be exposed to the Raillery of the Heretics (so they
call the Protestants) who would not fail to mock at them, as soon as they
should understand, that nothing had been found in the Cases of St. Victor,
which for so long a time had been the Object of the Peoples Adoration; besides,
That the Devotion of Laics, in assisting the Clergy, was already so far
cooled, that scarce any thing now was to be got from them, but by some pious
Fraud, or holy Artifice. The Archdeacon heard all his Discourse without
contradicting him in the least, and the Curate of the Parish, as being the
person most concerned in the Case, very officiously returned him his most
hearty Thanks. This done, they proceeded to the opening of the Cases, and the
truth is, Bones either of Saints, or no Saints, were found in them. In the mean
time, a Monk of the Abbey of St. Lomer in Blois, who was present, cried out at
the very instant, That he smelt a very sweet Odor, which proceeded from them,
wherewith he was so strongly seized, that it was like to overcome him. A young
Religious (his Companion) seconded him immediately, and some Country People of
the Parish protested the same thing. The Archdeacon and the rest of the Company
freely declared, that they smelt nothing: Yet forasmuch as it might be that
those Persons having some more particular Merit before God, he might think them
worthy of Receiving the like Favors; it was ordered that their Attestations
should be received, and set in the Margent of the Verbal Process, which was
then making of that Translation, the Original whereof was to be shut up with
the Relics in the new Cases. I had the Curiosity some weeks after, in the time
of Vi^tage, to examine some of these Persons, about the Odor they pretended to
have smelt, of what kind it was; whereupon some of them said it was the sent of
a Rose, others of Jessamin, and others of a Violet: But finding that they
faultered in their Expressions and smiled withal, I took occasion to press them
more seriouly, so that at the upshot they confessed, that the good Opinion they
had of the two Monks, which first started the matter, had drawn them in, and in
a manner forced their imagination to make them believe that they smelt that,
which they never smelt indeed. This ingenuous Confession of theirs, made me to
seek an opportunity to discourse these two Monks: I went to see the youngest of
them, and after I had given him two or three Visits of Civility, to increase
our Familiarity, I obtained leave of his Superior for him, to accompany me to a
Country House, where after friendly Entertainment given him, I put him upon the
matter of the Relics of S. Victor: The young Monk overcome by my kindness,
assured me he would open his Heart to me, as to his own Brother; that the truth
was, he had not smelt any such Miraculous Odor, which he then attested, but
that partly, that he might not contradict his companion, and partly by a sudden
shame that surprised him; lest he should not seem to be as much graced with
Heavenly favors as his Brother, had made him to depose against his Conscience,
for which afterward he was somewhat troubled. But Father, said I, how can you
be at Peace, without unsaying again, what you so openly averred and deposed,
and this in Honor to Truth? The Devil is the Father of Lies, and you cannot
pretend to the quality of a Child of God, without destroying the work of the
Devil, whereof your self have been the Instrument: He answered, that he had
consulted with his Superiors about the matter, and that the general Rule they
had given him, to pass over Scruples of that nature, was, to consider whether
the thing undertaken, or exerted into act, were opposite to the Glory of God,
or the good and advantage of his Order: That it was not against the Glory of
God, to advance the Honor of one of his Saints; especially when some
Circumstances, that were both Glorious and Profitable to the Order, engaged the
doing of it; and that all the evil that could be supposed in the case came but
to this, To say that God had done, what he might have done, and which he has
done on many other occasions, which at the highest could be no more than a
small Venial Sin; as, they say, all Lies are, that do not infringe Justice,
that is to say, that do no Body any harm. Having thus got this truth out of
him; I had no more to do now, but to convince the old Monk, which it was not
possible for me to do, for he continually persisted in asserting the truth of
what he had deposed, ay and much more; for he added, that the Odor had
followed him every where, as long as the least dust of those sacred Relics was
left upon his Clothes. In the mean time this did not hinder me from
considering, that all the Credibility of this Miracle was now reduced to the
Conscience of one single Person; upon whom the affirmations of all the other
Deponents rested, and that when ever these Cases should chance again to be
opened, in which the Verbal Process was shut up (as Superstition is used to get
strength by length of time) this Miracle would come to be believed with as much
assurance, as a great many other most false and Ridiculous ones are in the
Church of Rome. I was the more willing, Sir, to represent this to your
Consideration, as being a thing which happened in your Neighborhood, and
whereof you may fully inform your self, whenever you please; that so finding
the Faithfulness of my Relation in this particular, you may be the more
disposed to give Credit to what I shall Write to you, concerning Foreign
Countries. I return now to my Voyage.

From Flavigny, we went to Dijon, the Metropolis of the Duchy of Burgundy,
where I was Eye-witnes of a horrid cheat, practiced by the Men of the Church: I
do not relate this passage to you so much for its own sake, but to the end you
may make a reflection upon it, of great importance to our present Subject. We
took a walk to the Holy Chapel, where they showed us many Relics, that were
indeed very Ridiculous; and amongst the rest, that which they call the Holy
Host or Wafer, from whence they tell us, Blood issued in great abundance, after
that a Protestant had in several places Stabbed it with a Knife; that upon his
so doing the Wafer was changed into an Infant, and from an Infant to a Wafer
again, as it was before. Whereupon entering into Discourse, we at last were
insensibly led to this Question, How it came to pass, that at present there
were not so many Miracles to be seen, as in former times? In answer to which
the Canon, who showed us the Relics, told us, that in the Abbey of S. Benignus,
in the same City, there were almost every day Miracles wrought, at an Altar of
the Blessed Virgin, where Still-born Children, were restored to Lif^ for some
Moments, till they could be made partakers of the Sacrament of Baptism; which
was looked upon, as a very great happiness for them, forasmuch as according to
the Opinion of the Church of Rome, Infants dying in that manner cannot be saved
by the Faith of their Parents, but go down to a dark place they call Limbus,
which is made express for them, and where they are to continue for ever,
without suffering the Punishment of Sense, because they have never sinned by
inducement of the Senses; but where notwithstanding, they must undergo Poenam
Damni, or the Punishment of loss, which consists in the privation of the
Beatifick Vision, that being a Punishment due to Original Sin. We cannot
imagine, that any Fathers or Mothers should be so pittiless and unnatural, as
rather to desire to spare their Money, than to rescue their Children from so
Deplorable a Condition, by having Prayers and Masses said for them at the said
Altar: so that this was the Trade driven by the Religious of that Abbey. We went
therefore about 10 a Clock in the Morning to that Church, where we saw the
Miraculous Image of the Virgin, commonly called the Little, our Lady of S.
Benignus, and two Still-born Children, who had already lain there two days,
being black and livid, and very noisome. The Parents who were of the best
Families of Dijon, had during these two days, procured above 200 Masses to be
said in that Church, at a Crown a piece, in order to obtain from God, by
intercession of the said Image, and by the Prayers of the Religious of that
Abbey, so much life, for these poor Infants, as might be sufficient for them,
only to receive the Sacrament of Baptism. The Monks would very gladly have
deferred their Resurrection for a day longer, but the Bodies were already so
far corrupted, that it was almost impossible to abide in the Church, by reason
of the offensiveness of the stench that came from them: so that as it happened
we came in the very nick of time, to see the performance of it. Toward noon,
which was the time of the last Mass, a young Friar, who served at the Altar,
going to carry the Mass Book to that side where the Gospel is read, hit with
his Arm, either wittingly or by chance, the Table of the Altar, upon which the
Still-born Infants were laid, which made them move. The Priest who was saying
Mass, and who probably was acquainted with the hour and moment of this
interlude, immediately breaking off his sacred Mysteries, (as the Papists
please to exp^^ss it) pronounced with a loud Voice the Sacramental Words over
the Infants, Baptizo, etc. casting in the mean time on their Bodies the water,
wherewith he had washed his hands. At the same time, a great noise was raised
in the Church, the People crying out* A Miracle, a Miracle! My Eyes could not
deceive me, in a case I had so plainly discerned, and I could with all my Heart
have undertaken to undedeceive the poor People; but that I knew how dangerous
it is, to oppose the blind Rabble, kept and entertained in Error, by Priests
and Monks, who knowing no other God, but their own interest, would soon have
stirred them up, under the pretense of Heresy or Incredulity, to have Torn me
to pieces. However I could not refrain, from hinting a Word of it, in
particular to some Persons, who were present at that action, and who owned they
had observed the same thing. Burgundy was always a Country fruitful in
Superstition, and we may see the Signs of it every where; and consequently
also, there be very few Countries where the Priests and Monks thrive better, or
more abound in Riches. I beg of you now, Sir, only to make this Observation,
that the Fathers of the Abbey, are the Reformed Religious of the Order of S.
Bennet, and consequently of a Congregation, which you in France have the
greatest Veneration for, as well upon the account of their Learning, as Duty;
both which, as you have told me, render them equally recommendable: If then,
say I, these Men, who are so Holy and so Virtuous in your Opinion, are so able,
and cunning to deceive, and such profligate lovers of outward gain; what may
not we expect from so many, Non-reformed Religious, who live so licentiously
and loosly to the very Eye, as to make open profession of Trapanning Laymen, by
a Thousand kind of Artifices, to have wherewith to maintain their Flagitious
and Scandalous Debaucheries? We stayed some days at Dijon; where I was
Eyewitness to an abundance of Ridiculous Devotions, that are in Vogue there,
and which it would be too tedious to relate to you; as that of our Lady of
l'Estan, that of S. Bernard, and of the Image of the Virgin kept at Talent, and
pretended to have been Painted by S. Luke, and to be very Miraculous. But
forasmuch as the Devotion paid to these sorts of Images, is used to increase or
decrease, according as the Priests or Monks do more or less Dexterously manage
them; this last mentioned has suffered very much, being well nigh fallen into
contempt, insomuch as the Curate of that Parish, despaired almost of ever
bringing it into request again. To bring this about, he told us, he knew but
one way, which was to publish a Miracle, which lately happened about that Image,
which was a more remarkable one, than all the Cures it daily performed: The
case is this, said he, having perceived about 10 years ago, that the Devotion
to the Image daily decreased; I began to enquire into the cause of it, and
finding the Picture to be in a very rueful condition, by reason of the
moistness of the place, which had well nigh rotted the Cloth, and the Rats also
having made bold with some part of it, and extremely disfigured the Face
especially; I conceived that this might be the reason of the abatement of the
Peoples Devotion. Wherefore to remedy this, I made the old Cloth to be pasted
upon a new one, and sent for one of the best Painters of Dijon, to draw over
the defective places of it, which was accordingly done with a great deal of
care and exactness; and on a first Sunday of the Month, the Image thus drawn
over and imbellished, was set up in its former place with a great deal of
Solemnity, and a great concourse of People. Since which time, proceeded he, I
have been continually troubled with the Gout, and moreover the Blessed Virgin
to show her self displeased, that any Painter should be so bold as to put his
hand to a piece of work, which her Servant S. Luke had left to Posterity, in
order to the restoring of it to its first Luster; she has some days since, made
the colors that had been superadded to it, to scale away and fall down, and
thereby reduced the Image to the pitiful estate, it was in before; which
however she is much more pleased with, than to see her pourtraiture profaned
with strange colors. He added, that he had already caused the Relation of the
Miracle to be Printed, and that he did intend to send Copies of it to all
Neighboring, yea even into Foreign Countries; and that he looked upon this as a
probable way, to recall the Devotion of People to his Church. I had occasion,
Sir, to remind my self of this passage, during my Italian Voyage; for being at
Bononia, they showed me an excellent piece of Carat^he in Fresce, upon the
Walls of the Cloister of the Abbey of S. Michael in B^sco; which being extremely
injured by all-d^vouring Time, had moved the Compassion of Gudo Rhin, another
famous Italian Paint^^, who so dexte^ously mended the defects thereof, a^ in a
manner to restore it to its former Beauty; But yet we find that the new paint,
laid upon the (...) colors, falls down in scales, and that without a Miracle
too; there being nothing more natural and obvious, than that new colors,
cannot so well incorporate with old paint, as fresh colors do with one
another. But notwithstanding the Obviousness hereof, when Superstition has once
gaind the ascendent of a Man's Spirit, she does so strangly prepossess the same,
that there is nothing so common and ordinary, but appears to them Miraculous. I
have seen several other Images of the Blessed Virgin in Italy, which they say
were all painted by the same S. Luke, and are consequently reputed Miraculous,
particularly that of S. Mary the greater in Rome; but in truth they are so very
different from one another that it is impossible they should have been painted
by the same hand, or that all of them should be the Pictures of the Blessed
Virgin, the Lineaments, Figure and proportions of the Face and Body, vastly
varying from one another. I shall give you a more particular account of them,
in my observations of Italy. For the present, because we have not yet quit
Dijon, I will only relate to you what I was Eye witness of my self, in the same
Abbey of S. Benignus, belonging to the Reformed Benedictin Monks, where is kept
the Miraculous Image of the Blessed Virgin, that brings Still-born Children to
life again, as we have already mentioned. I went to visit one of my Brothers,
who is a Religious of that Abbey, and as I was walking with him in the Garden
after Dinner, another Religious came running toward us in great haste, and
told my Brother in his Ear, that he should immediately repair to the Church, to
see something well worth his Curiosity; and forasmuch as I was then in my
Brothers company, and well enough known to the Fathers, I followed them to the
Church. The business was this, The Prior accompanied with seven or eight of his
Monks, was about to uncover an old Crucifix, which was kept in a very fair
Chapel, which thence was called the Chapel of the Miraculous Crucifix, and
had for Forty years been covered with a Vail of black Velvet; The Story tells
us, that a Religious of that Abbey, saying his Prayer one Evening before that
Crucifix, the Image of Jesus Christ, which was fastened to it, spoke to him, and
said; My dear Brother, Cover me that I may no more see the Iniquities of my
People, and let no man from henceforwards, be so bold to uncover me, to behold
my Face. This Monk presently performed the charge laid upon him, by adviseing
his Abbot and Brethren thereof, who were not wanting, immediately to carry the
News throughout the whole City, which occasioned that great Devotion, which
continues still to this day. There is a vast concourse of People to this
Crucifix, especially on Frydays, but more particularly on Good-Fryday, when the
whole City gos in procession to the Image, to Worship it, and pay to it the
same Honor, as they would to Jesus Christ himself. Now the Prior of this
Monastery who was an old stander, and well versed in Monastic Intrigues, was
not much scared at this threatening of the Crucifix, being resolved, cost what
it would, to satisfy his Curiosity about it; as he also did, and in this
resolution he was fain to put his hand to the work himself, some of his Monks
having absolutely refused to do it, expressing themselves extremely frighted at
his undertaking, saying, that should they offer to touch it, they could expect
no less than to be consumed with fire from Heaven. But the Prior not concerned
at their apprehensions, with a wonderful courage uncovers the Mysterious and
dreaded Machin. I could not but laugh to my self, to see the posture of the
Monks that were present; Some of them betook themselves to their Heels,
declaring they would not by their presence make themselves partakers of so
horrid an attempt and Sacrilege; others shut their Eyes, that they might not
be dazzled and struck Blind with the Majesty of the Crucifix, Ne opprimerentur a
glori^, Scrutatores Majestatis; and others prostrated themselves with their
Faces on the Ground, that they might be seen by their Divine Master, as they
said themselves, in that most profound act of Adoration and self-abasement.
There were scarce any that kept standing, besides my Brother and I; we were
very near to the Prior of the Monastery, who was very busy with uncovering the
Crucifix, and who beginning himself to be frighted, or at least pretending to
be so, began to repeat the 51 st Psalm Miserere Mei Deus. But as it happened
neither the one nor the other had any great cause to fear; for when the Velvet
covering was taken off, they found nothing but a Linen Bag, with some bits of
Rotten Wood in it, which were the Remains of that dreaded and adored Crucifix.
Amongst these mouldred Fragments we had much ado, to distinguish the Head,
where was the Miraculous Mouth, that had spoke to the Monk: In a word, it was
in a pitiful state, being all Rotten and Worm-eaten, without either Form or
Figure, full of dead Flies and Spiders: Insomuch that the good Monks that were
present being somewhat recovered from their Fright, and perceiving no such
Glory as they had prefigur'd to themselves, began to discourse amongst
themselves, how to reconcile their Story with the present discovery; that is,
the condition wherein they found the Crucifix, with their Tradition, concerning
the Revelation and Discourse of the Crucifix with the Religious: For if it were
true, that it had never been uncovered, since the time of its speaking, when it
was yet fixed to the Cross, how could ^t be, that at present they found it in a
Thousand pieces, and in a Bag? The Superior concluded very wisely, that it was
probable, that this Crucifix had of old been had in great Veneration, and
thereby been of great advantage to the Monastery, and that this Monk by
^inadvertency or otherwise, had let it fall, and broke it to pieces, and
fearing to be severely punished by his Abbot therefore, had gathered up the
pieces into a Bag, and having fast^^ them again to the Cross, and covered them
with that piece of black Velvet, had afterward forged and published that his
pretended Revelation. However, forasmuch as he knew nothing of Certainty
concerning the matter, he chose rather to suspend his Judgment, than to pass a
rash one concerning it; and besides that, according to their general
Principles, the Devotion being already fixed, he would by no means be a
hinderance to so many good works, as were performed on that occasion, nor put a
stop to the course of so many Masses and Prayers, as were daily procured to be
said in the Chapel of the Miraculous Crucifix. So he packed up all again, and
put it in the same order as he had found it, which may still be seen, in case
they will permit the viewing of it, in the said Chapel, where the Devotion
continues as great as ever. If the Roman Catholic Bishops, were a little
better stocked with true zeal for the glory of God, or at least for the Honor
of their own party, they would without doubt more seriously apply themselves to
the examining of the different Devotions, that are in vogue in their Dioceses.
I am well assured they would find a great deal of downright impiety, covered
under the Mask of Devotion. But so far are they from this, that they are the
first to authorize and encourage them, by the Indulgences they give from time
to time, to the Churches and Chapels where these Devotions are entertained;
and accordingly we find that great abundance of them have been granted by the
Bishops of Langres to those who shall say five Pater Nosters, and as many Ave
Mary's in this Chapel of the Miraculous Crucifix, in the Abbey of S. Benignus
of Dijon. Before I have done with this City, Sir, I must not forget to
entertain you a while with a famous Nest of Monks, four Leagues distant from
it; I mean ^he great and famous Abbey of Citeaux, the Abbot of which, as you
know, is the chief and general of the whole Order, which is without doubt one
of the vastest Bodies of Religious, the Church of Rome can boast of; France,
Italy, Spain, Poland and Portugal, being throngd with the Monasteries of that
O^der, who all of them own this Abbey of the Citeaux for their Mother. I had
very particular acquaintance with the Prior of the Monastery, who was a young
man of the City of Orleans, who invited me to come and see him. The Abbot sent
two of his Coaches, with six Horses, to fetch some of his Relations, whom he
had invited to dine with him, and with whom I had the honor to join my self.
All the discourse we had on the way from Dijon thither, was about the Tragical
end of Monsieur Bourre, a Gentleman born of one of the most Noble Families of
Dijon, and a Religious of that order, who a little before had been publicly
executed at Dijon, for Poisoning his Abbot, because he went about to make an
enquiry into his Crimes; the fact being evident that he had Debauched some of
the Nuns of a Monastery, whither the Abbot had sent him in quality of their
Director or Confessor. As soon as we were come near to the Citeaux, I could not
but admire the stately Avenues of that Magnificent Abbey: This place which
formely was nothing but a horrid Wilderness, when S. Robert the first Abbot of
that Order, did institute it, is now at present by the Voluptuousness and
Luxury of the Monks, become an Earthly Paradise, abounding with all manner of
delights. The History tells us that that Abbot, being a lover of Silence and
Solitude, retired himself with some of his Disciples into these parts, which at
that time was nothing else, but a thick Wood, and lying out of the way of
almost all human Converse. Here it was they began to Build themselves Cells,
with the Branches of Trees; and some amongst them dug themselves Caves
underground, without either Art or Form, like to the Dens of Ravenous Beasts.
The Herbs and Roots, that grew in the Wood, served them indifferently, without
distinguishing the good from the bad, for Nourishment; and all the precaution
they used was this, that after they had boild them, they first gave some of
them to a Dog, or other domestic Animal, which if it did not immediately dye,
or appeared distempered, they took it for granted, that there were no Poisonous
Herbs in their Cookery, whose dangerous effects they had reason to apprehend.
But how prodigious a change appeared in that place not long after! The People
round about, being informed of the astonishing severities, and strange way of
living of these Anchorets, came flocking from all parts to admire them, and
returning to their homes, published everywhere that in the Wood de Citeaux,
they had in their days, seen somewhat more and greater than either Elias or S.
John the Baptist. And as in that Age of the World, People were much more
compassionate and tender than they are at present, toward persons, who for the
love of God, as they expressed it, had left all, they made it their business,
from all parts to carry them not only Food, but other conveniences of Life.
These good Hermits contented themselves for some time, to accept of some of the
coursest and meanest of their supplies; and afterward by little and little the
most exquisite and delicate, receiving them, as by an express order from God,
by attributing to themselves the promise of Jesus Christ made to his Apostles,
that having forsaken all for his sake, they should receive in this World an
hundred fold, and in the world to come Eternal Life. Thus within a short time,
from a Life of extraordinary Rigor and abstinence, and most signal and
remarkable piety, they chopped about, to a Life as Scandalous and Dissolute; and
whereof S. Bernard in his time began already highly to complain, but at present
is advanced to a far more Transcendent degree of excess. Instead of a Desert
and Solitude, as it was before in the highest degree, they have now made it a
kind of a City; which within its compass entertains all manner of Handicrafts
men, who live there with their Wives and all their Families: Instead of that
mean and spare Diet, to which they were obliged by a Solemn Vow, made at the
foot at their Altars, and in particular of abstaining from Flesh, all the days
of their Life, they have at present, directly contrary to their Vows,
introduced the use of it to the highest degree of Delicacy, as being always
accompanied with the agreeable Variety of Herbs and Fish. And, for my part, I
can truly aver, That for the Two days that I staid there, their Table (besides
their common Viands) were covered with several Dishes of Venison, followed by a
Service of Fish, the Sides of the Dishes being garnished with the Tongues and
Roes of Carps, and the Tails of Crabs. Yea, the Abbot had sent to Diep, which
is above an Hundred and twenty Leagues distant, at an excessive Charge, and by
a Post sent Express, who ran day and night for Soles, which were fresh enough,
and so costly a Rarity, that the Intendants and Presidents of the Parliament of
Dijon, durst not venture upon them in their most sumptuous Entertainments. The
Monks of this Abbey, in the mean time, glorying in this Excess, which ought
rather to have confounded them, vaunted with an unparalled Impudence, That in
all that Province, there was not a Man besides the Abbot of Citeaux, who could
bear such an Expense, and continue it every day. After Dinner, the Abbot
(followed by many of his Officers, and a great number of Lacqueys in Livery)
went himself to show us the New Buildings he was then making in his Abbey, and
which consisted in Four great Piles of Building, of a magnificent Structure,
all of Hewn-Stone of a Diamant-Cut, designed for the separate Lodging of the
four Principal Abbots of the Order, with all their Train, at the time of their
General Chapters. A fifth Building, which he intended for his own person, was a
lofty Palace, lifting up its proud Head above the other Four Buildings, as it
were to overlook and command them, to represent the Authority he had over the
other Abbots, in quality of their General. After we had taken a View of these
Magnificent Structures, we were led into the O^ Buildings: Here it was that a
fair Opportunity wa^ given me, to take notice of the Subtilty and Artifices of
the Monks, still to continue Laics, if possible, in the high esteem of their
Monastery and Pe^^ous. In order whereunto they show, to those wh^ Vis^^ them, a
great quantity of Relics, and places of (...), as they call them; upon their
entering into which they use fre^uent Bowings of their Bodies, and Kneelings,
^^peating some Prayers, besides some Gests and Cutting of Faces, wherein they
oblige the Company to imitate them. This done, they fill your Ears with the
recital of Old Stories and Miracles of the Days of Yore, wrought in favor of
their Order; amongst which, they never forget to inculcate the Tragedy of some
Usurper of the Revenues of their Monastery, or of some other that spoke ill of
the same, who at the upshot of the Story does never fail of being struck from
God with sudden Death by a Thunderbolt, or of having his Neck broke by some
Devil or other. I have since observed the same inveigling Tricks in almost all
the Monasteries and Convents of Italy, and in all other places frequented upon
the score of Devotion. They showed us a large Refectory of the first Religious
of their Order, which is a Vaulted Room, and very long, more resembling a
hideous Cave, than a place to eat in. And yet (said one of the Religious) this
is that holy Grotto, where our Ancient Fathers, the Blessed Founders of our
Order, met together every day after Sunset, wearied with their Handy-labour,
after having Sung the Praises of God, to partake together of a piece of black
Course-Bread, with some boild Pulse or Roots, without either Salt or Butter, or
any other Sauce or Dressings, and in so small a quantity, as designing rather
to keep themselves from Starving, than to make them strong and lively; and
continually practicing those severe Mortifications, which we can sooner admire
than imitate. These Great and Heroic Saints are now in Heaven, and have
changed their astonishing Severities, with the Eternal delights of the
Wedding-Supper of the Lamb; and it is from that high Station, they with a
favorable Eye look down upon those who Live, or have Lived for some time in
this Monastery, as likewise upon those who are or have been Benefactors to it;
and we are assured by Revelation, that none of them, nay, though they may have
lived a most abominable life, shall ever die in Mortal Sin. A Counselor of
Dijon, who was there present with us, said smiling, That he wanted but very
little of being persuaded, to leave all he had to the Monastery, and gently
pushing my Arm, asked me, Whether I was not well pleased to Hear a fat and
burly Monk, after having so well Dined, discoursing of the Abstinence and
Penance of those Ancient Fathers, and of the Blessings God has in store for
his Abbey too upon their account, with so much energy? But after all, the plain
Truth is, That it is nothing but an Artifice they make use of, to strike the
Spirits of Men with some kind of Veneration for their Orders and Persons. From
this place they led us to another, which they call the Old Chapter House, which
is a Building after the Gothic way, with many Rows of Pillars like a Church;
yet stately enough. The Stones of the Pavement are cut into Letters, which make
up all the Psalms of David; and near the midst of this place they showed us a
large Stone, on which of Old they were used to lay the Religious of the
Monastery some hours before their Departure, where they were exposed all Naked
upon Ashes and an Hair-Cloth, until they breathed their last. But this Custom
(said the Father) has since been abolished, because it was found by Experience,
that some of those who were so exposed, having more strength left than was
imagined, continued sometimes in that condition, exposed to the violence of
Cold for Twenty four Hours, or more, before they died; so as those who thus
exposed them, questioned, whether in so doing they had not been their
Murderers. At the present (said he smiling) the case is altered, and we die
softly on the Feathers, after having essayed whatsoever the Art of Medicine can
afford for our Recovery, and which is every whit as meritorious to us, as that
pityless Rigor our Predecessors were obliged to, forasmuch as herein we submit
our Wills to those who command us, and whom we are obliged to obey; Obedience
even in pleasing and agreeable things, being more acceptable to God than all
Sacrifices. Thus gallantly the Father excused the Decay of their Observance,
endeavoring to make that seem a Virtue, which indeed is nothing else but an
effect of their Softness and Effeminacy. Or rather, we may say, That by a just
Judgment of God, these kind of Men having rashly Vowed, what was not in their
power to perform, are fallen by so much lower, by how much they aspired to fly
higher. It Is upon this account that we see so many Reformations of these
Religious Orders, and soon after other Reformations of them again, who in a
short time will stand in need still of another Reformation. But that which is
the strangest thing of all is, That they fall into prodigious Corruptions, and
into those habits of Sinning, which strike the most Worldly men that are with
horror, as may be seen from the hint I gave of Monsieur Bourre, Monk of that
Order, and many other Examples, that fill the World with their Report.

There is but one only Religious Order in the Church of Rome, that can boast of
its Antiquity, and of having never been Reformed, which is that of the
Chartreux. Having stayed two days at Citeaux, we took our Way through Lionnois,
and Dauphine, and finding our selves not far from the Monastery called the
Great Chartreux, our Curiosity invited us to take a View of it. This Monastery
is the Chief Head of all those of the Order of Chartreux, and in it their
General Chapters are held. St. Bruno, who was the Founder of this Order,
retired hither with his Companions in the Year of our Lord 1080. What is
commonly related as the Reason of his Retirement, is rather a Fable, than an
History; which notwithstanding is maintained by a great deal of heat, as a
great Truth by the Fathers of this Order, who have caused the Story to be
Painted at large, and hung up in their Cloisters; but on the other hand, it is
denied by the Doctors of the Famous University of Paris. This Fable tells us,
That Bruno, who had a long time frequented that University, being present at
the Interment of a Doctor, who had been a Member of the same; a person of an
irreproachable Life, to outward view, and who died with the odor of Sanctity;
when the Office for the Dead was reciting in the Church for him, and that they
were come to those Words of the Lessons, Responde mihi, quantas habeo
iniquitates; Answer me, How many Sins I have; the Dead-Body raised himself on
the Bier, and sitting upright, with a terrible Voice pronounced these Words,
Accusatus sum; I am Accused: At which astonishing Accident, when all that were
present were extremely amazed, it was thought fit to put off the Obsequies till
the next day; at which time they began again the Office for the Dead, and when
they were come to the same Words, Responde mihi, etc. the Dead answered with a
Tone much more terrible than at first, these two Words more, Judicatus sum; I
am Judged; which increasing the horror and amazement of all those that were
present, made them resolve to delay the Burial one Day longer; at which time a
vast Crowd of People being assembled, the Office was begun again, and at the
same Words the Dead raising himself the third and last time, said with a
pitiful and mournful Accent, Condemnatus sum; that he was Condemned to Hell
without Recovery. This so strange and terrible a Spectacle (says the Fable)
had that effect on the Spirit of Bruno, that from that instant he resolved to
quit the World, and to retire into some Solitary place, for to live there
wholly to God, solitary and separate from the view of the World; and by his
persuasion, engaged seven Students of the University of Paris, his Companions,
with him in the same Resolution; who being all of one mind, went and cast
themselves at the Feet of the Bishop of Grenoble, to beg of him the Desert
called Chartreuse, which belonged to him; and having obtained their Request,
they retired there, and built themselves Cells. The Truth of the matter is,
That this Saint did indeed retire with his Companions into this place; but all
the Story of the Doctor is evidently false, as has been incontestably proved by
the Doctors of the University of Paris; there being none of the Contemporary
Writers, or any that were Two Hundred Years after, that make the least mention
of it; and is indeed nothing else but an Invention of the Papists, very fit to
be joined with the rest of their Stories, concerning the Apparitions of Souls
in Purgatory. Probably, Sir, your Curiosity will incline you to desire, I
should give you a description of this Place, and its Situation, which without
doubt is the most Desert place Nature could form; and yet notwithstanding is at
this day become a very pleasant Seat, by means of the immense Expenses which
these Fathers, who are extremely rich, have been at, to make it more pleasing
to Sense. Wherefore, Sir, I shall endeavor, in order to your Satisfaction, to
set down what comes to my Mind concerning it. This Desert, called Chartreuse,
which has given the Name to the Order that is thence denominated, is a place
situate in the Bosom of an exceeding high Mountain, the Top of which parts it
self into Four others, leaving in the midst of them a place of a Mile in
length, and above a Quarter of a Mile in breadth, in which space the Cells of
these Fathers are built. The Waters gushing forth from these Mountains, make a
most impetuous Torrent, which bears the Name of St. Lawrence. This was a place
altogether unfrequented, and almost inaccessible, when St. Bruno first retired
thither, though at present, by a vast profusion of Money, the Religious of the
place have made the access to it not only easy, but pleasant, having cut out
large Steps in the Rock, and by that means made (as it were) many Stairs to get
up to it. However, such is the situation of the place, that neither Coaches nor
Carts, no nor Horses neither, can come up to it; but they make use of Mules,
accustomed from their Youth to go up and down those Steps, to convey their
Provisions to them. We got up to the place by means of the same Conveniences,
and found the Snow in several places lying still on the Eminences of the Rocks,
notwithstanding that it was in the midst of August; and that at the Foot of the
Mountain, the Heat was almost insupportable. The Building of the Monastery was
not yet quite finished when we arrived there, having been reduced to Ashes some
short time before. There was a Suspicion, that the Religious themselves had
been the Incendiaries, because their Cells displeased them, as being too mean
and Old-fashioned; and besides, too much pinched of room, so that they could
not enjoy themselves in them with that ease and convenience they desired. It
happened at a time when the Wind extremely favored their design, and the Fire
began in a Quarter where so much Combustible matter was lodged, and so far from
the places where any Fires were made, that it was easy to judge, That it was
not a thing happened by accident, but contrived on purpose. Besides, the delays
and indifferency showed in quenching of it, gave a sufficient Testimony, That
the Friars desired nothing more, than to see it (with all expedition) burnt
down to the ground. Yea, some have averred it for a certain Truth, That the
News of it was known many days before in Foreign Countries, which was related to
us by one of the Fathers of that Society for a Miracle; saying, That without
doubt the Tutelary Angel of the place, foreseeing what was to happen to it, had
communicated the knowledge of it to so far distant Countries. But not to insist
on this any longer, certain it is, that the whole Building was reduced to
Ashes, and in less than six Months, in a manner quite Rebuilt again; a good
part of the Materials having been prepared beforehand, and as it were by a
Divine Providence, as the said Father expressed himself, in places adjacent to
the Mountain. It is to be noted, That their General Chapter having some
Veneration for those Ancient Buildings of their First-Fathers, and to prevent
Laymen from Taxing them with Niceness and Luxury, had refused them their
permission to Build. But what is capable to restrain the Longing of Monks,
whenas by direct or indirect means, by Hook or by Crook, they are in a
condition to effectuate it? In a word, These New Buildings were brought to
perfection, with a Magnificence very unbeseeming the Modesty of Hermits, and
more becoming the Palace of a King, than the Cells of such who pretend to have
forsaken the World. There remained only one Building at the Foot of the
Mountain yet unfinished, being designed for the Officers of the Chartreuse, and
which was already far advanced. As for their manner of Living, I must
acknowledge they still retain something of their first Institution, as in
particular their abstinence from Flesh; but the diversity and abundance of
Fish, Herbs, Eggs, and other such like things wherewith they are served, is far
more pleasing and agreeable to Sense, than any sort of Flesh-meat, and much
more costly. The Father-Purveyor of the House assured us, that the Expense of
every Religious amounted at the least to Five hundred Crowns a year. They have
a way of extracting the Substance, and as it were the Quintessence from several
great Fishes, whereof they make Jelly-Broths, that are extremely nourishing.
Their Bread is of an extraordinary Whiteness*, and the best Wine that can be
got for Love or Money, is afforded them without measure. Besides this, every
Religious has in his own Apartment a Reservatory, stored with Fruit and other
Necessaries, so that they may eat and drink whenever they please, and entertain
their Friends that come to Visit them, to charm the irksomness of their
Solitude. Some amongst them, who are of a melancholy Temperament, are so
immersed in their Solitude, that they abhor all manner of Conversation, and
will not so much as speak to their Superiors: This is no Virtue, but rather a
Savage-humor, that has got the Ascendent over them, and makes them almost
insupportable to themselves, and like Timon the Athenian, they conceive an
hatred against all Mankind. The greatest part of these, in process of time,
become distracted, losing the use of their Understanding and Reason; and
accordingly they have built for these a very fair Apartment. Every Chartreux
has his separate Apartment, which consists of five or six fair Rooms, very
neatly furnished and adorned, with a neat Garden, which separates one Apartment
from another; all which Gardens have a Door that opens into the Cloister, which
is of a prodigious length, and of a most sumptuous and magnificent Structure,
insomuch as it does not seem so much contrived for the Convenience of the
several Cells, as for the imbellishment and ornament of the Place. The great
company of Strangers, who come thither from all parts, either out of Curiosity
or Devotion, some about business, others to Visit some of their Friends or
Kindred, has changed this Solitude into a place of great Concourse, and
consequently made it appear less hideous to Nature; and particularly in
Summertime many Persons of Quality retire thither, there to enjoy the
deliciousness of the place, and the cool Air of the Mountain. These Fathers, to
engage the frequent Visits of others, and to draw thither their Kindred and
Friends, have established Hospitality in this their Monastery, and entertain
every one that comes, according to his Quality, both Person and Attendants,
without costing them a Farthing; and a man may stay their many days, according
as they find his Company either pleasing or profitable. At the first they had
also some respect for the Poor; but at present, if those who come there be not
men of Fashion, and in good order, they are neglected and contemned. That Part
where they entertain Strangers, is a most stately and sumptuous Building,
containing Apartments for persons of Quality of all Ranks and Degrees. The
Chief Officer of the Kitchen knows what kind of Entertainment is suitable to
each Chamber, which is very exactly observed. By this we may guess at the
immense Riches of these Fathers. You would be astonished, Sir, to see these
Anchorets, whose first Institutor, St. Bruno, showed himself to be so great a
lover of Poverty, Retirement, and Silence, are now by succession of Times,
mounted to so high a degree of Riches and Grandeur, and so ^rdently desirous to
change their Desert, of it self so solitary and inaccessible, into a well
inhabited Country, and more frequented, than the great Roads that lead to great
and Capital Cities. They boast, that they have never been Reformed since their
first Institution; but in good earnest, Sir, think you not after all this, that
they stand in need of a Sound Reformation? We may conclude from hence, That all
those great Efforts which are made to surmount Nature, which cannot subsist
without a most particular Grace and Assistance from God, which he vouchsafes to
whom it pleases him, when we will unadvisedly appropriate the same, and rashly
make profession of them, and tie our selves up to them by Vows, do commonly end
in shameful Weaknesses; which discovers, that they were rather Artifices of the
Devil, to lift up the Heart of Man, in order to his greater fall, than the
Motions of Grace, which are wont to humble and abase the Soul, in order to give
it the Victory over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. After this, as it were
to cast Dust in our Eyes, and to divert us from making any Reflection upon such
extravagant Disorders, they led us to the Chapel of St. Bruno, which is not
above a Quarter of a Mile distant from the Monastery, upon the top of a Rock,
surrounded with Three great Fir-Trees. They told us, that this formerly had
been his Cell, and that a Spring of most Clear-Water we saw there, had been
miraculously obtained by his Prayers, which restored many Sick persons to their
health, and though drunk to excess, was never known to hurt any. The Benedictin
Friar, who was my Companion in the Voyage, drunk a great quantity of it by way
of Devotion, but was much incommoded thereby in coming down from the Mountain;
which, that he might derogate nothing from the Miracle, he attributed to the
cold and pent-in Air of the Rocks. This Father assured me often, whilst we were
there, That he felt his Soul pierced with an Extraordinary Devotion, and a
great Sense of the Presence of God; and demanded of me, Whether I was not
sensible of the same thing? I answered, That I was; but withal, that in all
this I did not believe any thing to be more than what was very Common; it being
very natural for Grotto's, Darkplaces, close and shady Forests, vast Caverns,
and the Sources of Fountains and Rivers, to produce the same effect in us; and
not only so, but that we often experience, when we are alone by Night in great
Buildings, Chapels, or Churches, that our Souls are moved with a kind of
Horror, which calls God to our Remembrance, as I have often found by
Experience in my Travels. And some few days after, as I passed the Alps, which
are very high Mountains, in Company of this Benedictin, when we were come to a
place which was very Solitary, I obliged him to take notice, Whether it were
not indeed so as I had said? Whereupon he ingenuously acknowledged, That he
found himself no less moved, than he had been at the great Chartreuse.
Nevertheless, these Fathers make all Strangers, that frequent this place, to
take notice of it as a special Blessing of God, vouchsafed to this place by the
Intercession and Merits of St. Bruno. It is an astonishing thing to see, That
those Effects, which God as the Author of Nature works in us, are for the most
part by those of the Communion of Rome ascribed to God, as the Author of Grace,
and Worker of Miracles in their behalf. So true it is, That it is a ^ery
pleasing thing, and extremely flattering the Pride of Man, to believe, That God
thinks us worthy to be exempted from the Common-way, that he may favor us in a
more peculiar manner, not sticking every moment (for our sakes) to countermand
the Natural Course of things here below, by Prodigies and miraculous
Operations. We came down from this Monastery, by a very Narrow-way between
Rocks, for the space of near two Leagues, having on our left Hand the Torrent
of St. Lawrence, which precipitates it self with a horrid Noise from the Top of
the Mountain to the Bottom of it, where is situate the Town of St. Lawrence,
from whence it borrows its Name. All the Neighboring Country many Leagues
about, belongs to the Religious of this Monastery, and every where are seen
stately piles of Building, and Houses of Pleasure, which they have caused to be
built, with Pools and Ponds full of all sorts of rare Fish, to please their
Palats. We afterward continued our Way toward Savoy, and passed the Alps by
the Way of Montsenis; from whence we came down into Piedmont, to a little Town
called Suse. Here, Sir, I intend to stop, and shall conclude this Letter with
this last Reflection, which I would desire you to make; which is, That the
Church of Rome is so far from having any Cause, to pride her self in her
Religious Orders, and of which she boasts so much, as far excelling the
Protestant Church, which has wholly excluded them, ought rather upon that
account to be humbled; yea, to blush for shame; seeing it is evident, That this
sort of Men, under the specious pretexts of Devotion, Silence, and Retirement,
endeavor nothing else, but to acquire themselves a great Esteem in the Minds
of people, that by this means, they may turn them which way they please; and
Experience makes it appear, That all this is done for their Temporal Advantage.
They begin with the Spirit in appearance, but always palpably end in the Flesh.
I have made some other more curious Discoveries during my Voyage in Italy,
which I shall be very willing to communicate to you, in case I find you are not
offended with this my First LETTER; but that you have received it with the same
Spirit of Charity and Zeal, which I shall always preserve for the Spiritual
Good of so dear a person; as being, Sir,

Your, etc.

The Second LETTER, Of the Spirit of Revenge in the Romish Clergy, etc.
SIR,
FOrasmuch as their is nothing, the Church of Rome more strictly forbids her
Children, next to the Reading of the Scriptures, than the perusing of those
Writings, which discover the Lives and Doctrine of her Pastors, whom it is her
will they should follow Blindfold, without examining either what they say or
do; I had some fear for my first Letter, lest it might have given offense,
because it made some discoveries to you of their Conduct. But seeing the kind
welcome you afforded it, I hope that the Reflection you have made upon it, and
the good inclination you express, in declaring your willingness to be further
informed by me on this Subject, may at length conduce to the opening of your
Eyes, to see the dangerous condition you are in. And seeing I desire nothing
more, than to serve as an instrument to produce so good an effect; I shall
gladly continue, Sir, to communicate the Observations I have made, during my
Travels, about matters of Religion.

Being arrived at Susa, a small Town of Piedmont in Italy, and subject to the
Duke of Savoy, we were told that the Body of S. Maurus Abbot and first Disciple
of S. Bennet, reposed in one of the Churches of this place. And forasmuch as
the Father, that was my Companion in my Travels, was a Reformed Benedictin, of
the Congregation of S. Maurus in France; I asked him whether he would not go to
pay his duty to that Relic of his Blessed Founder? But he very freely told
me, that he would take heed of doing so, adding that the Italians were great
Cheats, who pretended to have all the Saints of Paradise in their Country,
whereas indeed there was nothing more false; forasmuch as the Body of S.
Maurus, was preserved whole and entire, in one of their Abbeys in France. And
moreover assured me that the Bodies of S. Bennet, and S. Scholastica were there
likewise, the one in the small Town of S. Bennet on the River Loire near
Orleans, and the other at Man's; notwithstanding the Italians contested with
them about all these Relics, and a vast number of others, of most authentic
Authority; and that upon no other ground, but that of the Popes Bulls, which
they have procured, said he, by some artifice or other, for this purpose, and
which declare them to be true and lawful possessors of these Relics, the
clear contrary to all Evidence drawn from History and Tradition. But Father,
said I, do you remember the discourse you held two days ago, as we passed the
Alps, to prove the Pope's Infallibility, which you extended with so much heat
and earnestness, not only to matters of Right, but also to matters of Fact? The
question then put was this, how the Popes could grant such thundering Bulls,
fraught with Excommunications and Anathemas against those who do not believe,
that the House of Loretto, was Transported from the Holy Land by Angels, to
that part of Italy, where it is supposed to stand at present; as likewise
against those who should deny, that a great Mountain near to the City of Cajeta
in the Kingdom of Naples, which is open at the Top, and as it were split in
two, was one of those Rocks, that were Rent at the Passion of our Savior Jesus
Christ. You then affirmed that the Pope on all such occasions, was assisted
with an Infallible Direction from the Holy Ghost; and consequently, that it was
impossible for him to be deceived himself, or to deceive others, any more than
in matters of Faith it self; and more especially yet, in a case of giving
Religious Worship to some object of Devotion, as that is, which is given to the
House of Loretto, and to the Holy Mountain; and how then can you now say,
Father, with respect to your S. Maurus and S. Bennet, or any other whatsoever,
that those Popes, who declared against you in favor of the Italians, have been
mistaken? Is not this a case of Worship, as well as that of Loretto? The Parity
was but visible, and the good Father must needs have entangled himself in a
most troublesome contradiction: Wherefore to avoid the shame and confusion that
thence would have followed, he chose rather to turn his answer into a piece of
Raillery, saying, he confessed that he was indeed a very bad politician,
because when he was on the Alps he spoke like an Italian, but that at present
he spoke as a Frenchman. Because it is true, that the People of Italy,
especially those of the Popes Territories, do own the Popes Infallibility in
matters of fact, which the greatest part of the Roman Catholics of France do
deny. This distinction of speaking as an Italian, or as a Frenchman was indeed
very frivolous; and intruth if it were permitted to utter ones opinion,
sometimes according to the humor of one Country, and sometime of another, if
our Benedctin had spoken like a German or an Hungarian, he would have reduced
the Papal Authority to a very low Ebb: for I have observed in my Travels, that
these People, tho for the most part they profess the Romish Religion, yet have
this advantage that they believe little of it. Without doubt, Sir, it would
much better have become him, to have spoke as a Christian ought to do, viz.
Like a good and honest man, with a sincere and unbyassed Spirit, strengthened
by Grace, supported by Reason, and grounded upon the Holy Scripture, for then
would he never have attributed the title of Infallible to a mortal man upon
Earth, which belongs to God alone. I was ready to give him my thoughts to this
purpose, but I called to mind that I was got into Italy, where one only word
might drag me before the cruel and merciless Tribunal of the Inquisition, and
therefore thought it more wisdom to hold my Peace. However I could not but make
this reflection on these procedings of the Religious, that in cases wherein the
Priests or Monks find their advantage, or in things altogether indifferent to
them, they are not wanting with open Mouth to publish the Popes Infallibility;
but when his Infallibility seems in the least to clash with their interests, he
is no more than an ignorant and mistaken man, who may be bubbled as well as any
other. From Susa we came to Turin, which is a very fine City, situate upon the
Banks of the River Po, and the Court of the Dukes of Savoy. Here it was that a
dawning of the Beauty of the Churches of Italy, presented it self to our Eyes:
The greatest part of the Parish-Churches, Monasteries and Convents are very
sumptuously built, and most Richly adorned within. Nothing is seen in them, but
Marble, Porphyry, Jasper Stones, and most exquisite Guilding and Painting. The
Crosses, the Candlesticks, Lamps, Statues, and Cases of the Relics are all of
Gold and Silver, and almost infinite in number and value. Some good French
Priests, who had joined themselves with us, to take a view of the Churches,
were in a strange rapture at so dazzling a sight, and being inwardly moved to
see so many Temples of the Lord, so gloriously adorned, wept for joy: For as in
their Journey from France, they had taken their way through Geneva, and the
Swiss Cantons, where they had seen the Protestant Churches, devoid almost of
all material Embellishments, they from thence concluded, (how truly I leave you
to judge) that there was no other true Religion, besides that of the Church of
Rome, whose zeal for the House of God, was an evident Witness of the truth of
her Faith. I told them that this their conclusion seemed to me to be built upon
very weak Principles, and that where we had a mind to prove the truth of any
Religion, the Grandeur and Riches of the World were too weak premises to
support a conclusion; and that for my part, if I were to form a presumptive
Argument in favor of any Religion, I should sooner take it from the good life
and manners of those that profess it, than from the sumptuous Ornaments of
their Churches. They showed us the Church Treasury, where is preserved the holy
Shroud or Sheet, and soon after the Canons and Priests entered the Quire, to
Sing their Vespers and Complins which are the Evening Prayers of the Church of
Rome. They entered without any order and very undecently, talking and laughing
together, and pushing one another Elbows. The first come, without expecting
till the rest were seated in their places, began to sing the Office: and that
which might well have lasted an hour and half, in case it had been said with
the required Pauses devoutly and modestly, as it is practiced in the Common
Prayer of the Church of England; was dispatched in less than a quarter of an
hour, with a strange kind of precipitation, so that it was scarcely possible to
distinguish between one word and another, or between the end and beginning of
the Verses. In truth, Sir, were it lawful to judge of the Consciences of men,
from any thing that is outward, I might have had good reason to infer from
their behavior, that their Hearts were much stranged from the words of their
Lips, and their Lips and their Hearts yet further from God. They did not much
weary our Patience with hearing them; and the Service being thus roundly
dispatched, they rather fled, than went out of Church, every one his own way.
The Father that was with me, perceving that I was Scandalized at it, told me,
as having had some former experience of Italy, by a Journey he had before made
through it; that it was not yet time for me to be offended, and that the nearer
I should appear to Rome, the more cause I should find for it. I had been told
indeed, that the further I went, the more stately Churches I should find, and
the more richly adorned: So that joining these two together, I concluded, that
all this outward Bravery and Ornament, did not proceed from the piety or zeal
of the Clergy of Italy for the House of God; because they neglected the chief
Glory and Embellishment of it, viz. the inward, and that something else must be
the Motive to it, as I discovered afterward, and of which I shall give you a
more particular account upon another occasion. After we had visited the
Churches, toward Evening, we went to view the great Piazza of Turin, facing
the Palace of his Royal Highness. Here we saw many Theaters or Stages of
Rope-Dancers, and Mountebanks, wherewith the Market Places of the Cities in
Italy are always well provided, for the Satisfaction of the Public. But that
which surprised me most was, that the greatest part of those that assisted as
Auditors and Spectators about those Theaters, were either Priests or Monks, who
clapped their Hands in Applause of the most Ridiculous and Scandalous stuff
they produced, and laughed with all their might. We saw there of all sorts of
Orders, some Father-Jesuits, that seemed the most concerned for these
Fopperies, saluted the Father Benedictin that was with us; and having
understood that he was Procurator general of the Order, they offered him an
Eminent place, near unto themselves, which he accepted of. For my part, I was
unwilling to engage my self in the concern, and retired with the two French
Priests to our Inn. We had an opportunity the same Evening of discoursing with
Count Zamberti, an Officer of his Royal Highness, whom formerly I had seen in
France, and we could not keep our selves from acquainting him how strangely we
had been surprised, to see so many Religious at the public Shows, and so
attentive to the lewd Fooleries of Buffoons, because we looked upon it, as very
unworthy and scandalous, and that no such thing was to be seen in France. He
told us, that this was not that which ought most of all to suprize us, for that
in Italy, those of the Clergy who did commonly fr^quent the Piazza in the
Evening, were the most esteemed of, as being ordinarily the best amongst them;
because the rest at the same time were for the most part either in
Whore-Houses, or at Taverns, in company of their Wenches. Here I turned my self
to our French Priests, and said, well Gentlemen, what say you now? Do you think
you concluded well from the Magnificence of the Churches of this Country, that
their Religion and Piety must needs be the best, because their Churches were
the most stately and sumptuous? whereas you see that these who ought in a more
especial manner, to be the living Temples of the Holy Ghost, abandon themselves
to such execrable Profaneness and Debauchery? As to that which we alleged,
that no such lewd deportments were to be found amongst our Ecclesiastics in
France, the Count very wisely replied, that for that, we might thank the
Protestants, for that it was only their presence that mantained the Learning,
Modesty and reserved Carriage of the Clergy of the Gallican Church, and if they
once should be forced to quit the Country, (for the Kings design was already
known here) we should soon see all Sciences and Virtues exiled with them. This,
Sir, agrees incomparably well with what some persons of Quality of the Roman
Communion have of late freely owned to me, That they begin already in France to
perceive, that since the Protestants have been Banished thence, and that they
believed them far enough from them; the burning Zeal of the Ecclesiastics is
turned to Lukewarmness, their Devotion grown cold, and their Application to
their Studies, become very flat and languishing. So that at present they are
seldom found at their Books, but for the most part Ranging from one House to
another, upon pretense of encouraging and confirming their new Perverts, and
boasting themselves for great Doctors, with what they have learnt, at a time,
when they were forced upon by the learned Writings, and close Arguings of the
Protestant Ministers. I return now to my Voyage, but before I leave Turin,
because I have already made mention of the Church, wherein is kept the Holy
Shroud or Linnen-sheet, wherein they pretend our Saviors dead Body was wrapped;
I suppose you will not take it amiss, if I tell you in short what I think of
it. They of your Religion suppose it to be the same Shroud or Linnen-sheet, in
which Joseph of Arimathea wrapped up and buried the precious Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, after that it was taken down from the Cross, and that the Figure
of that adorable Body remains Miraculously imprinted upon it, for the Comfort
of Believers. I intend not to enter the Lists about the truth of that History,
which I never searched into; but I shall only tell you, Sir, that there is
another of them to be seen in the Cathedral of Besancon in Burgundy, which they
maintain to be the same in which Joseph wrapped the Body of our Savior: Several
Popes according to their distinct Fancies and Humors have granted several
Bulls and Indulgences, some to that of Turin, others to that of Besancon, until
that these Contestations raised such extreme Feuds between the Archbishops of
these two Cities, that at last they fell to libelling one another; whereupon to
stifle the Flame from spreading further, a way was found out at Rome to
reconcile them, by determining (contrary to the express words of the vulgar
Translation, Matthew. 27. and involvit illud Sindone munda, and wrapped it in a
clean Linen Cloth, where the word Sindone is in the Singular Number), that
there were two, and consequently that both the one and the other of them were
true. It cannot indeed be denied, but that there was such a Shroud or
Linen Cloth, and it is possible that with great care it might have been
preserved till now; but to see the Church of Rome, for the reconciling of two
Bishops, with so much easiness, boldly to determine that there were two, when
the Scripture seems but to speak of one, this is that which will not go down
with men of understanding: And moreover to ordain that the same Worship and
Adoration be given to them both on Easter Day, which is given to the Cross on
Good Friday, which does not differ at all from what is given to Jesus Christ
himself: This is no less than down right Impiety and Idolatry.

After some days stay at Turin, finding my self within two days Journey of
Genoua, the curiosity of seeing that Lofty City, made me resolve to go thither.
However I found some strife in my self about it, because of the Satisfaction I
had enjoyed in the Company of my Benedictin, whose Conversation was indeed very
pleasant and agreeable; as finding that if I continued my Resolution, it would
be necessary for us to part; for the Letter of Obedience, which he had showed
me, of his General, expressed, that he was without stop or stay to go directly
to Rome. I Communicated to him my Resolution of going to Genoua, whereupon he
immediately told me, that he was resolved to go along with me, and that he
would order the matter so, as his Superiors should know nothing of it, and
accordingly in the Letter he wrote to them from Turin, acquainting them, that
being not not yet wholly recovered from some Fits of an Ague he had had, he
should he obliged to remain there still for some days, which was just the very
Time he took, to go this Journey with me. I found by this that the most reformed
Monks, make no great scruple of Violating the Obedience they have Vowed to
observe, and to transgress the Rules they profess, upon the least occasion that
presents it self to them, of any particular Satisfaction. The use of Meat was
also forbid him by his Rule, and yet he no sooner found himself at a distance
from the Monasteries of his Order, but he made bold with it; and as soon as he
met with another, he took up his observance again, as before, desiring me not
to divulge that ever he had Transgressed it. And in the mean time, I can say
with truth, that I never saw a more Rigorous Censor of another man's actions
than he was, when he was in the company of Monks, who were not Reformed, or who
took more liberty than those of their Congregation; he would undertake them in
a high manner, yea with Insolence it self: He said, he could not look upon them
any better than damned Souls, and worse than Devils. Neither had he any more
charitable Opinion, for the People, whom the Monks, by way of distinction, term
the People of the World, and Worldlings, with which words they denote all
Laymen in general. It seemed to him impossible for a man that lived at large in
the World, to be saved, except he took up, and confined himself to a Convent;
yea, and it must be in a Convent of his Order too. If by chance he saw in the
Streets a Woman well dressed, without examining whether her Condition, or some
other reason might oblige her to it, he immediately pronounced a Sentence of
Eternal Condemnation against her; saying, that she was a Victim destined to the
Flames of Hell; and if he heard speak of any persons newly Married, or that had
obtained some good Fortune, alas, said he, these persons make their Paradise of
this World, but they shall burn for ever in the other for it. And thus without
excepting any whatsoever, and putting a wrong construction upon the most
innocent Actions, he judged with an inveteracy of Heart, what belongs alone to
God to judge of. What I now say, is not only to be understood of this Religious
alone, but generally almost of all sorts of Reformed Religious, or those who
profess a more strict life than others; and of secular Priests also, who by
their little Superstitious ways, pretend to be quite distinguished from the
Common sort of People: I have observed that they judge Men without Mercy. Some
have owned to me, that from their Youth up they have been accustomed to these
Ideas, the World having been always represented to them as a Tempestuous and
Raging Sea, whence it is very rare for any one to escape, without being
Shipwrack'd, and that their Monasteries are the very Ports of Salvation and the
Havens of Grace, where it is impossible to perish. Whereas it were much better,
to educate them in a Spirit of Humility, and to inspire them with charitable
thoughts toward their Neighbor, whether they be joined with them in the same
profession of Life, or engaged in another way, to which we ought Christian-like
to believe that God has called them. This indeed we must own, that it seems to
be the unhappy Let of all Persons whatsoever, that engage themselves in a
party, not to have any consideration but for those of their own company,
despising and condemning all the rest. It was this consideration without doubt,
that made our Fathers, the first Reformers of Religion to disapprove and
afterward to reject all these kind of inequalities, which by dividing men into
several different States, do ordinarily divide their Hearts also, and by this
means separate them from the Charity of Jesus Christ. But to return to our
Benedictin, who as he was extremely Rigorous to others, so was he as Indulgent
to himself. He was naturally very Comical, and inclined to Raillery, and did
not affect that Monkish Gravity, but upon certain occasions.

We arrived at Genou^ the 1 st of September. Being informed that there was a
very fair Abbey of his Order in the City, called St. Catharine of Genoua, he
would needs go and Lodge there, in hopes of being as well Entertained, as he
had been hitherto in the several Monasteries he had called at. He went and
presented his Letter of Obedience to the Abbot, who having read it, took a view
of him from Top to Toe: He asked him, of what Order he was? He answered, that
his Letter showed that, and that he was a Reformed Benedictin: The other
replied, That he believed nothing of what he said, because he was not in the
Habit of St. Bennet, which was the chief mark which distinguished their Order.
Now, it is to be noted, that these Monks in France wear Gowns of Course-Cloth,
with a Cowl cut very strait; whereas the Italians have extremely amplified
theirs, and wear Stuffs very fine and lustrous; they are very neatly shod, wear
Silk-Stockins, fine gray Hats, and are not a whit inferior to the Bravery of
Laymen. Moreover, a small difference in the Habits in Italy, makes also a
difference of Order. There are about Ten Sorts of the Religious of the Order of
St. Francis, which are only distinguished from one another, because some of
them have their Sleeves, or their Cowls, two or three Fingers-breadth larger
than the others. And yet this makes so great a division between them, that they
cannot endure the sight of one another, and hate one another mortally. The Monk
of whom I am speaking, was not sprucely enough accommodated, according to their
Mode, to please this nice and curious Abbot; and the conclusion was, That he
very basely denied him entrance into his Monastery. The poor Benedictin was put
into such a Rage by this Affront put upon him, that he could not forbear
downright Railing at the Abbot in his own Monastery; telling him, That he was
an Abbot accursed of God; that Damnation would be his portion, and that all
those who lived under his Conduct, might make State to go to Hell with him;
that it was they that had changed the Venerable Habit of the Order; and altered
it to that degree, that it seemed at present rather contrived to please and
entice young Ladies, than to distinguish them from the people of the World; and
that they would see one day, but alas too late! what a Reception their glorious
Patriarch would afford them in Heaven to that poor Habit which he had upon his
Body, and which they vilified so much here on Earth. The Abbot found himself so
extremely netled at this Invective, that he threatened our Reformed Monk, that
in case he did not that very Evening depart the City, he would take care to
stop his Pipes for him. The poor Monk frighted and trembling at this Threat,
returns to the Inn where I was, and gave me an account of his Disaster. This
was the Reason that I stayed only three Days at Gen^ua, because my Companion,
for fear of being Sacrificed to the Italick Revenge, durst not stir abroad, but
was fain to keep himself shut up in a Chamber, all the while I staid there to
take a View of the City.

Revenge is an abominable Vice, and which at present is not without great
Reason particularly appropriated to the Italians; but certainly amongst them
all, there are none who exercise and act it with greater Rage and Fury than the
Clergy; who, as they have no Families to care for, their Attention is less
divided, and consequently more united and concentred, to resent Injuries done
unto them, and have also more leisure time to descant upon them; and besides
all this, in case of any Accident, they have none but their own persons to
save. Neither do they fear so much as others the Confiscation of their Goods,
as being assured, That whatsoever Country their Lot may cast them upon, so it
be the Romish Communion, they cannot miss of getting a Livelihood by their
Masses, and of being furnished with a full supply of their Necessities. This is
a Patrimony that follows them whithersoever they go, and cannot be taken away
from them, but with their Life. One thing which extremely facilitates the
taking of Revenge in Italy, is, the great number of petty Principalities, into
which it is divided; and whereof the Princes are all of them Independent one of
another, and extremely jealous of preserving their Rights, especially of
Protection and Refuge, to those who having done some ill Turn, retire
themselves to their Territories. The King of France would sooner and with more
ease obtain a Fugitive person from the Emperor, than from the Duke of
Mirandula, whose Territories do not extend themselves to Three Italian Miles;
because always the more inconsiderable any Power is, the more it strives to
appear great. The Commonwealth of St. Marin, is but an inconsiderable Hamlet of
about some Fifty Houses of poor Peasants, who are governed by themselves: And
though they be shut in on every side by the Pope's Territories, which they call
the Domaine of St. Peter, yet they do give such a resolute Protection to
Priests guilty of Murder, or Manslaughter, that it is not possible for the
Pope to persuade them, to deliver up any one of them. Neither are the Sovereign
Princes of Italy only thus jealous of the Franchises of their Estates, but also
all persons of Quality in general, who will not permit a Malefactor to be
seized in their Houses. I shall here tell you by the by, Sir, that it is this
pretended Liberty, which was the Rise of the Franchise or Liberty of the
Ambassadors of Crowned-Heads Heads at Rome, and which caused the great Dispute
between Pope Innocent XI. and the French King: For seeing the Ambassadors to
distinguish themselves were willing to have some privilege above the Ordinary
Nobility, they did not only pretend to have an Immunity for their Palaces, but
over and above, an entire Franchise throughout all the Quarters where their
Abode was. Now Pope Innocent the XI th conceived it an Enterprise becoming his
Glory and Courage, efficaciously to endeavor the final destruction of these
Retreats for Robbers and Murderers in Rome, obliging the Ambassadors for ever
to renounce the Franchises of the Quarters, and to content themselves, for the
Respect born to their Masters, with the Immunity of their Houses. But to speak
Truth, To what purpose was it for the Pope to be so Zealously bent, to abolish
these places of Refuge? Did not he know, that all the Churches, Monasteries,
Convents, and Colleges of Rome, are so many open places, which one meets with
at every turn, where Injustice, Incest, Robbery and Murder are protected and
secured? I confess, it seems not unreasonable, that the Churches of God should
be esteemed so Holy and Sacred, as to make it a kind of Profanation to enter
them Armed, in order to seize a Criminal; but what Reason is there to allow the
same Privilege to all Cloisters and Houses of those wretched Monks, that are
the very worst of Criminals? And the compass of whose Walls take up so much
ground, that if they were all joined together, they would without doubt make
more than a third part of Rome; and what is the Sacredness and Holiness of
these Profane persons, for which they are to enjoy this Exemption? For my part,
I cannot imagine any other Reason for it, but that the Pope, with the rest of
the Ecclesiastical Princes of that Communion, endeavoring no less to establish
their Temporal Power, than their Usurped Tyranny over the Souls of men, will be
very backward of diminishing the Privileges belonging to the Monasteries that
are amongst them; lest Foreign Princes following their Example, should
undertake the same in their Countries; and seeing, that the Monks always side
with the Pope, the taking of this Course, would be a manifest weakening of their
own Party. Moreover, these Monks are of such mean and interessed Spirits, that
if the Pope or a Cardinal send to them, to deliver up any that have taken
Refuge with them, they immediately comply with the Demand, as being well
pleased to have this occasion, to procure their Favor at so cheap a rate: But
if any other Secular Lord comes to request any such thing of them, then they
stand stiffly in defense of their Privileges, and without a good piece of Money
in hand, will never grant their Request. Especially if the Criminal be a Monk
or a Clergyman; and indeed (as was mentioned before) that which makes them so
bold in revenging themselves, is the assurance they have of being always
seconded and assisted by some of their Brotherhood: For upon any such occasion
they are very ready to take one another part, so that it is impossible to
offend any one of them, without engaging with a whole party. For either they
are Monks or Friars, and so are Fellow Members with all those of the same
Order, Convent or Monastery; or they are Secular Priests, and so make up one
Body with all the other Priests of their Diocese, Cathedral or Parish, there
being never a Church so inconsiderable, that has not at least fifteen or twenty
Priests belonging to it: So that when any one Member of the same Body is
offended, all the rest are affected by Sympathy, and endeavor to revenge it,
as done to themselves. It Is evident, that a Spirit of Charity does not engage
them to these courses; for Charity avengeth not it self: But it is a kind of
Natural pleasure they take, to make others feel the effects of their Rage and
Fury, that have either offended them, or those they have any relation to; and
which makes them say with one of their Poets, Dolcissima, Mortali, e la
Vendetta.
Revenge is the sweetest thing in the World.
My self, when I was at Bononia, counted no less than Seventeen in one Week,
that had been sacrificed to this infernal Fury, and who (for the most part of
them) had been murdered by either Monks or Priests. The great Provost, who
there is called the Bargello, having by Order of the Cardinal-Archbishop made
search for a Monk, who very scandalously kept a public Stews, was one of the
number of these unhappy Victims, being miserably massacred on Easter Day, as he
was coming out of a Church. One of the most dreadful means the Clergy have to
glut their Vengeance, is the Inquisition, which they have introduced under the
pretext of Religion; though indeed it be the most Diabolical Invention that ever
was forged in Hell, and which they do as dexterously manage for the serving of
their particular Self Ends. They have made it an Inquisition-matter for any to
strike, affront or vilify any person belonging to the Clergy, whether Secular
or Regular. I will give you an Instance how they proceeded at Bononia, against
an honest man of my Acquaintance, who in the heat of his Passion had called a
Dominican Friar, Old Fool of a Monk. The Friar immediately went and made his
Complaint to the Inquisitor, who forthwith caused the Young Man to be seized,
and cast into the Inquisition-Prison, where he continued Ten Months before ever
any enquiry was made about the Cause of of his Commitment. At last he was
brought before the Sacred Tribunal; and forasmuch as he could not deny, but
that he had called the Friar, Old Fool of a Monk; his Indictment was drawn up
to this purpose. He who does not respect Churchmen, does not believe the
Ecclesiastic State worthy of Honor, and consequently is an Heretic: Now it
is apparent, that you have had no respect for Brother Nicholas, who is an
Ecclesiastic; and consequently, neither do you think the Ecclesiastic State
worthy of Honor, and therefore are an Heretic. The Defendant pleaded for
himself, That it was true he called the Plaintiff, Old Fool, but only with
respect to his Person, without intending the least reflection upon his
Profession. But the Plaintiff insisted, That he called him Fool with respect to
his Profession, by joining the word Monk with that reproachful word, and
without adding these words, Saving your Character. For true it is, That if in
Italy a man chance to affront a Priest or a Monk, by calling them Knaves,
Rascals, or the like, so he do but remember immediately to subjoyn, Saving your
Character, or, Saving your Habit, they cannot make an Inquisition matter of it;
but if by mischance this be forgot, he is undone. Thus this poor Gentleman was
found Guilty. As for Striking any one of the Clergy, in what manner soever it
be, whether sorely or slightly, it is always a matter the Inquisition takes
Cognizance of. And this is that which makes the men of the Church so peremptory
and insolent throughout all Italy. I happened at Rome to see a Priest, who fell
out with an Officer in the Piazza Novana: The Officer very dexterously and
freely stained the Priest with his Tongue, never forgetting at the end of each
Injury, to Compliment him with a Saving his Character; which so confounded the
poor Priest, that quite foaming with Rage, he began to say to the People that
stood about; Gentlemen, I must put this Man into the Inquisition, for if I be
not mistaken he struck me: Did not you see him give me a slight stroke? Indeed,
he could have wished he had with all his heart, that so he might have had an
opportunity to have prosecuted his Revenge; but none of those that were present
having seen any such thing, they could not witness against him. The Italians
have a Proverb, That he who would live peaceably at Rome, must take heed of
offending any Female, or Priest; because the Women procure their Lovers to work
their Revenge, and the Clergy make use of the Inquisition to avenge themselves.
It Is true indeed, That persons of Rank amongst them, as Abbots, Bishops, and
Cardinals, do not ordinarily make use of this means, as appearing to them a
little too troublesome. They have Servants and Dependents, who for Money, or to
obtain some favor, do voluntarily offer themselves to be the Executioners of
their Revenge; and if at any time they chance to be seized in the Act, they are
but very little concerned at it, fully relying upon their Masters Power and
Authority, who are never wanting, by all manner of means, to procure their
discharge and liberty. As for the Popes, who are no more exempt from this
weakness than other men, neither do they forget, upon occasion, to make use of
the Power they have in their hands; but like other Monarchs, whenever they are
offended, show themselves to have long Hands. There is no speaking to these
Holy Fathers of Humility or Patience in suffering of Injuries, in imitation of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whose person they will needs represent upon Earth. They
have in a manner rejected all his Virtues, and their study at present is to
represent here below, his Heavenly Glory, viz. his Power and Judicature. The
Title of Holiness, which is given them, is only a swelling Term they make use
of to express their Pride. We have a Signal Example of Revenge in the Life of
Pope Sixtus the Fifth. He was of a very mean Extraction, his Father being a
poor Vine-Dresser, and his Mother a Serving-maid, and he himself in his Youth
was reduced to be a Hog-heard; and yet by the subtilty of his Spirit, in
conjunction with an extraordinary Fortune, he stepped over all these
Difficulties, and mounted the Pontifical Throne. But so far was this meanness
of his Birth from inspiring him with an answerable degree of Humility, in the
midst of that Greatness to which he was raised, that he could not endure to
hear the least Hint of it; but by a Revengeful inclination, which was natural
to him, he let loose his cruel and unrelenting Nature against all those, who
either imprudently, or of set-purpose let drop the least word of Contempt
reflecting that way; of which the following Story may be a pregnant Instance:
The Statue of Pasquin in Rome appeared one Morning with a very nasty Shirt
pulled over it; and Morforius demanding the Reason, Why for shame he did not
shift himself, and put on a clean one? Because (answered Pasquin) my
Washer-woman is become a Princess. This Answer stung the Pope's Sister Camilla,
who of a poor Washer-woman, which she was before, was by her Brother raised to
a Principality. The Pope being enraged at this cutting Satyr, made use of all
the ways imaginable to find out the Author; but missing the desired success in
this his Research, he betook himself to Craft and Circumvention, but that to
one so base and unworthy, that the sole recital of it is sufficient to strike a
Man with horror. He caused it to be published every where, That he was so
extremely pleased with the delicate Poignancy of this piece of Wit, that if the
Author of it would come and discover himself to him, he would be so far from
punishing him with Death, that he would bestow upon him Two Thousand Crowns for
a Reward. The poor unhappy Wretch, Trepan'd by this advantageous Promise, makes
himself known. The Pope, upon owning himself to be the Author of it, caused the
2000 Crowns to be counted out to him, assuring him withal, That he would be as
good as his word, and that he should not be hanged. At which words, the Wretch
overjoyed, poured forth his most humble Acknowledgments to his Holiness, for so
unparalled a piece of Grace. Ay, Ay, (answered the Pope) I will be as good as
my word in all this; but take notice, Sirrah, that I never promised you not to
cause your Hands to be cut off, and your Tongue to be plucked out of your Head.
And immediately commanded the Cruel Sentence to be executed in his presence, as
a pleasing Sacrifice to his implacable Revenge. I have sometimes set my self to
enquire, what might be the cause of this Spirit of Vengeance, which nowadays is
become so natural to the Italians, whether it proceed from the Climate, or
Nature of the Country, or from some other necessary and inevitable Cause. But
having called to my remembrance the Generosity, Courage and Greatness of Soul,
that shone forth so illustriously in the Lives of the Ancient Romans, who
inhabited the same Country, and who rendered themselves every where as amiable
by their Clemency, as formidable for their Valor; I soon found that I was
rather to seek for a Moral Cause of it, than a Natural; and as far as I can
reach it is this, That the greatest part of Italy, in process of time, being
fallen under the Domination of the Bishops of Rome, they sent Priests to be
their Lieutenants in the several Provinces of their Dominions; a sort of People
equally ignorant in matters of Commerce and War, which are the two Sinews of
State, and without which the Government is like a Body afflicted with the
Palsy, without either action or motion. This Idleness, joined to the great Heat
of the Country, and to the corrupt Examples of the said Governors, as being
Men that only minded their pleasures, at last introduced an entire dissolution
and effeminacy. In Rome of old, the Sword sometime gave way to the Robe, and
Arms to Letters. Cedant Arma Togae. But at present all veils to the Love of
Women. This Love being excessive and unbounded, is the inseparable Companion of
Jealousy; and the fruit of Jealousy, inexorable Revenge; which are the two
great Vices which do stain the Reputation of the Italians. From this great
easiness of Revenging themselves, when affronted in their Amors, they are now
arrived to that point, as not to suffer the least Word, or the least Injury to
fall to the ground, without taking (so it be in their power) a most pitiless
Revenge. This Vice, which had its Birth in the Pope's Dominions, has in^ensibly
dispersed it self into those of the Neighboring Princes, and at present
miserably infected all Italy. It has been observed, that Bononia and Ferrara,
who were the last that have submitted their Necks to the Roman-Yoke, have since
that time doubled their Revengeful Spirit. But that which is most of all to be
condemned in their way of Revenge is, That they do commonly execute it in the
basest and most cowardly manner imaginable; that is, either by Poison* or
treacherously Stabbing their Enemy in the Back. They deride our Duels, and say,
It is the greatest Folly in the World, to put the Sword in our Enemies Hand,
and by this means state him in as fair a condition of being Revenged of us, as
we our selves are of being avenged of him. When we have an Enemy (say they) we
are not such Fools to cry to him at a distance, Stand upon your Guard; but
endeavor to kill him with the first occasion, without putting our selves to
the hazard of being killed by him. However, Sir, though the Italians have their
Faults, yet on the other hand I must own, they have also some very good
Qualities; they are very prudent in the conduct of their Affairs, very discreet
in their Discourse, civil and handsome in their Carriage amongst themselves, or
toward Strangers; they are good Counselors, and very ready to render Service;
constant in their Friendship, and of a very obliging Humor, provided it cost
them nothing: They are very Witty, and I dare say, that if their Priests and
their Monks had not corrupted them in their Morals, and had not so strangely
spoiled and changed their Religious Worship, (as well as the best Country in
Europe) they would be some of the best Men in the World. Indeed, Popery is
grown to that prodigious excess of Idolatry, Superstition, and Folly, that I am
astonished they are so backward in casting off that Yoke. I know there are a
great many amongst them, that begin to open their Eyes, and see their Errors;
but they dare not declare their Minds to any one whatsoever, for fear of
falling Victims to the barbarous and inexorable Cruelty of the Inquisition.
This Tribunal was set up more particularly, for a Curb to the Italians, amongst
whom many began to waver, and to debate the Doctrine of Rome. And in order to
make it the more fierce and terrible, the Popes thought they could not trust it
in better hands, than those of the Dominicans, a cruel and pitiless sort of
Fellows, and more than any other Order, engaged to maintain the Popes Interest.
And to encourage them to a rigorous discharge of that barbarous and butcherly
Function, they have found it convenient from time to time, to confer the
Episcopal Dignity upon the most Zealous Inquisitors, and even to raise many of
them to the Eminence of Cardinals. Throughout all the Dominions of the Great
Duke of Florence, this Employ has always been attributed to the Franciscans,
many of whom likewise have been elevated to Bishoprics and Cardinals-Caps. The
end in dividing the Inquisition thus between two different Orders, was only in
order to the more vigorous maintaining of the same by the Emulation of both the
Pretenders. The main design at first intended for the erecting of the
Inquisition, was by ways of Blood and Violence, to put a stop to the progress
of Heresy, or to speak in their own Terms, Contra Haereticam pravitatem,
Against Heretical Pravity: But the Clergy having since considered, the great
advantage the Inquisition gave them, above the Laity, have learnt so
dexterously to serve themselves of it, that at present there is scarce any
thing, which they have not brought within the Verge of that Court, in order to
bring about their private Self Ends. If you fail of paying your Tithes, without
troubling them to examine, Whether you be able or not; they Argue, That the
Reason why you do not pay them, is because you don't believe they ought to be
paid, and consequently, that you are an Heretic. If the least word chance to
drop from you, reflecting upon the Licentious Lives of the Bishops and Clergy,
whether Regular or Secular, they accuse you as one whose design is to vilisie
the Episcopal Dignity, and consequently the Church it self, in the Eyes of the
People; that in so doing you have done the Heretics work for them, and served
their Interest, and therefore must be looked upon as being one your self. If a
Man be known to have an Estate, and in the mean time shows himself cold and
indifferent in contributing to the Collections that are made for the saying of
Masses, and other Prayers, for the repose of the Souls of the Dead; though it be
well known, that there is never a Priest or Monk that will so much as say one
without Money, he is presently accused, as one who does not believe Purgatory,
and consequently a downright Heretic. Nay moreover, if any one be frequently
observed to refuse putting somethi^g into those Boxes, that continually run up
and down the Streets, to help to celebrate the Festivals of such an He or She
Saint, toward such a Procession, in such a Church, toward the Chapel of the
Rosary, toward the Scapulary of the Blessed Virgin, or for the Cord of St.
Francis; these Fellows have the impudence to tell you, That they see well
enough you have no Devotion for Holy Things, and consequently believe little of
them; which is a kind of Advertisement, That in case you should be guilty again
of the same neglect, occasion would be taken to recommend you to the
Inquisition, there to learn better Manners. It is not lawful for any to excuse,
or to intercede (either in person, or by ones Friends) directly or indirectly,
for those who have had the mishap to fall into the Prisons of the Inquisition,
except you have a mind to involve your self in the guilt of the same Crimes,
whereof they (...) attainted. One cannot so much as come to speak with them
without an express permission given in Writing by the Inquisitor himself, which
he never grants, but with a great deal of difficulty, and very seldom. An Abbot
of Calabria, one of my Acquaintance, was put into the Inquisition at Venice,
for Smiling at the Story a certain Monk told, about the Apparition of a Soul in
Purgatory. After that he had been a whole Year in Prison, I understood that
Sentence of Death was not as yet pronounced against him, though he had been
several times put upon the Rack; and having occasion to go to the Inquisitor,
to obtain his License for printing of a Book; I took this opportunity to beg
leave of him, that I might go and see this poor Prisoner: Who having heard the
Request I made him, looked sternly upon me, and demanded what business I had to
concern my self with him? I told him, That nothing made me to desire this
Favor, save only a motive of Charity, to bestow some words of Comfort upon
him. But the Monk answered me in a most rude and disobliging way, or rather
like himself, That the Prisoner was in very good Hands, and did not at all
stand in need of any of my Comfort; so that it was not possible for me to get
to speak with him. However, I had the satisfaction of seeing him set at Liberty
about Six Months after, through the charitable Care, and powerful Intercession
of Cornelia Episcopia, a Noble Venetian young Lady, of extraordinary Learning
and Merit, to whom my Friend dedicated his Learned Poems, which he had Composed
during the Time of his Confinement. I have before mentioned, that it was not
lawful to interceed for any, that are committed by the Inquisition; but you must
know, Sir, that the Inquisition is much more favorable at Venice, than it is in
other parts of Italy. That wise S^^ate Abhorring the Inhumanity of those Monks
that manage it, have erected a particular Chamber, where some Venetian Nobles
preside, and take Cognizance of all matters that are brought before the
Inquisition, in so much that the Dominicans, are not altogether the Masters of
it. This Friend of mine having had the good Fortune to escape so great a
danger, was so sensibly touched with the Cruelties they had made him suffer
during his Imprisonment, that he readily concluded from thence; that the Church
of Rome being possessed with such a Spirit of Cruelty and Barbarity, as is never
to be paralleled even amongst the worst of Heathens, could never be the true
Spouse of Jesus Christ. She might indeed be allowed the prudence of Serpents,
for her own preservation, provided it were always in Conjunction, with the mild
nature of the Dove, that so she might not render her self unworthy of, and
unlike to him, who wills us to learn of him, to be meek and lowly of Heart. My
Friend confessed to me, that indeed, before he was cast into Prison, he had some
doubts about Purgatory and Transubstantiation; but that since that they had
gone about to make him believe them perforce, he believed nothing at all of
them, and that he was resolved to retire into Switzerland or Geneva; there to
enjoy that Liberty of Conscience, which would not be allowed him in his own
Country. He told me that never a Night past over his Head, in which he was not
disquieted in his Sleep, with the frightful Ideas and representations of the
Torments he had in their Dungeons, where they had Rackt all his Members out of
joint, one after another, Bruised all his Fingers, and applied plates of red
hot Iron to the Soles of his Feet. And after all this, to make him the more
sensible of his pains, they in this Condition shut him up again for some days
in his Dungeon, allowing him nothing but a poor morsel of brown Bread, and a
small measure of Water, and then again put him into the Hands of the
Executioners of the Inquisition, to go through a new course of Torments. They
tied him by one Arm, and by means of a Pully, hoisted him up into the Air, and
there left him hanging for several hours, which time being over they let him
down again, rather dead than alive; and to bring him to himself again, they
most Cruelly and inhumanly Scourged him with a kind of a Whip made of slender
Iron Chains full of points, as sharp as needles, and this till he was all of a
gore Blood. And all this, O strange and unparalled Barbarity! to discover the
Secrets of a poor Conscience, and to search the bottom of a Heart, which God
has reserved to himself as his own Divine Prerogative. The Father Inquisitor,
who was all the while present, to encourage the Exexcutioners, and to observe,
whether they were not wanting in their Duty, sometimes would draw near to the
Patient, and with a severe Tone demand of him, Whether he did not believe
Purgatory yet, wishing him to think seriously of it, for that all that he
suffered there, was but a slight draught of the Torments of that place, and
that it was much more Terrible to fall into the Hands of the Living God. This
poor Gentleman answered nothing, to all this, save only by Sighs and Tears: but
he confessed to me, that since, he had made a very serious reflection upon this
matter, and that he was come to this result, that it was utterly inconsistent
with the infinite Goodness of God, to treat those Souls whom he had destinated
to his Heavenly Glory, and the enjoyment of himself for ever, to such
extremities of Pains and Torments. That all the works of God being perfect, he
showed Mercy to whom he showed Mercy, that is to say, perfect and complete
Mercy; and that it was infinitely more Glorious for him, wholly to Pardon both
Guilt and Punishment, than to reserve himself a miserable Vengeance, from the
Fire and Flames of their feigned Purgatory, and that for this very reason he
did not believe any thing of it at all. The Common Punishment inflicted at
Venice on those who are convict of Heresy, is either to Strangle them in
Prison, or to tie a great Stone to their Necks, and so cast them into the Sea.
And herein also the Inquisition of Venice is much more favorable, than it is in
other parts of Italy, where they either Burn them alive with a slow Fire, or
else cut off their Members, one by one, which are cast into the Fire before
their Eyes, after having first of all plucked out their Tongues, and made them
suffer unexpressible Torments. Can you ever believe in good earnest, Sir, that
this is the Spirit of the Gospel? Is this the way our Savior made use of to
convert Sinners? Did he ever threaten the disobedient or unbelievers with
Prisons, Racks and Tortures? Has he ever left us so much as one Example or
Command to Authorize this sacred Inquisitional Method? I trow no, and
consequently this cannot be the Spirit of Christianity. Thus these very means
the Popes take to maintain their Tyranny over the Consciences of men, might
serve (and without doubt will so in time) for just Motives to pull it down, if
the People would once open their Eyes, and Vigorously oppose themselves to the
effects of a most unjust and inhuman Violence. It Is Virtue alone, that stands in
need of no support; but Sin and Iniquity are always in the search of props and
contrivances to uphold their tottering and crazy constution; and what they
cannot carry by the strength of the Lion, they endeavor to bring about by the
Foxes Craft. Thus what the Popes and their Adherents cannot obtain by the
Inquisition, they strive to compass by Artifice and Lies. One of the Chief
Fetches they have to keep the People in their Obedience, is to secure them in
the Chains of profound Ignorance; first of the truths of the Gospel; very
expressly forbidding them to read the Holy Scriptures, as a Book very dangerous
and pernicious to their Souls. Their next care is to prevent any Books of
Controversy, written by Protestants, from coming into their Hands. It Is an
Inquisitional matter to have or read any of them, or to be privy to any others
having of them: Moreover they take special care to charge the Preachers in
their Sermons, that in speaking of the Protestants, who being very well
grounded in their Principles, must consequently be looked up, as the most
formidable Enemies the Church of Rome has, they be sure to represent them to
their Auditors, as men that have absolutely renounced the Faith of Jesus
Christ, and who do no more believe in him, than Heathens and Infidels.
Wherefore also, they indifferently call them Heretics and Infidels; or to make
use of the Italian word, Questi non Cristiani. So that indeed all the Common
People, yea and the greatest part of those that are learned too, are of the
Opinion, that Protestants do not all believe in Jesus Christ, no more than the
Turks do. A Canon once demanded of me in Rome, by way of Curiosity, What the
Infidels did in France, and why they were suffered there? I desired him to tell
me what he meant by that word, which I did not understand; and finding that he
spoke of Protestants, I told him that they were no Infidels, but believed in
Jesus Christ as well as the Roman Catholics, only that they rejected
Transubstantiation, the Mass, Purgatory, etc. and in particular the power and
infallibility of the Pope. And having heard me discourse at this rate a good
while; In truth, Sir, said he, if the case be as you say, I perceive that those
People are not such great Devils, as they are represented to us here. I have
often heard it declared from the Pulpit, that they were as unbelieving as the
Jews themselves; and you are the very first, I ever heard say, that the
Protestants believed in Jesus Christ. But, Sir, said I, it is impossible, but
that you who have studied Divinity, must needs have heard of the Opinions of
Luther, Calvin and Zuinglius, in the Treatise of the Sacraments in general, and
in partilar of those of the Eucharist, Penance, the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc.
I know, said he, that those Ringleaders of Heresy pretended not to destroy,
but to reform the Church; and as to some points, they have very strong
Arguments, which even to this day we are hard put to, to answer. But
nevertheless God, who has a particular care of his Church, that he might make
known to belivers that these men were in a bad way, has so ordered it, that
their whole party came to nothing. For as one Error draws on another, they have
still rolled from one Precipice to another, till at last they are fallen into
the Abyss of Infidelity. They at first separated themselves from the Church of
Rome, upon the pretense of Reforming it, but some time after their followers,
reduced all to the particular Spirit, which is to believe what they please, and
that, provided only they do Worship one God, whosoever he be, and lead ^
morally good life, that this is enough for them to be saved. I perceived by
this discourse, Sir, that this Canon had been ill informed (as indeed most part
of the Italians are,) of the present State of Protestants and of their Doctrine,
and that at Rome all manner of slights and tricks are made use of against those
who refuse to bow their Knees to Baal. T^ tell a Lie with them is a Virtue, as
long as it is but employed, as they think, for a good end. I remember that a
Jesuit who was lately come from England, boldly Preached in the Church of
Lateran, that all Religion there was reduced to the particular Spirit; and
having made an ample description of the Meetings of the Anabaptists and
Quakers, under the name of the Church of England, when he came to speak of
their Sighing and Groaning, and their Women Preaching, he made all his Auditory
break forth into a loud Laughter, and by this means* without doubt, though with a
great deal of Injustice, he made many there present, conceive very
Contemptuously of that August and Venerable Body of Protestants, the Church of
England, so Zealous for the Glory of God, and of Jesus Christ his only Son; so
exact and decent in the Worship and Obedience she renders to his Divine
Majesty, and so reasonable in her Orders and Ceremonies. As long as those
vigilant Pastors, the Bishops of the Church of England, and the Learned
Ministers that are under them, keep their watchful Eyes fixed on the Flocks
committed to their Charge, there is no cause to fear that ever the Romish
Wolf, will be in a condition to snatch so much as any single one of them out
of their Hands; nor will any of her Emissaries, as subtle Thieves as they be,
ever be able by night to steal into the Sheepfold to devour or massacre them,
as they have already so often endeavored to do. I have since made this
Observation on this Sermon of the Jesuit, which I heard from the beginning to
the end, and I could wish all Protestants might seriously take it to Heart,
viz. That to pull down the Church of Rome, the great secret is not, absolutely
to reject, as some do, all that she practices; but that the best way to
compass her downfall is, to retain all that is good in her, only rejecting the
evil. If we absolutely reject all Fasts, because they of the Church of Rome
observe some of them, as they desire nothing more than to blacken the
Protestants, representing their Actions in the worst Light they can, and always
concealing the good that is amongst them, they presently cry with open Throat,
that the Protestants are a sort of People that love nothing but their Bellies,
abhorring and abominating whatever serves to mortify the Flesh. If we reject
Episcopacy, they hate, cry they, all manner of Subjection, and love nothing but
Independency. If we refuse the use of Common Prayer, we are not joined in the
Band of Charity, neither is there any Union amongst us: If we do not from time
to time consult the Ministers in cases of Conscience, we reduce all to the
private Spirit. In a word, If we celebrate Marriages and Funerals, without any
Prayers or Ceremonies, they say that Protestants go together like Beasts, and
are Buried like Dogs. At this rate did this Calumniating Jesuit* with a
renowned Malice, from the beginning of his Sermon to the end, endeavor to make
them odious and execrable. Neither was it a hard matter for him to obtain his
end, in a Country where they are so little known, and where they are never
mentioned but under the notion of Devils, Heretics, new Christians and
Infidels. But the case would be much altered, if retaining what is good and
lawful or only indifferent amongst them, as far as may be, the Protestants
would singly apply themselves to oppose those points of Doctrine or Practice
amongst them, which first occasioned the Reformation; for so they would not be
able to condemn them in any thing, but by producing the points of Doctrine and
Practice in Controversy, with the oppositions made against them; which is a
thing they are very loath to do, for fear of discovering their own Nakedness.
An evident proof of what I here allege, is the great care they take, to hinder
any Books of Controversy from coming into Italy, not so much as those, which
have been Penned by the most Famous men of their own Party. I was extremely put
to it, when I was at Rome to meet with the works of Mosieur Arnau'd, which he
had dedicated to the Pope, and which I don't believe, were ever yet Translated
into Italian; their design herein being to prevent, by all means imaginable,
the true state of the question from being known; for their Objections are so
weak, and the answers they make to those of the Protestants, so pitiful, that
any unprejudiced mind, may easily from their own Books perceive, on what side
the Truth lies. If ever there was any Author that straind his Wits to
calumniate and blacken the Protestants, it was without doubt Father Maimbourg
the Jesuit, in his Books of Lutheranism and Calvinism: When I was at Venice I
undertook the Translation of all his Works; and had already translated several
of his Volums, when I took in hand those of Lutheranism and Calviaism; but I
was not a little surpised, when the Inquisitor of Venice, would not give me
leave to continue the Traduction; and some time after I received an Order from
the Pope, forbidding me to Print those two Books, with another of the same
Authors, Treating about the growth of the power of the Bishops of Rome. The
single Title of Bishop which was given him in this last Treatise, in stead of
the Magnificent Titles of Pope, and Sovereign Priest, together with some
curious enquiries concerning the rise and progress of that prodigious Grandeur,
to which the Bishops of Rome are mounted at present, were a powerful motive to
the Pope to condemn it: But I could not penetrate, what reason he had to
pronounce the same Sentence against the other two, except it were, as I have
hinted before, to prevent the occasion, of renewing in the minds of the
Italians, the state of the Question between the Catholics and the Protestants.
For notwithstanding both these Books be fraught with Scoffs, injurious
Reproaches, and Calumnies, coined on purpose to render a party contemptible,
whom they had resolved by all manner of means to run down in the conceit of the
People, yet for all this Innocent the XIth, did not believe that this beating
of them down, would prove of as great advantage to the Church of Rome, as the
Publication of some Points of Doctrine, that are there necessarily inserted,
might prove dangerous and mischievous to it. You can no way imagine, Sir, the
extreme precautions the Popes make use to prevent any Protestant Books, from
being brought into Italy. As there is no other way to enter that Country by
Land, without passing the Alps, they keep men express at all the passages
thereof, to examine the Travelers that come that way, and search them whether
they have any forbidden Books about them; amongst which number are accounted
all those that Trat of Controversies. In a Journey I made from Venice to Lions,
I took my way, in my return to Italy, through the Land of Valois; at the entry
of this Country, which is a kind of straight or narrow passage of the Mountain,
there is a famous Abbey of the Canons Regular of S. Austin, called S. Maurice.
The River Rhosne, which is extremely impetuous and violent in this place, and
which a little lower disembogues it self into the Lake of Geneva, leaves only a
very narrow way, by which one must necessarily pass to enter Italy. The Abbot
of S. Maurice, had built a Gate at this Pass, and forasmuch as he is the Master
of it, the Popes who know it to be one of the Keys of the Alps, which opens a
way to Italy, have charged him to have a careful Eye upon all Passengers coming
that way, that they do not bring with them any forbidden Books, because Geneva,
which they stand in great fear of, is no further from it than the length of its
Lake. The promise the Pope had made to the Abbot of making him a Bishop, in
case he were found faithful in the discharge of his Commission, had made him
very exact, when I past that way. He caused all Passengers to be stopped without
Exception, those that were on Foot were searched at the Gate by the Guards, and
those on Horseback that had any appearance, were conducted into the Abbey,
where the Abbot entertained them very Civilly, and made them Eat with him,
whilst they were searching their Portmantels. The Abbot with whom I discoursed
after Dinner for a good while, told me that the Pope allowed him Money toward
the Entertainment of Passengers, because without that the whole Revenue of his
Abbey would not have been sufficient for it: And that he had sent him most
pressing Letters to recommend to him, an extraordinary care of that Post,
whence he easily conceived how much they apprehended the Books of Protestants
at Rome. And being himself well acquainted with the temper of Italy, he told
me, that if the Italians, and more particularly the Popes Subjects, might but
have the least Communication with Geneva, it might be greatly feared, they
would utterly cast off their Obedience to the Pope. Indeed there are none have
more reason to know the weakness of that God on Earth, of the sacred College
of Cardinals, and of other Ecclesiastics, than they who are the Eyewitnesses
of it; neither are there any more concerned, than they, to cast off a Yoke,
which upon other accounts is so insupportable to them. One can scarcely call to
mind the flourishing condition of those fair Provinces, that constitute the
Patrimony of S. Peter, without shedding of Tears, to see them miserably
Groaning and Languishing at present, under the oppressive Domineering of
Priests, wholly waste and desolate and deprived of their former Beauty and
Ornament. Those famous and ancient Cities of Ravenna, Benevento, Spoleto,
Perusa, Orvietta, and so many more, which heretofore were the glory of Italy,
are hardly any thing else at present but heaps of Rubbish, occasioned by the
insatiable avarice and rapaciousness of Popes. True it is, that naturally this
Country is the most pleasant and Fruitful Territory in the World; but withal
there is none more bare of Money. The immense Impositions the Pope lays on it,
have exhausted a great part of it; and the Legates he sends thither every three
Years, strive by all manner of Extortions, during their Triennial Government to
squeeze out the rest, and then return to Rome laden with the Spoils of that
miserable People, where they are no sooner arrived, but they consume it with as
much Prodigality, as they had hookt it in by Avarice and Extortion. I will not
here entertain you with the Grandeur and Luxury of the Roman Court; I may have
an occasion to give you some account of that, more at large hereafter. I shall
only desire you to tell me, whether indeed you do not believe that the Italions
have great reason, to endeavor to deliver themselves from so oppressive an
Usurpation and Tyranny, by withdrawing at the same time their Consciences, from
so intolerable a Slavery, and their Estates, from the Hands of such merciless
Extortioners. For my part, Sir, I cannot question, but that if the Learned
Writings of the Protestants of the Church of England, could one day make their
way into this Country, and that they would only so far honor them, as to give
them the Reading, I say, I doubt not, but that Popery, whose Foundations they
so evidently overturn, would find it self at an end. Or rather let us say, that
it shall be thus, when it shall please our great God the Father of Lights, to
enlighten their Minds, toward an acknowledgment of their Blindness, and to
warm their Hearts by his Holy Grace to embrace the Truth; that then, I say, we
shall see all Italy turned Protestants against their own Errors, and composing
one Sheepfold with those who so many years ago, so courageously protested
against them, under the one and only Sheepherd of our Souls the Lord Jesus
Christ. I shall not trouble you, Sir, with the Relation of other particulars
and Curiosities, I observed at Genoua; forasmuch as my design is not, as I have
hinted to you before, to give you an entire Relation of my Travels, but only to
single out those Matters, that more particularly have some reference to
Religion. This is that I intend to do from time to time in these my Letters, if
I find you continuing to give them the same reception, wherewith you have
favored my first. It being my great wish to Evidence to you with what zeal I
am, Sir,

Your, etc.

The Third LETTER, Of the Hospitals and Pilgrims of Italy, etc.
TO continue the Account I have undertaken to give you, of the Observations I
made in my Voyage of Italy, relating to Matters of Religion; I shall tell you,
Sir, That from Genoua we took our way along the Seacoast, and in Three days
arrived at Sestre, an Episcopal See, situate on the Sea of Liguria. The Bishop
of the place received us with a great deal of Civility. We had waved going by
Sea to Legorne, because the Father, my Companion, could not bear that kind of
passage, and was besides very fearful of falling into the hands of Pirates.
None can be imagined more Stoical in their Discourses of Death than the Monks
are, neither are any more Cowardly and Frightful than they, when they are in
any likelihood of facing it. This made us resolve to pass the Apennine to Luca,
and from thence continue our Journey through Tuscany. The Bishop advised us, to
take Guides along with us in passing the Mountain, forasmuch as otherwise, he
assured us, we should run great hazard of being Robbed; that we had a Three
days Journey to pass through very Desert and Solitary Ways, where we should meet
with neither Houses nor Villages, except only two or three sorry Inns, at
Twelve Leagues distance from each other. There are always plenty of these
Guides at Sestre, in a readiness to accompany Travelers; being provided with
Carbines, Blunderbusses, Pistols, and Bayonets. The Custom is to take Two or
Three of them, or as many as one pleases, to pass the Mountain, paying them
Two Crowns apiece. Two Genoua Merchants intending the same Way, joined Company
with us, which made us only take Two Guides with us, at the Charge of Four
Crowns. Our Benedictin, whom one would have thought a former Journey he had made
to Italy, should have made more circumspect, had a mind to make use of his
Wits, and to spare the Crown he was to pay for his share to the Guides we had
taken; saying, That he would spare that Money, to make much of himself at the
next Inn he should come at; that there was no danger at all in passing the
Mountain, and that all those Guides were a Company of Knaves, who made it their
business to fright Passengers, to get a piece of Money out of them; but, that he
(for his part) was resolved they should have none of his. Thus having taken
Directions of the Way in Writing, he went his way Two hours before us. For my
part, I remembered the Counsel the Bishop had given us, who was a Venerable Old
Man; and considered, that if it were only for the respect that is due to Old
Age, we ought never (where it may be done) reject the Advice of such persons.
For this Reason, I joined my self with the Genouese Merchants, resolving to go
with them, attended by our Guides. The Benedictin parted from us at Six of the
Clock, though with an intent not to make so much haste, but that we might
overtake him, that so he might have an opportunity of falling again (as it were
by chance) into our Company, without being obliged to pay any thing toward the
Guides, we had taken on our own accounts. But so it happened, that very unluckily
for him, we staid Three hours longer than was intended; for we did not leave
the City till Eleven of the Clock. We were extremely surprised, when at the end
of Seven Leagues, upon the Mountain, we found this poor Monk sitting on a
Stone, in his Boots, Lamenting and all in Tears, for the Mishap that had
befallen him. He had been set upon in the same place by Five Robbers, who
having dismounted him, had taken away all his Money, and all they found in his
Portmantel, except his Breviary, which they had restored to him; which seemed
to vex him more than all the rest: For (said he) had they but taken this with
the rest, I should at least have been excused from saying my Breviary till I
came to Rome. We made a shift to get him on Horsback again, persuading one of
the Guides to lend him his; in consideration of which, the Monk promised to
give him his Boots, and we defrayed his Charges between us, till we came to
Luca. He assured us, That the Men that had Robbed him, were Armed and Clothed
in the same manner as the Guides; and that if he were not extremely mistaken,
he had seen the very same persons in the Marketplace of Sestre. We were told
since, That these Robbers are the very Guides themselves, who accompanying
Travelers out of Town, do afterward by a shorter Way get before them, placing
themselves in Ambush near the Road by which they are sure they must pass, and
never fail of Robbing those, who have refused to make use of them, or any of
their Companions. By ill-luck for our Father Benedictin, he had but lately
received a Letter of Exchange at Turin, and was not to receive another till he
came to Rome. This forced us to part Company, because I was not in a condition
to bear his Expense, and my own too. He resolved therefore to take his Journey
the best way he could to Rome, through the Monasteries of all sorts of Orders
and Hospitals also, Necessity forcing him thereto. I saw him afterward at
Rome, where I found him not wholly recovered yet from the Miseries he had
suffered since our parting. He gave me a particular and full account of the
Hospitals, at which he called in his Journey, what they were, and the
Entertainment he had met with in them. I have heard Roman Catholics often
reproachfully object to Protestants, That they have no Hospitals amongst them,
to entertain Strangers; and confounding this kind of puplick Hospitality with
Charity, boldly conclude, That they are not Charitable, and consequently no
true Children of the Church. It Is the mark of a Weak Cause, to lay hold of
every thing it meets with to support it self, which notwithstanding commonly
contributes most to its overthrow. To defeat this pretended Charity of
Catholics, it will be sufficient to relate to you what this Father told me,
and what I have learnt of some other Travelers, which I intend in part to make
the Subject of this my Third LETTER.

I shall tell you first of all in general, Sir, That all the Ancient Hospitals
of Italy owe their Foundation to the Holy places of Rome and Loretto. The
Pilgrimages to these some Ages ago, by reason of a more Universal Deluge of
Superstition, were much more in Vogue than they are at present; though it were to
be wished, they were much less than they are. A Man was scarcely reputed a good
Christian, except he had been at Rome: And the Popes perceiving how much this
vast Concourse did augment their Revenues, and rendered their Capital City rich
and wealthy, found a way to oblige Confessors to enjoin their Penitents, for
the Expiation of the greatest Sins, such as Rape, Incest, and Murder, a Journey
thither; so that there was no Remission for these kind of Sins, without going
to Rome. They afterward made reserved Cases of most of these kind of Sins,
whereof we find still at this day a great number in the Bull, Entitled, In
Coena Domini, reserving to themselves alone the power of Absolving them; so
that in these Cases, the parties concerned must either go to Rome, or else
resolve never to enter into Paradise. It is true, that at present they have
bethought themselves of a way to spare men this Trouble, which is, of sending
thither a good Sum of Money: With this they content themselves now; for I am
sure, it is not the Person they desire, but his Purse, which at any time will
abundantly supply his Absence. And forasmuch as amongst the great number of
Pilgrims, that flocked thither out of Devotion, or of Necessity, for the
expiation of their Sins, there were many Poor people, that had not wherewith to
defray their Charges in public Inns; many Rich persons, moved with Compassion
toward these poor Wretches, Founded Hospitals for their Entertainment, where
they received both Lodging and Diet; or at whatsoever Hour of the Day they
called there, had an Alms given them, which they call La Passade; according as
the Foundation was more or less Endowed such was the Alms, in some places more,
in others less. We met with many Hospitals in Italy, that were founded toward
the end of the 10 th, or the beginning of the 11 th Century; the cause of which
was a False Opinion, that was uppermost then, viz. That the Day of Judgment was
near, grounded upon a Forged Tradition, which is preserved still to this day in
the Church of Rome; That Christ being asked by his Apostles, How long this
outward World should last? He Answered them, A Thousand years and upward. So
that the most part of Christian Princes, and great Lords about this Time took a
Journey to Rome, Founded Hospitals for the Poor and Pilgrims, and several
Abbeys, into which many of them retired themselves, in expectation of the
dreadful Day of Judgment. As for the Hospitals they Founded, the Care and
Administration of them was committed to Priests, as being the Men who think
themselves concerned in all Pious Legacies, and who very readily take upon them
the Care of those places, where they find a plentiful Current of
Devotional-Mony. It was too much their Interest, not to encourage so favorable
Beginnings, and therefore were not wanting, no more than at this day,
constantly to frequent the Houses of Widows and Rich persons, to induce them by
their Last-Wills to enlarge the Revenues of their Hospitals, of which they were
constituted the Stewards and Overseers; Insomuch, that in a little Time these
Hospitals became prodigiously Rich. It remains now only, that we take a view of
the Use which is made of them at present, that thence we may judge, whether
from them a good Argument can be drawn in favor of those of the Roman
Communion; to prove, that their Charity so far exceeds that of the Protestants,
as they would fain make People believe; or, whether indeed we have not much
more Reason to infer the contrary? Our Benedictin, by sad Experience, was in a
condition of giving me some Information concerning this matter: He told me,
That after he had parted with me at Luca, which is a small Republic, he took
his Journey on Foot by Alto Passo, which is a very ancient and famous Hospital,
founded by a Queen of France, Eight Miles distant from Luca. He could not
exactly tell me what were the Revenues of that Hospital; but that this was the
Law of it, That all Strangers, of what Rank or Quality soever, Rich or Poor,
were to be received and entertained there Three days together, according to
their Quality: But that at present it admits none besides the Priests and Monks
that pass that Way, and to other Travelers they only give a Loaf of Half a
pound weight, and a Pint of Wine at the Gate; and before they can be admitted
to this Favor, they must produce several Passports and Letters, to prove
themselves Pilgrims, for want of which our Father was in a great danger of
being shut out and rejected; but instead thereof he boldly produced his Letter
of Obedience. The good Priest who examined them, seeing that the Letter was
writ in Latin, in which probably he was not over skilful, according to the
Custom of the Priests of Italy, let it pass; saying, That he perceived that it
was a Travelling-Letter of the Apostolical Nuncio at Turin; so that by this
shift he was at last admitted. He told me, That his Entertainment there was
very tolerable, and that upon his Enquiry into the manner of the Government of
that Hospital, an Old Servant of the House told him, There were Twenty five
Officers that were Intendants over it, some of them with the Titles of
Guardians, Administrators, and Receivers; and others with the Names of the
First, Second, and Third Officers of the Pantry and Butlery, which were all
R^^h Clergymen, who divided amongst themselves almost all the Revenues of that
Hospital, there being but a very inconsiderable part of it reserved for those
few Charitable Deeds, that are exercised there. From thence he came to Pesche,
which is a very fine City, a small days Jonrny from thence, where there is a
vast Number of Convents and Monasteries. He went and presented himself to
several of them, to procure himself a Lodging; but every where they shut the
Door upon him; for the Italian Monks are very pityless, and never give any Alms
to Strangers. They have an Artifice amongst them they make use of to refuse
poor Passengers, which is this, All the Monks and Brothers have order to tell
them, That they Abbot, Guardian, or Prior is not in the Monastery; and if you
happen by chance to meet with the Men themselves, they tell you, That the
Steward, Butler, or some other Officer that has the Purse, is gone abroad. By
this means they make the poor Travelers lose all Patience, forcing them to
depart without the least Relief. Our Monk being thus refused Admittance every
where, was fain to seek out an Hospital, which he found very different from
that of Alto Passo; for the bad Entertainment he there met with, though it was
with much more difficulty that he was admitted, because his Letter mentioned,
That he was sent to Rome about Business, and not upon the account of Devotion.
For though, for the most part, they understand but little Latin; yet they are so
wise as to put Travelers upon showing them these two Words in their Letters,
Ex Devotione. Two Hermits of Those Italian Vagabonds, who spent their Life in
running from one Hospital to another, having perceived that our Monk had been
somewhat Rudely used by reason of his Letter, came to him after Supper,
offering to remedy the matter, and to supply the defect of his Letter, so that
he should never run the hazard of exposing himself to the like Affront for time
to come. The way was this, They promised to draw up for him a Letter of
Pilgrimage, and to affix to it the Seal of the Archbishop of Lions, which they
had Counterfeited. So that the Question now only was, about a piece of Money
they demanded of our Benedictin for this seasonable Service; who having none to
give, offered them his his Breviary. The one of them absolutely refused it,
saying, That that was a bad Implement to carry with one to Hospitals; that it
was long since they had been happily Robbed of theirs, and by this means were
excused from a tedious repeating of them, according to the Decree of the Sacred
Congregation at Rome to that purpose; Amisso vel ablato Breviario, non tenetur
Presbyter Officio; A Priest is not bound to the Duty of Saying his Breviary, in
case he has lost, or is robbed of it. They added, That not long since they had
seen a Priest expelled an Hospital, because having a Breviary about him, he had
forgot or neglected to say the Office before Supper. But his Companion accepted
of the Bargain, saying, He would make it his Business to rid himself of it, the
first Bookseller's Shop he came at. Thus the Benedictin at the same time
procured two Advantages, the one of being rid of the trouble of Saying his
Prayers; the other, of having got a sure Key to give him Entrance into all
Hospitals, and this by means of a Counterfeit Letter of Pilgrimage; which these
two Hermits were ready (for their Money) to give to any that did desire it. The
Father being thus provided, boldly prosecuted his Journey through all the Cities
of Italy, till he came to Rome, having been every where received into the
Hospitals without any difficulty. But he protested to me, That if it were in
his power to inflict a severe Punishment upon all the Guardians and
Administrators of them, he thought that in so doing he should render a most
acceptable Service to God, as well as to all poor Pilgrims: Because (said he)
it is a most lamentable thing to see how they treat them; what they give them
to eat does not amount to Twopence Charges for each person; and this too; in
such a nasty and slovenly manner, that it turns ones Stomach; whilst in the
mean time, those Wretched Priests engross and sweep all the Money into their own
Coffers, to maintain their Coach and Horses, with the Magnificent Titles they
take to themselves of High Almoners, Grand Administrators, and Grand Priors of
the Hospital. It Is an infamous thing to see how they Lodge poor Strangers:
There are about Twenty or Thirty Beds in a great Room, where they lie Two and
Two, or Three and Three in a Bed, according as they are stocked with Company.
Before they are suffered to enter into this Room, they are stripped stark Naked
in another, without suffering them so much as to keep on their Shifts: This
done, they are all of them shut up together till next Morning. The Beds are all
rotten and spoiled, and crawling with Vermin, and most of them without any
Sheets. The Hospitals indeed are well Endowed; but it is the malicious
Contrivance of those who have the Care and Administration of them, to give
their Visitants the worst Entertainment they can devise, to turn their Stomachs
from ever coming there again; and indeed, a man must be reduced to extreme
Necessity before he can resolve on a Second Visit.

The Benedictin gave me a more particular Account of an Hospital, which is in
the Hands of the Dominicans of Viterbo: These Fathers employed their utmost
Endeavors with the Magistrates of the City, to procure the Direction of it,
promising, That they would make it their business, to take a particular Care
for Pilgrims, by faithfully employing the Revenues thereof for their Use and
Relief; whereupon at last their Request was granted them. But since this,
forasmuch as they never had the least thought of performing their Promise; but
to make use of it for their own advantage, they have taken up all the best part
of the Building for themselves, and Lodge the Pilgrims that Visit them in one
of the Cellars that belong to the House. Our Benedictin arriving here, met with
a Company of Seven or Eight Pilgrims besides himself, who were all together
Locked up in that Cellar, without giving them either Meat or Drink, or Beds to
lie upon; and left them thus shut up till Ten of the Clock the next Morning, at
which time the Door was opened for them. The Fathers Dominicans seeing them in
great confusion coming forth from their miserable Lodging, Scoffed at them,
asking them, Whether they had lined their Insides well, and been Lodged at
their Ease? desiring them at their Return from Rome, to call that Way, for that
all things should be in a readiness to give them a very goodly Entertainment.
All the World knows, That there is nothing of more dangerous consequence in
Italy, than to offend a Dominican; because, having the Inquisition in their
Hands, they commonly make excellent use of it, to avenge the least Affront is
offered them: Wherefore these poor Wretches were fain to slink away in silence,
without as much as daring to reply one Word, to this their Villainous Scoffing
at them, after having treated them so outragiously. The famous and rich
Hospital of Loretto, to which vast and imme^se Donations have been given in
favor of Pilgrims, is for all that but little better served, than that we have
just now mentioned.

To this purpose I shall relate to you a Passage, whereof my self was Witness
when I was at Loretto. I was walking in the Great place which is between the
Church and that Hospital, with two French Priests, who had Lodged there the
Night before. The Guardians it seems are obliged to Ring a Bell, to gather the
Pilgrims together before Supper, that none of them may be absent: But these
Wretches, that have no more Religion in them than Dogs, and whose only desire
is, to defraud and pinch the poor Pilgrims, had on purpose omitted Ringing of
the Bell, as they often do. The French Priests about Six of the Clock retired
to the Hospital; where they demanded of them, Why they did not come sooner, and
that Supper-time was past? They Excused themselves by alleging, that they had
not Rung the Bell for them: But they falsely and impudently maintained, that the
Bell had been rung; so that it was not possible for them to obtain so much as a
piece of Bread for themselves that Night. The next Morning, these poor Priests
were so fearful of being served the same Trick, (for in that Hospital they are
obliged to give their Visitants Supper and Lodging for Three Nights together)
that they continued from Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, until Evening,
under the Belfry. The Guardians seeing, that it was impossible to put them by
their Suppers, called them softly (about Six of the Clock) to come into the
Hall to Supper; which they very honestly refused to do till they had Rung the
Bell, to give warning to the rest of the Pilgrims: The Guardians, though enraged
at this, yet durst not but do it; but avenged themselves another way, by giving
them very bad Wine. In other parts of Italy, they make use of other Devices in
their Hospitals, to affright Pilgrims from coming at them. At Parma and Turin,
they oblige them (all Wearied as they are) to go in Procession throughout the
whole City, in the sight of all Men, and to sing Long Litanies; which makes
persons that have the least spark of Generosity, or those who are naturally
more shamefaced than others, rather expose themselves to lie in the Streets,
yea, or perish for Hunger, than to Visit such kind of Hospitals, where they
must subject themselves to such odious Laws. Others make it their business to
spoil and deface all the Passports of Strangers with great ugly black Marks
they make upon them, as a sign they have been entertained in such and such
Hospitals: Now persons that are any thing careful of preserving their Honor in
their own Country, and to keep their Passports neat and clean, will take care
how they present themselves to such places as those, whose Charity is so
infamously and ignominiously administered. In the mean time, by these scandalous
Fetches, they make a shift to reduce their Guests to a very small Number; for
the fewer Visitants they have in a Year, the greater is their Dividend at the
Years end. Others have the Impudence, to make them gain that by their own
Labor, which was destinated for them out of Charity: And indeed, generally
every where, if they be not there precisely at the Set-time, which ordinarily
is an hour before Night, they are irrecoverably shut out of the Hospital; and
it is impossible, either by Prayers or Tears, to procure any Entrance. Others
again treat their Guests very rudely in their Discourse, and with the greatest
Disdain and Contempt imaginable. In a word, Charity is every where administered
in so Uncharitable and Misbecoming a manner, that if the Benefactors of those
Hospitals could once return to Life, and have the possession of their Goods
they formerly bequeathed to these places; I do persuade my self, that seeing
the horrid Abuses that are there practiced, they would take heed of Undertaking
the like Foundations for time to come.

The Father told me, That he had been in no place better Treated, than at a New
Hospital that was a Building at Mountefiascone, Three days Journey from Rome. It
was about Five or Six years ago, that the Priests of that place had been
persuading the Nobility and Citizens of that small City, to contribute to this
Foundation. They had already procured a considerable Revenue, by the pious
Legacies of some Ladies of Quality, and some Annual Rents the City had granted
toward it. The Benedictin seeing the good Entertainment they had given him,
said Smilingly to the Priests, who had the Direction of the House, That he was
very well satisfied with the good Entertainment he had received, that he prayed
God to preserve in them this Spirit of Charity for the Poor; and that he
heartily wished for the good of their Souls, that they might not one day become
like others, by shearing the Revenues of the Hospital amongst themselves, and
neglecting, and abusing the Members of Jesus Christ, as they do. Many Pilgrims
have assured me, that it is the greatest misery in the World, to take up ones
Lodging in any of the old Hospitals, notwithstanding that they are the most
Richly endowed; and that in the new Hospitals, they were well enough
entertained, because the Priests had not yet divided the Revenue amongst
themselves. They do like the Gardiners, who suffer the Fruit to hang on the
Tree, till it be come to its full growth and maturity, and then gather it, and
make their profit of it: or like Merchants that Traffic in company, who do not
divide the Purse till it be full. All these external practices and shows of
Piety and Devotion, visibly terminating in self-interest, make it evident
beyond dispute, that they proceeded from no other Principles than Avarice and
Hypocrisy. You may probably object to me here, Sir, that the Italians, whom I
have elsewhere represented to you as men of Wit and Understanding, must needs
be very simple in suffering themselves to be persuaded, to bestow their Goods
upon such Foundations as these, considering the great abuse of them. To this,
Sir, I shall answer, that the Priests in all Countries, have a very powerful
Ascendent over the Spirits of the People, and that this joined with the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, which is, that the Prayers of Pilgrims are of a
particular efficacy with God to deliver Souls out of Purgatory; and with the
practice observed in these Hospitals, of obliging the Pilgrims at night to make
long Prayers for the Souls of their deceased Benefactors, and causing Mass to
be said for them in the Chapels belonging to the said Hospitals, is a powerful
motive, considering the false belief wherein they are engaged, to persuade them
to it. Moreover these Priests are very Dexterous in divulging every where, that
they are very faithful in the Administration of their Alms, that they are very
careful in giving good Entertainment to their Pilgrims, even so far as to
contribute of their own Money, to defray the charges they are at for Provisions.
But it is evident enough that by a mental restriction, they must understand
this of Provisions for themselves, though before God they cannot by this means
excuse themselves from lying. There were formerly many more Hospitals in Italy
than there be at present, every Monastery had its Hospital. S. Odon Abbot of
Clugny, seeing that these Hospitals were all in vogue, and that it was a kind
of Devotion that made a great noise in the World, would not in this point come
behind any Seculars. He divided the vast Revenues of his Abbey into three parts;
The first, was for the Abbot and the Entertainment of Strangers of note, that
came to the Monastery; The second, for the Maintenance of the Monks, which was
called the Conventual portion; and the third part for the relief of the Poor,
and the Entertainment of Pilgrims, whose Feet the Abbot himself, as an effect
of his Humility, was pleased to wash. Almost all the Abbots of France, Germany
and Italy followed this Example; and in like manner made a Tripartition of the
Revenues of their Abbeys. But this their abundant Chairty, was not of any long
continuance; for soon after, that which had been given with one Hand, was taken
away with the other. The share of the Poor was lost, or rather confounded, with
those of the Abbot and the Monks: At present there are no more of these
Hospitals to be found in Italy, excepting one, at Mont-Cassin, and another at
the Great Camaldule, where they entertain Pilgrims. The Chartreux Monks have
also another in the Duchy of Milan, at their Monastery of Pavia. But it is not
to their Charity Strangers are beholden for this Convenience, but to that of
Galeacius Viscount, Duke of Milan, their Founder, who would have this
Monastery, which he had endowed with a vast Revenue, to be a place of public
reception and Entertainment for all, whether Rich or Poor. The Fathers of this
Foundation have since done their utmost endeavor, to rid themselves of this
Hospitality, under the specious pretext, that it was a great disturbance to
their Solitude. But the Lords and great Men of that Duchy, who by the Charter
of that Foundation, are to be Splendidly entertained there with all their Train
and Equipage, as often as they pass that way, found themselves too much
interessed in this their Petition, and therefore have always opposed it with
all the Vigor imaginable; so that they are still forced to continue the same,
though sore against their Wills. It Is a thing but too well^ known in Italy, and
Avowed by all, that their Clergy are extremely wanting in this great Duty, and
distinguishing Christian Badge of Charity. It Is an Observation I have made my
self, that the Poor, who are over and above persuaded of this Truth, by their
own experience, do seldom, or never beg any Alms of them. As for the Regular
Clergy, the Benedictin told me, that from the time of our parting, he had
presented himself to all the Monasteries of his Order he met with, to obtain a
Lodging with them, but that scarce ever they had been willing to receive him:
the Common answer he had from them was, that there was an Hospital in the City,
to which he had best address himself for Entertainment; and that when he came
thither, they absolutely refused him entrance, telling him there was a
Monastery of his Order in the City, and that it was more proper for him to seek
a Lodging there. Thus this poor Monk, seeing himself sometimes rejected on all
sides, lamented his sad Condition, occasioned by the scandalous
uncharitableness of the Clergy, and his own Brethren of the same Order. He
added, that if it were in his power, he would abolish all these Hospitals, as
well as all Pilgrimaging: For, said he, as these Hospitals are most
Scandalously Administered; so neither can any thing be imagined more Abominable,
than the persons that take up their Lodging in them; amongst a score of them,
it is hard to find one, that is come from his own Country with a design to visit
the Holy places; being for the most part of them a company of Vagabonds, who
make it their business, every year to go the round of Italy. They commonly pass
the Summer in the Alps, and then begin their Journey in Autumn, spend their
Winter at Rome, Naples, or in Calabria; and in the Spring begin their round a
new, in order to return to their Summer Quarters in the Mountains. The way they
take to Live is this, They beg in the daytime, go from one Farm to another,
leap Hedges, Rob Orchards, and steal Fowl they meet with on the Highway, or in
the back Courts of Country Houses, or whatever else they meet with. After this
good days work they retire toward the Evening, to some Neighboring Village,
where they know there is an Hospital. Many of them Travel up and down thus with
their whole Families, trailing their Wives and Children along with them. These
generally profess themselves to be new Converts; that formerly they were either
Jews or Protestants; but having abjured their Errors, they have thereby reduced
themselves into so miserable a Condition, for the Love of Jesus Christ. To this
purpose they show you very fair and plausible Letters of Credence, with fair
great Seals annexed to them. I have sometimes diverted my self with questioning
this kind of People, about the Principles of Judaism, or the Faith of
Protestants; but they were never able to answer any thing to the purpose.
Perceiving this, I came nearer to them, and demanded of them, how they came by
these fair Commendatory Letters; whereupon some of them freely owned to me,
that they had bought them for their Money, of an Abbot living at Turin, who made
a Trade and Livelihood of it. That to this purpose he was furnished with all
manner of Seals, and could Counterfeit all Writing Hands. And as for
themselves, they ingenuously confessed they had never been either Jews or
Protestants, but that they made use of this Artifice to induce People to a
greater degree of Charity toward them: Besides these we find many other sorts
of Hospital Haunters, that are never a jot better than those, I have now
mentioned: some of these drag great Chains after them, and Iron Manacles,
declaring themselves to have been Slaves in Turkey, from whence they were
Miraculously delivered, by some Vows they made to Rome, or to our Lady of
Loretto: But if any one take them to task about those remote Countries, they
can answer nothing that is Pertinent; and besides it is Notorious, that they
buy their Chains of the Black-smiths, which many Italians have assured me, to
have been Eyewitnesses of. Moreover they are a sort of People so dissolute in
their Manners, and so Debauched, that were it true indeed, that the Bless
Virgin had wrought a Miracle to deliver them from their Bondage, she ought by
another to return them thither again. Another sort of Pilgrims well known in
these Hospitals, are a kind of Hermits, of the Nature of those two I mentioned
before, who spend their time in Trouling from one place of Devotion to another,
from Rome to Loretto, and from Loretto to Rome, leading a most scandalous Life.
These are the men, who without any Permission obtained from their Bishops to
lead an Hermetick Life, have taken up the Habit of themselves. I remember that
at Lions, the Vicar General caused one of these Hermits to be seized, who in
Prison confessed, that he himself had given the Habit to Seventeen Vagabond
Rgues like himself, for three Crowns a piece, in consideration of which he had
also furnished them with Cloth cut out, and sowed their Gowns and Cowls
himself, and given them counterfeit Letters to wander throughout Germany and
Italy. Now it is observable that the Guardians of Hospitals do commonly give a
better reception to those sort of Cattle, than to Passengers and Pilgrims,
because they know their Company is very apt to turn other Peoples Stomachs from
coming at them. These are the several sorts, and divisions of Hospital-Mongers,
which Houses being besides ordered after the manner I have informed you, judge,
I pray you, Sir, Whether the Church of Rome has reason to be so Huffy and Proud
of her Pilgrims and Hospitals, or to Reproach the Protestants for wanting such
goodly Ornaments, and Testimonies of their Charity? For my part, I am firm in
the Opinion, that the Protestants Method in this point is by far the better:
They have very wisely Retrenched these sorts of Pilgrimages, being convinced
that it is much better for a man to shut himself up in his Closet, there to
pray in secret to his Heavenly Father, than to Run up and down to pray to God,
and the Saints in Public places, as the Romanists do. They know that God has
not tied up Holiness neither to time or place; and that it is a great piece of
folly to found places of Entertainment for Vagabonds, which are for the most
part either lazy Droons, or wicked Villains, which ought rather to be shut up
in Houses of Correction, and made to work for their Living, than to leave them
at their Liberty, which they make such ill use of. As for what concerns
Strangers and Travelers, if they happen to fall into some necessity, they are
not wanting in Protestant Countries, charitably to assist them in their needs,
especially if they be known to be honest People. And as for the Poor and
necessitous that dwell in Cities, the Parishes to which they belong take notice
of what their wants are, and take care to supply them. This, Sir, as far as I
can judge, is a far better regulated Charity, and consequently also more
pleasing to God, and such as was practiced in the Primitive times of the
Church. It may be, you will tell me, Sir, that the Pilgrims of the Church of Rome,
are not all of them such pitiful Wretches as I have just now described, but
that there are a vast number of Persons of Quality, of different Ranks and
Conditions, who Travel to Rome and Loretto upon the account of Devotion, in
imitation of S. Paul, S. Pelagia and Eustochium, Noble Roman Ladies, who
undertook a Jerusalem Voyage, to visit the Holy places there, according to the
Testimony of S. Jerome, and that such as these are the Persons whose Zeal your
Church extremely boasts it self of. I will not deny, Sir, but that indeed I
have seen many Persons of Quality going in Pilgrimage to Rome, and other places
of Devotion that are most in Vogue in Italy, neither would I altogether
disapprove of their design, could I find that the objects to which they pay
their Devotions, were in any degree worthy of them, and that they did it in a
decent and edifying manner. But sincerely to tell you my Opinion; I could never
see any thing in all Italy, that deserved a man's putting of himself to so great
charges, except only to see its fair Cities, and the Masterpieces of Art and
Nature it contains: But in this case it is Curiosity, and not Devotion, that
puts men upon under-taking that Journey. Besides, Sir, the manner of your rich
People going a Pilgrimaging is so Extravagant, and so fraught with staring
Libertmism and Licentiousness, that in truth they had much better keep at Home,
and Honor God in their Families, than to quit them, as they do, to satisfy
their Lusts, under a Cloak of Devotion, to the great scandal of all good and
sober People. I question not but you will be of my mind, as soon as you shall
have read the account I intend to give you in my next LETTER, wherein I shall
Treat of my Journey to Loretto. For the present, because I have not quitted
Luca, where I parted with my Benedictin, who has given me an occasion to Write
what I have done of Hospitals, I shall only tell you, before I part with this
City, without giving you the Description of it, that being no part of my
design, that as I was one day coming forth from my Inn, I was extremely
surpised, to hear the People in the Street Swearing and Blaspheming the Holy
Name of Jesus Christ. There was a great throng of People gathered together, who
looked upon those that did so, without witnessing the least Horror, for hearing
such execrable Blasphemies. I demanded of them with some Indignation, why they
suffered them to talk at such a rate? They mildly answered me, that I was
mistaken, and that they did neither Swear nor Blaspheme, but that it was only a
particular quarrel, about a piece of Money of the value of a Shilling or
thereabouts, which at Luca, they call a Jesus Christ. The Magistrates of this
City caused this Money to be Coined, in Honor of a Miraculous Crucifix, which
is kept in their Cathedral, which, they say, did either Weep, or Speak, or
Bleed, these being the ordinary Miracles of these Crucifixes. The Figure of
Jesus Christ hanging on the Cross, is Stamped upon this Coin, which therefore
they call a Christ. By which means when they are at play, or upon Quarrels
arising about payments, the adorable Name of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, is not only very frequently taken in Vain, but also outrag'd and
blasphemed, as those Wretches, whom I have just now mentioned, did for one of
these pieces, which the one of them restored to the other with these Horrid
words, take there your R -- of a Christ. I have seen another sort of Money at
Bononia called a Madonnin, that is to say, an Our Lady, or a Virgin Mary, which
is of the Value of Sixpence at Bononia, upon occasion of which the same
inconveniences do proportionably happen in the like Disputes. Thus we see, that
an imprudent Devotion ordinarily terminates in a great Impiety. The Queen of
Sweden having seen one of these pieces of Money, said Smilingly to the Cardinal
of Luca, That the Italians would have done much better, to have stamped a Coin,
and bestowed the Name of God upon it; intimating, That Gold and Silver were the
God of Italy, there being no People in the World that worship it with more
Idolatry, and yet that are more lazy and careless in the gaining of it. From
Luca I came to Pisa, an ancient City of Tuscany, situate upon the River Arno.
Amongst other remarkable things, here is to be seen a fair Churchyard, called
in Italian, Campo Santo; it is exceeding large, and of a square Figure. The
Walls and Tombs of it are all of Marble, Jasper, and Porphyry, very
artificially wrought. They of Pisa had filled this place with the Earth, which
in a great number of Vessels they brought from Jerusalem, and in which the
Dead-Bodies are consumed in 24 Hours. In a word, they tell us, that this
Holy-Earth is nothing but a continual Miracle: But for my part, I find no more
of Miracle in the case, than there is in the Churchyard of S. Innocents at
Paris, where Bodies are consumed within the same compass of Time, without any
Miracle at all. In all their Churches they show us a prodigious number of
Relics of Saints and Saintesses, as in all the rest of Italy, the most of
which are extremely Ridiculous. I will not stop at present to give you a
Catalogue of them, but will pass on to Florence, where I shall have occasion to
entertain you with the Great Devotion, that is so much in Vogue and Credit at a
Church called the Annonciade, or Annunciation. The Original of the Devotion
take as follows: A Painter having been employed to make a Picture of the
Blessed Virgin, in the posture wherein the Romish Tradition tells us she was,
when the Angel. Gabriel was sent to her, to acquaint her with the Incarnation
of the Word; that is, in her Chamber on her Knees, reading the Prophecy of
Isaiah: The Painter had finished all other parts of the Picture, except one, to
wit, the Virgins Face, which he had reserved for his last Task; but being at a
loss what Idea to follow, in representing to the Life so Excellent a Creature;
and despairing ever to find any thing in his Art of sufficient perfection to
reach this height, he in this trouble and discomposure of Thoughts fell asleep
i^ the Church, where he was at Work; and awaking three or four Hours after, (O
strange Prodigy! and well deserving the Wonder of all men!) he found the Thing
that had so much perplexed him happily finished, and much better than ever he
could hope to have done it himself; whereupon he began to cry out amain, A
Miracle, a Miracle; highly averring, that an Angel sent from Heaven had done
the work whilst he was asleep. The Friars of the Convent where he Wrought,
finding their Interest in the thing, ranged themselves of his Side, so that in
a moment the Devotion took fire, and the Concourse of People to their Church
was so great, and has ever since continued with such extraordinary Success, as
has made it at this day one of the Richest of all Italy; and the Convent of
Friars, one of the best Endowed. The Reflections I have made on this Picture,
is, That on many accounts all this might be no more than a mere Cheat or
Mistake. For first of all, Some unknown person, or rather Friar of skill in
that Art, entering by Chance into the Chapel where the Painter was at Work, and
finding him asleep, might make use of that opportunity, and having finished the
Work, retire himself before the Painter awoke. Secondly, We may suppose, that
the Painter, to make himself talked of, and to gain himself the credit and
reputation of a Good Man, might have invented this Lie himself. Or Lastly, We
may conceive, that the Friars of the Convent, upon consideration of a good
piece of Money, might have induced him to have published this Lie, to make their
Advantage of it. What I allege here, that might have been, is not done with
this intent, as if I had a mind by all manner of ways to disgrace and discredit
this pretended Miracle, by supposing it a piece of Forgery: I know it is the
Character of a disingenuous and malicious Spirit, to put a bad Construction
upon a Matter, that admits a favorable one, and verily, I would not for all
the World expose my self to that Reproach. But the Reason of what I have said
concerning this Matter is, That I am otherwise satisfied on good grounds, that
the Point in question is a manifest and palpable Falsehood. For first of all, If
it were an Angel, as is pretended, that had painted this Face of the Virgin, as
the Work of an Angel is far more perfect than that of a Man, it will follow,
That this Picture, at least as to the mixture and laying on of the Colors,
must have far excelled all the Pieces of Caratche, Guido, Rhin, or any other of
the most famous Painters of Italy; and in the mean time we see the contrary,
and that it does not at all exceed the rest of the Picture, finished by the
Painter himself, which made a Traveller (who Eyed it very well) to say, That
the Angel-Limner must have been but a Blockhead and Bungler at his Art, to draw
such rude and incurious Strokes. But besides this, We have another Argument to
convince the Romanists, that this is a false Supposition; which is, That this
Portraiture of the Blessed Virgin, bears no resemblance at all with those other
Pictures of the Virgin, which they pretend to have been drawn by the Hand of S.
Luke himself. The Face here is round, fair, and ruddy, with lively and brisk
Eyes, and a low smooth Forehead; whereas that painted by S. Luke is long and
swarthy, Egyptian like, with an humble and modest Look, and an high and
prominent Forehead, and which has nothing of that so charming Beauty of the
Blessed Virgin, they so highly magnify when they speak of her, being more
proper to excite Sensual Lust, than any Sentiments of Devotion. Wherefore we
must conclude, That either this Angel was mistaken, or that S. Luke was a great
Ignoramus in the Art of Painting; which notwithstanding they tell us, he was
skilful in, to perfection; for, without doubt, the one or the other must have
been foully mistaken. To attribute this Mistake to the Angel, would be to
derogate extremely, and against all Reason, from the transcendent Excellence of
those Blessed Spirits; and to accuse S. Luke, would destroy their own
Tradition; which they ought not so far to villfie and debase, as to make it
give way to the particular Testimony of a Silly Painter, who may be a Liar, as
well as so many others; I speak of him who drew this Picture of the
Annunciation. Lastly, It might also as well be alleged, That the Devil, for
the encouragement and increase of Superstition, might have had a Finger in the
Intrigue, as so peremptorily to assert, That it was an Angel of Light; though to
speak the Truth, this is not very Rational neither, for the Devil is too
cunning to have done his Work so much at random, and would without doubt rather
have borrowed his Idea from the Picture of Sancta Maria Magiore, at Rome.
However the Popes have declared it to be a Truth, they have approved the
Matter, and have issued their Bulls for the Authorizing of it, and
Thunder'd-out their Excommunications against those who should be so Foolhardy
to doubt of it, being the same that other Popes have done in favor of the
Picture of S. Luke. This Devotion has procured vast Treasures to the Fathers of
this Convent, called Serviti. The Great Duke of Tuscany repaired thither every
Evening to Say his Prayers, whilst I was at Florence, and it is the common
Rendezvous of Strangers, that have a mind to see this Court. He every day gave
great Alms to the Poor at the Door of the Church, who all of them, (as I was
told) were persons very well to Live, though (to induce people more to
Compassion) they keep themselves covered with nothing but Rags. They have taken
such firm possession of this Post, that they will not suffer any strange Beggar
to mingle with them. By occasion of mentioning these Beggars, and that you may
somewhat the better apprehend the powerful Virtue of the Holy Image, and the
Miracles the Virgin continually works in favor of those, who repair thither to
pay her their Adorations, I Will here relate to you a Miracle which they Cried
along the Streets of Florence, as a thing that had lately happened, which Print
my Curiosity prompted me to buy. The Story seemed to me very Gallant, and though
it be something long, yet I hope the Recital will not seem tedious to you.

A Gentleman of one of the best Families of Florence, was fallen from a
flourishing condition, by means of some cross Blasts of Fortune, to extreme
Poverty. That which greatly added to his Affliction was, That he had two grown
Daughters that were not yet provided for; his only recourse in this miserable
condition, was to the Mother of God. And to enter himself the better into her
Favor, he made a Vow, to continue all his Life long very devout to her
Miraculous Image of the Annunciade: To this purpose he Rose very early every
Morning, and went to Say his Prayers in the Church Porch, before the Doors were
opened. After he had continued his Devotion thus for a long time, the Blessed
Virgin thought good at last to hear his Prayers, and to send him some Relief.
Accordingly she inspired two Blind-men, of the number of those who always kept
about the Door of the Church, to Rise sooner than ordinary, to take their
Stations in the Church Porch: Being arrived there, one of them began to tell
his Companion, how much he was beholden to the Miraculous Virgin, for that from
extreme Poverty, he had in a short time attained to competent Riches, by the
Alms he had received there; and that besides the Money in Silver he had left at
his Lodging, he had Two hundred Pistols in Gold quilted in the Crown of his
Hat. His Blind Comrade having heard this his Discourse, told him, That for his
part he did not in the least envy his good Luck, as being much more obliged to
the Miraculous Image, and that he had quilted in his Hat no less than Five
hundred Pistols in Gold. The Gentleman who was near to them at his Prayers,
without making the least Noise, that might discover him to be there, having
heard them discoursing at this rate, and seeing so fair an opportunity offered
him of enriching himself, very softly drew near to the two Blind-men, and very
dexterously took off both their Hats at once, retiring some Paces backwards.
The Blind-men being extremely surpised hereat, and each of them believing his
Companion had done the Feat, demanded their Hats of one another, and proceeded
to such a Rage, that handling their Crutches, they discharged several hearty
Strokes upon one another Heads; and without doubt had killed one another, if
People had not come in to part them. Whilst they were thus hotly engaged, the
Gentleman went off, and finding some scruple in himself for what he had done,
he goes the same Day to the Cardinal, Archbishop of Florence, to whom he told
all that had past: The Archbishop having heard the Relation, did fully approve
of what he had done, and told him, That he was not at all obliged to make any
Restitution; forasmuch as it was apparent, That the Virgin had visibly assisted
him in the whole course of that Affair, in consideration of the Devotion he
bore to her Miraculous Portraiture, and Ordered, That for the Comfort of the
Faithful it should be printed and published through, out the City of Florence.
This same Story has since been printed anew, in a Book which is very Current in
Italy, and has for its Title, L'Utile col Dolci, or, Profit with Pleasure. You
see here, Sir, a very pleasant Miracle, wherein the Virgin, to pleasure one of
her Servants, makes a Robber of him, and who as such ought to be punished
according to the Laws. For by what means soever these poor Blind-men might have
picked up this Money, however theirs it was, and had been given them for Alms.
But if we suppose this, to be a Story invented at pleasure, I am astonished,
that a Cardinal-Archbishop should ever cause it to be printed; and that the
Inquisition, which in all other Matters appear so exact and scrupulous, should
License the Impression of it in the Book beforementioned, People are so cloyed
with Miracles in Italy, that except they contain some thing Romantic and
Fabulous, they are scarcely taken notice of. This is that which makes the
Italians, who not without great Reason are accused of Coining New On^s every
day, to have a great care to set them out with such rare and surprising, or
such merry and pleasing Circumstances, that it is very divertizing to Read
them, or hear them Related. I may have an occasion to give you a more
particular Account hereof in one of my LETTERS; and therefore shall at present
pass over in Silence the many Miracles of this Famous Church of the Annunciade,
to give you an Account of some Places of Devotion, which are not far distant
from the City of Florence, and which I had the Curiosity to go and Visit.

It Is amongst the high Mountains of the Apennine, that we meet with Three
famous Deserts, at a Days Journey distance from each other, where as many Heads
of different Orders had their Beginning: The first of these is Camaldule, the
second Valombrosa, and the third Mont-Alverne. Of these, Camaldule has by way
of pre-eminence been called the Holy Desert, and is certainly one of the most
Desert places Nature can produce. S. Romualdus obtained this place of an Earl,
called Maldule, from whence it took its Name of Camaldule, as being a kind of
abbreviation of Campmaldule, or the Field of Maldule. Hither it was then, that
he retired, to lead a Penitent Life; and having by his Example engaged some
Disciples to join with him, he built there a Monastery upon a very high
Mountain, in an Interval lying between two Tops or Prominences thereof; and
afterward being desirous of a greater Solitude, he retired to one of those
Tops, which is a place almost inaccessible: Where he Instituted a kind of
Double Order, one of Monks, and the other of Solitaries or Hermits; but under
the same Habit and Rule, excepting only some particular Constitutions to the
one, with reference to the Hermetick-Life; and to the others, for the
Monastic. The Monks dwelt in the Monastery he had built below, and the
Solitaries retired with him to the Top, which at present is called the Holy
Desert. I arrived at this Monastery in the beginning of October. From Florence
it is in a manner a continual Up-hill thither, and from thence one may discover
that great and lofty City, with the Country all about it, which affords a most
pleasing Prospect. These Fathers have always preserved Hospitality amongst
them, and to this Day entertain all Strangers that come thither, and Treat them
according to their Quality for Three days together. Forasmuch as there is
neither Inn, nor any Houses near it, I went and presented my self to the Abbey,
where I was very civilly received. I found here Three Florentine Gentlemen, to
whose Company I joined my self, and at Night we were Served at Table with Eggs
and Fish, without any Superfluity, but with a Mediocrity well-becoming the
Religious State of these Fathers, with which I was much more Edified, than I
had been at the Citeaux in France, where the Abbot Treated us with so much
Profusion and Excess. We acquainted them over Night, That we designed the next
Day to go to the Sacred Desert; and accordingly they Called us up at Five of
the Clock the next Morning, and made us Sit-down to Eat at Six. I was extremely
surpised, to see they had prepared Dinner so early, when none of us had the
least Appetite to Meat: But they told us, That we must force our selves to Eat
as well as we could, because the Air was so piercing and cold in climbing up to
the Top of the Mountain, that we should never be able to bear it, if we
attempted it with empty Stomachs. Moreover, That we were to prepare our selves,
to Clamber on Foot for Six Miles together on the Rocks, and to march through
the Snow, before we could come to the Top of the Holy Desert, and that there
they never gave any Meat to any person, to avoid disturbing of their Solitude;
so that we should be forced, to come down from thence by the same Way to the
Monastery, there to take a Second Refreshment. We suffered our selves therefore
to be persuaded, and after we had Eaten, we parted from the Monastery about
Seven of the Clock, and walked on toward the Top, always compassing the
Mountain, in a continued Forest of tall Fir-Trees. All these Rocks are full of
little Springs, from whence issues a very clear Water, whose Rivulets disperse
themselves all over the Way by which we went; so that one cannot Climb very
high without marching in the Water, which is very troublesome. These Waters
meeting together form a considerable Torrent, which we passed and re-pass'd
upon great Fir-Trees laid over in the form of Bridges. We arrived about Noon at
the Top, after having marched Two Miles through the Snow. This was in the Month
of October; but the Top of the Mountain is so cold, that when it Rains below,
it almost continually Snows here on high. We found the Snow very high there,
and had been so for Eight Days; so that at a distance we could see nothing but
the Upper Part of the Church, and the Tiles or Covering of the Cells; we
counted about Sixty of them, which are about Twenty Paces distant from one
another, and taken all together form a Little Town: Every Cell has several
Rooms, and a Garden. They showed us that of St. Romuald, which one of the
Hermits dwelt in. We asked them, Why they bore no greater respect to the Cell
of their Happy Founder, but left it to one of their Religious to live in? They
told us, That this was the only way they had to preserve it against the
Moisture the place was obnoxious to; and that otherwise the Wood would rot, and
the Cell be in danger of Falling-down. They showed us the Cell of a Venerable
Hermit, who (they assured us) had not stirred thence for Forty Years together,
and who still lived there in perpetual Silence, not so much as speaking a Word
to any one. They put in his Meat to him through a Little Window, which he took
with great sobriety and moderation. These Solitaries esteemed him a Saint, for
they value Silence above all other Virtues: Which gave me occasion to demand of
those who were ordered to accompany us, what kind of thing this great Virtue of
Silence was, and how they defined it? They answered, That it was to be Silent
with Men, in order to speak to God. Whereupon I replied, That it seemed to me
to be better defined thus; To be Silent, or to speak when one ought; and that I
could not approve of the Use they had introduced amongst them, of Speaking to
one another by Signs. We our selves indeed had but newly experienced the
Inconveniences of it, at our first Entrance into the Holy Desert; for having
found the Court-Gate open, we went in to rights; but when we were entered, not
knowing which Way to betake our selves, we drew near to some of these
Solitaries, who were busy in removing of the Snow, to make a Passage. We
desired them, to be so kind, as to tell us, To whom we might address our
selves, for to take a View of the Place; but not so much as one of them opened
their Mouths, to give us a Word in answer: Some of them made Signs to us with
their Hands and Feet, and others with their Brooms and Shovels. We believed at
first, that they were Fools, or that they had a mind to drive us out again; but
at last we apprehended, That they made Signs to us to Return to the Gate, and
there speak with the Porters; with whom we happily met. I immediately told
these Porters, That it appeared to me very strange, that God having given to
Men a Tongue and a Mouth, wherewith to express their Thoughts; some persons,
instead of acknowledging this Advantage God had given them above Brute-Beasts,
by a good and discreet use thereof, should undertake to make use of their Hands
and Feet to express themselves, like those that are Dumb-born, or that have
their Tongues cut out. That at the best this seemed to me very improper, and
very far from appearing to be a Virtue, fit to make Men Good and Holy. They
Answered me, That these were Mysteries hid and unknown to Seculars, and only
revealed by God to Solitaries and Perfect Souls, who knew the Excellence of it.
The Sins (proceeded he) of the Men of the World, are gross Sins, such as
Covetousness, Envy, Luxury, Blasphemy, etc. but as for us, our greatest Sins
are, when sometimes by Frailty we do break our observance of Silence; to Walk
with too much haste and precipitation; to cast some curious (though Innocent)
Looks; to be Slovenly in our Habits; to have preferred sometime Vocal, to
Mental-Prayer; to have been too much pleased with the Taste of Heavenly
Comfort, or too Heavy and Cast-down under Sufferings. I seemed to perceive in
these his Answers, something of Pride and Haughtiness, and that smelt strong of
a Pharisaical, Non sum sicut caeteri hominum; I am not like other Men; and
which made me fear, that Pride (having been the Sin of the Angels in Heaven)
might probably also be the Sin of these Solitaries here on the Top of the
Mountain. And indeed, so far were all these dazzling Shows of Piety from making
me conceive any Inclination for these Material Solitudes, which seemed so much
to facilitate the Practice thereof, that on the contrary it made me conceive a
greater Love for an Ordinary and Humble Life in the World, accompanied with all
those Pious Practices, which in such a Life we have continual Opportunities to
ex^rt. It appeared to me, That these Solitaries placed the whole and main of
Godliness in some trifling Observances, which yet are powerful enough to make
them wander from the Paths of that Charity, they ought to have for those who
are engaged in the Commerce of the World, as looking upon them no otherwise,
than as Men that are in the Highway to utter Perdition, and for whom there is
almost no hope of Salvation. Surely such Thoughts as these cannot be said to
comply with Charity; for without doubt, some Seculars living in the World, are
as acceptable in the Eyes of God, as these Hermits on the Mountains. The
Porters told us, That Three times a Week, they of the Monastery below brought
up Viands, and other necessary Provisions, for the Sustenance of those who
lived in the Sacred Desert. At last, they conducted us to the Church, which is
very Little and Narrow, all Lined and Wainscoted with Wood, against the
Moisture and great Coldness of the place. They assured us, That some certain
Winters, the Cells, Church and all, were wholly buried in the Snow, and that
they were fain to hollow themselves out Passages below through the Snow, making
some Holes to the Top, to let in the Light, for to pass from one Cell to
another, which then appeared like so many great White-Vaults. They told us,
That all the while they live under the Snow, they are very little sensible of
the Cold; but to preserve themselves from the ill effects of the Moisture, they
keep good Wood-Fires, that burn Day and Night, as having very near them vast
Forests of Pine, Chestnut, and Fir-Trees, which do furnish them with Wood in
great abundance. After we had Visited the Church, we Returned by the same Way
we came, and arrived at the Abbey about five a Clock in the Evening, where we
were Civilly entertained as before. It Is only this Monastery that is still
maintaind in good Observance; all other Monks of the same Order, who have many
Monasteries in Italy, lead a very scandalous Life. We parted thence the next
day, after that we had returned our Thanks to these Fathers, and knowing that
the Abbey of Valombrosa, which is chief of another Order of Monks, very famous
in Italy, was not above a days Journey from thence, we all of us Traveled
thither. We went down Hill for some Miles, and afterward Coasted about the
Apennin, by a very pleasant way. We Traveled a great way through Woods of
Olive Trees, all laden with Olives, and ever and anon met with small Hills
full of Orange and Citron-Trees, full hung with Citrons and Oranges. Some of
them are so high that a Man on Horseback may pass under them, without touching
the Branches. After they have been once planted, they grow without standing in
need of any Art or Husbandry. All these sides of the Mountains are exceeding
Rich, as abounding with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and at the bottom of every
one of these Trees, there is the stock of a Vine that embraces it, and
enterlacing its Branches with those of the Tree, does at the Season make a very
pleasant mixture of its Grapes with the Fruit. After half a days Journey, we
were obliged to mount the Apennin, for four Miles together, through very stony
and rugged ways, until we came to Valombrosa, in Latin Vallis Umbrosa. This
place is indeed a Valley with repect to the Tops of the Mountains, that raise
themselves a great hight above it; but if we compare it, with the Level of the
Country that lies beneath, it is a very high Mountain, and very cold, for there
are no Fruit Trees to be seen here, except only some Chestnut-Trees, and a few
Apple Trees. The great Forests of Pine and Fir-Trees that emcompass it, in
former times rendered the place very Dark and Shady, which was the occasion of
giving it the name of Valombrosa. S. John Gualbert made choice of this place
for his retirement. He naturally was a Lover of these kind of places, and in
all his Travels, whenever he met with any Dark Wood, or very Solitary place,
he cast in his mind, some time or other to come and fix his Abode there, and to
be the founder of a Monastery. I am frequently obliged in my Letters, in
compliance with the Exigency of my matter, to relate to you several vicious and
wicked Actions of the Italian Priests and Monks; a thing very contrary to my
Natural inclination, which prompts me to conceal the ill, and to publish only
the good. Wherefore a little to refresh my wearied Pen, and to comply with the
desire I have to Honor the Memory of great men, you will give me leave, Sir, I
hope, to give my self the Satisfaction of Relating to you an Action truly
Virtuous and Memorable of S. John Gualbert. This young Lord had a Brother, whom
he most tenderly loved, who being engaged in a Duel, was unhappily killed by
his Rival. Gualbert supposed it would be an Action worthy of his Honor, and
great Courage, to endeavor to avenge the Death of his Brother. To this purpose
he engaged himself in pursuit of this Homicide, who being fled, he went in
quest of him throughout all the Provinces of Italy. It happened at length that he
met with him Disarmed in a way where he could not escape him. The unhappy
Wretch seeing him come toward him, with his drawn Sword in his Hand* cast
himself Prostrate on the Ground, Crying for Mercy; but perceiving by his
Thundering Voice, and his inflamed looks, that there was no Quarter to be hoped
for, laid his Arms a cross his Breast, in expectation of the mortal Thrust.
Gualbert seeing him in this posture, called to mind our Lord Jesus Christ
hanging on the Cross, who was so far from Avenging himself, that he not only
prayed for his Persecuters, but died for them. This thought having quite spoild
his former design, he alights from his Horse, and instead of Running his Enemy
through, he freely forgave him, kissed him, and embraced him, and tendered him
ever after as his own Brother. If the Italians and other Papists in stead of
amusing themselves, about the Superstitious worship of their Saints, would once
apply themselvee to imitate these lovely examples of their Virtues, they would
without doubt render themselves more acceptable to God, neither would they be
found so basely and abominably Avenging themselves as they do. I return now to
my Solitude of Valombrosa: We arrived at this famous Abbey, where are some of
the most Magnificent and Sumptuous Buildings that can be. One of the Florentine
Gentlemen that was with me had a Brother there, who was the chief Person there,
next to the Abbot, for whose sake we were very Civilly received. The Monks here
lead a very Commodious and Pleasant Life; when they are weary of living in this
Desert, they make an enterchange with the Monks of Florence, and thereby enjoy
the pleasing variety of living one part of the year in the Country, and the
other in the City. They have cut down for a quarter of a League round their
Monastery all the great Fir-Trees that Shadowed it, to give themselves more
Air, and to make the place more Healthy. The next Morning we were led to the
Hermitage of S. John Gualbert, which is at about half a Leagues distance, upon
the Point of a little Rock, which lifts up it self in the midst of the Valley
being very craggy on every side. In getting up to it, we went round the Rock as
by a winding Stairs for the space of about a quarter of an hour, at the end of
which, we found our selves at the Top of the Rock, where the Hermitage is;
which consists of a very neat Chapel, curiously Guilt and Painted all over,
and a very hansome Set of Lodgings, well Wainscoted and Painted all within,
with a Garden of a moderate size, so that the whole is a mere Jewel. There is
no Monument left here of the ancient Cell of this Saint, all the Buildings
being new and Modern: There is always a Father Hermit, that dwells here with a
Converse Brother to serve him. Whenever the Hermit dies, the Abbots of the
Congregation of Valombrosa, at their general Chapter, make choice of a Monk, of
exemplary Life, and a Lover of Solitude, to reside there. The great Abbey is to
furnish him, with all necessaries of Life: He has a very fine Library full of
choice Books, when he has a mind to Study, and indeed the Hermit that was then
in Possession of the place, was a man of competent Learning, and appeard to me
a very honest man. He made us a very fine discourse about the contempt of the
World, and the advantages of Retirement and Solitude: Tho indeed there was no
great need of it, for we were already, without all that, so Charmed with the
Beauty of this Hermitage, that in case there had been more of the same cut,
Nature, rather than Grace would easily ^ave persuaded us to become Hermits, in
order to enjoy an easy and pleasent Life, without either care or trouble. The
Monks of Valombrosa, have extremely relaxed the strictness of their first
Institution. They are Clothed in Black, and profess the Rule of S. Bennet, tho
indeed they observe but little of it: The next day we set out very betimes in
^he Morning toward Mount Alverne. This is ^^e place where the Seraphick Father
S. Francis, ^^under of all the Religious Orders, that live under (...) is Rule,
retired himself, to spend his Life in Contemplation, and where, as they tell
us, he received the Impression of the sacred Wounds. This days Journey was
exceeding troublesome to us; We went up from Valombrosa, by the direction of a
Guide we took along with us, to the very Top of the Appennin, and continued our
way upon the same, till we came to the Foot of Alverne. This Mountain is
discovered at a great distance, and some maintain it to be the highest of all
the Alpennin. It has nothing that is pleasing or delightful about it, neither
is any thing to be seen here besides bare Rocks, without either Trees or
Verdure: It is so high that it seldom or never Rains there, which was the
reason we found no Snow here. We got up to it, with a great deal of trouble and
difficulty, by a very narrow way, between extreme high Precipices, and we could
not gain the Top of it, till it was in a manner quite dark night. Here we found
a large Convent of Religious, of the Order of S. Francis, called by the
Italians Soccolanti, because of the Wooden-Socks they wear instead of Shoes.
The first thing we did was to enquire where we might Lodge for that night; the
Fathers told us there was an Inn close by, for the Entertainment of Strangers.
Formerly these Religious exercised Hospitality toward all sorts of Persons,
that out of Devotion came to Alverne, as the Fathers of Camaldule do to this
day, to those who come to visit the Holy Desert, whereof I have spoken before;
but at present they are weary of this piece of service, and do employ the Fund
destinated to that purpose, to their own advantage. By bad hap for us, there
was no body in the Inn, the Innkeeper with all his Family, being gone to a
Wedding, a days Journey from the place; so that we were obliged to return to the
Convent, and entreat the Fathers to afford us some shelter amongst them for
that night, since there was no other place for us to bestow our selves. The
Fathers seeing no remedy granted our request, but with so much Aversness and
ill will, that we could not but wonder to see that persons, who for the most
part live upon the Alms, that are abundantly contributed to them by Seculars,
should refuse to assist them upon occasion. They showed us a Chamber where we
might lie, but as for affording us any thing to Eat, they desired our excuse,
telling us that they had none for themselves; being thus resolved to leave us
without either Meat or Fire, though the nights be exceeding cold there, upon the
pretense of the trouble they had in getting their Wood, as being obliged to
fetch it from the Foot of the Mountain. We desired them at least to be so kind,
to give us leave to enter their Kitchen, for to warm our selves a little at
their common Fire: but they being very loath that we should see the good
Provisions, they had there prepared for themselves, told us that they could not
grant our request, because they had some of their Fathers that were Sick, about
the Fire, saying of their Office. One of the Florentine Gentlemen that was in
our Company, knowing that the Convent was never destitute of Provisions, broke
out into a Passion against the Guardian, and reproaching him with his base
Incivility, told him That he constantly three times a Week sent a good quantity
of Bread and Wine to their great Convent at Florence, but that he was resolved
to stop his Hand for time to come, and give them the bag, and that moreover he
himself would acquaint them with the Reason moving him so to do. This
advertisement made the Guardian presently change his note, and having excused
himself for what was past in consideration of the Benefactor of his Order, he
himself conducted us into the Kitchen, where in stead of these Sick Fathers,
and mumblers of their Offices, we found there four or five fat and bonny
Friars, playing at Dice, a great Pot Boiling over the Fire, besides several
Joints of Meat a Roasting: One of these Friars seeing us come in, very nimbly
snatched up the Dice and Boxes into his Gown; but a while after forgetting
himself, rose up, and let all tumble down on the Ground. The Father Guardian
perceiving the mischance had happened, excused them the best he could, telling
us, that having been that day a great way off a Preaching, to refresh
themselves they had made bold with a little Recreation. In fine they made us
Sup with them, and we were very well Treated. After Supper they conducted us to
our Chamber, where we found a very good Fire. The next day one of these Fathers
accompanied us to show us the Holy Places of Mount Alvern: We were extremely
surprised to see the surface of this Mountain, which we had not had the time
the night before to take notice of, because it was very late when we arrived.
The whole Mountain is nothing else but a company of Rocks heaped one upon
another, and all cleft asunder, forming as many hideous Precipices, which
cannot be viewed without Horror. Some believe that these Rocks were Rent
asunder at the Death of our Lord: S. Francis was of this mind, when he pitched
upon this place for his Retirement, to Meditate upon the sacred Mysteries of
the Passion. They showed us the place, where the History of his Life tells us,
that Jesus Christ appeared to him, in the form of a Seraphim on the Cross, and
imprinted in his Hands, his Feet, and his Side, the Five wounds were given him
on the Cross, to the end it might be said, that S. Francis had suffered as much
as he: But indeed according to this account he would have suffered much more,
for the same Legend adds, that he suffered even till his Death, the Pains of
Jesus Christ as sensibly, as Jesus Christ felt them, when he received them on
the Cross; and that from that time forward the Life he lived was continued by a
perpetual Miracle, which preserved his Life in the midst of a continual Death.
For my part, I find this pretended Apparition of Jesus Christ like a Seraphim
with Wings, extremely improper, not to say Ridiculous; why not rather in his
human form? He that would not take upon him the nature of Angels, shall we
believe that he would ever take their Figure? And would not this highly favor
the Opinion of those Ancient Heretics, who maintained, that the Son of God,
had only taken upon him an Aerie and Fantastical Body? And to speak my mind, I
believe that this Impression of the Wounds, was only performed in the strong
Imagination of S. Francis, much like some others have imagined, that they had
Feet of Wax, and a Head of Glass. The place where it is said, that this
Miraculous Operation was Celebrated, is under a great Stone, whereof the one
end only is wedged into the Rocks, yet so as according to my Understanding is
sufficient for its Support. Nevertheless these Fathers, every where proclaim
this for a great Miracle, and that it cannot be conceived but that naturally
the Stone must needs fall. Near to this they show us a little Pathway very
narrow, upon the Brink of a vast Precipice, which was the way by which S.
Francis went to pray, under that Rock. The Devil envying his great Devotion,
Attempted, upon a time to cast him down Headlong; but he seeing the Enemy of
Mankind coming toward him, leand himself against the Rock, which made way for
his Body, softning like Wax to receive him. They still show this Impression of
his Body left in the Rock, but which may as well have been done with a Chizzel,
as the way they tell us. As for the Devil, sure it is that the Roman Catholics
make many pretty Stories of him, that are not always very Authentic. I
remember to have seen in France, in the Church of S. Colombe near Sens, a very
pleasant History, represented En relief, upon an Holy Water Basin Marble, near
the Door of the Church, concerning an Holy Hermit called Beat. The Devil being
come on a certain time to distract his Thoughts, whilst he was saying of his
Office, the Saint laying hold of him, lift him up by the Ears, and put him into
the Basin and having laid his Breviary upon it, kept him a Prisoner there for
ten days together. Nothing can be imagined more Comical, than to see the
Representation of this Devil, who as far as he is able, lifts up his great
Asses-Ears, above the Holy Water, with the marks of an extreme Rage in his
Countenance; for, say they, he fears the Holy Water, many degrees beyond the
Fire of Hell. The Monks of this Abbey thought good to be at the charge of this
work, ad perpetuam rei Memoriam; But I return to Mount Alvern: The Fathers
afterward showed us many other places in the Rocks where S. Francis performed
his Religious Exercises, and amongst others, that where he wrote the
Constitutions of his Order, whereof I have seen the Original writ with his own
Hand, at Our Lady of Portiuncule, which is a little Chapel in Umbria, about
five Miles from Assise. Here it was, as they tell us, that he had many
Revelations and Apparitions: Amongst the rest they tell us, of an Apparition of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who in consideration of the great Zeal of this Saint for
the Salvation of Sinners, granted to him, as plenary an Indulgence as he could
give, that is to say, an entire Remission of Guilt and Punishment for all
those, who the first day of August should visit this little Chapel: So that
the Grand Universal Jubilee of the Holy Year, is not more saving to Sinners,
than this of S. Francis. Any person who on this day goes to visit that Chapel,
with intention to enjoy the advantage of this Jubilee, with saying five Paster
Nosters and as many Ave Marias, be he the most Abominable Sinner that lives on
Earth, becomes as Pure and Innocent, as he was when newly Baptized; and should
he die in that Condition, there is neither Hell nor Purgatory for him, but
would go directly to Paradise. And conformable to this Belief of the Roman
Catholics, and more particularly of the Italians, there is such a prodigious
concourse of People on this day from all parts, that it causes a Famine in all
the Country thereabouts, and many are killed in the throng that is at the Door
of the Church, who then go to enjoy the Privilege of their Indulgence in the
other World. Now seeing all this, must not we avow, that either the Roman
Catholics are very blind, or else very negligent of their Salvation, when in
the most Important Affair Imaginable, and the greatest concern of their
Immortal Souls, the Remissions of their Sins, rely upon the word of a Mortal
man? Their S. Francis has told them, that by going to such a place, on such a
day, and there saying such and such Prayers, their Sins, with all the
Chastisements due to them, for the same, shall be entirely forgiven them, and
that he has received the assurance of this from the Mouth of Jesus Christ
himself, who, he says, appeard in particular to him for this purpose; and
without examining the matter any further, they believe it, they rely upon his
word, and cast behind their Backs, O stupendous occaecation! the Sacred Oracles
of the Gospel, which do seriously warn them, that the only way to have their
Sins Pardoned, is true Repentance. The Fathers Soccolanti of the Order of S.
Francis, who are extremely enriched by means of this Devotion, have built
themselves in this place a very fair Convent; and forasmuch as the Chapel was
too little for their use, they have built a great and Magnificent Church round
about it, so as the little Church stands now enclosed in the greater. I never
yet saw any place of Devotion in Italy, which had not some fair Palace, and a
good Kitchen for the use and Accommodation of those who make the best of it,
which I confess makes them still the more suspect to me. Five Miles distant
from hence, we met with Assise, which is a pretty Town, Situate on a Hill: This
is the place where S. Francis was Born, and where they say his Body reposeth at
the great Convent of the Franciscans, in a Subterranean Chapel, under the high
Altar. It Is said, that his Body, and that of S. Dominick continue there,
without the least Symptom of Corruption, and that they stand both upright on
their Feet, Hand in Hand, without any thing to uphold them: and that it has
pleased God thus to permit, that these two Saints, that had been so great
Friends during their Lives, should not be separated after Death. This is a
Mystery that is not suffered to be seen at present; the Pope himself for all
his pretended Power in Heaven and on Earth, is not admitted to th^^ Privilege,
since one of his Predecessors miscarried in the attempt, who being resolved to
take a view of this rare Wonder, Died suddenly. And soon after both these
Saints appeared to an honest Franciscan-Fryar, and told him, that the like
should happen to all those, who should be so Foolhardy, (...) attempt the same
thing. But yet notwithstandin^ all this Tradition, the Fathers Soccolanti, who
co^stitute a distinct Body, from that of the Francisca^^ assure us, That they
have the Body of S. Francis (...) Portiuncule, which, as I have already said,
is not ^bove five Miles distant from thence; as well as the Dominicans maintain
that they have the Bod^ of their Patriarch, in their Great Convent of Bononia^
Indeed, the Reason why the Popes do not Visit this place, is not because they
are afraid of meeting Death there, but because they are afraid of disobliging
of one of these Potent parties, I mean the Franciscans, or the Dominicans;
since it is evident, they could not make the Discovery, without ruining one or
other of these Devotions, which would be a vast prejudice to these Religious
Orders; wherefore they like better, to leave the People in Superstition and
Error, than to open their Eyes at their own Cost. The Pope is obliged to
cultivate and improve the Interest of the Monks, forasmuch as they support his
Interest.

The Third thing wherewith I designed to entertain you, before my closing of
this LETTER concerning S. Francis, is, That amongst other things, I saw a small
Convent which he built himself, with the Assistance of his Brethren, in a
Descent from the Apennin, leading to a Town of Italy, called, The Borough of
the Holy Sepulcher. He lived in this Convent several Years, and designed it for
a Model to those Convents of his Order, that should be built for time to come.
To speak the Truth, I never in my Life saw so wretched a Dwelling: The whole
Convent is nothing else but a company of Holes or Caves, more proper to Lodge
Bears, than for Men to retire in. Now, I could wish, that Men would a little
compare this poor Hovel, with those Magnificent Convents which his Children, I
mean those who profess to live under his Rule, have built throughout all Italy;
to wit, those Grand Convents of Rome, Naples, Venice, and in a word, of all the
other Cities. Have not the most Famous Architects exhausted their Art, and
racked their Brains, to form the Model of them? The most Renowned Painters
employed their utmost Skill and choicest Colors, to make all their Walls a
pleasing and lively Story? The most curious Guilders their finest Gold, to make
thereof Ceilings bright and luminous? And lastly, Have not the Bowels of the
Apennin been ravaged for the finest Marbles, the choicest Jaspers and rarest
Porphyries, to form the Pillars that support them, to Pave their Cloisters,
their Refectories, and their Dormitories; and to Compose all the Doors,
Windows, and Chimneys of their Cells? The Cap^chin Fathers are the only Men
that have witnessed some horror for so extravagant a Pomp, so diametrically
opposite to the Laws of Humility and Poverty, which they received from their
Legislato^ S. Francis. They engaged themselves at the beginning of their
Reformation, to a certain Standard o^ Building their Convents, which was both
very modest and regular; only they have always had a great Care, to provide
themselves fair Gardens, with fine Parterres, pleasant Fountains, and great
Walks of Trees, which are commonly frequented by the Gentlemen of Cities that
are near them, to take the Air in. The Capuchins are at this da^ the best
Gardiners in Europe. In Italy they furnish^^ all the Ladies with Flowers, and
Big-bellied Women with Fruits.

But we find, that of late they have lost much of their Modesty in Building
too: The New Buildings they make at present are more lofty, more large; their
Cells greater, their Churches more adorned, and their other Regular places,
more comporting with the Modern way of Building. They have very fair Convents
at Venice, Florence, Pisa, and Milan. When I passed through the Duchy of
Burgundy in France, I saw at Dijon the fine Pile of Building, these Fathers
caused to be raised for their Sick, which was not in the least inferior to the
fair Palaces of the Presidents and Counselors of Parliament of that City. And
when I passed through Germany, in my Way for England, I saw upon the Rhine,
about Half a days Journey above Coblentz, a stately Building, which I took for
one of the Palaces of the Elector of Treves, but was indeed a Convent of
Capuchins, which his Electoral Highness caused to be built for them. Before the
Foundations of it were laid, he demanded of them a Model of their Convents, to
have it built by; but the Fathers answered him, That if S. Francis were to give
the Plane, it would be very plain and scanty; but that forasmuch as his
Electoral Highness had the Goodness to concern himself therewith, it could not
well be blamed, if the Building did in some degree suit with his Greatness.

The Conclusion of all is this, Sir, That whatever these Men may pretend to, as
long as they shall make the Christian-Perfection to consist in certain
Fantastic, Stoical and Extraordinary ways of Living, a short times Experience
will make it appear they have deceived themselves; all their fine Designs will
vanish in their own view. And as the Principles on which they build are false,
they will always find themselves reduced to the impossibility of practicing what
they have Vowed; and will be forced at last to acknowledge, that the great
Axioms of Christian Morality, which are of an infallible Truth, and to which
only we ought to tie our selves; are to avoid Evil, and to do Good; to love God
with all our Heart, and our Neighbor as our selves. I conclude with these
excellent words, and am with all my Heart,

SIR, Your, etc.

The Fourth LETTER, Of a Journey to Loretto, etc.
SIR,
HAving promised in my last LETTER, to give you an Account of my Journey to
Loretto, I doubt not but your Curiosity, (to be informed about that place of
Devotion, which makes so great a Noise in the World,) will incline you to wish
for the performance of my Promise. To the end therefore that I may acquit my
self thereof, I shall begin where my last LETTER left me. After the View I had
taken of Mount Alverne, I parted with my Company, who went no further, and all
alone came down the other side of the Apennin; and taking my Way through the
Towns of Fossombrone and Urbane, I came to Fane, which is a pretty City,
situate on the Adri^tick Sea. Whilst I was here, going abroad in the Morning to
look out for some Convenience to go to Loretto, I saw a great Company of
persons very comically Mounted, and dress^d, coming into Town. They were
Pilgrims that came from Bononia, being about Threescore in number, and all of
them mounted on Asses, which is a very easy and commodious way of Traveling,
and more in request in the Marquisate of Ancone, than the use of Horses. The
first place where we meet with this convenience of Traveling, is at Imola,
Half a days Journey from Bononia. Formerly Travelers were wont to hire their
Asses at Bononia: But forasmuch as some Wits took occasion from hence to use an
Allusion, which did not over-please the Scholars and Doctors of the University
of that City; (for it was a common Saying, We will go to Loretto, and take an
Ass at Bononia) the Magistrates for their sakes abolished that Custom; so that
now these Beasts must be hired at Imola, and for the value of about a Shilling
a Man may Travel Six Miles, which is the Stage those Asses are wont to perform.
They are furnished with Little Saddles and Stirrups, in the manner as Horses;
but there is no need either of a Whip or Spurs, for as soon as one is got upon
their Backs, they run continually with all their might, until they be come to
their Journies end; where being arrived it is impossible by all the Strokes
that can be given them, to make them advance one step further; but one is
forced to leave them there, and take others. Thus these Asses are changed at
every Six Miles end, till one comes to the Mountain of Ancona* which is not
very far from Laretto.

But to return to our Pilgrims, and to give you a further description of them;
they were all of them accoutred in their Pilgrimage Habits, which consisted of
a large Linnen-Vest, of an Ash-grey color, reaching to the middle of the Leg,
with very wide Sleeves, coming down to the Wrist; on the backside of these
Vests, at the Collar, they have a kind of a large Cowl, which they put over
their Heads, and being pulled down reaches to the Pit of the Stomach, so that
their Faces are wholly covered with them. And to the end, that in this posture
they might have their free Sight and Breathing, these Cowls have openings in
them, answering to the Eyes and Mouth, like Masks. They never draw these Cowls
over their Heads, but when they come to places where they have no mind to be
known; for otherwise, they let them hang backwards upon their Shoulders. They
gird this Vest about them with a Girdle, and somewhat above the Girdle upon
their Breast, they have a Scutcheon, representing the Arms of their Society,
Confriery, or Company, which they call in Italian, Scuola. There be scarcely
any Italians that are not of one or other of these Societies. These Pilgrims
moreover have a large Row of Pater-noster-Beads hanging at their Girdles, and a
Pilgrims Staff in their Hands, which is the chief mark of their Pilgrimaging.
These Staves are about an Half-Pikes length, with Knots or Protuberances at the
Top and middle of them. They carry them to the Church, to get them blessed by
their Curates, before their Setting-forth, which Ceremony is performed with
many Prayers, and the assistance of Holy Water: As soon as they have received
them, it is not lawful for them to stay any longer than Three days at the place
of their Residence, and cannot be admitted to the Communion till they have
performed their Pilgrimage, except they be pleased to change the Vow they have
made into a Pecuniary Mulct; for in that case they are very readily discharged
by the Priests. The Pilgrims which I saw, upon their arrival at Fane, were all
of them dressed in Vests of the same Color, and had already run one Stage on
their Asses. Their Vests were all New, and of very sine Linen; and forasmuch
as in all appearance, they were not moved to put on that Garb from a Penitent
Spirit, they had taken care to tuck them up high enough in several places, to
make their sine Clothes of Gold and Silk, they had under them, to be seen;
which made me also believe, that probably they must be Persons of Quality.
Their Girdles were of Silk, of the same color with their Vests, and extremely
well wrought. Upon my Enquiry, Who they were? it was told me, They were the
Company or Society of our Lady of Life of Bononia, which is the Name of a very
richly Endowed Hospital, for the Relief of poor Sick. People, and where the
Priests have Erected a Congregation or Society of Noble Persons, who have their
daily Masses and Prayers there. Upon their entering into this Society, they
oblige themselves to assist the Poor of that place, with their Estates and best
Endeavors. The greatest part of the Gentlemen of Bononia are of this Society;
they go every year by way of Procession to Loretto, toward the end of Autumn,
when Vintage is past; which is likewise observed by most other Companies. As
soon as they were come near to the Great Church, the Priests came out to meet
them, with the Cross and Banner, by way of Reception and bidding of them
Welcome, and made a short Speech to them; to which the Prior of the Company,
being a Bononian Earl, returned an Answer in few words. After this, they entered
into the Church, where they made some short Prayers, and then dispersed
themselves throughout the best Inns of the City, whither Orders had been sent
Overnight, to provide a good Dinner. It was about Ten of the Clock in the
Morning when these Pilgrims arrived, and near half an Hour after, they were
followed by about some Twenty Caleches, full of Ladies. These were
She-Pilgrims, who had left Bononia upon the same design; and who were all of
them, either Kinswomen or Mistresses of the foresaid Pilgrim-Gentlemen. They
were all of them most sumptuosly Attired, and with an Air of Wantonness and
Gaiety, that very ill became persons who went a Pilgrimaging out of Devotion
They had Little Pilgrims-Staves, fastened to the Bodies of their Gowns; some of
them were of Gold, others of Ivory all beset with costly Pearls and Diamonds;
some had them made up of Orangeflowers, or of those Artificial-flowers which
are in so great esteem at Bononia, and which make the greatest part of the
Traffic of the Nuns of that City. Others again had them all wrought of
Needle Work, to that height of Curiosity, that one of them might probably have
been the Work of many Years: And lastly, Others had them of other precious and
costly Matter. The Pilgrims had no sooner taken possession of their Inns, and
given Order to have all things in a readiness, but they went forth to meet
their Ladies; and having bid them Welcome, they conducted them with a great deal
of Honor and Ceremony into the Apartment prepared for them. My Curiosity to
observe these Proceedings, prompted me to Return to mine Inn; where I had
already taken notice of the great Preparations that were making for them: And
finding that the Gentlemen wanted a Chamber more to accomodate them, I offered
them mine; and in Recompense thereof they very civilly entreated me to Dine
with them. The Table was covered with many Dishes, and all Dinnertime their
Discourse was nothing but a continual Raillery upon their Ladies
Pilgrim-Staves: It was not any hitting or pinching Raillery, but such as
consisted only of some pat Allusions, full of Wit, and certain ambiguous Words,
which these Italians knew to be for the Tooth of their Ladies. As soon as
Dinner was done, every one of them put themselves in order to prosecute their
Journey. The Pilgrims mounted on their Asses, and the Ladies into their
Caleches. As for my part, I joined my self with a very honest Man, born at
Parma, who did not go on Pilgrimage, but Traveled out of Curiosity. We
followed this Troop of Pilgrims at a small distance, being Mounted in the same
manner as they, though we could not join our selves in company with them, because
we had no Pilgrims Habits. I demanded of the Italian, Why those Gentlemen, who
were all Persons of Quality, and who probably had their Coach and Horses at
Bononia, did make use of these Asses in their Journey. He told me, That some
made use of them out of a Frolic, and to make themselves Mirth on the Road;
others, by way of Humility, and to obtain more Merit: And moreover, that these
Asses by carrying so many Devout persons to Loretto, had by that means obtained
a very particular kind of Blessing; which was, That never any Mischance happened
to those that rid on them; for if by chance any did fall from them, or were
cast by them into any Slough, they always escaped very happily, without
receiving any hurt. By this Discourse I began to perceive, that this honest
Gentleman believed these Asses also to be Miraculous. He told me, That some
Algier-Pirates having lately made a descent in the Marquisate of Ancona, could
not with all their Endeavors overtake a Company of Travelers* that were
Mounted on these Holy Asses, though they pursued them very close, and that having
Fired very thick at them, they neither killed nor wounded any one of the
Company. As we Rid on thus Discoursing together, we ever anon cast an Eye
toward our Pilgrims that were before us, and found, they made it their only
business on the Road, to divert the Ladies that Rid in the Caleches: Some of
them Crossing the Way before them, strove to put themselves into Comical and
Ridiculous postures, to make them Laugh; others fell from their Asses on
purpose; and in a word, as the Italians have a very pleasant and ready Wit,
their Behavior all along the Road was nothing but Mirth and Comedies. The
Ladies without doubt, were not wanting to bestow a Thousand Blessings on the
Day and Moment, wherein they were so happy to make a Vow to go to Loretto,
forasmuch as probably they had never in all their Lives been better diverted.
Every Body knows the Humor of the Italians, That no sooner have they Married a
Wife, but they make her a Slave. However, their Jealousy has never yet been
able to hinder them from going to the Church on Sundays and Holy Days, or to
the places of Pilgrimage, when they have made a Vow to that purpose. The Church
of Rome have declared it a Mortal Sin, not to go to Mass on those days, or not
to accomplish the Pilgrimage one has Vowed, and has deprived Husbands of the
Power to hinder their Wives from performing these necessary Duties. If any
Husband should go about to oppose his Wife in these particulars, the
Inquisition would take notice of it, and proceed against him, as against a
person who does not approve of going to Mass or Pilgrimages, and consequently
is an Heretic. The Ladies, you may assure you, are not wanting to make good
use of this their Privilege; or to have recourse, whenever they think fit, to
this last Plank of their Shipwreck. Liberty; Ultima Naufragae Libertatis
Tabula. Scarcely ever shall you see a Lady going to these kind of Devotions,
but she has some very Devout Lover following her; and one might judge with half
an Eye, from the Air of these He and She Pilgrims, I am now upon, what was the
principal Motive that swayed them to undertake the Journey. About Four of the
Clock in the Afternoon they stopped at a Village to Refresh themselves; which
done, the Gentlemen Rid on before to the next Town, to Complement the next
Church before the Ladies coming, as they had done in the Morning at Fane. After
which, they retired with their Ladies to the best Inns of the Town, where they
were not wanting to make good Cheer, and divert themselves; and in the foresaid
manner continued the rest of their Journey, till they came to Loretto. I Will be
judged by you, Sir, whether this be not a very Devout-way of Pilgrimaging,
sufficient to confound and abash the Protestants, who reject them, and content
themselves to call upon their Father that is in Heaven, without putting
themselves to the trouble of going to seek him either at Rome or Loretto.

We met with, besides these Pilgrims already mentioned, whom we followed very
close, several other Bands of them, consisting of Merchants and Tradesinen,
some of them going to Loretto, and others returning thence, all of them making
themselves Sport with their Pilgrims-Staves, and extravagant Habits upon the
Road; and in all the Inns they came to, treating themselves with the best that
could be had. I have since understood, that all Tradesmen in Italy do each of
them keep a Saving-Box, into which they put what Money they can spare during the
whole Year, in order to their going in Pilgrimage, either to Loretto, or to S.
Anthony of Padua, or to some other place, at a further or nearer distance,
according as they guess that the Money they have gathered will hold out, to
desray their Charges going and coming, and every where making much of
themselves. And, to speak the Truth, there is nothing more agreeable in Italy,
than these kind of Journies in the beginning of the Spring, or toward the end
of Autumn, after the great Heat is past; especially when one is in good
Company, where there is never wanting some or other, that has the Gift of
making others Laugh. The Italian Females especially, make use of a Thousand
Intrigues and Inventions, to oblige their Parents or their Husbands, to let
them go a Pilgrimaging: There is no Vow they make more readily. Above all
things, they make great use of the Authority of their Confessors, to acquaint
them, That it is the Will of God that they should go thither, according to
their Vow. In the mean time, the whole Journey is spent in Fooleries, as I have
now hinted; and the merry Adventures they meet with in them, furnish them all
the Winter at the Fires-Side, with pleasant Stories to divert the Company.

Thus I have given you some account of the Italian He and She Pilgrims,
according to my Promise, which I joined with those that frequent the Hospitals,
whose Description you have seen in my last LETTER, comprehends the whole Set of
Pilgrims, from the Richest to the Poorest. It Is to no purpose here for the
Papists to tell us, That these are only particular Instances, which cannot be
of any force against the Foundation of their Doctrine; for this Holiness of
Pilgrimages in general, is no more to be met with, than an Universal a Part
rei. A man indeed may imagine to himself an Universal human Nature, yet will he
never be able to find Human Nature, but in Particulars, or Individuals.
Besides, if Pilgrimages were endued with efficacy, to make men Holy, without
doubt we should find many Pilgrims so qualified; and the acknowledged Truth of
the Old Proverb would be overthrown, which says, That never did a good Horse,
or Wicked Man, become better by going to Rome. If S. Jerome, S. Paula, and many
others, went to Visit the Holy places of Palestine, yet it was not this that
Sanctified them, or made them Saints; and without doubt, they might have done
as well to have staid at home. I speak not this, as if I had a mind to blame
them for so doing, no more than I would reprove an honest Man, who out of
Curiosity, (yet so as not to neglect his Business, and without injuring any
one) should take a Journey to Constantinople, or to Rome. It is even Natural for
Men to have some respect and veneration for Great Travelers; and I cannot but
own it, to be a worthy Curiosity to go to Jerusalem, and see all the Holy
places where Jesus Christ has wrought our Redemption; but with Reference to our
Eternal Salvation, I look upon it as very unprofitable thing, and I shall never
believe that any one is the greater Saint for having been there: Jesus Christ
has not fixed our Salvation to any particular places of the World, more than to
others; and will never suffer, that those Novel Additions men have been so bold
as to join to the Gospel, to accomplish their Corrupt Ends, should serve as
efficacious Means for their Sanctification. I have conversed with a vast number
of persons that have gone a Pilgrimaging, but never could discern any the least
Amendment in their Lives; but on the contrary, I have seen many who have seemed
to me, to be much worse than they were before. They counseled me in Italy, to
do as a certain Genouese did, who was wont frequently to ask his Butcher, When
he would go to Loretto? The Butcher wondering at this his often repeated Question,
demanded of him one Day, What might be the Reason, why he so often asked him
the same Question? Because (said the Genouese) I have of a long time observed,
that upon your Return from your Pilgrimage, you never give me my full Weight;
and for this Reason, I am resolved, at your next Return, not to make use of you
for five or six Months. And indeed, he had Reason to make use of this Caution;
for commonly in these Journies they spend at a most Extravagant rate, and
afterward, to reimburse themselves, they make no scruple, to make use of
Thievish and Indirect Means. Moreover, as I have already intimated in my Third
LETTER, there be very few that undertake these kind of Journies from a true
Spirit of Devotion; but either out of Curiosity, or for their own Recreation;
or other such like Reasons.

But, forasmnch as I do not pretend to judge of the inward Intention of any one
by any thing that is outward, I will at present be so favorable as to suppose,
That all these Pilgrims go to their several places with the highest Sentiments
of Devotion; but yet for all this, I say, they are not excusable (...) God,
notwithstanding their good Intention, though we may pity them for being so foully
mistaken, as to give the Worship which is due to God alone, to a Creature. O
quam bond voluntate meseri sunt! This is all the Favor we can do them: For we
can by no means justify those Adorations they render to the Blessed Virgin and
Saints; yea, to the Houses where they have Lived, and the Instruments of their
Martyrdom. But forasmuch as this Point relates to Divinity, and my design is
not to write to you as a Divine, but only as a Traveller, I shall leave it at
present, and continue my Discourse about my Journey to Loretto. I arrived there
toward the end of October. This Town is situate in the midst of a very fertile
and pleasant Plain, two or three Miles from the Adriatic Sea. In former Times
there were no Buildings here, besides the Chapel; but in process of Time they
built many Houses about it; and the Popes, to whom all this Country belongs,
have ordered a Wall with Bastions to be built round it: So that at present it
is a considerable Fortress to secure the Ecclesiastical State on that side, and
more particularly against the Landing of Turks and other Corsairs, who formerly
did use very frequently to come and Ravage that part of the Country. This
Chapel is by the Italians called, LA SANTA CASA, that is to say, The Holy
House. The Roman Catholics believe this to be the very same House, wherein
Jesus Christ dwelt at Nazareth with the Blessed Virgin his Mother, and his
Reputed Father S. Joseph, for the space of Thirty years, until the time that he
began to Preach his Holy Doctrine, and to confirm it by his Divine Virtue and
Miracles. They pretend it was Transported by Angels from Nazareth, where it
stood at first, to the place where it is at present. The History they give us
of it runs thus; The Saracenes having made themselves Masters of Palestina, and
the Holy places, the Blessed Virgin unwilling to leave so great a Treasure, (as
was the House wherein she had dwelt with her Son Jesus Christ upon the Earth,)
in the Hands of Infidels, Commanded the Angels to Transport it into the
Christian Territories: The Angels in Obedience to her Command took it up,
Foundations and all, and carried it by night into Dalmatia; but afterward
taking notice of their mistake, and perceiving that the People there, were
nothing nigh so good as the Italians, they took it up again, and another Night,
carried it near to the City Recanati in Italy, placing it in a Field, that
belonged to two Brothers; where it continued many years, until the Brothers
began to quarrel about dividing the Alms that were given there; wherefore the
Virgin to punish them Commands the Angels to take it up a third time, and to
carry it to the Field of a poor Widow-Woman called Lorette, who was a very
devout Worshipper of her. This good Woman rising in the Morning, and finding a
little House, where there was not the least sign of any the Night before, was
as much surprised as the Brothers were, to see it fled from their Field. In
this surprise, She writes to the Pope what had happened, who already was by
Revelation made acquainted with the whole Matter, and immediately bestowed vast
Indulgences upon all those who should go to pay their bounden Duty to that Holy
House. The succeeding Popes have since confirmed all this, and have granted an
infinite number of other Pardons: This place in process of time, by great good
luck for them, is become an inexhaustible Fountain of Riches, and still to this
day brings them in Prodigious Sums of Money every year. What think you, Is not
this a very Pleasant Story, and is not the bare Relation sufficient to render
it contemptible? The good Angels that carried this Holy House the first time
into Dalmatia, sure were very stupid, and did not mind what they did. Moreover
if the Blessed Virgin was pleased to take it away from the two Brothers of
Becanati, because they were at variance about it; I wonder how she has the
Patience to leave it at present, amongst a company of Rascals and Robbers, that
have Nested themselves there, and who for the most part of them are all Sellers
of Paternoster-Beads and Medals; for all that everwere at Loretto know, and are
warned before they enter the Town, that in case they desire to perform their
Devotions there without having their Purses picked, they must hold their Beads
in one Hand, and their Purse in the other. I proceed now to the Description of
this Chapel, or the Santa Casa. The whole Building is of Brick, about
Twentyfive Foot long, the length being not proportionable to the breadth of it:
The Wood with which it was Cieled, being Consumed and Rotten by Age, it has
since been Vaulted with Brick. It has two Windows, and two Doors on the Two
sides of it, and another Window beneath, by which they say the Angel Gabriel
entered, to Annunciate to the Blessed Virgin the Mystery of the Incarnation.
They have erected an Altar, in the very place where they say the Virgin was
upon her Knees, when the Angel entered; and upon the Altar is an Image of the
Virgin, of Wood, about Four Foot and an half high, which is the Miraculous
Statue on which they bestow their Adorations. She has Changes of Clothes for
all Worky-days, and for all Holy Days and Sundays; she has them of all sort of
Colors, and Mourning Clothes, for the Passion week. They shift or change her
Clothes with abundance of Ceremonies. I was there one Saturday in the Evening,
when the Priests undressed her; they took away from her the Suit of Purple she
had on, in order to dress her in a Green Gown, which they performed in the
following manner; They first of all took off her Veil, then her great Robe or
Mantle Royal; afterward her Gown, and her Upper and Under Petticoats, and last
of all, with a great deal of Reverence they pulled off her Smock, to put her on
a clean one. I leave to you, Sir, to guess what thoughts this may probably
impress on the Imagination, as well of those who perform the Ceremony, as of
those who are the Assistants and Spectators. True it is that the Statue is not
made Naked; the Workman it seems that wrought it, having been more modest than
so, and represented her as Clothed: But this action of clothing and unclothing
the Figure of a Woman, is a thing that offends the Minds of those that are
never so little Chaste or Modest. I acknowledge indeed that they perform this
Ceremony with a great deal of outward Respect, if it may not more properly be
called Idolatry; for they kiss every part of the Apparel they take off from
her, bending their Knees to the Ground before the Statue, and Adoring it. The
People that are present upon their Knees, all the time the Ceremony is
performing, Beat their Breasts, and nothing is heard throughout the Chapel,
but Sighings and Groans, with interrupted Words and Ejaculations; Holy Virgin
of Loretto help me! Mother of God hear me! and other such like As soon as the
Image is quite Naked or Undrest, these Sighs and Groans are doubled, but
decrease again by degrees, as they dress it. I cannot imagine what should be the
cause of this change of their Tone, except it should be this, that when the
Statue is quite undrest, it more strongly affects their Imagination, and makes
them believe they see the very Virgin in Person, and that this therefore is the
nick of time, for them to Pray with the greatest fervor of Devotion. They
dressed her in a Green Suit of Apparel, extremely rich, being a Flower-work
upon a ground of Gold. The Veil they put upon her Head was yet more costly; for
besides that it was of the same Cloth of Gold, it was all Powdered with great
fine Pearls: After this they put upon her Head a Crown of Gold, thick beset
with Precious Stones of an inestimable price: Next they put on her Neck-Jewel,
her Pendants and her Bracelets of Diamonds, and many great Chains of Gold about
her Neck, to which were fastened abundance of Hearts and Medals of Gold, which
are the Presents that Queens and Catholic Princesses have bestowed on the
Image out of Devotion, in Testimony that they were resolved to be its Slaves.
The whole Adorning and Furniture of the Altar was equally Sumptuous and
Magnificent, nothing being to be seen but great Pots or Vessels, Basins, Lamps
and Candlesticks, all of Gold and Silver, and beset with Precious Stones; all
which by the light of a vast quantity of Wax Candles that burn there Day and
Night, afforded a luster whose Beauty Ravished the Soul through the Eyes. It is
no wonder to me that many do aver themselves to be sensible of an extraordinary
Devotion in this place: For besides that one cannot enter there without
thinking of God, because one's Imagination is already forestalled with the
thought, That it is the Chamber where the Eternal Word became Incarnate; it is
certain that it is the property of all Bright and Lustrous Creatures, to raise
our Hearts to the Creator, more than dark and common ones use to do; and
especially when their Splendour is seconded with Novelty. When we lift up our
Eyes to the Firmament in a clear night when the Sky is full of Stars, this
sight powerfully raises our Souls to God, and makes us say, Quam Augusta est
Domus Dei! How Glorious is the House of God! In like manner those Persons, who
are not wont to see so many Lights, so much Gold, Silver and Precious Stones,
which Mutually exalt each others Glory, as soon as they enter this Chapel of
Loretto, where they meet with all these things together, cannot but naturally
be moved with thoughts of Devotion. Naturalists observe that Precious Stones
are for the most part extremely friendly and sympathising with the Heart of
Man, and that they Recreate and make it light and Merry by a secret Sympathy
they have with the Vital Spirits; now there being an almost infinite number of
all sorts of these Precious Stones in this Chapel, who can doubt but that they
must make a Corresponding great Impression on the Hearts of the Ravished
Spectators? This natural effect being by some Simple and Ignorant People
supposed to be a particular Grace of God appropriated to that place, makes them
take it for no less than a continual Miracle: but the Extravagancies
continually committed here are a sufficient Argument against this weak and
ungrounded Opinion: They kiss the Walls all round about the Chapel, they lick
the Bricks with their Tongues, they rub their Beads against them, they take
Thread, and having compassed the Chapel with it, as if they pretended to take
the Measure or Compass of it, they afterward make a Girdle of it, which they
say is very Efficacious against Witchcraft, and all manner of Ills. The Priests
in the mean time are not unmindful of their Gain; they have persons placed
every where in the Chapel and great Church, who press the People to give Alms,
and to have Masses said for them, to our Lady. They pay a Crown apiece for
every Mass, and the Priests promise to say them all at our Ladies Altar, that
is in the Chapel. It Is certain that the Priests receive Money for the saying of
above 50000 Masses every year; and yet it is as sure that it is impossible for
them to say above ^0000 in a year at that Altar; so that all the rest who have
given their Money for that purpose, must needs be frustrated of their intentions
and choused of their Money. Those that are Rich and Wealthy bestow great
Presents upon the Wooden Statue of the Virgin that is in the Chapel, which
without any Addition or Modification, they call the Holy Virgin of Loretto;
They present her with Necklaces, and Bracelets of Pearls and Diamonds, Hearts
of Gold, Medals, Candlesticks, Lamps Embost, Pictures of Gold and Silver of a
Prodigious Weight and Bigness. Many present her with Rings, and most Precious
Jewels, as a Token of their espousing of her; she has above Fifty Gowns, all
of them of an Inestimable Price; insomuch as she is at this day the Richest
Pupp^t that is in the Universe, and the piece of Wood the most Sumptuously
dressed, that is to be found in the whole World. It Is to this Image that those
famous Litanies which are so much in vogue with the Church of Rom^ have been
addressed, which are commonly called the Litanies of the Virgin, or the
Litanies of our Lady of Loretto, wherein she is termed the Queen of Angels;
Mother of Divine Grace; the Gate of Heaven; the help of Christians; the Refuge
of Sinners, etc. However, neither all these costly Ornaments, or Glorious
Titles have been powerful enough to divert the Worms from exerting their
Activity upon this so highly Adorned and Adored Statue; for I observed as they
were a changing its Clothes, that the Wood was all Rotten and full of
Wormholes. Thus we see that this piece of Wood, which is supposed to hear the
Prayers of so many Idolaters, carries its own Condemnation with it, in that it
is not able to rescue it self from Corruption. The Popes who draw more Gold and
Silver from this place, than from any other in the World, have accordingly
favored it with the greatest Stock of Indulgences. They have granted to this
Chapel all the Privileges appertaining to their S. Peter of Rome. The Grand
Penitentiaries and Confessors, which are all Jesuits, do here absolve all sorts
of Cases, even of those the Popes have reserved for themselves: For seeing it
is a place in the Popes own Territories, it is very indifferent to them, whether
they be absolved there or at Rome, because their profit is the same: But I
question not, should the Angels think sit once more to take the pains to
Transport this Chapel into the Estate of some strange Prince, they would soon
Revoke and Cancel all their Pardons, forasmuch as then the case would be
altered. They are very careful to preserve this Chapel whole and entire; to
this end they have darted all the Thunderbolts of the Vatican against those who
shall under take to loosen the least Stone of it, or so much as to scrape the
Walls; it is lawful to lick them, but not to bite the least particle off from
them. The reason of this is, because according to the Principles of Rome, a
Part is taken for the Whole: Thus if they have but a Finger, or some other
small part of a Saints Body, it is the same thing as if they had it all entire:
Whence it follows, that if any one could get but a little piece of Brick of the
Santa Casa, he might go and Build a Chapel in a strange Country, and having
enclosed the Bit of Brick, make the place as considerable, as this of Loretto,
and by this means spare so many People the labor of going so far in
Pilgrimage. By this you may conceive how great a damage this would be to the
Popes, and how much it is their interest to affix, as they do in all places
within and without the Chapel, and the great Church which compasses it about,
the Anathemas and Excommunications they have pronounced against those, who
should be so unadvised as to take away the least particle thereof. However
being mistrustful of the Efficacy of their Thunderbolts in this case, and not
believing them sufficient to secure this their vast Treasure; they have had
recourse to subtilty and cunning, and have falsely published that God has
punished many persons with sudden Death, who had been so bold to take away some
of the Bricks thereof; that others have been deprived of Motion, until they had
Vowed to restore what they had so Sacrilegiously Stolen; and lastly, that
Angels had come and Snatched the Bricks out of the Hands of those, that had
Stolen them, in order to fix them where they were before. Amongst the rest they
show us two Bricks, which are fastened to one of the Walls of the Chapel, with
two pieces of Iron, to distinguish them from the rest; the one of which a
Polish Gentleman had carried away with the design of having a like Chapel to
that of Loretto, built in his own Country: They tell us that by an Invisible
force he was stopped in his Journey, and deprived of all Motion, and by this means
was forced to send back the Brick he robbed, to Loretto, which he had no sooner
done, but his Immobility being taken away, he was in a condition to continue
his Journey. The other was taken by a Spanish Lord, with the same intent, who
being on his Journey home-ward, the Angels pursued him, and after having Banged
him handsomely, took away the Brick from him, and carried it to Loretto.

These Miracles, (and many others of the same Stamp, that is to say, every whit
as Ridiculous) ar^ printed and affixed in several places of the Church, that
Strangers may Read them, and beware. For my part, Sir, I can assure you, that
all these are no better than great staring Lies, forged and invented by the
Popes, whereby they craftily endeavor to persuade their Roman Catholics, That
they have the Santa Casa whole and entire, and that there is not the least
Scrap of it in any other part of the Habitable World. That which makes me
assert this with so much confidence, is, That I my self, who Write to you, did
loosen a considerable piece of this Wall of Lorette, and carried it away with
me, without being Banged by the Angels, or made immovable by some Invisible
Power: And if the Guardians of the Chapel have not taken care, to stop up the
Hole again, I am sure it may be there seen still to this day.

They begin to Say their Masses every day at the Virgins Altar by Two of the
Clock in the Morning, and I repaired thither about Three, and finding but a
very few Persons in the Chapel, I kept in the Entry, where I could not be
taken notice of by any, the People being all before me, and none on either side
of me, or behind me; at which time, with an Iron-Instrument I had, I broke off
a piece of the Wall, and carried it away with me; since which I have Traveled
throughout all Italy; I have been in France and in Germany neither has any the
least ill Accident befallen me: Until at last being weary of carrying this
Stone so long in my Pocket, and looking upon it as an unprofitable Burden, I
cast it away in the Fields by way of Contempt, and out of a kind of
Indignation, in that it had received such Adorations as are due to God alone. I
must own, that about Two days Journey from Loretto, near Tolentin, in my Way to
Rome, there happened to fall a very great Rain for Two days together, whereby the
Brooks swelled to that degree, that they drowned a great part of the Country;
and passing over an Old-Bridge, one of the Arches shaken with the Tread of my
Horse, fell down with an horrid Noise into the Water at two Steps from me, upon
which swiftly Turning my Horse, I got over the other Half of the Bridge behind
me as fast as I could, and at the same Moment the Brick I had taken at Loretto
came to my mind: I deliberated with my self, whether I ought to go back and
return it to the place again; but taking Reason rather than the present
Accident to be my Counselor, I made these following Reflections.

First, I considered, That if indeed God were so Jealous of preserving that
Chapel whole and entire in every part of it, he would never have suffered the
Ceiling thereof, which was a considerable part thereof, to Rot and Fall-down;
to repair which Defect, (as I hinted before) they have Arched it over. In the
second place, I considered with my self, That the Manger at Bethlehem, and the
Holy Sepulcher, were not inferior in Dignity to this Little House of Nazareth,
and that nevertheless God had been pleased to leave them in the Hands of
Infidels; and that consequently the Story told concerning the Transportation of
the Santa Casa, and the Motives of it, could be no better than a Fable. And
lastly, as I my self had been an Eyewitness of so many Cheats and Lies, which
the Romish Priests invent to increase their Gains, this served for a convincing
Argument to me, Not to give the least Credit to all these pretended Miracles,
which are only invented either to preserve the Chapel of Loretto in the Popes
Territories; or at least to dispose the Minds of the People, that in case upon
occasion of War, any strange Prince should cause the same to be carried to his
own Country, they might notwithstanding believe, that the Angels had brought it
back again to its former place; and consequently might boldly deny, that this
supposed Prince had the True Santa Casa.

All this made me conclude, There was nothing extraordinary in the Fall of this
Bridge, as happening by reason of the Age and Weakness of the Bridge, or because
the violent Torrent of the Waters had undermined its Foundation. Being thus
satisfied, I went to seek another place for to pass the Water, and so continued
my Voyage, Thanks be to God, very happily. Had I gone back to restore the
Stone, the Priests to be sure would not have been wanting to cry out, A
Miracle, a Miracle! and to publish the same every where; a Picture would
presently have been drawn of this Accident, which they would have added to the
great Number of that kind, which are fastened to the Walls of the Church, and
the piece of Brick would have been distinguished with a piece of Iron, to be
taken notice of by Pilgrims and Strangers, as an Evidence of the said Miracle:
Whereas Experience and Time have since fully convinced me, That God never
concerned himself in the case, and that the Fall of the Bridge was merely
Casual. Before I take my leave of Loretto, I will tell you in general, That the
Treasure preserved there is altogether inestimable. A Pope being informed, That
some had acquainted the Turks thereof, and that they were projecting to make a
Descent there, caused the Town to be Fortified with strong Walls and Bastions,
where he planted abundance of Great Guns; He apprehended, it seems, that the
Angels would not be so zealous, to preserve the Treasure that is there kept, as
they had been to secure the Bricks of the Santa Casa. And to speak the Truth,
the Case is very different; for it is an easy matter to restore the Bricks,
where any are wanting, and then declare, That the Angels have returned them to
their places; but should the Turks come once to take away the precious Stones
of that inestimable Treasury, it is to be feared they would be to seek for a
Miracle, to restore them. The Jesuits, who are very vigilant of getting into
possession of the best and most advantageous Posts, have obtained all the
Confessors places of this Church, and at certain Hours of the day they repair
thither for to hear Confessions in all sorts of Languages. They have a very
peculiar and wonderful dexterousness to squeez Money from Strangers; they beg
some of all those that come to Confess to them, on pretense of assisting poor
Pilgrims therewith; but indeed keep all they get for themselves, except only
some few Pence they give them now and then, making use to this purpose of their
mental Restriction, as a Jesuit (who had quitted their Society) told me: for
seeing they have made a Vow of Personal Poverty, that is, of never possessing
any thing in particular, but all in common; they pretend themselves to be the
first and chiefest Poor, and Pilgrims too, forasmuch as every Man is a Pilgrim
upon Earth. Thus they bestow the Alms given them upon themselves, and believe,
that by this means they abundantly answer the intention of those, who have
trusted them with the Distribution of them. A poor Priest of Savoy^, who was
reduced to a very pitiful Condition, coming to me to began Alms, I sent him to
the Jesuits, who I knew had that Morning received Threescore Crowns of a Rich
Man, with whom I had spoke my self. The Jesuit told him, he was very sorry he
was not in a condition to assist him, for that of a long time he had not been
entrusted with any Charities, and so sent him away without giving him any
thing. Which way soever a man turns himself in this Holy City of Loretto, he
meets with persons that Beg Money of him: The Priests ask it, to say Masses for
you; The Jesuits, to give Alms to the Poor, as I have told you; an infinite
number of Box-Carryers, that gather in Money for the use of the Chapel, are
continually a Dunning you, as well in the Streets as the Church, to put
something into them. The Shopkeepers of the Town, who are all of them Sellers
of Bead-Rows and Medals, deaffen your Ears on every side, to come and buy their
Trumperies; a vast number of Vagabonds, in the Habit of Pilgrims, flock about
you to beg the Passada, and cut your Purse if they can: An lastly, The Vintners
and Innkeepers sell their Provisions at a most exorbitant Price; alleging for
their Excuse, That the Pope lays such vast Imposts upon every thing that enters
Loretto, that it is impossible any otherwise to save themselves harmless;
insomuch as all being well weighed, the Pope proves to be the greatest Exactor
of all. And is not this now, think you, a place sufficiently qualified with
Holiness, to make it the Darling City of the Blessed Virgin? And are not these
well-chosen People, for whom God should work so many Miracles, to keep them in
the secure possession of this House, which the Papists pretend, to be the very
same wherein the Eternal Word became Incarnate? All the Walls of the Great
Church are full hung with a vast number of Little Pictures, in which are
represented the Miracles the Holy Virgin has wrought in favor of those who
have Vowed to go thither in Pilgrimage.

I shall take occasion here, to acquaint you in what manner Miracles are still
wrought every day in Italy, and what they are. I have observed Three chief
Causes of them; The first is, the Covetousness of the Clergy; the second is,
the Cunning of some Beggars; and the third is, Popular Error, joined with a
Custom the Priests have introduced of sending Pictures to the Churches,
representing the Dangers that any have escaped.

As for the first of these, which is the Avarice of the Priests and Religious,
which are the two Orders that divide the whole Clergy, there can be no better
Invention to satisfy the same (next to Purgatory) than this of publishing from
time to time some Miracles, they pretend to have been wrought in their
Churches. I say, next to Purgatory, which indeed is to them an overflowing
Source of Riches, because the thing is more general. All Men must die, and all
the Elect (according to their Doctrine) must at least pass through the Flames of
Purgatory, for some Hours or some Days; Neither was there ever any (say they)
except the Blessed Virgin, who by a peculiar Privilege has been exempted from
it. This is the Reason, why there is not a Roman Catholic to be found who does
not give Money for Masses and Prayers to be said for his Deceased Friends and
Kindred; or, who does not make Legacies or Foundations, for to have the same
said for himself, after his Death: But as for Miracles, these only happen in
particular Cases. Nevertheless, forasmuch as the Life of Man is subject to many
sad Accidents or Disasters, Men would be very glad to be sure of a Miracle to
relieve them in time of need or danger: This is that which makes those of the
Romish Communion, to whom their Priests promise no less at every moment, upon
condition they will signalize their Devotion at the Chapel of such a
Miraculous Saint, which they pretend to have in their Church, or join
themselves to some of their Confraternities, suffer themselves easily to be
persuaded, to give them what Money they ask of them. In the mean time, they find
it necessary from time to time, to awaken and excite the Peoples Attentions by
the starting of some New Miracle, which they know how to do with a great deal
of Address and Cunning. The most common way they make use of is this; When they
go to Visit the Sick, they carry along with them either Wine or Water, or some
Rag of Linen, which they have blessed in the Name of such an He or She-Saint: If
the Sick person, who has made use of any of these, chance to Recover, which
very Naturally may happen so, because we have Instances every day of persons
that Recover, after that they have been given over by Physicians, then the
Priests are sure to attribute the Recovery of their Health to the Saint of
their Church: They demand an Attestation of it from him who was Sick; they make
a great Noise with it through the City; and the next Sunday, they publicly
proclaim the Miracle from the Pulpit. In like manner, If any person be ready to
undertake a Journey or Voyage, they go to him, and persuade him to make a Vow to
some Saint of their Church; and if afterward it happens, that this person meet
with some bad Accident; as a dangerous Storm at Sea, a Fall from his Horse, or
the Overturning of his Coach, and that he escapes with his Life and Health, as
it often happens to the worst of Men; in this case he never fails ascribing it
to the He or She-Saint of such a Church: Immediately upon his Return he
acquaints the Priests or Monks therewith, who begin anew to Toss it abouts,
Crying, A Miracle, a Miracle! And that nothing can be of greater force against
Storms and Tempests at Sea, or Mischances by Land, than to apply ones self to
the Saint of their Church, and to procure Prayers and Masses to be said for
them there, as the person who is lately Returned from his Voyage, and to whom
this Miracle has happened, did upon his Setting-out. Others, who are endowed with
a larger Conscience, and who believe it is lawful for them to Lie, to enhance
the Honor of their Saints, take the boldness to suppose and invent Miracles,
and to produce themselves for Examples* declaring, That they have had
Revelations, or that the Saints themselves have appeared to them, or have
Healed them of their Infirmities. The People, who suffer themselves to be
gulled by the outward Appearances of Godliness of those sorts of Men, do not
trouble themselves to search any further into the Matter, but rely upon their
Word. There are some Men, who from Natural Intimations, know two or three days
before what kind of Weather it will be: Thus there are some, who by the Pains
they feel in their Corns, will tell you whether we shall have Fair or Foul
Weather. A certain Father of the Order of the Servits at Viconza, a Man of a
wicked and debauched Life, who Entertained Three Lewd Women at Venice, by whom
he had had several Children, being seized with a Disease not fitting to be
named, never failed of feeling Excessive pains two or three Days before Rain.
Now there happened an extraordinary Drought for Three Months together, which
caused extreme Damage to all the Fruits of the Earth; but at last, the Season
being about to Change, the Father was not wanting to have the sad
Anvertisements of it. He was the Sacristan, or (as we corruptly speak it)
Sexton of a Church called Madonna del Monte, or My Lady of the Hill, which is
about Half a League distant from the City of Viconza, situate upon a pleasant
Hill, where is kept a Miraculous Image of the Virgin. And forasmuch as he
perceived, That the Devotion of People was already much abated, which he was
very sensible of by the slackness of his Purse, he thought of kindling it
again. To this purpose, making use of the present Conjuncture, he sent to the
Podesta, or Governor of the City of Viconza; acquainting him, That being at
Prayer in the Night time before the Image of the Virgin, whose Sacristan he had
the Honor to be, she had told him with an intelligible Voice, and a pleasant
Smile, That she had a great deal of Compassion on the Afflictions of her
People, by reason of the great Drought, which spoiled all the Country; and that
in case the Inhabitants of Viconza would within Three Days make a General
Procession to his Church, She would open the Floodgates of Heaven, so that
there should be Rain in abundanc^. The Governor hereupon immediately caused an
Order to be published for a Procession against the Time the good Friar had
signified; at which Time the Weather did not fail to change and favor his
Wishes: For scarcely was the Procession advanced Halfway, but there fell so
furious a Shower, that all those who assisted at it, were almost overthrown,
and had much ado to get to the Church, where they Sung Hymns of Thanks to the
Virgin for that high Favor. This Miracle being rumored abroad throughout the
Country, for Two Months together drew a great Number of People to this
Miraculous Image. The Devout Sacristan finding his Purse well Lined, repaired
the next Carnaval to Venice, to divertize himself there, and to make his
Mistresses partakers of his good Fortune; and frankly acquainted them with the
Success he had had, and how cleverly he had gulled the Unthinking People: But
some time after, one of them Falling-out with him, like another Delilah
betrayed him, and discovered his Imposture. Had it been in any other Country,
he would hardly have escaped without bearing the Marks of it; but in Italy
these things are easily excusable, with saying, That nothing was intended in
all this, save only the Advancement of the Blessed Virgins Honor.

Another Fetch of the Priests is something of my own Discovery, and which I do
not know that ever any one before me has taken Notice of; and it is this, They
are used to entertain Children with an infinite number of false Tales and
Stories, invented at random, concerning Apparitions and Miracles, that never
were. To explain this further to you, you may take notice, That in Italy the
Children are Catechized every Sunday and Holyday throughout the Year in all
their Churches, at One of the Clock in the Afternoon: To make them the more
ready and willing to come to be Catechized, the Priests, after that they have
explained some one Point of Doctrine, they tell them for a Conclusion some
pleasant Story, before they send them home. The Little Italians listen to it
with the greatest Attention imaginable, and as soon as they are come home, tell
it to their Mothers. I have observed, That these Priests do commonly take, for
the Subject of their Story, some Miracle or other, which they pretend to have
been wrought in their Church. I entered once into a Chapel, where one of these
young Catechizers was Informing his young Scholars; the Chapel was Dedicated
to S. Martin. They ordinarily Paint this Saint on Horseback, and with his Sword
cutting off the Half of his Cloak, to give it for an Alms to a poor Beggar.
'Twas in this posture his Statue, which was of a very pure White-Marble,
represented him on the Altar of that Chapel. When the Catechizing was over,
the Priest began to tell these Children a very pleasant Story concerning this
Statue: He told them, That a Good Curate of that Parish, had often seen him
very fairly come down from the Altar, and Running a full Gallop out of the
Church; that one day having taken the liberty to ask him, Whither he was a
going? S. Martin told him, That he was hasting to the Assistance of a very
honest Man, who had procured many Masses to be said at his Altar, and being at
present fallen into the hands of Robbers, in the midst of a Wood, was in great
danger of his Life; but that he hoped to come timely enough for his Relief; and
that at his Return, he would give him an Account of the Success of his
Enterprise. The Catechizer flourished his Discourse with Circumstances so
extravagant and ridiculous, that it was impossible to forbear Laughing. For he
gave a very particular description of S. Martins whole Journey, upon his Horse
of Marble, how he Rid a full Gallop over Trees, Rivers, Cities, and all. The
poor Children all this while Listened to him with profound Silence and
Attention. But the conclusion of all, and the Cream of the Jest was, That every
one that bore a great Devotion to that Chapel, and procured Masses to be said
there, in honor of S. Martin, might assure themselves never to perish on the
High ways, by the hands of Robbers. The next day I had occasion to speak to my
young Clergyman, and put him in mind of his Marble S. Martin, whom he had made
to Ride Post, for a Diversion to his Scholars. He answered me Smiling, What
would you have one do, Sir? It Is the Custom of this Country, to entertain the
Children that come to be Catechized, with such Stories as these; because
without this we should have none of their Company. It is impossible to tell
them always True ones, and therefore we are sometimes fain to be beholding to
our Inventions for them. Things are only so far Evil, as they produce ill
Effects; but these sorts of Stories cannot but in time bring forth very good
Fruits, as that of inspiring them with great Confidence in the Saints, and
obliging them to Pray, and cause Masses to be said in Honor of them. What
think you? Is not this an excellent piece of sound Morality? And are not these
Children, think you, well Taught? They are called to the School of Truth, and
yet they teach them nothing but Lies. In the mean time, there is nothing
capable of making a greater impression on our Spirits, or of fixing a thing
more lastingly in our Memory, than what we learn in our first and tender Youth:
All these Foolish Discourses do not fail of producing very great effects, and
of passing at last for current Truth in the Minds of the Papists, who, besides
this, are accustomed very glibly to swallow a great number of Absurdities and
Contradictions in the Point of Transubstantiation, which they so stiffly
maintain; and this is it probably, that has so overrun Italy with Fables, and
impertinent and ridiculous Stories. Yet these People are so infatuated
therewith, that in case any Honest Man and Lover of Truth, should seem too
curiously to enquire after these Matters, or in the least to disapprove them,
he would pass for no better than an Heretic. Thus a certain person was cast
into the Inquisition, for saying, That He did not believe what was told of the
Ass of S. Anthony of Padua, that kneeled down to worship the Host, to confound
the Protestants.

From this first Cause of Miracles, which is the Covetousness of the Clergy, I
proceed to the Second, which is the Slight and Cunning of certain Beggars.

Poverty is a Wellspring of Great Blessings to those who do bear it patiently,
taking it as from the Hand of God, and making good use of it; but withal, it is
no less a Gulf of all Misery and Unhappiness, to those who receive it with a
contrary Spirit; and I don't believe there is any Wickedness comparable to that
of a Wicked Beggar. A Wicked Beggar has no Conscience; he is disposed to
undertake any thing in order to rid himself from the wretched Circumstances of
his destitute condition. There be many of this sort in Italy, who Live by their
Wits and Invention: There are some that have the Patience, to counterfeit
themselves Cripples, Blind, or struck with the Palsy for Five or Six Years
together, to make the World at least believe, that a Miracle has been wrought
upon them, attributing their Recovery to some Image of the Virgin, or to some
Saint. The Profit which accrues to them by this is, That the People being
informed of the Miracle that has been wrought for them, presently believe them
to be very Good Men, and Great Friends of God, as having received such Signal
Favors from him: This makes them to bestow Liberal Alms upon them, to have a
share in their Prayers: Yea, it often happens, That some Rich and Devout persons
take care of, and make such Provision for them, that they never want all the
Remainder of their Lives. The Priests and the Monks also afford them an
Allowance, when at any times by this means they bring any of their Chapels in
Vogue and Request, so as they receive considerable Profit thereby. I have been
shown many of these Beggars in Convents and Monasteries, who Live there amongst
the Domestics in great Ease, and without doing any thing.

The Third Spring from whence Miracles issue in Italy, is a Popular Error;
which is crept in amongst them* and at present has taken such deep root, that
it is in a manner impossible to pluck it up. It Is this, Upon the least
Accident, that happens to the Italians, and the least Sickness or Indisposition
that seizes them, they make a Vow to some Statue or Image of the Virgin, or of
some Saint, to be delivered from it. Now it is evident, that all Mishaps do not
prove Fatal to Life, neither do all Diseases terminate in Death, so that many
times they escape and are restored to Health again; which by a strange
Superstition, instead of attributing the Glory thereof to God alone, who is the
Sole LORD of Life and Death, they attribute the Recovery of their Health, or
their Deliverance from Danger, to the Statues or Images to whom they have made
their Vows: To make their Acknowledgment of the Favor they have received the
more Authentic, in compliance with the ill Custom introduced amongst them,
they cause a Picture to be Drawn, wherein is set forth what happened to them, and
themselves, in the Act of imploring the Aid of the said Statue or Image, which
to that purpose is represented in one of the Corners of the Picture, and
toward which they stretch forth their Arms or Folded-Hands with these Three
Letters underneath P. G. R., which signify in Italian Pro Gratia Ricevuta; For
a Favor or Grace Received.

These Vowed Pictures we generally find in all the Churches of Italy; neither
is there any of them without some Miraculous Image, which receives the Honor
of all those Deliverances and Favors, and to whose Glory those
Shipwreck-Tables are hung up. There is no need of any Tapistry or Hangings in
these sorts of Chapels; for these Small Pictures are so thick hung, that they
cover all the Walls. There are of them of all Sorts: Some of them represent
persons pursued by Murderers; others, that have been Wounded; and others,
Beaten at Sea by Furious Tempests. Yea, there are not wanting some of them that
are very Scandalous; for we find amongst them Coaches full of Gentlemen and
Ladies overthrown, and they tumbling over one another; Young Women that are
forced by their Lovers, and Women in Childbed, represented in their Beds in a
very wanton and indecent manner. An Italian Lord told me, That he very
willingly went to hear Mass at those Altars, that were best hung with such
Pictures as these; because meeting in them with something for his Imagination
to feed upon, the Service of the Mass did seem less tedious to him. These
Pictures, which are no more than Simple Vows, have acquired so great Credit in
the Minds of the People, that they pass at present for Real Miracles: And the
Priests and Monks, who write the Histories of the Places of Devotion, which
belong to them, make no difficulty to allege them as such. So that now in
Italy, they count the Miracles by these Pictures; and the more of these any
Statue or Image has about it, the more Miraculous it is.

I will take this occasion to tell you of a Picture, which some young Monks of
the Abbey of S. Victor in Milan caused to be made whilst I was there. The
Accident which happened to them was this: They were Gilding the Roof of one of
the Lower-Isles of the Church. These Monks, out of Curiosity, whilst the
Workmen were gone to get their Dinner, did climb up the Scaffold to the number
of Seven or Eight of them, to View their Work; where one of them less heedful
than the rest, Treading upon a Board that was not well fastened, fell down upon
the Floor of the Church. All the rest being affrighted at this Accident, and
supposing that the whole Scaffold was coming down, betook themselves to
Ladders, and let themselves slide-down by them, without receiving any hurt,
except only the poor Monk, who Fell down with the loose-Board; who was much
Bruised. They took him up in this pitiful condition, and was obliged to keep
his Bed Two or Three Months before he was fully Recovered.

I was present when the Accident happened, and could see nothing in all this, but
what was very Natural. He who fell, hurt himself proportionably to the Height
from whence he came down, and the Rest received no hurt at all, because they
slid down by the Ladders: In all this there appears nothing of a Miracle;
however, because the Scaffold was erected before the Chapel of S. Bernard of
Sienna, the Monks concluded, That without doubt this Saint had helped them.
Accordingly they got a Picture drawn, representing their Fall, in one Corner
whereof the Saint was Painted, Stretching forth his Hands for their Safety.
They published every where throughout the City, That this Saint had upheld them
in their Fall from receiving any Harm. The Cardinal-Archbishop was immediately
acquainted therewith, and every one did Congratulate them, for being so much in
Favor with that Saint.

From this Example, and what before I have told you upon this Head of Miracles,
you may easily conceive, how far we are to give credit to those fine Legends,
of the Lives of the New Saints of the Romish Church; and of what weight that
Great List of Miracles ought to be with us, which are the chief stuffing and
garniture of them. There is not one of them that has not Restored Sight to the
Blind, Hearing to the Deaf, Speech to the Dumb, and a clever use of their Limbs
to Cripples; and in a word, They have preserved from all ill Accidents, and
Cured all manner of Diseases. But when one comes to an Enquiry into
Particulars, all this vanishes in Smoke, and the whole of the Matter is
reduced to some Pictures, which some Superstitious Ones (who without Reason
have imagined themselves, to have received Favors from them) have caused to be
made. However, when these Legends are sent to strange Countries, that are of
the Romish Communion, they make a great Noise, and are all looked upon as
Miracles, sufficiently confirmed by Authentic Proof and Evidence. It Is a
common Reproach cast upon Protestants, That no Miracles are done amongst them;
and they will needs have this to be an invincible Argument, to prove they are
in an Error, A Jesuit in a Latin Oration, pronounced in the Cathedral of
Strasbourgh, soon after that the French had taken possession of it, exclaimed
in these words; Quid dubitamus de falsitate Religionis eorum, apud quos
cessavit Propheta and Sacerdos, and Miracula periere? What do we doubt any
longer of the Falsness of their Religion, with whom both Priest and Prophet are
ceased, and Miracles are lost? The Protestants might very well have Answered
him with Truth, That there can be no reason of doubting, but that a Religion so
fraught with Superstition and Counterfeit Miracles, as the Papists Religion is,
must needs be False. The Profession of a Good Christian is, to live according
to the Gospel; but not to confirm it by Miracles; this is the Work of God
alone, and therefore we ought not to reproach one another upon that score. We
see every day, that Juglers, (though we know they deceive us, and though we Eye
them with all the Attention imaginable, for to discover their Artifice,) are
notwithstanding so dextrous at their Tricks, that they gull us before our Face;
and shall we blindly believe all the Italian Priests and Monks tell us, who
have the Gift of Cheat and Invention? Sic notus Ulysses? For my part,
considering the Times in which we live, I will never believe any Miracle, as
long as my Reason tells me, the Thing was feasible by Men.

It Is commonly held, That the Body of S. Nicholas of Bar, in the Pouille, is
Miraculous; and that from his Tomb there continually distills an Oil very
Salutiferous, and proper to restore the Sick to Health; but it is enough for me
to disbelieve this Miracle; because I know, that Men may easily convey the Oil
thither, and ingeniously make it to distill down. I have sometimes seen some
poor Pilgrims, who returned from that Pilgrimage, and who had little Bottles
full of this Oil, which had cost them Money enough, who would afterward fain
have given it for a piece of Bread; but could find no Customers to take it off
their Hands. Which makes it evident, That the Italians, for all their Bigotry,
had no Belief in it themselves. In like manner at Naples, the Priests make show
of a Bottle, which they aver to be full of the Blood of S. Januarius,
Archbishop of that City: When at first they bring forth this Blood to be seen,
it appears all Congealed; but as they approach it to the Body of this Saint, it
dissolves by degrees. As to this also; it is sufficient ground for me not to
believe it, because I know that this Liquor may be congealed; in the manner as
they make Sorbets, and afterward dissolve by the Heat of the place where they
show it, or by the heat of the Hands of those who handle it. At Padua is to be
seen the Tomb of S. Anthony of Padua, which sends forth a very sweet Scent
between that of Ambergris and Musk: The Friars of that Convent tell us, That
this Odor proceeds from the Bones of that Saint, which are shut up there: But
the Testimony of these Fellows, who are so biased by their Interest, does not
give me any satisfaction, as long as I know that they may easily anoint it with
Odoriferous Quintessences, as it is certain they do; because that this Odor is
the very same with that of the perfumed Pater-nosters, that are Sold in the
Shops at Padua. In the same place they show us, in a very fair Crystal,
supported by a stately Pedestal of Gold, extremely well wrought, the Tongue of
the said Saint, which they say was found in his Tomb, being endued with the
Privilege of Incorr^ption, all the rest of his Flesh being consumed. They have
the Impudence to aver, That this Tongue, for having been a Lash to the
Sacramentarians of his Time, has been preserved thus sound and whole, without
the least Taint of Corruption, that as a perpetual Miracle, it might bear
witness to the Truth of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. The greatest part of
the Romish Legends tell us, it is as fresh and lively as when the Saint was
alive; but that is very false, for I have seen it, and it is dry. Those who
have the Art of Embalming Bodies, may preserve a Tongue in this manner for many
Years, yea, many Ages, without any thing extraordinary, or so much as bordering
upon a Miracle.

Thus I have given you a View, Sir, of the most Famous and Avowed Miracles of
Italy, which the Roman Catholics pretend to be so palpable and sensible, that
they cannot be denied, without giving the Lie to Sense and Reason. I will add
to these, Three Bodies of Saints, which have been preserved without any Taint
of Corruption, and which I have seen all Three: The one is, the Body of S. Rose
of Viterbo; the other of S. Clara of Monfaucon; (...) the third of S. Katharine
of Bononia. These Bodies have been preserved whole and uncorrupted; but without
any the least Beauty, being altogether dried up, and as hard as Past-board, and
very black; they are very frightful to behold, notwithstanding they have dressed
them in very rich Habits, and adorned them with more Jewels, than Queens are
embelish'd with on their Coronation-days. Some have a great Esteem for these
incorrupted Bodies, and so should I too, in case they enjoyed their former
lively Tincture and Natural Color; but to be so dry, so black, and so ghastly,
it were more eligible in my mind, to return to the Universal way of all Flesh,
than to be made partakers of such a kind of Incorruption; neither can I see
that God herein has conferred any great Favor upon these Blessed Saints, by
preserving them in a condition proper to terrify Nature, and affright Mankind.
The Works of God are all perfect, he never bestows a Favor by halves, and if
he were pleased to grant Incorruption to Bodies, he would also probably
preserve them, with all the Natural qualities belonging to them. Wherefore I
don't believe, That the defective Incorruptions of the Bodies of these Saints
can truly be ascribed to any thing else, but the dexterity of those who have
dried or embalmed them.

We saw at the Chartreuse of Venice the Body of a Noble Venetian, which being
Embalmed, has been preserved whole and entire for above an Hundred years. This
person was never accounted a Saint, and yet I found his Body much fairer to the
Eye, than were those of the Three Saints now mentioned, though it be much more
disregarded and neglected than they are; for they have left the Body in an old
Wooden-Coffin, which does not shut close, and where all those that go to-the
Chartreuse do view it and touch it; whereas the Bodies of these Saints are kept
in very dry Chapels, where the great Wax-Tapers, that burn Day and Night,
purify the Air, and clear it of all moistures and impurity. I have also seen
in France, at Vandosme, in the Collegiate Church of the Castle, the Body of
Jane d' Albret, who died a very zealous Protestant, above an Hundred years
since; her Body has been very well Embalmed, and if at present one would take
it up from the place where it lies, and dress it, and keep it in a very dry
place, it would undoubtedly appear much fairer, than that of these Religious:
And yet I am very well assured, the Roman Catholics will never say, she was a
Saint.

And forasmuch as I am now upon the Chapter of these Saints, I shall acquaint
you, That I have often Read the History of their Lives, and of many others in
the Legends of the Church of Rome; but never in all my Life did I meet with any
thing more ridiculous: And I have observed, that these are those Prophetesses
of which the Jesuit spoke at Strasbourgh, and which the Protestants are
deprived of, Apud quos cessavit Propheta; who have no Prophets amongst them. In
a manner, all their Religion^ (after that they are arrived to the State of
Perfection, as they call it) take upon them to Prophecy. For the better
understanding of this, you may take notice, That at Rome they have
distinguished or divided the Spiritual Life into several States; as an House
has many Stories, the Lowermost, the Middle, and the Highest or Uppermost.
There is one State they call Active; this is the Lowest, and consists only in
Action, and a^ orderly regulation of the Senses, according to the Law of God:
The second is the Contemplative State, which consists in the Meditation of
those things which have no Communication with the Senses: The third is a State
Extatical, abstracted and purely Passive; in which the Soul does nothing but by
a simple Application, Adhaesion, and Union with the Divine Essence; receives
(without any Action, Affection, or Contemplation on her part) Impressions from
God. There are but few that arrive to this Uppermost Story; but when any are
once got thither, whatever Word they utter, or Action they do, it is no more
they themselves who Act or Speak, but God that Speaks and Acts in them; for as
for them, they never depart from this their intimate Union with God. Whatsoever
they Say or Speak in this State, is very carefully heeded, as being all Divine:
If they speak of Things past, they are Revelations; if of Things to come, they
are all Prophecies. It Is by this Door so many New Notions are entered into the
Church of Rome, which they believe as firmly as the Gospel, though they have no
other Foundation, but the overheated Brains of these Saints. Many of these
have themselves Penned their own Revelations, as S. Brigit, S. Melchilda, S.
Catharine of Sienna, S. Gertrude, and many others. By means of these
Saintesses, the Church of Rome has attained the knowledge of all the
Particularities of our Saviors Passion; how many Strokes he received at his
Whipping; how often he fell to the Ground, under the heavy burden of his
Cross; how many Thorns pierced his Sacred Head; and how many times they Spat in
his Holy Face. By the same way they have discovered whatsoever happened in the
Manger at Bethlehem; how the Blessed Virgin took the Veil from her Head, and
made Clouts of it for her Little Jesus; what she said and did, before she was
Delivered of him; and a vast Number of other Particulars, which are not to be
met with in the Gospel. By this means they were informed of the Great Mystery
of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin; when she ascended up to Heaven in Soul
and Body, the Discourse she had with the Apostles, how she by degrees mounted
up into the Air, bestowing her Blessings all the way she went. In a word almost
all the new Doctrine of Popery, is derived from this overflowing Spring, which
is not yet dried up, nor ever will as long as there are any of these
Prophetesses left in their Church. To give more weight to these new
Imaginations, these Saints, assured, that Jesus Christ appeared to them very
often, and was become very Familiar with them, that he talked with them as a
Bridegroom does with his Bride, and that they took occasion in these
Familiarities, to ask him whatsoever they desired to know. Jesus Christ himself
taught S. Catharine of Sienna to read, he came and did blow the Fire for her,
he swept her Chamber, as may be seen in the History of her Life, by which means
she had an occasion of Discoursing him often. Others of them received Visits
from Jesus Christ, who came and Visited them, accompanied with his Mother and
his Apostles; where they had great Conferences together, and these Saintesses
that heard them, discovered many secrets and Mysteries in their Discourse,
which they afterward Communicated to the Popes and the Church; and this is
that which at this day, in a great Measure, makes the difference that is
between the Doctrine of the Papists, and that of the Protestants. Apud quos
cessavit Propheta, who have no Prophets to boast of. There is never a Convent
of Nuns in Italy, that has not some Prophetess, which is always some old
Mother, that has been twice or thrice Superior of the Convent, and who not
being in a condition of doing any thing else, applies her self to the Unitive
Life.

During the long stay I made at Vicenza, I often went to Visit the Abbess of
the Nuns of S. Thomas: I upon a time enquired of her concerning the State of
her Nuns, who told me that she had Forty four that were in the Active Life,
three in the Contemplative, and one only in the Mystical or Unitive. A young
Countess, who was in the same Convent, and who was Visited by four or five
Galants, who came to see her at the Grate, was got no further yet than the
Active Life. I will engage my self no further at present in entertaining you,
about the Nuns of Italy, because probably I may have an occasion to do it more
at leisure.

I return now to my she Saints, whose Bodies remain Incorrupt. They were all
three of them arrived at the Unitive State, and have all of them left
Prophecies behind them: S. Rose of Viterbo, did for a long time importune the
Dominican Nuns of that City, to receive her amongst them, and to give her the
Habit of their Order; but the Nuns knowing she was extremely poor, and that she
could not, as the rest did, bring Money to the Convent, refused her company, and
would not so much as receive her into the Number of their Convert Sisters. The
Saint understanding this their rejecting of her, told them, That though they
would have none of her now she was alive, yet they should be very glad to have
her, when she was Dead. This Prophecy proved true; for Rose being deceased with
the Odor of Sanctity, and many Miracles, after the Italian manner, being
wrought at her Tomb, these same Nuns desired her Body, which was granted them.
The great Number of Masses which are procured to be said to her, and the
abundance of Alms that Travelers and Pilgrims do leave there, makes them
consider this Body at present, as their greatest Treasure. This Prophecy of S.
Rose was very easy to be made; she knew she was already far enough advanced in
the good Opinion of the People, for to make them esteem her a Saint after her
Death. She knew moreover, that the Bodies of such are always very gainful, that
the Nuns of that Convent, as well as others in Italy, were very Covetous; and
that by Virtue of a Vow she had made to S. Dominicus, they would not (...) to
demand her Relics, as of right belonging to them, and so was in a Condition to
Prophecy on a sure ground. The Saint whose Body is to be seen at Monte Faucon,
is accompanied with something that is very remarkable; they show you all the
Instruments of the Passion of our Savior, which, they say, were found in her
Heart after her Decease; they are all of dried Flesh, like as her Heart is;
They are very confused, neither are all of them sufficiently distinguishable or
Discernable. They show you likewise three little round Pellets of Flesh, which
they say, were likewise taken out of her Heart. One of these Pellets being laid
in a pair of Scales, weigh as much as all the three together, and all the three
weigh no more than one alone. This makes them say, That God was willing to
Imprint in the Heart of this Saint, a Resemblance of the most Holy Trinity: for
in like manner, as these three Pellets, though different in number, yet make but
one weight, and that the weight of one alone, is no less than that of all the
three together; so likewise though there be three Persons in the Holy Trinity,
yet there is but one Essence; and one of these Persons, is no less in Divine
Perfections, than the other two. I have seen these three Pellets, but so far
are they from suffering one to try the Experiment, that they will not suffer
you to touch it with your Finger, to feel whether it be Flesh or no. Every one
knows that a strong Imagination is capable of producing strange effects in the
Body. We see every day Children that come into the World bearing the Marks of
their Mothers Longings, which are the effects of their Imagination. It may be
that this Saint did so strongly Imagine the Instruments of the Passion, as to
leave them Engraved in her Heart; but it seems to me, that this is a Violence
done to Nature, which can no way be pleasing to God, who is the Author of it.
As for S. Catharine of Bononia, she more particularly rendered her self famous
by her Abstracted Life. The History of her Life tells us, That she was in a
continual Union with God. Doctor Molinus was no stranger to this Unitive Life,
for this is that he calls his Prayer of Rest: I doubt not at all, but that one
day he would have been one of the Saints of Rome, had not Obedience to
Superiors and particularly to the Pope been concerned in the case. The Pope
will suffer you to Unite with God, as much as you please, provided always that
this Union do not hinder you from obeying him, more than God himself. I doubt
not indeed but that there may be even to this day perfect Souls amongst them,
that are Ravished even into the third Heaven; but these are extraordinary
Graces, which do not depend on any Natural endeavor we can exert to obtain
them. But when I consider that the Roman Catholics have made a fixed State of
this Union, that they prescribe Rules to attain it, and it is sufficient
according to them, to put themselves into the Hands of one of these Mystical or
Unitive Doctors, and follow their Directions, in-order to arrive at this State.
When I consider this, I say, I cannot but condemn their Error. It Is a piece of
Impiety to make the Divine Operations dependent on the Humors of Men; to give
Rules for the obtaining of that by way of Merit, which is the mere Gift of
Grace, and to make one's self the Dispenser and Disposer of the Gifts of
Heaven, as these sorts of Doctors pretend to do. Moreover the ill Consequences
that follow from hence are very Pernicious to Souls. First of all, this
assurance only, received from these Mystical Masters, of once being advanced to
the Unitive Life, whilst so many others are left behind in the Contemplative
and Active Lives, which are so far below it, is very proper to inspire the
parties concerned with Pride and vain Glory. Secondly, This may prove a very
great Discouragement to those, who are necessarily engaged in an Active Life,
to consider that there are such perfect States beyond them, which it is
impossible for them ever to attain to, because these Doctors do not think them
fit to be admitted thereto. Thirdly, This opens a Door to manifold
Superstitions and Errors; for they who are engaged in the Active Life, never
take the pains to examine what the Contemplative say; nor these, what the
Unitive or Mystical do allege for Truth: So that the two first do both of them
rely upon these last, who for the most part are persons of weak Brains, and
most extravagant Thoughts, who believe, that whatsoever they speak or act is
from God. It is evident that the Opinion of Transubstantiation is only an
effect of their Whimseys, by the Impropriety, Abuse and Confusion of the Terms
they make use of to explain themselves. For in like manner, as they call their
Mystical Life sometimes Union, Unity, Identity, Confusion or mingling of the
Soul with God; sometimes the Loss of the Soul in God; the pure sight of God;
Peaceable possession of God; and many more which may be in the Books that Treat
of the Mystical Life, whereof some are very False and Impious, as those of
Unity, Identity, Confusion and Losing of ones self in God, and all the others
do only belong to the Future Life: Now in like manner, say I, as they make use
of these Terms to signify a simple adherence, compliance and acquiescence of
our Souls in the good pleasure of God, which cannot produce Identification; so
of old Times they called the Holy Supper, The real Union of Jesus Christ with
our Souls, and the Bread we partake therein the Truth, Reality and Substance of
the Body of Jesus Christ, which notwithstanding is only there in a Figure: And
afterward, when this Error had taken good Rooting, it brought forth this big
word of Transubstantiation, which at this day makes the chief difference
between Papists, who maintain it Tooth and Nail, and the Protestants who oppose
it. Neither is it any great matter of wonder that an Error of such Consequence,
is crept into the Church of Rome, without making any great Noise; for in the
first place, there was nothing in it contradictory to the Popes Authority: And
again it was not lawful for the People to examine what the Mystical Tribe
asserted; insomuch that even to this day in Italy, if you chance in discourse
with a Contemplative or Unitive person to contradict them in any thing, they
tell you very freely, That these are Matters too high for your Capacity, and
that you are to believe them in the things they assert, as being better
acquainted than you with the ways of God, and as having already spent a
considerable time in tracing the Mystical Paths of a Spiritual Life. I have
scarce ever seen any of these Mystical persons, but were very Proud: They look
upon themselves as Eagles who take their Flights in the highest part of the
Air, and upon other men, as Beasts creeping upon the Earth. A common and humble
Life, full of Affability, Benignity and Sweetness toward ones Neighbor, shall
always be more desirable to me, than all these great Sublimations of Spirit,
which are apt to inspire Men with so much Pride: And if ever it shall please
God, to raise me to the high degree of Contemplation or Union, it shall be His
work, and not the effect of any Rule or direction, which Men can afford me. In
Italy they make a kind of Trade of it; and if a Man does not put himself into
the Hands of some of these Mystical Doctors, who pretend to be old Travelers
and thoroughly well acquainted with the Way to Heaven, and who profess the Art
of Guiding Souls thither, he can never hope of arriving there. These Professors
are ordinarily old Jesuits, old Capuchins, or old Fathers Missionaries, who
being no more able to Scout it up and down in strange Countries, in Holland and
in England to pervert Protestants, apply themselves in their Convents, to play
the Seraphick Fathers, to the end they may be followed by a Company of He and
she Votaries, whom they Discourse to Morning and Evening in their Churches.
When they are met together in their Assemblies, you hear nothing but Sighs,
Groans, and some broken words, at another guess rate than the Qaukers in
England; and certainly in this respect, they have nothing to cast them in the
Teeth with. The Director is seated in his Confessional Chair, in the midst of
all these People, whom he calls his Sons and Daughters; and there as from a
Tribunal or Throne he determines, without Appeal of their Sighs, and of their
Postures, whether they proceed from God, the Devil, or Self-Love: Young Women
or Married are seldom found at these sorts of Assemblies, because commonly they
are kept in on Working-days, on which days the Italians keep them shut up under
Lock and Key; but they are commonly Widows and old Maids, who have no persons
to command them. They call them in Italy, Beati, or Blessed Ones, Good Sisters,
Devout Women, and sometimes by way of derision, Bigots. The Father Directors
are very Zealous of their Advancement in the Mystical Life, and never leave
them, till they have so wholly divested them of all Love for the good things
and Riches of this World, that to be delivered from the Burden of them, they
settle them on their Convent: Then it is they are arrived at perfection. They
call them Sisters, and tell them that having made a Gift of their Goods to
their Monasteries, it is the same thing, as if they had professed amongst them.
They bestow upon them pieces of their Habits, they call them Little
Scapularies, which they wear under their Bodies: By Virtue of which Bits of
Cloth, they are made partakers of all the good Works they do, and of all the
Graces, Privileges, Blessings and Indulgences granted to their Order: When
they are Dead they Bury them in their Churches, and they endeavor, if they
can, to make them pass for Saints, for an Encouragement to others. And indeed
it is very easy for them to do it; to this purpose they have but this course to
take; the first Sick Person they go to visit they amply discourse, about the
high State of Perfection to which Madam such an one was arrived, who was lately
Buired in their Church; That they do not doubt in the least, but she is a great
Saint, and that if the Sick Person can resolve to Pray to, and call upon her
with full assurance, they question not but she will work a Miracle in favor of
him: Yea, they oftentimes offer to Bless some Wine, Syrup or some other Liquor
in the name of this Saint, or to Dip it in something or other that in her Life
time she used to wear, as her Discipline, or Pater Noster: And having done
this, they offer this Liquor to the Sick party to Drink, who if they chance to
recover, the Saint has wrought a Miracle; they cause a Picture to be drawn of
what has happened, which they carry to the Saints Tomb. But if it happen that the
Patient Die, or that the Sickness continue very long, there is not a word made
of it, but all hushed in hopes of a better opportunity for the future. Those
who are any thing acquainted with the State of Affairs in Italy, know that in
all this I advance nothing but what is very true. Hence it is easy to conceive
by what means so many new Saints are en^red into the Church of Rome, to whom at
present Altars are Erected. It is to no purpose to allege here, the great
Precautions they take at Rome, in examining matters of Fact in the Verbal
Processes they make of their Canonization; so that it is impossible for any
thing to escape the Cognizance of those, who have the charge of it. Alas, it is
but too well known, how great a power Silver and Gold have at Rome; and it is
certain they never Canonize any Saint, but it brings them in Immense Sums of
Money. In case any difficulties be started, it is only to get the Money doubled.

My Design at first, was only to give you some account of the Italick
Pilgrimages; but the occasion of mentioning these three Saints, whose Bodies
are preserved in Incorruptions have put me upon this Digression. Wherefore to
make an end in few words of what I have yet to say of my first Subject, you may
take notice, that all other Pilgrimages of Italy, besides those of Loretto,
Rome and S. Anthony of Padua, are very inconsiderable. Some Pilgrims go to S.
Michael, which is at Mount Gargan in the Poville, others to S. Nicholas of Bar;
but the most that go to these places are Beggars, because the way thither is
very troublesome from the City of Naples, lying all over high Mountains, and the
Inhabitants of that Country are almost all Robbers: The Italian Lords are very
backward to lead their Ladies a walk thither, with their Pilgrim-Staves all set
with Diamonds. The Delicious March of Ancona, is much more proper and secure
for this sort of Pilgrims: The Pilgrimage of S. Anthony of Padua in the
Pleasant Venetian Country, is for the same reason much more suitable to them.
There be very few Italians, who do not take this Journey every three years; and
some of them go Regularly every year. This Saint has gained so great Credit in
Italy, that he is of equal esteem with the Virgin, yea, with God himself; some
with a great deal of reason have called him the God of Italy, Italiae Deus.
When an Italian has Sworn by S. Antonio, it is the greatest Oath he can Swear:
And whereas in other Countries they are wont to say, I intend to go to such or
such a place at such a time, if God preserve my Life; or 'Ile do this or that,
if it please God; it is their custom to say 'Ile go thither, or do this, if it
please the Virgin and S. Anthony. Their most common Interjection when ever they
are in any danger, surprise or admiration, is to Cry, Madonna Santissima! or S.
Antonio! And by a strange kind of Blasphemy, though they make it a great Point of
Devotion, they have the Impiety to say, I hope in S. Anthony, that I shall
never Perish. They call him the Saint, by way of Emphasis, I^ Santo, which is a
great Honor, but of right due to God only, to whom the Angels Cry continually,
Holy, Holy, Holy! There is never a Church in Italy, where there is not an Altar
Dedicated to S. Anthony of Padua. They make their Addresses in particular to
this Saint for all things that are lost, to which purpose they tell you this
following Story:

A Rich Venetian Merchant being at Sea, by Mischance let a Diamond of a very
great price fall into the Sea, who immediately upon his return to Venice went
to Padua, and betook himself al Santo; he desired the Friars of that Convent to
say Nine Masses for him, and to join their Prayers with his, for the recovery
of his Diamond. The Ninth day after his Nine Masses were ended, the Merchant
designing to Treat all the Monks of the Convent with a Dinner, he bought
amongst other things a very large Fish and sent it to them; the Friar Cook
having opened and gutted this Fish, found the Diamond in the Intrails of it,
which the Merchant had dropped into the Sea; which was immediately restored to
him, and Thanks returned to the Saint, who had heard their Prayers.

This Story is related at large in the Legend of his Life: But does it not seem
to you, Sir, to be contrived or invented of these good Monks, to persuade Men
to send them in good Dinners, and to get them to say Masses for them?

They tell another pleasant Story, which however they were very Cautious of
inserting in their Legend. The Friars del Santo go without contradiction for
the most Debauched that are in all Padua, and who in this quality outvie the
Scholars themselves of the University. One of these Monks having for some
Months Solicited a young Woman to comply with his Lust, she at last fell under
the Temptation; but soon after was so extremely grieved for the Sin she had
committed, that she was ready to Despair. The Friar perceiving it,
notwithstanding what was past, made a shift to persuade her, that in case she
would give him some considerable Sum of Money, for Masses to be said to S.
Anthony, that Saint should restore her the Virginity she had lost. Thus besides
the satisfying of his Lust, he got Money of her wherewith to glut his Luxury
elsewhere. I will not oblige you to believe this Story, having no sufficient
Warrant to believe it my self: However sure I am, that these Jolly Monks under
the Cloak of their S. Anthony, play many Tricks not a whit inferior to this.

I may possibly have occasion to entertain you with some of them in one of my
LETTERS; and in the mean time conclude this, assuring you that I shall be all
my Life,

Sir, Your, etc.

The Fifth LETTER, Of Festivals and Confraternities, etc.
SIR,
I Met with nothing considerable in my Journey from Loretto to Rome, save the
Accident that happened to me in passing of a Bridge, whereof I gave you an
Account in my Last LETTER. I arrived there about Christmas, and continued in
that City all the Holy Days, and the Lent following, until Easter. My principal
Employment, during my stay here, was to frequent their Festivals, to hear their
Sermons, and to be present at their Confraternities; which accordingly I do
intend shall be the Subject of this present LETTER.

This Word Feast, or Festival, in the Church of Rome, properly signifies those
Days of the Year, which are more Religiously observed than the rest, in honor
either of the Virgin, or of some Mystery of the Gospel, or of some Saint, which
we in England call Holy Days. Some of these Feasts are Universal, others only
Particular. The Universal Feasts are those, that are generally observed in all
Countries that profess the Romish Religion; and on these Days they are bound
(under pain of Mortal Sin) to go to Mass. The Particular Feasts, are such as
are only kept in certain Provinces, Cities, Parishes, or Chapels. Thus,
forasmuch as at Rome there is a prodigious Number of Churches and Chapels, it
is every day Holy Day in diverse parts of that City.

But they have another sort of Feasts in Italy, which for distinction sake I
may call, Feasts of Gallantry: These are, When some Noble or Wealthy Persons,
do at their own Costs and Charges, undertake to have the First and Second
Vespers, together with the Mass, Sung in Music, in Honor of some He or She
Saint: I give them the Name of Gallant Feasts; not so much for the Musicks
sake, (that is to say, for the admirable Sympathy of Voices, and Concerts of
Instruments, which are so great a part of them;) but with respect to the
Ladies, who are Invited to them, or who do commonly frequent them.

After that I had for some Days rested my self at Rome, I went abroad, to take
a View of the Curiosities and Antiquities of that Great City. As I was Walking
one Evening on the Piazza Navonna, I passed by a very fine Church, called De la
Pace: The Porch, which of it self was a most exquisite piece of Architecture,
of the fairest White-Marble, was over and above magnificently Embelish'd and
Adorned with most curious Pictures, and a multitude of Figures made of small
Sheets of Silk of different Colors, of the Bononia fashion. This gave me the
Curiosity of entering into the Church, where I saw a very fine Company of
Gentlemen, who had caused a kind of a Throne to be made for them in a part of
the Church, from whence they could very Commodiously view those who either came
in or went out. It was one of these Gentlemen, as I understood afterward, at
whose Appointment and Charges this Feast was Celebrated in Honor of S. Agnes;
tho it was not the day of the year which is Consecrated to her, viz. the 21 st
of January; But there was another Mystery in the case, which we shall presently
discover.

These young Lords had each of them, in their Turns appointed the Celebration
of their Mistresses Festivals: they were Eight of them in all, whereof the Four
first had already kept theirs in other Churches, and this was the Feast
appointed by the Fifth of them. He was of the Family of Carpegna, and his
Mistresses Name was Agnes Victorini. The Church de la Pace, that is, of Peace,
is extremely well Adorned; it is Guilt and Painted all within in like manner,
as almost all the Churches of Rome be; however the more to exalt its Beauty,
and to add something peculiar with Relation to the Feast, now to be Solemnized
there, there were several Triumphal Arches erected in the Middle of the Church,
which afforded a Lively Representation of the History of S. Agnes, who by her
Constancy Triumphed over all the Torments which Tyrants could inflict upon her.

This whole History was represented to the Life, with little Scrowls of Silk:
These are of different Sizes, and of all sorts of Colors. They know the set
Price they are to pay for an Hundred Else thereof ready wrought, and every one
chooses what pleases them best. There are a sort of Men at Rome, and
throughout all Italy, who are called Addobbatori, or Adorners of Churches;
these Furnish the Silk themselves, and are extremely Ingenious and Artificial
to Fold and Form them, in all manner of Shapes and Figures. They had been three
Weeks a preparing these Ornaments I am speaking of: There were two Theaters
erected on each side of the Quire, which were Embellished all over with
Histories Represented in the foresaid Silken Figures; the one being designed
for the Vocal Music, the other for the Instrumental, each consisting of Fifty
Musicians: Besides these there were in a little Box near the Altar, Four
Musicians, called Sing-alones, which were said to be Four of the best Musicians
that were in Rome; who were to sing by themselves, the one after the other.
They never go any where to Sing, but they are paid 40 Crowns for each Motet.

The Italians, more than any other Nation of the World, Love Consorts of
Music, and those amongst them, that have good Ears follow these excellent
Musicians to all places, so that there was a vast concourse to this Church.
When I entered, the Music was not yet begun, and I took my place near to the
Throne, where these Gentlemen were seated. They seemed to be somewhat restless,
to have Vespers or Evening Song begin, for it was already near six a Clock, and
all the Wax Candles had already been Lighted above a quarter of an hour, and
the Musicians were all at their Posts. Some Boys that had counted the Wax
Tapers, said there were Four Hundred and Forty of them, of an extraordinary
white Wax. However, the Gentlemen, all Impatient as they were, durst not order
the beginning of the Ceremony, because the Fair Agnes, for whose dear sake all
these Preparations were made, was not yet come: And forasmuch as they were
willing not to be understood, they made use of the little French they had
Learnt, to talk to one another. The Principal, (who was at the Cost of this
Festival, somewhat to quiet the mind of his Companions) told them, he was
assured his Agnes would quickly be there; that he had sent one of his Lackeys,
to come and give him notice, as soon as he should see her set forth from home;
that she precisely knew the hour, and having promised to be there, she would
certainly be as good as her Word. Some of them answered him, That they feared
lest her Mother, who was very Difficult and Humorsom, might keep her at home;
and advised him to send another Lackey to acquaint her Mother, That if she
would not suffer her Daughter to come, she should repent it. But just as they
were in Consultation about this Point, in comes the first Lackey, and tells his
Master that the long looked for Agnes was coming, and already very near the
Church. Whereupon, immediately a Signal was given to the Musicians to be in a
readiness, and at the very Moment she set her Foot in the Church, upon another
Signal given them, they Thundered away the first Anthem of the Common Even. Song
for the Feast of Virgins, beginning thus, Haec est Virgo Sapiens and una de
numero Prudentium. This is a wise Virgin and one of the number of the Prudent
ones. Whereupon our Gentlemen in a trice changed their restlesness into an
excess of Joy and Satisfaction, which might easily be read in their Faces. I
heard them say, That Ladies often took Pleasure to make their Lovers wait for
them, to make their Presence, after a long Attendance the more acceptable and
welcome. I should never have known this fair Idol, amongst those throngs of
Ladies, that entered every Moment, if the young Gentleman, who had prepared all
this Incense for her, had not gone to meet her, and lead her to her place. She
seemed to me very Modestly Dressed, having her Head covered with a large Black
Scarf, which almost reached down to her Feet: Her Face was wholly covered,
according to the Custom of the Romish Ladies, whenever they go abroad: Her
Mother followed her, the Custom of the Country being for the Daughters to go
before, and the Mothers after. Near to the Throne where these Gentlemen were
seated, there was prepared for her a Reading-Desk, covered with a very fair
Carpet of Blew Velvet set round with a deep Golden Fringe, and great Cushions
of the same Richly Embroidered, whereon she and her Mother Kneeled down. I was
very near her, and observed that as long as the Music lasted, she did her
utmost endeavor, under pretext of Sticking some Pins about her Head, to
discover some part of her Face, in favor of those Gentlemen, who had their Eyes
almost continually fixed upon her; she made a shift to send them some Smiles,
and to make Signs to them with her Eyes: Her Breasts were Scandalously exposed
to View, for there being nothing to cover them, save only that part of her
Veil, which hung down over them, she knew so dexterously to play with it, that
every one, who was not deprived of his Eyesight, might at times have a full
View of them. In the mean time the Music was Incomparable and Ravishing, and
all the Anthems that were Sung, tho for the most part they were taken out of
the Canticles, were more applicable to this young ^ady, than to S. Agnes, whose
Feast they pretended to Celebrate. Whilst I was here, I chanced to cast an Eye
upon a Picture of this Saint, which was placed upon the Altar, at which the
Masses were to be said the next Morning, and I easily perceived it to be the
very Face of Agnes Victorini, except only, that it was surrounded with Rays,
as the Saints are used to be, and that they had Painted a little Lamb by her,
as is Customary in all the Representations of S. Agnes. I saw by this, that the
young Gentleman had forgot nothing that might manifest his Devotion to his
Lady, having taken care to place her upon the very Altars, there to be Adored
by every one. About the middle of the Even-Song, two of these Gentlemen took a
great Charger, full of Flowers, with an intent to present all the Ladies there
present, with Nosegaies made of Carnatians, Knops of Roses, and Orange Flowers
mixed together, (for at Rome you may have any sort of Flowers at any Season of
the year,) they were tied together with a Golden-Twist, to which was fastened a
fair Knot of about three or four Yards of Riband; so that each Nosegay could
not be worth less than two Crowns, or thereabouts. The first of these was
presented to the Fair Agnes; and I took notice, that there was a little Note
conveyed between the Flowers, which she immediately took thence and put into
her Hours, or Book of Devotion, to peruse it. It was not possible for me to
discern the Contents, and though I was very nigh to her, I could not discover any
more than these two words, Mia Diva; My Goddess. No sooner were these Nosegays
distributed, but there came flying from the upper Galleries of the Church a
vast quantity of Printed Papers, which the People strove to catch. These Prints
contained Sonnets in the praise of St. Agnes, but which really and indeed
reached the Lady, much more than the Saint, for the Poem was almost a continual
allusion to Victories; being a sufficient hint they were calculated for her,
whose Name was Victorini. This Concert of Music lasted almost four Hours, and
it was very late before all was over; however, so exceeding charming and
delightful was the Music, that it seemed to me I had not been above half an
Hour in the Church.

The next day I returned thither again, and was present at the whole Service;
which was celebrated with all the Pomp and Solemnity imaginable. All the
Morning they celebrated a great number of Masses, and many Abbots (to honor
the young Carpegna and his Mistress) came and said Mass at the Altar, but now
mentioned, before the fair Image. At the beginning of High Mass, they threw
down from the upper Galleries other Sonnets; some of them in praise of S.
Agnes, and others in commendation of the young Gentleman, who was the Master of
the Festival: For the Priests of this Church finding themselves much obliged to
him, for that he had been pleased to make choice of their Church for this
Solemnity (whence they always reap a considerable Profit) had caused this Poem
to be made in praise of his great Devotion and extraordinary worth. There are a
sort of Men in Italy, whom they call Virtuosi, or Poets, who make a livelihood
of Praising others; that is, of making Encomiastical Songs or Poems. Neither is
it expenceful to make use of their Wit; for if you do but give them the
Subject, they furnish you with a good one for a single Crown; so that you are
at no further Charges, save only that of printing it.

It was One of the Clock in the Afternoon by that time the Morning-Service was
ended, when the Ladies retired to their own Homes, and the Gentlemen with the
Priests to an Apartment near the Church of Peace, whither they had taken care
to send abundance of Provisions, to make a sumptuous Dinner. The Musicians
retired into the Sextry, whither some Hours after they sent in to them several
large Dishes of Meat, abundance of all sorts of Wine, with Sugared and
Cooling-Waters. The Notes, distributed to that purpose, specified, That the
second Even-song was to begin about Three in the Afternoon; wherefore I made it
my business to be there about that time; but I found I was come too soon, for
the Musicians had not Dined yet, more Dishes of Meat being still sent in to
them, neither did Service begin till about Five of the Clock; and the same
Order was observed as at the former Even-song, except only that the Verses and
Anthems were changed, and that the Ladies (before they departed) were not only
presented with Nosegays, as before, but with great Chargers of Sweetmeats,
with which they filled their Handkerchiefs, and so returned home laden with
Flowers and Fruits. The young Carpegna not a little proud and pleased, for
having so magnificently discharged all the parts of that Solemnity, received
the Congratulatory Applauses of all his Companions; and another of them (whose
Turn was next) appointed the next Sunday for a like Festival to be celebrated
at the Church of S. Andrew of the Valley, where he had ordered all things to be
prepared for the solemnizing of the Feast of S. Catharine.

I was willing, Sir, somewhat to enlarge my self in the description of the
Particulars of this Feast; not as if it were a thing rare and extraordinary,
(for indeed, what I have here related is but as One of a Thousand that I have
seen, and which it would be very superfluous to repeat to you, there being
indeed nothing more common in Italy;) but my design was only to give you a more
distinct Idea of this thing, when you shall chance to hear any discourse
concerning these Italian Feasts. I have lived Seven years in that Country, and
in all that time, never did a Week pass over my Head, in which I was not
present at some or other of them; wherefore I have reason to be able, to speak
with good ground concerning them. I shall only add one thing, which may well
make the Roman Catholics blush; viz. That it is at these sorts of Feasts, that
young Women are debauched and corrupted.

There are Bawds, who (by their Emissaries) acquaint them with the places where
any of these Feasts are to be kept, whereupon they never fail to resort thither
in Troops, very Lasciviously dressed: And as for other Women and Maidens, as the
only pretext they can have to oblige their Parents or Husbands to let them go
abroad, is that of going to Church; they continually sigh and long for these
sorts of Feasts, to have so fair an opportunity to go abroad and divert
themselves. It Is at these Feasts, I say, that Meetings are appointed, and Notes
secretly conveyed; here it is they learn to make Love with the Eyes, and to
discourse one another by Gests and Signs; and in a word, here it is, O shame!
that their lewd and infamous Bargains are made. Neither do I assert ought in
all this, but what is fully confirmed by their own Proverb; which tells us, Chi
manda la sua figliuola ad ogni Festa, in p^oco Tempo ne fa una Puttana; That he
who sends his Daughter to every Feast, will make her a Whore in a short time.
The Young and Married Women seat themselves on each side of the Church, and the
Gentlemen walk in the midst, whereby they have an opportunity to look them in
the Face. They Push one another, they Laugh, they Talk aloud, and entertain one
another with Discourses, very unbecoming the Sacredness of the place where they
are. The Holy Sacrament, which they believe to be the True living Body of our
Savior Jesus Christ, is for the most part exposed upon the High Altar, or in
some particular Chapel, to make the Solemnity the greater; but they have so
little respect for it, that they turn their Backs upon it, to face the Ladies
and Musicians. Whence it is evident, That they do but very slightly, if at all,
believe that main Point of their Doctrine, or at least, that their Practice
gives their Faith the Lie. The Priests reap a considerable advantage from these
Feasts; for all the Ceremonies they officiate, and the Masses they say, are
very dearly paid them, and are highly Feasted into the bargain.

But more particularly, we meet with these kind of Feasts very frequent in
Convents or Monasteries; the Religious whereof may be distinguished into three
sorts, either such as are endowed with Means for their Subsistence, as
generally all those called Monks are; or else they live partly of their Incoms,
and partly of Alms, as are all those who are called Frati, or Friars; or
lastly, they are such who live wholly upon Alms, as the Capuchins, and other
Mendicant Orders. Now each of these are very ambitious, and do their utmost
endeavors to have of these Feasts made in their Churches. The Monks desire it,
to make a show of their Riches and Grandeur; the whole Ceremony is carried on
at their own Charges, and the Feast they make is called a Pontifical, and is
indeed the most pompous and magnificent Show, that can be seen.

I will endeavor to give you here the most exact Description of it, that
possibly I can. To this purpose I will take for my Subject one of those I saw
in the Famous Abbey of S. Michael in Bosco of Bononia, where I Taught for Two
years together, the Monks whereof are of the Order of Mount Olivet. The Abbot
is not Commendatory, but Regular, and has the power of officiating
Pontifically. He caused his Pontifical to be published in Bononia, Three Weeks
before the Feast of S. Bernard, Founder of their Order, which happened to be on a
Thursday; and accordingly the first Even-Song began on Wednesday in the
Evening. The Church of this Abbey is a mere Jewel of a thing, for the
extraordinary curiosity of the Marble, Jasper, and Porphyrie Stones, that do in
part compose and embellish it; the Guilding and Painting that adorn it, are of
an inestimable price; the Roof and all the Walls of the Church are Guilt; the
High-Altar, as well as the other lesser ones of the Chapels, are all of
Precious Stones. All the Seats of the Quire are of In-laid Work, wherein the
whole Life of S. Bennet, and many Histories of the Bible are represented; the
Ballisters of Iron, that shut the Quire and Chapels, are all Gilt, and very
delicately Wrought; the Pavement is of black and white Marble; insomuch that
there is not the least part in the whole Church, that stands in need of any
superadded Ornament. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Abbot sent for the most
dexterous Adorners of Churches to set it forth, with the Silken Machins of
Bononia, with which all the Windows and Walls of the Church were filled,
affording various Historical Representations; though, to speak the Truth, this
was a very needless Cost, because what was hid by these Silken-Figures was more
curious and costly, than the Figures themselves. He ordered Arms of Silver to
be fixed round the Church, and Candlesticks of the same, to be placed on all
the Cornishes and Pillars of the Church, to support a prodigious number of
white Wax-Candles, which were to burn all the time of the Service. The
High-Altar was set as thick as it could hold with Plate, brought out of the
Treasury of that Abbey, to make a show of it to all Men. About Three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, the Abbot (accompanied with all his Monks) and many
Gentlemen of his Relations and Friends following him, marched forwards toward
the Church. He was Apparel'd in the Habit of his Order, being distinguished
from the rest of the Monks by his Ring, his Hood, and his four Cornered Cap.
The Monks of this Abbey are wont to enter into the Church by the Gate of the
Cloister which is near the Choir; but for the more State, and to make a greater
show of their Abbot in all his Pomp and Majesty, they chose this time to come
out of the Monastery, and to take a Round, in order to their Entering the Church
by the Great Gate, at the West End of it. As soon as they entered, the Bells,
Organs, and other Musical Instruments sounded a March; and as for the Monks,
they gave forth such an Air in their going, as discovered rather the Vanity of
their Hearts, than that Majesty which becomes the Ministers at the Altar.

When they were come into the Church, the Abbot made a Halt before the Chapel
of S. Bernard, which is at the Lower-end of the Church, and kneeled down upon
Cushions of Violet-colour'd Velvet, very richly Embroidered, which were laid
upon a Desk, covered with a Carpet of the same, garnished with a rich
Golden-Fringe. And at the same time the Musicians sung an Anthem in praise of
that Saint. After this the Abbot was conducted to his Throne, which they had
erected at the Right side of the Altar. It was covered on high with a
magnificent Canopy of State, and surrounded with several Seats, very richly
Adorned, for all the Officers that were to officiate at the Pontifical. Being
arrived here, he seated himself, having two Abbots of his Friends on each side
of him; and immediately Fourteen of his Monks, in their Surplices, went and
took the Ornaments that were laid on Tables placed near the High Altar,
wherewith he was to be invested; and having each of them taken what belonged to
their place, they ranged themselves one behind another, making a long Row. The
first of them carried in a large Silver-gilt-Charger the Abbatical Buskins; the
second, in another like Charger, the Abbatical Sh^es, of Violet colored Velvet
richly Embroidered; a third carried the Coif; a fourth the Ro^het; which, as
also the Coif, was of most fine Linen, Laced round about, and at the Hands,
with a very curious Point de Venice of a Foot deep; the fi^^h followed with a
very costly Girdle of white Silk woven and wrought to admiration; the sixth
carried the Stole; the seventh and eighth, each of them a Tunicle of white
Taffety; the ninth had the Cap, which like the Stole was of Cloth of Gold, the
Edges of it being raised by Embroidery into several curious Figures, composed
of Seed-Pearl, and furnished with Golden Clasps; the tenth carried the Little
Cross of Diamonds, valued at Two Thousand Crowns; the eleventh, in a great
Charger gilt and enameled, carried the Abbatical Gloves; and the twelfth, the
Abbatical Ring, being an Amethist of an extraordinary size; the thirteenth
followed with the Mitre, thick set with Pearls and precious Stones; and the
fourteenth and last, carried the Crosier or Pastoral Staff. Every one of these
in order, as they drew near to the Abbot (seated on his Throne) bowed the Knee
before him; and after they had delivered their several Charges into the hand of
the Assistant Abbots, who were to Attire their Prelate, having first worshipped
him with another Genuflexion, retired again in good order. At every Ornament
that was put upon him, there were particular Prayers which the Assisting Abbots
repeated, and the Officiating Prelat read himself in the Pontifical Book, which
was supported by two Monks; and two others, in their Surplices and Tunicles,
held Wax Candles to light him, whilst the Master of Ceremonies turned the
Leaves for him.

The Abbot being Accoutred with all these Ornaments, and having the Mitre on
his Head, seated himself on his Throne in the midst of the two Abbots
Assistants; and immediately all the Officers, who were to officiate at the
Ceremony, ranged themselves near to him. These Officers were four Chaunters in
their Rochets and Hoods, four Sub-Chaunters in their Surplices, two Deacons in
their Stoles and Tunicles, two Subdeacons in their Tunicles, two Taper-Bearers
to hold the Candlesticks, and two Incense-Bearers, dressed in Surplices and their
Silver Censers in their Hands; besides another Officer to hold the
Crosier-Staff, and the Master of Ceremonies with his Rod or Wand. All these
were only to Officiate till about the middle of Even-song; at which time, as if
they had been extremely tired with the Attendance they had given, they were
relieved by others, yet more gorgeously Apparel'd, who were to Officiate till
the Service was ended. Their Music was very numerous and choice: The Abbot
sung the first Verse of Even-song, which was continued by the Music and
Singing-men with abundance of Ceremonies, which I shall not insist upon at
present, that which I have already delivered being sufficient to give you an
Idea of that extraordinary Majesty and External Pomp, wherewith Feasts are
^olemnized in the Churches of Italy. For in case it be a Bishop or Archbishop
that Officiates, the Magnificence is much greater; and if it be a Cardinal or
Pope that celebrates the Feast, these Ceremonies are carried to the highest
point of Elevation and Grandeur imaginable.

I remember to have Read somewhere in an English Protestant Author, the
Commendations and Elogies he bestows upon those of the Roman Communion, in this
Point of Ceremonies, saying, That in this only they are Praiseworthy and to be
commended, that they spare nothing that may contribute to the Costliness and
Solemnity of their Feasts. For my part, I have very industriously applied my
self, to search out the Principle from whence so much false Luster does
proceed, which they make use of in the Church of Rome, to dazzle the Eyes of the
inconsiderate and unthinking People; and I have found, That it is not their
great Zeal for the House of God that is the Motive of it, but only Interest,
Vainglory and Self-love, as I abundantly discovered upon this occasion.

The Even-song ended, about Six of the Clock in the Evening; after which, the
Abbot and his Officers, having put off their Ornaments, went into the Sextry,
where they found great Tables covered and thick set with dry and wet Confects,
Neats-Tongues, Bononia-Sausages, and sine Pastry-meat. All the Ladies and
Gentlemen of Quality, that were in the Church, were desired to enter; and as
for my self, having a free access to that Abbey, as being in a manner one of the
Family; because I publicly taught there the Liberal Arts, and had a good
Allowance, besides the Abbots Table; I entered into the Sextry with them, and
had moreover the Privilege of bringing some Frenchmen of my Acquaintance in
with me, which are now in London. The Gentlemen and Ladies were not wanting to
bestow great Encomiums on the Abbot, each declaring how admirable well his
Pontifical Habit did become him, and how gracefully he did Officiate. In the
mean time the Monks applied themselves to the Ladies of their Acquaintance, and
entered into close Discourse with them, but what it was, I could not be Witness
to; only thus much I can aver, That their Beauty had so far charmed them, that
for a whole Month after it was the great Subject of their Discourse. It seems
they had so well studied them, during the Converse they had with them, that
they could give an exact account of the Clothes, Ribands, and Laces they had on.

The Abbot (during the Entertainment) Addressed himself to two Ladies of Quality,
the one a Lady Marquess, and the other a Countess; and demanded of them,
Whether they had not found a desire stirring in them, to persuade some of their
Children to become Religious of his Order? The Lady Marquess Answered, She
would consider of it. But the Countess very frankly assured him, That she had
been so extremely satisfied with the Pontifical, which had been celebrated with
so much Pomp and Majesty, that it had even Ravished her; and that she was
absolutely resolved, her Son should take the Habit of the Order. She told the
Abbot, That the Jesuits did their utmost Endeavors, to draw him over to them;
but that she would be sure to break all their Measures, and hoped that her Son
would behave himself so well in the Monastery, that one day she might have the
Joy and Comfort, to see him made Abbot of the Order, and Pontifically
Officiating.

All our good Natured Monks, in the mean time, notwithstanding all the pains
they had taken in assisting at the Church-Ceremonies, were very ready to wait
upon the Fair Ladies at Table, and to keep them Company, as being in this
regard a Thousandfold more happy, than other Italian Laym^n, who have not the
Privilege of making Feasts, to get a Sight of their Ladies, and who can
scarcely ever meet with an opportunity of rendering them the like Services. I
cannot deny, but that some of these Ladies were of Kin to them; but however, it
must needs be a great satisfaction to have an occasion of Treating them so
splendidly out of the public Stock of the Abbey, which cannot be done, but in
those sorts of Ceremonies: For at any time, if they desire to do it, it must
cost them a Round Sum of Money. The Ladies, in the mean while, were in so a good
Humor, and so extraordinarily well pleased, as well with their Entertainment in
the Church, as in the Sextry, That they very freely asked the Abbot, When they
might expect to come to another Pontifical? Who promised them, to celebrate
another on the Day of S. Francis, of Rome.

It is impossible, Sir, you should not take notice in all this I have related
to you, concerning the Solemnity of this Feast, what indeed were the true
Motives of it. The Abbot hereby pleased his Vainglorious humor, by appearing in
a Pontifical Dress, with so many pompous Ornaments, amidst so many Adorations
and so many Incensings as were presented to him. Besides this, he made also his
Advantage of it; for from hence he took occasion to solicit Persons of
Quality, after he had dazzled their Eyes with the magnificent Splendour of his
Pontifical, to persuade their Children to take the Habit of the Order. I know
very well how gainful it is to the Abbot and other Principal Officers of the
Abbey, when the Children of Persons of Quality take upon them the Habit. They
never admit them to the Profession, till their Parents have presented them very
liberally, besides the Annual Pension they are bound to allow their Son; and
the more Honorable the Persons are, the more considerable still are the
Presents that are made them. The rest of the Religious find their pleasure and
satisfaction in these Festivals; their Eyes are feasted with the sumptuous
Adorning of their Churches, and their Ears with the sweetness of the most
choice and exquisit Music; neither is the Feast that concludes the Solemnity,
and the Ladies company, the least Charm to make them desirable: So that in a
word, the Glory of God, and the Zeal of his Holy Temple, are at the best, and
to speak most favorably, but the more remote Object of these Pompous
Solemnities.

I have already told you in one of my LETTERS, That I feared to pass for a
Severe Censor in your Judgment, who takes pleasure to put a rigorous Sense upon
Actions, otherwise capable of a favorable Interpretation; and for this Reason,
I always back what I say with the Reasons that induce me to pass these sorts of
Judgments; and I question not in the least, but that if you will be pleased
well to weigh them, you will find that I have used abundance of Moderation in my
Expressions. To apply this therefore to the present Subject, I shall proceed to
tell you, That the Festival of S. Francis of Rome approaching, on which Day the
Abbot had promised the Ladies another Pontifical, Preparations were made for
greater Pomp and Splendour, than before had been at the Feast of S. Bernard.
They had sent for Musicians from Florence and Venice, who two days before the
Feast were arrived at the Abbey, where they were very splendidly Entertained.
The Evening before, the Abbot and the Monks prayed heartily for fair Weather;
and the Air being at that time very clear and serene, there was all the
appearance imaginable that it would continue so; which Hopes filled them with
unutterable Joys. There was only one good old Convert Friar amongst them, who
being better informed than all this, by the Twitches his Corns gave him, very
peremptorily aver'd, It would Rain the next Day. Upon this ominous Intimation,
the Abbot himself went out after Supper, to Star-gaze what Weather they were
like to have the next day; and seeing the Sky so very clear and full of Stars,
declared, There was no need to fear, but they should have a fair Day on it, and
that the Old Friar was a Turba Festa, a mere Trouble-Feast to talk so at
random: Upon this Assurance the Monks retired to their Apartments that Evening
with a great deal of Joy. But forasmuch as it is not for Men to know the Times
and Seasons, which God has reserved in his own power, about Midnight the
Weather changed, and the next Morning there fell so furious a Shower, that it
was impossible to stir abroad without being wet to the Skin. This Tempestous
Weather continued till Night, which seized the Spirits of the poor Monks with a
strange Consternation. The next Morning they appeared all Pail-fac'd, and gave
evident Proof, how great a Change crossed Desires are able to produce in the Body
of Man. Some of them openly murmured against Heaven, because that almost every
Year it disturbed or disappointed their Feast of S. Francis; others of them
retained still some hope, that the Rain might hold up within few Hours; but
alas! their Hopes were all in vain; the Heavens were too resolved, and the
Storm was so far from ceasing or diminishing, that it increased more and more.
The Abbot perceiving there was no Remedy, sent word to the Sexton, to shut up
the Ornaments of the Pontifical; however, he ordered the Music should Play,
because the Musicians were present, and that most of them were paid before
hand; but he forbad the great Rows of Wax-Candles to be Lighted, which had been
disposed of round the Church, or to burn the Incense that had been prepared for
the Altars: So that, excepting only the Music, the Office was very simply and
plainly celebrated after the ordinary manner. The Abbot did not appear at it
himself, and all this great Pomp and Solemnity vanished in Smoke.

Now I desire you, Sir, only to draw a rational and obvious Consequence from
all these proceedings. Can you persuade your self, that God or the Saint were
the Object or Motive of all this ado? God is Immense and Infinite, every where
present, whether it be fair or foul; and the Saint also is supposed to be
always the same in Heaven: How came it to pass then, that the Solemnity was
changed, and put off; but because the Gentlemen and Ladies that had been
Invited, and for whose sake the Feast was intended, could not come? Sublata
causa tollitur effectus; Take away the Cause, and the Effect cease. Or can we
draw a more just Consequence, or more proper to stop the Mouths of our
Adversaries of the Romish Communion, who object to us their Divine Service, as
celebrated with so much Pomp and Magnificence, and who find so much fault with
the Simplicity and Modesty of ours? When they celebrate their Mattins, or
Morning Service, or their greatest Holidays before Daylight, they scarcely
Light Two Wax-Candles on the Altar, ( Because, say they, no body frequents
them); whereas in the Day time, when there is abundance of Company, they Light
a matter of Three or Four hundred. May we not therefore with great Reason
reproach them, That all their Pompous Feasts and Solemnities, are only to
satisfy their own Pleasure, Vainglory and Avarice? and that therefore God
abhors and abominates these their Services; so far are they from being any
proof of the Truth of their Religion. In the mean time I must needs
acknowledge, That this is that which deludes many, and is a Stone of Offense to
all those, who in Matters of Religious Worship consider only that which strikes
the Senses.

I knew a Papist in England, that was turned Protestant many years before, who
told me he was returning again to Italy, in order to join himself again to the
Romish Communion; and his Reason was, Because forsooth, the Divine Service was
not solemnized here with that Solemnity, as it was in his Country. I wonder,
why by the dint of the same Argument he was not persuaded to turn Jew, who use
yet more Ceremonies than the Church of Rome; or rather, I am astonished he did
not consider with himself, That all these Ceremonies and Pompous Vanities being
only Arbitrary things, which depend only on the Will of Men, if the Protestants
were inclined that way, might contrive and institute such as should be more
Magnificent than those of Rome, and might make their Bishops to appear every
day in as pompous Ornaments, as the Pope does on S. Peter's Day: And if they
don't do it, the Reason is, Because they are well persuaded, that what is most
pleasing in the Eyes of Men, is not always most acceptable to God, who requires
pure and holy Hearts, and not rich and pompous Apparel, and to whom the
fervency of our Prayers is far more acceptable, than Clouds of the sweetest
Incense. Besides, the Service and Worship of God, as it is celebrated in their
Churches, is not altogether destitute of decent Ornaments neither: The
Ministers Habit is such as distinguishes them from all others in their
Ministry, but yet so, as without any thing of Superstition; there is no Divine
Virtue attributed to them, that renders the Wearers thereof more holy than
others; whereas, in the Church of Rome, should a Priest celebrate Mass without
his Hood, or Amict, and that wilfully, they hold it to be a Mortal Sin.

I return now to our Feasts again, and having given you an account how the same
are celebrated by those Monks who live upon their Incoms; I shall proceed now
to those of other Religious, who partly live of Incoms and partly of Alms, as
well as of those who live altogether of Alms, who are known in Italy by the
Name of Frati. During my stay at Rome, I went to the Minerva, which is a Famous
Convent of the Dominicans; it was on a Saturday, at which time they were
celebrating a Festival in Honor of the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin. I learnt,
That the Heads of that Confraternity met every Saturday, and did every one of
them by Turns celebrate the Feast of the Rosary at their own Charges. It Is the
Humor of the Italians, in such like cases, to strive for the Honor of
surpassing one another, and spare no Cost, to the end they may in Magnificence
outvy others; This is an Emulation that is Natural to them, and which I believe
cannot with good ground be attributed to their Virtue, because herein they feed
their Vanity as much, as in those sumptuous Cavalcades they make, and in which
(after the same manner) their great aim is to outdo one another.

These Religious, or Frati, have contrived a Form of Feasts for their own
Tooth: The Monks (as was said before) make them at their own Charges, and to
set forth their Riches and Glory; but these always celebrate them upon other
Men's Purses, and with such Caution, as withal to fill their own into the
bargain. The Laws they have established to this purpose, are, That whosoever
causes a Feast to be solemnized, must send beforehand a sufficient Sum of
Money, to defray all the Masses that the Religious of the Convent do celebrate
that Day: In the second place, he must be at all the Charge of Adorning the
Chapel, or Church, where the Feast is to be kept; and in the third place, he
is obliged to send in a splendid Dinner for all the good Friars of the Convent.
Some amongst them, for this very Reason, do very aptly call these Feasts, The
Friars Milch-Cows. As for those Friars which are called Mendicants, such as the
Capuchins, and some others, who live wholly of Alms; forasmuch as they cannot,
by reason of their Vow of Poverty in Common, receive any Money for their Masses,
there is this difference, that instead of delivering the Money for that purpose
into their own Hands, it is to be paid to him whom they call their Temporal
Father, that is a Layman, who has the disposal of their Money for their use, and
whom they call every Month to an account, even to the utmost Farthing. Their
Patriarch, S. Francis, never dreamt of this piece of subtilty, and consequently
also he has not made the least mention of it in his Rule, or Directory; but as
for these good Fathers, they have quite outdone him in refined Wit and
Invention. They do not think it convenient, so wholly to rely upon the Divine
Providence, as not to think their own the more safe and sure way. What would
you have us do? (say they) alas! the Times are changed, and Laymen are not so
Charitable now, as they were in the time of S. Francis! For my part, I durst
undertake to prove to their Faces, That in case they lived with as much
Frugality as their Ancient Fathers (who, to speak Truth, are of no great
Antiquity neither) they would find Superstitious People enough, to furnish them
with a sufficiency, for a Sober and Penitential Diet. But who would take
delight to incommodate themselves, to Cram a Company of Lazy Lubbers, who do
nothing but go from House to House to fill their Bellies, especially leading so
scandalous a Life as they do? True it is, that by their Cunning they have so
ordered the Matter, that they want for nothing; and one of the best Inventions
they have ever yet found out, to be sumptuously and delicately Treated, is
their Feasts.

And forasmuch as a Regular Feast, I mean those that are marked in the
Almanac, are only to be found once in the Year, they have invented the useful
Contrivance of Confraternities, as being most fruitful Nurseries of Feasts or
Holy Days for them, so as even to produce many for them in one and the same
Week. A Confraternity, according to the definition they give us of it, is an
Association of many Persons, who unite themselves and agree together, at
certain Times, to render some Religious Worship to God, to the Virgin, or to
some other Saint, in such a manner as is not common to all: But at the bottom,
it is indeed nothing else, but the most sure and refined Art the Church of Rome
has to catch Money; and they have always some good Crafty. Father or other, that
has the Trade of Drawing-in People at his Fingers-end, who is the Director of
it: It Is to him all those that desire to be Admitted to the Confraternity must
address themselves, where (for Writing down his Name in the Book, and for
Entrance-Mony) it costs him a Crown at least; and every Year at the same Day,
he must come to have his Name renewed, and pay over the same Entrance-Mony, as
at his first Admittance, otherwise you are without Mercy most ignominiously
Expelled the Confraternity, and from that time forwards are excluded from
having any share in their Prayers, or partaking of their Indulgences. Over and
above all this, there is some Money to be paid every Month, toward the Lights
of the Chapel where the Confraternity is erected; which, considering the vast
Number of those who are Enrolled in it, produces a prodigious Sum of Money.

The Least Confraternities that are, consist of Three or Four hundred persons;
there are some have a Thousand, yea, Two or Three Thousand belonging to them. I
have my self seen above Twenty Thousand Names enrolled in the Book of the
Confraternity of the Scapulary of the Carmelites of Milan; and in that of the
great Confraternity of the Rosary of S. John, and S. Paul of Venice, I have
been certainly informed, there are above ^orty Thousand Brothers: Suppose every
one of the Brethren should only give a Penny every Months toward the
Chappel-Lights, it would be impossible to burn all the Wax-Candles that Money
would buy; which by consequence turns to the profit of these good Friars. They
are continually hankering about the Richest Persons of their Confraternity,
endeavoring to persuade them to make Feasts in honor of the He or She Saint,
in whose Name their Confraternity is erected.

I happened once to be in Company of an Italian Count, who was of the
Confraternity of the Little Scapulary of the Virgin, erected in the Great
Convent of the Carmelites at Rome; at the time when the Father Director of the
Confraternity came in to him, and told him with a Smiling Countenance, Conte
Giovanni, I have a great Complaint against you, from one of your very good She
Friends. The Count supposing it to be from one of his Mistresses, asked him,
Who it was? The Director answered, That it was from the Blessed Virgin, and
that he had no Reason to doubt, but that she was very angry with him, for
having for so long a time neglected, to cause the Feast of the Holy Scapulary
to be celebrated. The Count excused himself upon the account of some
extraordinary business, that had put him by his Thoughts that way; and desired
the Director, to send him in next Week the List of their Religious. When he was
departed, the Count told me, That what he had told him implied as much, as that
he would make the Feast of the Scapulary the next Week; because on the like
occasion it is customary, to send in as many Couples of Capons and Bottles of
Wine, as there be Religious in the Convent, besides Money to pay for the Masses
that are to be said that Day; so that his demanding a List of the Director, was
a full Intimation, that he had granted his Suit; and accordingly he took his
leave very well satisfied, Saying, He would take care to pacify his She
Friend. The Count told me afterward, That this Feast would cost him a Round
Sum, because commonly the Note of the Director of the Confraternity mounted
very high, as well for the Lights, as for the Musicians and Adorners of the
Church.

And in order to the multiplication of these Feasts, they have pitched upon one
Day of the Week, for the assembling or meeting together of their
Confraternities; that of the Rosary meets every Saturday; of the Little
Scapulary on Thursdays, as likewise that of the Holy Sacrament the
Confraternity of S. Francis his Cord on Fridays; that of the Annunciation on
Wednesdays; that of S. Antonio, on the Tuesdays; and lastly, the Mondays are
peculiarly appropriated to the Confraternities of the Souls in Purgatory. So
that you see, they are fairly provided with Feasts for every Day of the Week,
and that without counting several other particular Confraternities, the Number
whereof is unknown to me, these which I have mentioned being only the more
general. They are not indeed all of them to be met with in one Church, nor in
one and the same Order of Religious; for the Rosary belongs to the Dominicans;
the Little Scapulary to the Carmelites; the Cord of S. Francis to the
Franciscans; the Annunciation to the Soccolanti; S. Anthony of Padua appertains
in general to all the Religious, that live under the Rule of S. Francis; and
the Souls in Purgatory do not only belong to all the Religious Orders, but also
to all Parishes and Churches under the inspection of Secular Priests.

After all this, it cannot be denied, but that those of the Roman Communion are
certainly fallen in love with their own Blindness, in that they will not so
much as take the pains to open their Eyes, to see how mise^ably these Fellows
gull and cheat them: For what can be imagined more ridiculous, than all these
sorts of Confraternities? Because S. Francis forsooth, wore a Cord or Rope
instead of a Girdle, they have erected a Confraternity in Honor of it;
accordingly every Brother of the Society must wear a small Cord: These small
Cords or Bands, do not in the least resemble that which S. Francis wore, which
I have seen at Assize, and is as thick as some of the greatest Ropes, that wind
up Buckets in a Well; but these are very delicately wrought, and very
artificially Knotted in several places. The Custom is, to bless them publicly,
with many Ceremonies and Prayers; which being performed, they tells us, They
have the virtue to blot out all Venial Sins; to drive away the Devil, and
troublesome Temptations of the Flesh. Most of the Ladies of Italy wear this Cord
of S. Francis; they ty them round about their Bodies, and the Ends of them
reach to the bottom of their Petty-coats; they are full of pretty little Knots,
and they serve them to Play withal, as the English Ladies do with their Fans or
Masks. Were it true indeed, That these Cords had the power of repressing Carnal
Temptations, the Ladies of Italy, who wear such lovely ones, could not fail of
being the Cha^est Women in the World; and yet I am sure, this is not the
Commendation that is given them. But be it as it will, this Cord is a thing so
extraordinary Holy, that Great Feasts are celebrated in Honor of it every Week
in all the Churches belonging to the Franciscans; and the Popes have been
pleased to bestow great Indulgences to all those, who shall Enroll themselves
in this Society of the Cord. They are only the poor Protestants that do not
enjoy all these fair Advantages, because they look upon them, as no better than
mere Folly; and for my part, I believe they have very good Reason for being of
this Opinion; and that the surest and safest way is, to believe with them, That
the only thing that can make us of proof against all Temptations, and endue us
with power to overcome Sin, is the Grace of God, and that by means of it alone,
we shall become Conquerors over the Devil, the Flesh, and the World, without
the assistance of either Rope, or Cord.

The Confraternity of the Rosary, is no less Superstitiously founded than the
foregoing. Since the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin, has past
in the Church of Rome for the most Holy Prayer that can be made to her, the
Father Dominicans, who pretend to be the greatest Favorites of the Holy
Virgin, to the end they might have some particular Devotion to distinguish them
from the Common, have invented that which is now called The Rosary, which is
nothing else but an aggregation of several Ave Mary's; there are Tentimes Ten
of them in the Rosary, and at the end of each Ten they add the Lords Prayer.
And to the end they may not fail of saying the just Number (for in case one
only Ave-Mary should chance to be omitted, it would be the loss of the whole
Indulgence) they have brought into use their Paternosters, or Beads, by which
they count the Prayers as they say them, that there may be no mistake. And as
it is the Belief of the Church of Rome, That the Elements and material Subjects
of the Sacraments, are not only Signs, but Physical Instrumental Causes,
producing Grace in the Soul: For they say, That the Water in Baptism, the Oil
in the Extreme Unction, and the Matter presented in the Collation of Orders, do
physically produce Grace in the Soul; so in like manner the Popes have affixed
to these Beads of Wood, Glass, or any other Matter, the Graces and Privileges
that belong to the Rosary: So that if a person should Repeat all the Prayers
ordered and established for the Rosary, without having one of these
Paternosters; yea, though (to be exact in his Tale) he should count them on his
Buttons or Fingers, yet would he not thereby obtain the Indulgence: No, by no
means, there must be Pater-nosters in the case, as being the Instrumental
Causes of producing Grace in the Soul. There are scarcely any Italians, but
have these Pater-nosters about them, either in their Pockets, or hanging about
their Necks, between their Shirts and their Doublets. The Ladies carry them on
their Arms, and they have nowadays made an Ornamental Bravery of it, not
inferior to their Necklaces and Bracelets of Pearls and Diamonds. They
sometimes go abroad without either Fan or Mask, but never without their Beads.
The most common, for Women of a mean Condition, are of Coral or Amber; but the
Ladies of Quality have them of Precious Stones, or of Odoriferous Pasts,
adorned with the most curious Ribands, and garnished with abundance of Gold and
Silver Medals. The greatest Prostitutes would be ashamed to go abroad without
their Great Paternosters on their Arms, which hang down to their Feet; not that
their Devotion is so great in Running of them over, but merely because it is
customary, and a kind of necessary Implement for them to trifle with, which
they cannot well be without: Neither do they make any difficulty, to ask of
their Lovers a Paternoster for the Price of their Infamous Commerce.

The Little Scapulary, or Habit of the Virgin, is a Piece of the same worth and
value, and belongs to the Carmelites; for it is their own Habit to which they
make People pay so great Respect, and so many Adorations. These Fathers were
originally Hermits, who had their place of Retirement on Carmel. They pretend,
That the Blessed Virgin appeared to them there, and gave them the Form of the
Habit they were to wear, which is a Vest and a Scapulary of a Brown Color, and
a great White Hood; and that she told them at the same time, That all those who
should wear that Habit, should be Blessed by her and her Son Jesus Christ, and
should never die in any Mortal Sin. Now forasmuch as it is not possible to
persuade all the World to become Carmelites, that so they might enjoy the
Privileges of this Miraculous Habit, they have found out a way to cut their
Old Habits into little Square-pieces of the bigness of four or five
Fingers-breadth, which they (for their Money) bestow upon Laymen, to wear about
them. They have Persons on purpose standing at the Doors of their Churches, who
^ell them for Four-pence or Five-pence a piece. Certainly, this is the best
improvement of Old Clothes that ever was thought of; and the most excellent
Invention never to want New ones, and to be always well Clad, that could
possibly be imagined. And indeed, I scarcely remember ever to have seen any
Carmelites, that were not very well Accouter'd, and that with New Clothes too.
True it is, There are some of those to be sold, that are very curiously wrought
over with Silk, for those, who not contenting themselves with these Foolish
Devotions, must needs have them set forth with abundance of Vanity; but
however, the Ground of them must always be a Shred of a Carmelites Old Frock.
They have instituted several Confraternities in Honor of this Holy Habit; they
celebrate Great Feasts every Week, with most exquisit Music, and have
particular Masses said in Reverence and Respect to this Habit. As for this
Little Scapulary, as well as the Rosary, S. Francis's Cord, the blessed Pasts and
Medals of our Lady of Loretto, it is still one and the same Song; it, as all the
rest, Forgives Venial Sins, prevents ones dying in Mortal Sin, and procures a
speedy Deliverance from the Flames of Purgatory. I desire you, Sir, to
represent to your self a poor Roman Catholic with all this Gear and Harness
about him, one of the Little Scapularies on his Back, S. Francis his Rope about
his Waste, a Rosary, or Great Paternoster in his Hand; abundance of Medals and
Blessed Pasts, Images, Written Prayers, and Saints Bones, about his Neck, upon
his Breast, or in his Pockets, who is Cock-sure, that by means of these he
shall not only escape Hell, but also the scorching Flames of Purgatory. What
think you? Have we not all the Reason of the World, to write above his Head in
great Characters, Error and Superstitio? On the other hand, set before your
Eyes a Good Protestant, who neglecting all these things, wholly applies himself
to Live well, placing all his Hope and Confidence in God alone, and the Merits
of his Savior Jesus Christ; and then tell me sincerely, and without bias,
which of both has more Reason of his Side, and better ground for what he does.
And yet this Error and Superstition is so deeply rooted in the Minds of the
Papists, that there is scarcely any way left to disabuse and unhoodwink them,
so fatally have their Priests and Monks enchanted them.

I knew in Germany, a German Captain, who had no great Faith in all these
Confraternities and Contrived Devotions; I Tabled at his House, in the City of
Mentz; whenever there happened to be any Discourse concerning them, he always
discovered his Aversion to them, and declared with abundance of Reason, That
they were only the effects of Priests and Monk-Craft, to get Money; and that he
believed, God would most severely punish them for it in the other World, as
well as those who suffered themselves to be abused by such Follies. This
Captain some time after fell into a Consumption, and about Three or Four Hours
before his Death, I was with him in his Chamber, and forasmuch as he had still
the free use of his Senses and Speech, he discoursed concerning the Things of
Eternal Life, and (as a Good Father) exhorted his Children, which stood about
his Bed, to an honest and truly Christian Life. Whilst he was thus employed, in
comes a Father Dominican, who had been sent for by the Mistress of the House:
He was the Director of the Confraternity of the Rosary, with a Great
Paternoster in his Hand, and drawing near to the Dying-man, he exhorted him to
Enroll himself in the Confraternity before his Death. The Sick-man desired him,
not to interrupt the Exhortation he was giving to his Children, which might be
of far more Profit to them than his* Rosary; the Words of a dying-Father to his
Children, remaining commonly impressed on their Minds as long as they live. The
Dominican giving little heed to all this, obstinately prosecuted his Design,
repeating continually to him, That should he come to die without Enrolling his
Name in the Confraternity, he would lie a tedious while in Purgatory, and that
there he would have time enough, and to spare, to repent him at leisure. The
Sick Man told him, If you believe it to be so good and saving a thing for my
Soul, why don't you then set down my Name of your own accord? But the Father
not finding his Account in this, continued to fright and terrify the Patient;
who at last being scared by the horrid Representations he had made him, Cried
out to his Wife, Pray give him a Crown, and let him write down my Name.
Whereupon the Father, after he had given him a Paternoster, went his way, and
as he was going out of Doors, told his Wife, That in case he had not happily
come to her Husband, he would have died like a Dog. The good Father having
obtained his end, came no more to look after him; and this poor Gentleman died
about Three or Four hours after, with his great Bead-row about his Neck. I
confess, I should have been extremely surpised to see, That a Man, who had all
his life time witnessed so great an aversion for these Foppish Superstitions,
should himself at last fall under them a little before his Death; I say, I
should have been very much astonished at it, had I not my self heard the
frightful Discourse wherewith the Dominican entertained him, taking occasion
from his weak and dying condition, to impress in his Mind all the Pannick
Terrors of Hell and Purgatory; for he talked at such a dreadful rate to him,
as if it were impossible for him (without giving his consent to be admitted of
the Confraternity, with a Crown at the Tail of it) to be ever saved, but would
be sure to be damned with all the Devils in Hell to all Eternity.

See here, Sir, the goodly use is made of these Confraternities, and what all
these affected and contrived Devotions of the Papists do end in. I am now
entered into so large a Field, and I have so many True Stories to produce on
this Subject, that I should never make an end, should I once begin with them;
and am therefore obliged, to the end this LETTER may not swell too big, to pass
them by in Silence. Nevertheless, I think I cannot in Reason exempt my self
from giving you a word of Information more, concerning the Society of the Souls
in Purgatory. This is the most general of them all, as belonging to all
Churches, and to all Priests, as well Secular as Regular: This is their true
Nursing-Mother; for in Italy the Dead (which is strange) maintain the Living;
and the Priests and the Monks are the Ravens and Crows, that fatten and cram
themselves with the Karkasses of the Dead. This is that probably which inspires
them with that inhuman Cruelty and Barbarity, that makes them desire the Death
of all Men.

I shall not spend any time here, to oppose the false Opinion of Purgatory,
because being a Point of Doctrine, it is no part of the Task I have undertaken;
but shall only acquaint you with the use is made of it in the Church of Rome;
and how dexterously the Priests and Monks have turned it to their great Gain
and Advantage. I cannot but own, that a person who is persuaded of the
Existence of a Purgatory, and that so dreadful an one as the Roman Catholics
represent to us, cannot but apprehend it his Interest to think seriously of it;
and according to this Persuasion, I do not think it strange, if a Papist in his
Last Will appropriates some considerable part of his Estate for Prayers and
Masses to be said for the Relief of his Soul after Death, or even his bestowing
something by way of Charity, to have them said for others also; but when this
is done with Indiscretion and Excess, and to the great prejudice of ones
Neighbor, this is a thing I can in no wise approve of. I know well, that in
this Point I shall have all the Clergy of the Roman Communion against me* for
they maintain, That in this case there can be no Indiscretion or Excess
committed, nor any prejudice or hurt done to any whatsoever, grounding
themselves on this Principle (which they extremely Misconstrue,) That a
well-ordered Charity begins from a man's self; Charitas been ordinata incipit a
seipsa. So that conform to their Hypothesis, a man that should Disinherit all
his Children without any other Cause, but the desire he has to bestow all his
Estate upon the Priests, that they may Pray to God, and say Masses for his Soul
after his Death, does them no injury at all; and that they would be ready to
represent him as a man who did not consult with Flesh and Blood, in a case
where the good of his own Soul lay at stake, and was concerned.

I shall to this purpose relate to you a Matter of Fact, the remembrance only
whereof does still afflict and grieve me, because it proved the Ruin of some
persons, whom I was particularly acquainted with. In a second Journey I took to
Rome, I took a Lodging in the House of a very honest Widow, who was plentifully
provided for, her Husband having left her a good Estate; and forasmuch as she
had no Children, she took two of her Sisters to live with her, and Entertained
them very Charitably. The Father Jesuits, who are far better acquainted with
how many Widows there are in Rome, than how many Chapters there be in the
Bible, had not forgot to set this good Woman on their List; neither were they
wanting in their diligence and application to Court her, in hopes to get her
Estate. Her Confessor, who probably wanted to have her in the other World,
ordered her (during the greatest Heats of the Summer) to take a Journey to
Loretto; which she failed not to perform; but returned very sick to Rome, where
the Physicians soon despaired of her Recovery; whereupon she made her Last
Will, whereby she left all her Estate to her two Sisters, except only Two
hundred Livers, which she assigned for Masses to be said for her after her
decease. The Father Jesuits had soon notice of this, and without delay
presented themselves before the Bed of their dying Votary; they forgot nothing
which they conceived might prevail with her to change her Testament. They
represented to her, That it was the greatest folly imaginable to bestow ones
Goods upon Relations, who commonly were very unthankful; That her chiefest Care
ought to be, to procure her own Rest and Happiness in the other World; That she
might be sure her Sisters would never be at a Farthing charge, to procure
Prayers for her; yea, so far was it from that, that they had discovered, That
her Sisters fostered a secret and mortal Hatred against her, and that
consequently (by a Trick of an Italian Revenge) they should be glad to leave
her to swelter a good while in Purgatory. Last of all, they told her, That her
Sisters were too far engaged in a Worldly Spirit, and would probably make a
very ill use of the Estate she should leave them; and that to leave them any
Money would be no better, than to trust a Knife in the hand of a Child, or Fool,
who might hurt themselves therewith; And by this means, said they, she would
give an occasion to her Sisters of offending God, and damning their own Souls,
and consequently would become responsible therefore before God: That her
Sisters could Work, and so might honestly gain their Livelihood with the Labor
of their Hands, which at the same time would secure them from Idleness, which
is the Mother of all Vices. All these fair Reasons being uttered with all the
Artifice and Rhetoric imaginable, prevailed with this poor Widow, whom a
violent Fever, and the Pangs of approaching Death, made yet more apprehensive
of the Pains of Purgatory; so that without any more ado she revoked her
Testament, and made but one Article of it, disposing all she had to the House
of the Father Jesuits of Rome, that they might cause Prayers and Masses to be
said for her. Thus she Died in the midst of four Jesuits; and scarcely had they
shut her Eyes, ^but they turned her Sisters out of Doors, and possessed
themselves of all that she had. These poor Gentlewomen, with Tears in their
Eyes, desired only, That they would be pleased to give them some of their
Sisters Clothes; but the Jesuits utterly refused it, saying, That they could
not dispose of the least thing that belonged to their Sister, for that all was
to be turned into Money, to pray God for her Soul, who was now actually burning
in the Flames of Purgatory; so that they could not in Conscience deprive her of
the least Refreshment or Comfort, she had so wisely provided for her self. Thus
these poor afflicted young Women were fain to leave the House in a most
desolate condition; and I learnt since, That one of them died in an Hospital,
and that the other (pressed by Want) had suffered her self to be debauched, and
at present led a lewd and scandalous Life in Rome.

What think you, Sir? Is not this an excellent use that is made of the Doctrine
of Purgatory by these wretched and accursed Jesuits? I Will spend no more time in
representing to you the deformity and abominableness of the Fact, since the
sole recital of it evidenceth it as clear as the Sun.

Now, to bring this false Devotion the more in Request, and to procure ways and
means of multiplying it, they teach in Italy, That the Souls in Purgatory are
not only succored and relieved by the Prayers and Masses of the Priests, but
that by the same means they become helps and assistants to others. If we will
believe them, they assist Persons upon Earth in all their Concerns and
Occasions; if any one has a Suit at Law, or is engaged in some Troublesome
business; or if a man be desirous to obtain a Place, Command or Dignity; the
surest way (say they) in these cases, is to have recourse to these
Suffering-Souls, and to get a Number of Masses said for them; for then by way
of gratitude and acknowledgment, they take all Rubs out of ones way; they
influence the Spirits of the Judges, and procure the Favo^^ of Great Men. If a
man be to go a Journey, (...) is nothing more common in Italy, than to send him
away with this good Prayer or Wish; Go, and may the Blessed Virgin, S. Anthony
of Padua, and the Souls of Purgatory accompany you every where, and deliver you
from all Dangers. This is so Universal, that even the Boys that go to the
Jesuits School are taught, That if they would rise at the Set-hour in the
Morning, they must recommend themselves to the Souls in Purgatory overnight,
before they go to Sleep. But pray, What appearance is there, That those poor
Souls who cannot help themselves, should be in a condition to concern
themselves about, and help others? I have seen Lewd Women impudently come into
the Sextry, and to order a company of Masses to be said for the Souls in
Purgatory, to recover the good will of some of their Lovers, and to get more
Practice; neither indeed are they so much to be blamed, for they are no better
taught.

The Power of the Souls in Purgatory is conceived to be of that extent, and so
general, as to believe, That by this means they can obtain even Unlawful things
at the Hand of God. If it be demanded, Who they are that entertain the People
in this gross Ignorance? It is evident, that they are no other but the Priests
and Monks; and the Motive for which they do it, is purely their own Interest.
They agree admirably well in the Doctrine of Purgatory; but in sharing the Money
that is assigned for the Prayers, they are all of them together (...) the Ears,
and it is neither better nor worse, (...) Catch that catch can.

A Noble Venetian, in a Company where I happened to be present, gave a very
pleasant Relation of the Sport he had on this occasion: He was left Executor of
a Testament, and made the Guardian of a Pupil: The Lady who was dead, had
bequeathed a Sum of Money for Two Thousand Masses, to be said for her. The Monks
and Priests are very diligent to inform themselves, by means of their
Emissaries, when any Person of Quality dies, to the end they may prevent one
another if they can, and get the Masses for themselves. The Jesuits, as being
the most crafty of all, had first got the scent of it, and before any others,
addressed themselves to the Noble Venetian; and as their Custom is, they began to
enlarge on the Subject of their own Praises, and averred, That there were no
Religious in the Church of God, who did celebrate Masses with more Modesty and
Devotion than themselves; and that the great Zeal they had for the speedy
Deliverance of the deceased Party, had induced them to come and desire the
discharging of the Two Thousand Masses, left by her Last Will. They said, it
was an open shame to see in what manner the other Religious and Secular Priests
did dispatch their Masses with so much hurry and precipitation, that a Mass did
not last above Half a quarter of an Hour, and that without doubt God was rather
dishonored, than honored by such Services. The Noble Venetian having heard
this fair Speech, told them, He was glad to see the great Zeal they had for the
Soul of his Kinswoman, though he was not so fully persuaded of the Indevotion of
all other Ecclesiastics, as they seemed willing to represent them; that they
might say Masses for the Dead as well as others; and that though he knew well,
that it was not lawful for the Jesuits, according to their Constitution, to
receive the least Money for the Masses they said; yet because he would not seem
altog^ther to reject them, he would give them Mon^ for F^^ty of them. The
Jesuits being sorely vex'^^, thus to be put by the Two Thousand Mass^s they had
already devoured, retired themselves.

Soon after them the Sacristans, or Sextons of the Father Dominicans, were
introduced; who represented, That they had in their Churches of Castello, and
of S. G^ovanni and Paolo, many Priviledg'd Altars (these are Altars, to which
the Popes have affixed so many Indulgences, that if one only Mass be said at
them for any Soul in Purgatory, they are infallibly delivered thence) they
alleged besides, That all the other Religious made no Bones of it, to Sing one
High Mass instead of many, and which they made to pass for an Hundred common
Masses; but that, as for them, they scorned any such sinister ways, and
promised fairly to Say them all without the least abatement of the Tale; and
that moreover, to testify their superabundant Kindness to the Deceased party,
they would over and above the Number cause several Masses to be Sung for her on
the grand Priviledg'd Altar in their Chapel of the Holy Rosary. The Noble
Venetian, without taking any great notice of their Discourse, Treated them no
better than the Jesuits; and having granted them only some few Masses, sent
them packing.

After them followed a great number of Sextons of other Religious Houses, and
all for the Love of these Two Thousand Masses. If a man might believe them,
they were every one of them more Holy than their Brethren of other Orders; all
others, according to them, were Persons without Conscience, who devoured the
Money assigned to Masses, without performing the obligations they took upon
them. The Venetian however gave to every of them a pretty competent number of
Masses, so that of the Two Thousand he had only Five Hundred left.

He sent in the Evening one of his Servants to the Place of S. Mark, to inform
the Sec^lar Priests (who commonly have their Walks there, to acquaint
themselves where they may meet with Money for their Masses) That the next
Morning his Master would be there, in order to distribute a number of Masses.
According to his Promise, the Venetian Nobleman repaired thither with Five
Hundred Notes (this being the way of giving Masses in Italy, they give a Note,
whereupon he that has received, goes and says Mass, and enters it into the
Sexton's Book, and then returns it to him who has given it him, to receive his
Money) and went up to the Procuracies of S. Mark, which are the Buildings which
surround the Place of S. Mark, and there pleased himself, throwing down these
Notes amongst them from some of the Upper-Windows. There were about Three or
Four Hundred Priests below greedily waiting for them; who, as soon as they saw
the Papers fly about, put themselves in a posture, to catch each of them the
most they could; they pushed one another, they flung one another in the Dirt,
they Beat one another, they plucked one another by the Hair, and tore one
another Bands and Cassocks, whilst a great number of People looked on, and
Laughed at them. There can be no better way of representing this Action, than
by fancying to our selves a Crowd of Common People, or rather of the Scum or
Filth of the People, to whom some pieces of Money are thrown out of Windows, as
I saw some Persons of Quality did on the Day of the Coronation of Their
Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; for this was a perfect Representation
of the Behavior of the good Priests of the Roman Church on this occasion. And
seeing many in the Scuffle had dropped their Cloaks and Hats, some of their
Companions, more dexterous than they, who chose rather to get a Cloak, or a
Hat, than a Note, took them up, and having slily conveyed them under their own,
skulk'd away with two Cloaks instead of one. The Notes being thus distributed,
or rather Chance and Force having thus disposed of them, these good Priests
departed each of them to their several Posts, to say their Masses.

Probably, Sir, you will think very strange of this Relation of the Noble
Venetian, yet I dare assure you, you need not question the belief of every part
of it. The Priests and Monks do agree the best in the World, and are but as
one, as long as their Common Interest cements and keeps them together; but they
are all at Daggers-drawing, when the least particular Interest divides them:
And as for those Priests who Thrub'd one another in the Place of S. Mark, for
to catch the Assignations to say Masses, that is no strange thing in Italy, I
my self have seen it with mine own Eyes above an hundred times: Alas! they do
far worse than this, for even whilst they are in the Sextry, invested with
their Sacerdotal Ornaments, they sometimes fight together for the Priority, or
Precedence, in saying their Masses, and call one another the most Infamous
Names imaginable. The Italians in this also excuse them with a great deal of
Favourableness, or rather with too much Indulgence. What would you have them do
(say they)? they are a Company of Poor Priests, that live of their Masses, and
have nothing else to help themselves with; when that fails them, all fails
them: And therefore they have great Reason to exert their utmost Activity for
the obtaining of them. However, I am not a little amazed, that the Bishops take
no course to prevent these scandalous Disorders, and that they ordain so many
Priests without providing them some Benefices. There is nothing more scandalous
in a Clergy, than to see those who are the Members of it, to be reduced by a
necessity of Subsistence, to base and mean Actions, and altogether unworthy of
their Character. This Disgrace cannot but with a great deal of Reason reflect
upon their Heads; and it is an evident demonstration either of their Negligence
to remedy it, or their want of Charity to procure the means of it. The most
part of these Poor Priests in Italy live of their Masses, or else by Filching,
when Masses fail them: They take all they can get, even in the Churches
themselves; the Calices, the Linnen-Covering of the Altar, the Wax Candles, the
Books, and in a word, all that comes to hand. Wherefore we need make no
difficulty to believe what this Noble Venetian averred, That some in the
Scuffle had stolen the Cloaks of their Companions.

Another thing mentioned in his Discourse, and whereon I desire you to make
some Reflection, is the great Division and Enmity of those Religious who went
to demand the Masses: They accused one another as persons without Conscience,
and false and faithless in discharging the Trust they took upon them, and for
which they were paid. What the Jacobite said of the Cordelier, the very same
the Cordelier said of the Jacobite, and so of the rest; and indeed herein they
all spoke Truth. It Is a matter of common practice in Italy, That when any one
sends Money to a Convent for an Hundred Masses, they content themselves with
Singing one, with the assistance of a Deacon and Subdeacon. It Is the Prior, or
Guardian of the College, that Sings it: They call this a Mass Sung, an High
Mass, a Solemn Mass; and they maintain that one of these Masses is an
equivalent to many Common ones: They call this, Making a Reduction.

But, pray Sir, What can this Singing, or these Ceremonies, contribute toward
the rendering One Mass as efficacious as an Hundred? I know a Protestant may
easily solve this difficulty, by saying, That One Mass is as good as an
Hundred, and that an Hundred are of no more Value than One; because they are
good for naught, whether singly or aggregately considered. But you who are a
Roman Catholic, how can you answer this? If you have never so little
Sincerity, you cannot but own that your Priests and Monks, are not only content
for to satisfy their Covetousness, to make use of the Doctrine of Purgatory to
induce Laymen to lavish their Money for the celebrating of Masses; but that
after all this, they would by this Artifice of Reduction, exempt themselves
from the trouble of Saying them.

The deceased Pope Innocent the Eleventh was no way favoring this Trick of
Reduction; for being informed, that the Carmelites of Naples had celebrated a
Mass in Music, to acquit themselves of all the Masses they were obliged to
say, he sent down a Commission, to examine the Registers and Books of the
Sextry; and upon Examination there were found no less than Four and forty
Thousand Masses, which were not discharged. Innocent being acquainted herewith,
did not believe, That so vast a number of Masses could ever be satisfied by one
Mass only, how solemn soever it might be. He let them know, That seeing they
had received the Money, they ought to Say them with the first; and because they
had not Priests enough in their Convent to celebrate them, they must take in
some Secular Priests to their assistance. The thing taking Wind, and being
divulged through Naples, many Stranger Priests went and presented themselves to
celebrate some of them, and for Fifteen Days they admitted them; within which
Time they said about Four Thousand Masses at several Altars; and the Fathers
paid them at the Rate of the one Half of what they had received for them. At
the end of Three Weeks, some Priests that I was acquainted with, came and told
me, That having been to offer themselves, to Say more Masses for them, they
were refused; and told, That all the Masses were already celebrated; though
indeed it were a thing absolutely impossible, for so many Masses to be said in
that compass of Time: But the Truth of the matter was, That they were grieved
at the Heart, to squander their Money thus abroad, and therefore were resolved
rather to tell a gross Lie, than to part with any more. They alleged for their
Excuse, That they had celebrated several Masses at their Priviledg'd Altar.
This is another Stratagem of those Priests, which is never a whit inferior to
that of Reduction, and against which the Popes have nothing to allege; for
otherwise they would contradict themselves, as to the Power they pretend to
have over the Affairs of Purgatory.

These Priviledg'd Altars (as was hinted before) are such as be Endowed with
great Indulgences. To obtain one of these Altars, great Sums of Money must be
given; but what care they, as long as the Bubled Multitude refund it an
Hundredfold. A Mass celebrated at this sort of Altars, on such a Day of the
Week, which commonly is Monday, does infallibly deliver a Soul out of
Purgatory; and a man who should dare to question this, would be looked upon as
an Heretic, and Committed to the Inquisition, as if he had denied one of the
Fundamentals of Christianity. According now to this Principle, they Argue thus;
(and indeed, granting their Supposition, I find their Argument strong enough)
The Pope (say they) grants a Privilege to one of our Altars, and declares,
That when any shall procure a Mass to be said there for any Soul in Purgatory,
though the most obnoxious that is there, it shall in the same moment be delivered
thence. Now, the Pope is Infallible in all he declares, especially about the
Concerns of the other World; wherefore to draw to a Conclusion, We have Money
sent us to celebrate so many Hundred or Thousand Masses, to Say for such a Man
or Woman; What is to be done in this Case? Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri
potest per pauciora; It Is a folly to go about, when there lies a short Cut
before us; We Will therefore cause One Mass to be said at our Priviledg'd Altar,
which will infallibly deliver the Party concerned out of Purgatory, and will
trouble our selves no farther about Saying the rest; forasmuch as they, being
only in order to procure the same End, would be altogether superfluous and
unprofitable; so that by this fair Way, we have (without the least
Pains-taking) gained a good Lump of Money, as well as without the least
discomposure to our Peace of Conscience. This Argument was once most vigorously
enforced against the Jesuits of Rome upon this occasion:

A Rich Merchant by his Last Will had left them all his Estate, to have so many
Millions of Masses said for the Deliverance of his Soul from Purgatory after
his Death: His near Kinsman, who of Right was to have been his Heir, being made
acquainted with his Will, lost no time; but as soon as he was Dead, went to the
Jesuits, and gave them Money to say a Mass at their Priviledg'd Altar, for the
Soul of the Deceased; he himself was present at it, and took an Attestation in
Writing of them, that they had Said it. Having done this, he ordered all the
Goods of his Kinsman to be Arrested; alleging, That the End of the Testament
being obtained, the Goods ought to return to their Natural Channel; that is to
say, to the Heir at Law; that he could prove, That his Relation was either in
Paradise, or in Hell, and that in either of those places he stood in no need of
Masses. The Case was brought to the Bar, and pleaded with great heat on both
sides; the Jesuits being Plaintiffs, and the Merchant the Defendant: But alas!
the Case was to be determined by an Ecclesiastical Court, where all the Judges
were Parties, who (had they done right) would have condemned what themselves do
every day: So the Suit was carried in Favor of the Jesuits, under pretense
forsooth, That the Church must always be favored. However, it is evident that
Right and Reason were on the Merchant's side, and that he could not be
condemned without Injustice. But I return to our Confraternities.

There is never a Village in Italy, how small and inconsiderable soever, which
has not a Confraternity for the Souls of Purgatory, and at the least a Score of
Priests, who live upon it very plentifully. Besides the Money they receive for
their Masses, which never fails them, they have a sort of People who carry
Boxes through the Streets, from House to House, Begging of all those they meet
with, with a great deal of Importunity, some Money for the Souls in Purgatory;
which Money the Priests afterward share amongst themselves. In many places of
Italy, especially in the great Cities, in order to their having a fixed and
settled Income, they Let to Farm this Purgatory-Mony to some Layman or other,
as I have seen at Milan, in that Famous Confraternity of the Souls in
Purgatory, established in the Church of S. John de Casa Rotta. The Farmer here
pays Four Thousand Crowns every Year to the Priests of that Church, and makes
his Profit of the rest: He maintains for this end Forty Box-Carriers, who are
clothed in White, and wear upon their short White Cloaks the Arms of the
Con^raternity, to distinguish them. They have each of them a Shilling a Day
allowed them, and their Business is to run through all the Streets of the City,
and beg Money for the Souls in Purgatory. These Box-Carryers are picked Men, very
cunning and skilful at their Trade of Begging. Sometimes they are so
importunate and impertinent, that they follow a man the length of two or three
Streets, without quitting him, to force him by their Importunity to give them
something. Neither is it without danger to give them any rude or churlish
Answer; for in that case, they have the Malice to tell you to your Face, That
they see well enough by you, you have no consideration for the Souls in
Purgatory: And should you continue to Revile them, might probably get you
recommended to the Inquisition, to learn more Manners. The Farmer of the Souls
in Purgatory, has the Keys of all these Boxes, and they are bound once or twice
a Week to bring them in to him. When at any time they bring them full and well
Lined, he gives them something over and above their ordinary Pay, to encourage
them to perform the Quest with so much the more application and dexterity. He
takes care to place some of his Boxes in all Inns, Ordinaries, Taverns,
Victualling-Houses, and other public Places. Those who have Traveled Italy
know, That the Host does commonly at the end of every Meal, bring in his Box
for the Souls in Purgatory, and desire his Guests to put in their Charity. At
the Time of Harvest and Vintage, the Farmer sends some of his Emissaries into
the Fields, to carry on the Quest there for the said Souls; they have great
Wagons with them, and beg some Portion of what is gathered, in Corn, Wine,
Wood, Rice, Hemp, even to the very Eggs and Hens. Which done, they either spend
what they have got themselves, or else sell it and turn it to Money.

Now the poor Country People being extremely Simple and Ignorant, and the
persons employed to Receive their Charity being very Subtle and Cra^ty, make
them believe what they please themselves, and so abuse them extremely. I
overheard once a poor Country-woman, who gave some Hemp to some of these
crafty Collectors; saying, She was very sorry she could not give them enough,
to make a great Shift of: But one of the Quest-men told her, That they would
take care to make a little Shift of it, for some small Soul in Purgatory. They
turned their Heads, and laughed at the Simplicity of this poor Woman; but not
one of them had the Charity to inform her better.

Ignorance in the Church of Rome passes for Simplicity; and it is to this
Ignorant Simplicity, or Simple Ignorance, that they attribute that Blessing of
the Gospel, Blessed are the poor in Spirit. Whereas it seems to me, that this
Poverty of Spirit is to be understood of a Simplicity equally devoid of Malice
and Ignorance, and of a Candid and Open Spirit, without any foldings or deceit;
or else of those, who having their Hearts set loose from the desire of the
Riches of this World, are the true Lovers of Evangelical Poverty. But to speak
Truth, the Reason hereof is, Because this Ignorant Simplicity, is a thing of
such exceeding Profit and Advantage to the Priests and Religious of Rome. The
more Idiots the People are, the more easy it is to Chowse them, and to Pick
their Pockets.

This is, Sir, some part of what I have observed concerning the Use that is
made of the Doctrine of Purgatory in Italy. I might produce many Instances of
every different Point I have Treated of in my LETTERS; but commonly I allege
one only, and very rarely two; and indeed never, but when some particular
Circumstance, which deserves ones Notice, does oblige me to it. I shall only
add a word or two concerning their Pictures of Purgatory, before I conclude
this LETTER.

There is never a Church or Chapel in Italy, which has not some large Picture
in it, representing Purgatory. The Souls that are there are painted in the
resemblance of Naked young Men and Women, with some Flames surrounding them;
these Flames indeed are harmless enough, because they burn not; but I fear
those infamous Naked Figures, kindle very dangerous Flames in the Hearts of
many Spectators. An Italian having caused his Mistress to be painted in the
Flames of Purgatory; because she had refused him some Favors, had these two
Lines writ at the bottom of the Picture: S' e cosi piacevole divederla in
Purgatorio,
Che cosa sarebbe divederla nel Ciele.
His Fancy was this: If it be so pleasing a thing to see her in Purgatory,
where the Flames hide some part of her Naked Body; how great would the pleasure
be, to see her painted in Heaven stark Naked, where no part of her Body would
be hid? For after this manner do they of the Church of Rome represent the Last
Judgment, and the Blessed Souls in Heaven. They publicly expose these Pictures
on their Altars, and the People have them before their Eyes, whilst they hear
Mass. I know what they allege, That this is done, to impress these great
Truths of Christianity the more strongly upon the Imagination; as if Christians
were only to be led by their Imaginations, and not by their Reason. They will
have a man to submit his Reason in all things, and at the same time spare
nothing for to fortify his Imagination. Whereas the Protestants do quite the
contrary, they disregard and neglect Material things that so vigorously affect
the Senses, that they may worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and render to him
a reasonable Service.

They practice one thing in Italy, which indeed is very horrible. When a poor
Criminal is led to Punishment, he has always two Priests by his side, who hold
a Picture of Purgatory before his Eyes; yea, they go up the Ladder or Scaffold
with him, still holding the Picture before him till Execution be done, and talk
to him of nothing else. Is not this indeed to double the Fright and Terror of
these poor Wretches, who are but too much terrified already with the Death they
see prepared for them? The same thing they practice toward those that lie a
Dying; They place a Picture of Purgatory at the Feet of their Bed, between two
lighted Wax-Candles, to make it appear with more luster, and the Patient is
exhorted to keep his Eyes upon it. Some are fain to beseech them, to speak to
them of the Goodness and Mercy of God, because they are already sufficiently
terrified with his Justice: But for the most part, they do but Knock at a
Deadman's Door; for the Priests are so wedded to their Songs of Purgatory, that
if they chance to make a small digression, they presently fall again into their
old Track. For my part, I am of Opinion, That after we have spoke to a Sick
Person concerning the Justice of God, of punishing of Sin in the other World*
by the Eternal Pains of Hell, to the end, to make him seriously examine his own
Couscience; it is very sitting afterward to lay before him the great Mercy of
God, to raise his Hope and inflame his Charity. We Fear God, because he is Just
to Punish; but we Love him, because ^e is kind to Pardon; and surely, it is
better the last Moments of a Christians Life should be spent in Loving God,
than in the Fears and Terrors of his Judgments. This is that which has cast
many into those Terrors, which wanted little of downright Despair. But alas!
it is but too evident, That the Doctrine of Purgatory was never contrived so
much for the Comfort of Dying persons, as for the Profit of the Living, I mean
of those Lazy Priests, who think of nothing, but of pleasing themselves, and to
enjoy Ease and Plenty in this World.

I should now come, to speak something of the Principal Means they make use of,
to confirm and maintain their Doctrine of Purgatory, which is to Preach it up
with an incomparable Zeal and Earnestness. I call to mind also, that I promised
you at the beginning of this LETTER, to give you some account of their Manner
of Preaching in Italy: But forasmuch as I perceive my LETTER to be long enough
already, and that this Subject cannot be dispatched in few Words, I shall
reserve it for the next occasion I shall have of Writing to you; and in the
mean time, Sir, I beseech you to believe, that I shall continue all my Life,

Your, etc.

The Sixth LETTER, Of the deplorable Abuse of Preaching in Italy, etc.
YOu know, Sir, That that which supports the Church of God, and is (as it were)
the Life and Soul of it, are the Sacraments and the Word of God; wherefore it
is of the highest Consequence, that both these be faithfully and decently
Administered; and I shall always take the due and faithful Dispensation thereof
for a sure Mark of the True Church. This Motive engaged me, whilst I was at
Rome, particularly to inspect the Practices of the Church of Rome; in reference
to both these. I supposed I could not meet with any place more favorable to
this my design than this Great City, which boasts her self (if we will believe
her) not only to contain within her Precinct, the Principal and Mother Church
of the whole World; but over and above, does attribute to Her self (though it be
hard to say upon what good ground) the Name of HOLY, Roma Sancta. As for what
concerns the Administration of the Sacraments, I cannot deny, but the same is
performed there both very orderly and solemnly, and indeed with an overplus of
Ceremonies, even to Superstition. Here I should give you an account of those
Ceremonies which are observed at the Consecration of Priests, the Celebrating
of the Eucharist, and of the Pompous Preparations that are made against Easter,
the Week before, called The Holy Week; which by their Splendor and
Magnificence, draw an infinite Number of Strangers to Rome, toward the End of
Lent, to be Spectators thereof. It is a common Saying, That he who would pass
his Time most agreeably in Italy, must be at Venice at Shrovetide and
Ascension-day; the Octave of the Holy Sacrament at Bononia, and the Holy Week
at Rome.

Here also I should have occasion to Relate to you an infinite Number of
Fopperies, that are practiced here on certain Feasts in the Year; as at
Christmas, Ascension, and Pentecost; but because this would take up a great
deal of Time, I shall pass them by in Silence at present, to enlarge my self on
a more considerable Subject, wherewith my intent is to Entertain you
particularly at this time, which is, their Way and Manner of Preaching. As Much
as there is of Superstition and Excess in the pompous Administration of their
Sacraments; so great a Deficiency, Negligence, and Unfaithfulness do we meet
with in their Dispensing of the Word. During the space of the Seven Years, that
I was in Italy, in all the Cities where I have been at the Times of Advent and
Shrovetide, I have heard a vast Number of Sermons; but I have never seen or
known any Curate, or Secular Priest, to Preach, except once a Canon at S. John
of Lateran, and a Cardinal on Easter Day, in the Cathedral Church of Milan. So
that in case the Word of God be corrupted and abused, as indeed it is very
considerably every day, we cannot charge the Secular Priests of Italy
therewith, who do not Preach at all, or who indeed are (for the most part) so
Ignorant, that they cannot, if they would; but the Fault is wholly to be laid
at the Door of the Monks, and other Religious, who have in a manner wholly
engrossed the performance thereof. Methinks it is enough said, when I tell you,
That the true Pastors, who are the Curates, take no pains to ^eed their own
Flock, but recommend that Care to Strangers, I mean to Monks, who are more
sollicitous to satisfy their own Interest and Vainglory, than to procure the
Salvation of Souls. Yea, the Monks have so absolutely possessed themselves of
this Ministry, that they will not suffer a Secular Priest to Preach in his own
Church; and if any of them should undertake so to do, and they should find that
they could not supplant him, they would maliciously employ all manner of Means
to blacken and misrepresent him in the Eyes of the People, and rob him of his
Credit and Reputation.

True it is, that on the other hand, the Curates being generally lovers of Ease
and Idleness, make no great endeavors to reclaim their Right to the Pulpit:
They declare openly, That it is the Business of the Monks to Preach, forasmuch
as not being engaged in the Business and Trouble of the World, they have
leisure enough in their Monasteries to Study and Cun their Sermons; but that as
for them, being wholly employed in the Administration of the Sacraments, in
hearing of Confessions, and assisting at Funerals, they have no spare Time to
turn their Thoughts that way. So that we seldom meet with any Quarrels on this
occasion between them and the Monks.

Whilst I was at Rome* I often went to the Minerva to hear Sermons: They are
the Father Dominicans that Preach here, who are also called The Preaching
Brothers; because in the sharing and division of the Gifts and Graces of God,
the Monks have made amongst themselves, these have boldly appropriated to
themselves the Gift of Preaching. But we find, that this is nothing but an
arrogant Usurpation of theirs, without the Consent of the Holy Spirit; for I
have scarcely found any Monks more unsuccessful in this Ministry than
themselves. God will never permit the Pride of Men, to dispose of those Gifts
which belong to him alone. The Jesuits have arrogated to themselves the Gifts
of Tongues, and of Informing Youth; and yet Experience shows, that they are
indeed very ignorant and unskilful in both these; and that the Scholars who
have Studied in the Universities under other Masters, are incomparably better
grounded in Learning, than theirs are. The Monks of S. Bennet have appropriated
to themselves the Character of Retirement and Silence, and yet we find no
People more Gadding up and down in Cities and Country, than they.

But to return to my Discourse; It was one of these Old Dominican, or Preaching
Brothers, that Pre^^^ed at the Minerva; but he did it in so unworthy and
indecent a manner, that I wonder how I could resolve to go and hear him more
than once. All that was attractive in him was, That notwithstanding he was very
Old, yet he was extremely Comical, and an egregious Buffoon; so that he made
his Auditors Laugh with open Throats: He walked in his Pulpit (for in Italy
they have them very long and wide); he Thump'd the Pulpit with his Hands and
Feet; he Rolled his Eyes in his Head, and put himself into an Hundred
ridiculous Postures.

I shall give you here a small scantling of one of his Sermons, which I still
remember, that by the Pattern ye may judge of the Whole Piece. He had a mind it
seems, to make a Moral Application of the History set down in the XXI. Chapter
of the Book of Genesis, where Abraham turned his Maid Hagar out of Doors. He
begins thus; Sirs, said he, come follow me, and take a Walk with me in the Holy
Scripture; Then fetching three Steps in the Pulpit, having one of his Arms a
Kimbow, he stopped short at the Fourth, and as a man who in an horrid Desert saw
some Body at a great distance, he stood still a good while without speaking a
word, and very attentively fixing his Eyes till the near approach of the
Object; he began to say, What is that I see there? Sure it is a Woman; and
keeping Silence again a good while, he said, O God! if I beent much mistaken,
it is Hagar, Abraham's Servant: Ay, sure enough it is the very same. God save you
Hagar! Prithee tell me what is thy Business here in this loansom Desert, which
is so dismal and frightful to Nature? Then making as if he viewed her from Head
to Foot; I perceive one thing already ( said he), that she has not Robbed her
Master, as many Servants do now adays; for she is in a very pitiful Equipage*
Tell me Hagar, Why is it then you have left your Master? Here making Hagar
speak in a most afflicted and sorrowful manner, and as it were all in Tears,
That it was because of her Mistresses Jealousy; he answered Laughing, A very
fine Reason believe me; What was this all? Hum* this is very pleasant; Madam
Sarah Turns away her Servant, because she is jealous of her. Come Hagar, come
thou along with me; I Will at this instant go and speak to thy Master about it.
And then taking seven or eight Turns in the Pulpit, muttering all the while to
himself; Sarah Turns away her Servant, because she is Jealous of her; a stanch
Reason indeed; and then stopped, Striking two great Thumps against the Pulpit, he
said, Who is there? Pray tell Abraham, I would speak with him; and soon after
making a very low Bow, as if he had seen Abraham, he said to him, Abraham, pray
tell me for what Reason you have Turned away your Servant Hagar? She tells me
it is, because your Wife is Jealous of her: Then personating Abraham, Abraham
answers him, If I have turned away my Servant, I have had an Order from God for
it, and therefore don't think my self bound to give you any further Reason of
it. Though indeed Hagar has not told you all; It was not only upon the account of
Jealousy she was turned out of Doors, but because she has a Little Boy of her
own, that is very Naughty, he beats him that I had by my Wi^e; they are
continually wrangling together; they pull one another by the Hair; they Cry,
and make an intolerable Noise in the House. My Wife has several times spoke
friendly to her Servant about it, but Hagar is become too bold and impertinent,
she gives saw^y Answers, and has too much Tongue: For these Reasons therefore,
and to have quiet in mine own House, I have been fain to Turn her out of Doors.
Here the Old Father Dominican, rolling his Eyes in his Head, and wrinkling his
Brow, as one that was very Angry with Hagar; Hagar, said he, I find now, that
you did not tell me the Cream of the Jest: Thou art just like the Servants of
Rome; when they are turned out of Service, it is never any of their Fault, it is
because their Mistresses are of an intolerable difficult Temper; they are
exceeding Humoursom; they are very Jealous, and it is impossible to live with
them: But by what I can perceive, it was because you began to play the
Mistress, and because there was a continual disturbance in the House upon your
account. I know well enough, that Jealousy could not be a sufficient Reason
for sending a good Servant packing; for otherwise our Roman Dames, who are
extremely Jealous, would never be able to keep any: But there must be this
besides in the case, That this Jealousy causes Disturbance and Noise in the
House between the Husband and his Wife, or between the Children; and then I am
clearly of Abraham's Opinion, The Servant must Turn out, Ejice Ancillam and
^iliu^ ej^^* The Father, after that he had very dexterously played the Buffoon
on this History of the Bible, past on to another, which he handled in the same
Comical manner, making all his Hearers to burst out into loud Laughter: And
after all, fell upon the Devotion common to their Order, which is the Rosary;
for they bring this in by Head and Shoulders upon all occasions, let their
Subjects be what they please. This was his constant Mode of Preaching, and the
Church was always full of People.

The Italians are extremely in love with Sermons that make them Laugh, which is
the Reason, that the most part of their Preachers apply themselves to a Comical
and Drolling Style. The Jesuits have another Way of Preaching, which I may call
a Poetical Style: For they being persons who have spent their young Years in
Teaching Human Learning in their Colleges, they have their Head and Fancies
filled with Ovid's Metamorphosis and Aesop's Fables, and accordingly all their
Sermons are stuffed with them. If they speak concerning the Incarnation of the
Word, they would think they had not expressed themselves well, without saying,
That the Divine Prometheus brought down Fire from Heaven to the Earth; that is
to say, Has personally united the Divine with the Human Nature. They commonly
quote a vast number of Passages drawn from Profane Authors and Poets; as from
Cicero, Virgil, Horace, Martial, etc. yea, I have heard some of them that have
quoted Terence's Comedies, and Ovid De Art Amandi; but they very seldom are
heard Citing the Fathers, and yet more seldom the Holy Scripture. The great
Converse they have with Persons of Quality, makes their Words and Expressions
to be choice; their Discourse neat and refined, though Substance and Solidity be
for the most part wanting in them; their Gesture is very proper, and their
Declamation or Elocution not amiss. For to gain the more Credit to their Order,
which is of late standing, and yet so powerful, they very frequently quote the
Book of the Exercises of their Founder S. Ignatius; which, after all, is but a
very poor Book, and (as it is said) none of his own neither, having stolen it
when he was Convert Brother in the Abbey of the Benedictins of Montserra.

The Capuchins have another Way of Preaching, and their Style is Stoical,
Emphatical, and Thundering: They commonly make choice of very Terrible
Subjects, as Death, the Last Judgment, Purgatory, and Hell: They ^ill the Air
with Exclamations, Thump the Pulpit with their Hands and Feet; they lay hold of
their great Beards, and Roar with such a Tone, as terrisies all Men, yea, and
the Dogs too; for I have observed, That when a Capuchin Preaches, all the Dogs
run out of Church. In a word, Almost all the Religious have a different Way of
Preaching, and different Divines too, whom they follow, whose Opinions are
frequently opposite to one another. The Cordeliers have their Scotus and S.
Bonaventura; the Dominicans, S. Thomas; the Jesuits, their Suarez; and so of
the rest.

As for the Order observed as to Partition of their Sermon, it is the same
throughout all Italy. They all begin their Sermon with the Angelical
Salutation, or Ave Maria; and not with the Invocation of our Heavenly Father,
in praying, Our Father, etc. or by calling upon the Holy Ghost, which yet are
the most proper, or rather the only necessary for this purpose. But indeed, the
Doctrine they preach is so extremely corrupt and wrested, that it is no wonder
to find their Introductions tainted with the same Infection. God by this very
thing manifesting to us, That what they preach is not the pure Word of God, by
permitting them to Preface their Human Inventions with the Invocation of a
Creature. After their Address to the Virgin they pronounce their Text, which
commonly is a place of Scripture, or sometimes a part of a Prayer of their
Church, or some Entrance of the Mass. They cite the Texts of Scripture only by
halves, and in an abstract and interrupted Sense, without declaring what goes
before, or follows after; which yet they ought to do, to render the Sense
perfect. After this they proceed to their Proposition, and then continue their
Discourse all of a pi^^e, without any Divisions or Subdivisions at all. They
divide their Sermon indeed into Two parts; but the Second is nothing else but
an heap of Examples, Histories, and Tales made at pleasure, to divert their
Auditors. In the Interval between this First and Second part, they gather the
Alms in the Church for the Poor. There are Men appointed for this purpose, who
have Bags fastened to the end of long S^aves, with little Bells at the Bottom of
them, and they pass by all the Ranks and Seats of the Hearers, to receive their
Charity. The Preacher in the mean time, whilst these Bags or Purses are
marching about, does with an incomparable Zeal exhort them, to Give freely.

I never in my life saw People more enflamed with Charity for their Neighbor,
than they are, in the Pulpit; you would say, They are the very Fathers of the
Poor. Herein I cannot but do them the Justice to own, That our Protestant
Ministers are not so good Advocates for the Necessitous Members of Jesus
Christ, and do not take the Cause of the Poor to Heart, with so much Heat and
Zeal, as these Men do. However, Sir, I would have you know, that when I praise
your Italian Monks, it is not their Persons I praise, but their Action, or
rather the External Appearance of their Action: For if we cut this Fair Apple
in two, we shall find the Worm there, which makes it all Rotten and Corrupt
within. To make short, my meaning is, That the Motive that prompts them so
seriously and zealously to Recommend the Poor to their Auditors, is a piece of
Self-Interest: For the one half of the Alms that are gathered in the Church, as
well as at the Church-Door, during the Sermon, belongs to the Father-Preacher:
Otherwise, it were impossible to induce those Hard-hearted and pitiless Monks,
those Hearts of Brass and Marble, who are so signally qualified with
Insensibleness and Cruelty; I say, it would be impossible to induce them to any
Sentiments of Mercy and Compassion for the Miseries of their Neighbor, if
Laymen had not found out a way to join the Interest of the Preachers with that
of the Poor, and to make but one of them. This, this Sir, is the great Spring
that moves the whole Engine, and makes the Monks to study such importunate
Motives and Reasons, to draw Money from their Hearers Purses: Yea, there be some
of them, who are so extremely Malepert and Insolent, that I am astonished they
do not pull them out of the Pulpit.

I went one day in Lent, to hear one of the Sermons at the Church of S. Andrew
of the Valley at Rome; it was a Father Franciscan that then preached there; his
Sermon was concerning Predestination, and after he had declared, That the
Number of those that were predestinate, was not so small as some did imagine; I
speak now (said he) of Catholics; for as for all Infidels, who do not believe
in Jesus Christ, as well as all Heretics, as the Lutherans, Calvinists,
Zuinglians, etc. our Mother (the Holy Church Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman)
teaches us, that they are all undoubtedly Damned, and we ought to believe
accordingly. Afterward, making a long enumeration of all those he firmly
believed would certainly be saved, he amongst the rest mentioned all those who
were Enrolled in the Confraternity of S. Francis his Rope, which peculiarly
belongs to those of his Order; Because (said he) it is impossible, according to
the Bulls we have concerning it, from the Popes, that any such should die in
any Mortal Sin. He very frankly allowed the same Grace also to all those who
wore the Habit of his Order, and so very handsomely justled in himself into the
Number of the Elect. Finally, putting a Question to himself, Whether there were
not some visible Mark upon Earth, by which one might distinguish the Elect from
the Reprobate? he answered himself, Yes, that certainly there were such Signs.
Amongst other Signs he reckoned up, I remember this was one, To love Music,
and the sound of Instruments; but that the principal Sign of all was, To give
Alms. This indeed was the Point he would be at, and very dexterously he took
occasion from hence, to Exhort all his Auditory, To expose that day to the Eyes
of all Men, the undoubted Tokens of their Predestination, by their Liberal
putting into the Purses; and that for his part, He would take exact Notice from
his station on high, of all those who gave this Evidence of their Election,
that so he might know, who were Reprobate, and who were Predestinate amongst
them. Accordingly he sets himself down in his Pulpit, and was silent; and
staring with his great Eyes that way they carried the Bags, having perceived
all the first Rank had showed themselves very Liberal: This is well, said he, I
find that here is one Rank already of my Auditors that are Predestinate: And
the second and third having followed the same Example; In very Truth (said he)
I believe, that my whole Auditory will prove to be of the Number of the Elect.
This is an extraordinary Comfort for me, that I have Preached here this Lent,
and I render Thanks to God for it* because it is a Sign, that Sinners are
Converted. By this means, the Father procured a very Liberal Collection. I
observed all this while, that he put many of his Auditors into great trouble
and confusion, especially some Women, who probably had no Money about them; they
Blushed exceedingly, and to avoid the confusion of being accounted Reprobates,
they reached forth their Hands to the Bags, as if they had put in something. I
my self heard an Handicrafts-man saying to one of his Acquaintance, That Monk
there (with his Signs of Predestination) made me, sore against my Will, put a
Crown into the Bags, because I had no other Small Money about me; for if I had
given nothing, it would have spoiled my Reputation; they would have taken me
for a Damned Wretch, which would have been enough to have frightened all
Customers from my Shop.

The Monk ravished to have seen so many Elect in his Auditory, very joyfully
fell to the Second part of his Discourse, and being put into an extreme good
Humor by their Liberality, he played the Buffoon to admiration. After he had
told them many Little pleasant Stories, he began his Second Quest for the Souls
in Purgatory. He made use of the same Motive, with which he had speeded so well
before. He represented to them, That it was not enough to have showed their
Charity to the Living, but that it was necessary for the completing of the
Evidence of their Predestination, to extend it also to those that are Dead;
that is, to the Members of the Suffering-Church; for that is the Title they
give to Purgatory. The Money of this Quest, goes to the Priests or Monks to whom
the Church belongs, where the Sermon is Preached; and to Encourage the Preacher
to do it more effectually, they allow him the Fourth part of the Collection.
This is that which makes them so zealous to Exhort the People from their
Pulpits, to a Liberal Contribution. There are some who are so far transported
with Zeal for these Suffering Souls, that not content to have made one Quest in
General on this Subject, they back the same with two others. The Second is with
an intention to Relieve some Relation or Friend, that any of the Auditors are
more particularly obliged to assist; and the Third for that Soul in Purgatory,
which is the most neglected as to matter of Suffrages, and who has neither
Relations nor Friends to pray God for her. Thus it is that these Foolish and
Rash Men, imprudently exalt their own Mercy and Compassion above that of God
himself; implying, That if their Charity did not extend it self to these
Wretched Souls, destitute of all help and assistance, as they say, God would be
Pitiless and Cruel enough, to let them suffer a vast Number of Years, yea, even
to the Day of Judgment, without showing any Mercy to them.

I have been told a Story of a Countryman, who perceiving that the Preacher of
his Parish, after having made Three Quests one after another, was about to make
the Fourth, for the Soul that suffered the most; called out to him aloud,
Father, I would advise you to shut up your Purgatory at present; for if you let
one Soul more out, she will be in danger to return from whence she came,
without any thing: For my part (said he) I tell you plainly, I have no more
Money to give. Whether this be a true Story or no, I cannot aver; only this I
know, that very often they give a fair occasion for their Auditors to say as
much. It Is in the Interval of their gathering this Collect, that the good
Father Preachers do utter whatsoever comes into their Crowns, to persuade their
Auditors to so Charitable a Work. Here it is, that with a great deal of Heat
they vent all their Fables and Tales of Purgatory.

I heard a Father Carmelite in the Parish of S. Sophia at Venice, who having
made a Sign with his Hand, to oblige his Auditory to be Silent, and Listening
attentively with his Ear, as if he had heard something; he at length asked
them, Whether they did not hear a kind of indistinct Noise, as of many Voices
at a distance? Afterward, lending his Ear a Second time, he told them, That he
heard the Souls of Purgatory calling upon them, Not to spare their Charities,
but to Relieve them with a Liberal Contribution; corrupting to this purpose
that Passage of the Revelation, Audivi sub Altar Animas interfectorum
clamantium, vindica sanguinem nostrum, Deus noster; I heard under the Altar the
Souls of those that were slain; Crying, Avenge our Blood, O God: For he made
bold to change most of the Words, to accommodate them to his purpose; saying,
Audio sub Altar Animas defunctorum clamantium, Refrigerate Sanguinem nostrum
Fratres nostri; I heard under the Altar the Souls in Purgatory, that Cry,
Refresh and cool our Blood our Dear Brethren. I took this Action of the
Preacher for an excellent Figure of Rhetoric, which is called Fictio; but I am
sure, that many there did not take it in my Sense, but did really believe, That
the Preacher had indeed heard the Souls in Purgatory crying under the High
Altar; a sure Sign of which was, that many rose up from their Seats to look
that way. The Sermon being ended, the Preacher comes down out of the Pulpit,
and is led into the Sextry; whither the Purses are brought, and there they are
opened in his presence, and his Share or Dividend counted out to him; the
Preachers herein resembling Fowls of Prey, or Hunting-Dogs, to whom always a
portion is given of the Prey they have taken.

In those parts of Italy that Border upon Germany and France, the People don't
suffer the Priests and Monks to lead them by the Nose, so much as the
Inhabitants of the Provinces that are nearer to Rome. True it is, the Priests
are not wanting to use their utmost Endeavors to bring their Purgatory into
Request; but the Laymen look upon them no better than Mountebanks for their
pains, who spare no Lies to persuade the People to buy their Drugs.

I was once desired, by the Curate of Campo Dolcino in the Alps, to take the
pains to clamber up to Mount Splug, to go and preach the Day of the Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin, in a small Village: I went thither, and did my utmost
Endeavor to stir up their Devotion, and make it Beneficial to their Curate;
but it was impossible for me to exalt their Beneficence, beyond a few Pounds of
Butter, notwithstanding the Curate had earnestly entreated me, to be
importunate with them for some Money. Money it seems is very scarce in those
Mountains, they affording nothing besides Butter, Cheese, Chestnuts, and
Salt-Meat; and the poor Country people carry to the Church such as they have,
to bestow upon their Curate. At the place where I went to Preach, the
Inhabitants cannot continue, but about Two Months in the very midst of the
Summer; after which the extreme Cold drives them from thence, and obliges them
to Remove lower, where they continue about Two Months longer with their Cattle;
thus descending by degrees, till they come down to the Valleys, where they
continue all the Winter. But to return to our Preachers.

The Second part of their Sermon, as is already mentioned, is made up of
nothing but Idle Tales and Drollery; which is the Reason why many persons, who
take no delight in these Jests and Fooleries, and probably also, for fear they
should be forced against their Wills by the Impudence of the Preacher, to put
Money into the Purses, go out of Church toward the End of the First part. This
First part contains the Body and Substance of their Discourse; and they who
print their Quadragesimals and their Advent Sermons, that they may not
disparage themselves, never print the Second part of them; but make a shift to
divide their First part, and make two of it.

The Buffoon, or Comical Preachers, are the most followed by the Common people;
but those that preach by curious Thoughts, are the most esteemed; and those who
are called Dotti, or Virtuosi, do generally frequent them. This Way of
Preaching by curious Thoughts, consists chiefly in never representing things in
their Natural Sense. If they allege a Text of Scripture, it is a Sense that is
forced, subtle, curious, and far-fetched, which is not the meaning of the
Scripture; and a Preacher who should stop at the Literal and Natural Sense,
would be looked upon no better than a Simpleton, Ignoramus, and Idiot; and
except he had something of a Comical Air with him, would be very slenderly
provided with Auditors. I have made it my Observation, That they commonly take
no place of Scripture in the Literal Sense, besides the Sacramental Words, Hoc
est Corpus meum; This is my Body; for here they obstinately keep to the Letter.
And yet I once heard a Father Minim, in Trinity Church on the Hill, at Rome,
who interpreted the whole History of the Institution of the Lord's Supper in
another Sense, applying it wholly to the Doctrine of Alms. Our Lord Jesus Christ
(said he) the more engagingly to recommend to us the Care of the Poor, would
have the last Action he ever did here on Earth, should be an Act of Charity; to
this purpose, when he had nothing more to dispose of, save one poor Morsel of
Bread he had in his hands, He brake it, and gave it to his Disciples. This
Thought of his was found very quaint and curious; though in the mean time it is
very evident, that this is not the True and Natural Sense of the Holy History;
for Jesus Christ in this Action, did not in the least pretend to give an Alms,
but to institute a Sacrament, that might serve for the Sustenance and Spiritual
nourishment of our Souls. However, the Monk was extraordinarily applauded for
this his curious Thought, and he was not wanting to make good use of it, at his
Quest. And to the end they may be the more fruitful and copious in these fine
Thoughts, the Monks ordinarily Retire, and take their Walks in pleasant places,
as in Gardens and Woods, there to Meditate their Sermons: Others again, betake
themselves to Dark and Subterranean places, there to Contemplate without
disturbance. Some of them drink good Wine, and that in good quantity too,
because (according to the Common Proverb) Vinum acuit Ingenium; Wine excites
Invention: And lastly, Others follow there particular Humors.

The Superiors of Religious Houses, suffer their Preaching Monks to do what
they please, and go whither they will, to favor their Invention, or (as they
term it) their curious Thoughts. They deal with them as charily, as we used to
do with Bigbellied-Women, whom nothing must be refused, for fear of spoiling
their Fruit, which are their fine Thoughts. It Is this great Liberty and
Indulgence, that makes so many Monks in Italy apply themselves to Preaching,
because being once engaged in this Way, they are exempted from all the
Obserservances their Rule obliges them to.

The Way of setting forth these their fine Thoughts in the Pulpit is this: As
soon as they have uttered any thing that is Neat and Curious, to make appear,
that it does not want solidity, they (in order to back it) endeavor to find
out some Texts of Scripture that seem to favor it, and to which, for the most
part, they give as forced a Turn, as to that which is the Basis and Ground of
their neat Thought. They commonly quote nothing but Ends and Scraps of Verses,
without telling what goes before, or what follows, and seldom or never cite the
Books from whence they are taken. They content themselves with saying, As it is
Written; or, According to the Oracle of the Holy Spirit; or, As it is set down
in the Sacred Texts; and then quote the place they intend: But it is impossible
to know, whether what they allege, be faithfully Reported by them or no. Thus
it is an easy thing for these Corrupters of the Holy Writ, (that they may
Authorize their neat Thoughts, and high Sublimations of Wit) to seduce poor
People which never Read the Scripture, and to whom the Reading of it is not so
much as permitted. After they have thus endeavored to back their curious
Thought with Scripture, they endeavor further to strengthen it by the
Authority of the Fathers. They reckon amongst the Fathers, not only the Ancient
Doctors of the Church, as S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S. Austin, etc.
but also their most Modern Doctors, as S. Thomas Aquinas, Cardinal Bellarmin,
etc. insomuch as at this rate they have a very large and wide Field to go a
pickecring in. And forasmuch as it is an ordinary Say^ng, that Good Wits jump,
this egregiously flatters their Pride, to make out to the People, That those
great Understandings of Ancient times do accord so well with theirs. Some have
the sottish Vanity to say in the Pulpit, S. Austin, or S. Ambrose, had the same
Thought with me, when he said, etc. They very seldom quote the Books and
Chapters from whence they have their Authorities, and they content themselves
with saying in general, As says S. Austin; As S. Ambrose affirms. But
Experience does evidence it beyond dispute, That they cite a vast Number of
Authorities falsely, or else do so extremely mangle and corrupt them, that if we
should go to look for them in the Original, from whence they pretend to have
drawn them, it would be a very hard matter to know them.

I once heard a Benedictin Monk in the Church of S. Praxed at Rome, who having
made an Objection to himself, Why amongst so many persons, who have recourse to
the Blessed Virgin in their needs, so few are relieved by Her? An Event indeed
which seems directly opposed to the Belief of the Church of Rome, viz. That all
those who Addressed themselves with Confidence to the Blessed Virgin, are
infallibly assisted by her. He Answered this Objection by saying, That those
who failed of her Aid, were such as did not Lift up their Hearts to her. They
indeed (said he) do often enough Lift up their Eyes, their Hands, and their
Voice to Mary; but their Hearts all the while are grovelling on the Earth, and
they never lift them up toward her. To this purpose he quoted S. Jerome, Si
volumus exaudiri a Maria, erigamus corda nostra ad Mariam; If we would have
Mary hear us, we must Lift up our Hearts to Mary. I have Read S. Jerome before,
and I have Read him over since, having always this Passage of the Benedictin
well impressed in my Memory, but I could never find it there; and I am well
assured, that no Body will be able to find it there after me: But the Mystery
of it was, That this Passage was very proper to back and confirm the fine
Thought of the Monk.

We need not wonder to find the Roman Catholics boast, of having the Fathers
on their side; for if at any time they are not so, they soon make them come
over to them by force, and draw them in (as we say) by Head and Soulders. In
this case they do imitate another Italian Monk; who not being able to make a
Passage of S. Chrysostom favor a fine Thought was come into his Head, he began
to be in a Passion, and having changed two or three Words in the Text, which
did in a manner spoil the whole sense of it; he said in bad Latin, but very
expressive of what he would be at, Faciam te been venire, and thus forced the
Text to comply with his foolish Imaginations. By this means it is these
miserable Monks, make those Venerable Ancient Fathers, to assert that which
they never thought of, and can never be found in their Writings; and all this
is only to feed their Vainglorious Humor, and to obtrude their own Dreams for
Authentic Truths, owned and believed by the purest Times of Christendom.

Moreover, to set forth these their curious Thoughts with the greater luster,
they do adorn them with many quaint Figures of Rhetoric; all their Discourse
being made up of Metaphors, Allusions, and Holy Allegories, with a taking
Elocution, and curious select Words; and all of them Antitheta, or opposed to
one another, wherein the Italian Language is happy beyond others. See here the
fair and glittering Cup of Gold, wherein the Whore mingles her Poison, Lies and
Errors, to intoxicate the Souls of Men. This is the Wide Gate, by which so many
extravagant and dangerous Opinions are entered into the Church of Rome. You may
easily judge by the Nature of the Pasture, of the Condition the Flock is in;
and by the Qualifications of their New Pastors, I mean the Monks, the wretched
Estate of the Sheepfold, committed to their charge. These are those Pastors,
who shear the Wool, and feed on the Fattest of the Flock; but have little or no
concern for the Salvation of their Souls, so they may but glut and satisfy
their Covetousness and Ambition.

Loredano, a Noble Venetian, so Famous in Italy for his witty and curious
Compositions, Writing to Almoro Grimani at Verona, to recommend to him a
Preacher of his Acquaintance, expressed himself in his Letter to him in these
Words; Seen viene in cotesta Citta il Padre Fra. Girolamo Olivi, a far pompa
d'Eloquenza nel corso Quadragesimale; The Father Jerome Olivi goes to Verona,
to make a pompous Show of his Eloquence during Lent. He says not, That this
Monk goes to preach the Gospel, or to strive to gain Souls to Jesus Christ; but
says, That he goes, to make a Show of his Eloquence; in which Words he very
fully expresses the Motive that puts these Monks upon Preaching.

I have no words, Sir, to express to you the Cabals, Intriegues,
Solicitations, and Intercessions that are made to get into the best Pulpits;
that is to say, those where the most Money or Honor is to be got. They
interpose the Favor of Grandees and Princes, to assure themselves of them, and
that Four or Five Years before they become Vacant. There are some of these
Pulpits^, that are worth to the Preacher, for an Advent and Lent, Four hundred,
Five hundred, and Six hundred Crowns; yea, some of them a Thousand and more,
without reckoning their Share of the Alms given to the Poor. As for those, from
whence there is no great profit to be expected, the press is not so great; and
as for the poor Parishes in the Countr^, where nothing at all is to be had,
there is not a Monk to be found, that will bestow so much as one Sermon upon
them.

They have ordinarily no Preaching in Italy, save only during Advent and Lent:
On all other Feasts, and Sundays of the Year, they have no Sermons at the
Parishes; and instead th^reof they only Sing an High Mass in Music; but the
Word of God is not preached at all in them. Yet in some Convents of Monks, they
have Sermons in the Afternoon; but these are Sermons peculiar to the Order of
which the Monks are, and always on the same Subject. The Dominicans preach
eternally on the Rosary; the Carmelites, on the Scapulary; the Franciscans, on
the Rope of S. Francis; and the Soccolanti have for their Subject S. Anthony of
Padua. True it is, that these Matters are of themselves very dry and barren,
and I am astonished, how they can continually make them yield something to Talk
of. One great Help indeed they have, which is, that the greatest part of their
Sermons is made up of a Relation of Miracles, which a Preacher of good
Invention may almost with as much ease, Coin, as Utter.

The Jesuits also have erected in their Houses, Congregations, which they
denominate from the Blessed Virgin, where they preach all Sundays and
Holy Days: And to the end they may Have at all, and draw to them all sorts of
People, they make a distinction of Persons; they have one Congregation for
Artizans and Handycraft-men, another for Scholars, a third for Merchants, and a
Fourth for Gentlemen and Noblemen. They have also Set-days on which they Preach
in their Churches, to prepare People to Die well: They have very happily
possessed themselves of this Post; for it is exceeding gainful and profitable to
them. Upon this score it is, that they are sent for to Exhort the Sick, and
such as lie at the point of Death; which is the most proper time, and fairest
occasion, for them to get themselves put into their Last Wills.

There is yet another sort of Preachers in Italy, which I never saw in any
other parts, where the Popish Religion is professed: These Preachers are called,
Preachers of the Place. To give you a more distinct Idea hereof, you must know,
Sir, that in the Great Cities of Italy, toward Evening, when the great Heat of
the Day is past, the Italians (of what Rank or Quality soever they be) go and
take a Walk in the Piazza: Here it is they give Audience, and discourse about
their Business. If any has a mind to meet with any person about that Time, the
first thing he does, is to go and look for him at the Place. Here you are sure
always to meet with a great number of Ballad-Singers, Juglers, Mountebanks,
Fortune Tellers, and other such like; who find their greatest profit, amongst
the greatest Crowds: And the People do not fail to get about them, for their
Diversion and Recreation; and amongst these, you meet with more Priests and
Monks, than Laymen; for after they have discharged themselves of their Masses
in the Morning, there are none more Idle than they all the rest of the Day. No
sooner are the Mountebanks got up to their Stage, but at the same time (by what
Motive or Zeal I know not) a Monk, with a great Crucifix carried before him,
with a little Bell they Ring, to give Notice of his Coming, mounts a portative
Pulpit, prepared for him in one of the Corners of the Place, opposite to the
Theater of the Rope-Dancers, and there begins to Preach; a Multitude of People
Running from all parts to Hear him.

When I first saw this, I was extremely Edified, to see such Crowds of People
leave these Actors and Rope-Dancers, to hear a Sermon; but drawing near my self
to hear the Di^course, I found that these Preachers were better qualified, to
make the People laugh by their pleasant Discourse and Mimical G^sture, than the
Merry- Andrews of the Stage. The Mountebanks play the Fool on their Stages; and
they, the Buffoons and Drolls in their Pulpits. Whilst those use their utmost
Effort, to sell their Drugs; these make a Quest in the Place, which goes in the
Name of Being for the Poor, whom they Recommend with a great deal of Zeal and
Earnestness to their Hearers; though indeed all the Money they gather, comes into
their own Pockets. I chanced once to be in the Company of some Monks, who
impudently did aver, That these Sermons in the Piazza's, were a manifest proof
of the Truth of the Religion at Rome against the Heretics; because in them
there was a Visible accomplishment of that Oracle of the Holy Ghost, which we
find in the First Chapter of the Proverbs, where it is said, that Wisdom cries
in the public Places; and that this was only to be found amongst the Roman
Catholics, where Wisdom, that is, The Word of God, made it self to be heard in
public, by means of these Preachers of the Places.

To tell you my Thoughts, Sir, I am fully persuaded, that if Wisdom do indeed
Cry there, it is for Vengeance upon the horrid Abuse and Affront done to his
Gospel, which is there ridiculed and made the Subject of their Drollery, to
make People laugh. Neither can it be said, That Wisdom causes her Voice to be
heard there, with respect to the persons of the Preachers; the most of them
being Monks, of most debauched and profligate Lives. I knew one of them at
Venice, that was a most wicked Wretch, who no sooner got out of the Pulpit, but
went and spent the Money he had got at his Quest, in Infamous places, upon
Whores.

The Roman Catholics are at a loss, whither to betake themselves for Visible
Signs of the Truth of their Church. They produce some others every whit as
pitiful as that now mentioned, amongst which they reckon a certain Custom
introduced in Italy, to make Little Children Preach publicly in their
Churches, from Christmas to Twelf-tide. They take pretty Children of about
Three or Four Years of Age, and they make them get by Heart some short Sermons,
upon the Birth of our Savior, which may last about a Quarter of an Hour. They
spend much Time to exercise them in the Utterance of them with a good Grace;
and on Christmass-day they preach them, before the Mangers, that are prepared
in all Churches at that Time. These Little Children observe all the Ceremonies
of Preachers: They begin with their Ave Maria, then proceed to a short
Introduction, and afterward to a Division. As soon as they have made an end of
their first Part, they make a Quest, and all their Auditors give them
something. This done, they preach for the Souls in Purgatory. No sooner has one
of them made an end of his Sermon, but another takes his place, and begins: And
thus they continue till Twelfth tide. They begin early in the Morning, and
don't make an end till far in the Night. The Many they get at their Quests,
serves them afterward to make a Collation with, and to buy them Sweetmeats,
or other Junkets. Thus it is they Educate and Accustom these young Lions
betimes to the Prey, to the end (when they are grown up to be great Preachers)
they may be Expert at devouring the Alms, which are given to the Poor only.

Now all this petty Intriegue is produced by the Italians, as a Mark forsooth
of the Truth of their Religion, applying to it that Verse of the Psalmist; Ex
ore Infantium and Lactentium perfecisti Laudem; Thou have (according to their
Explication of it) perfected the work of Preaching, out of the Mouth of
Infants. They say, That this is no where to be found, save only in their
Church. This gives me an occasion, to speak to you of that signal Mark of their
Church, of which they boast so much, and which with so much Vehemence they
object to the Protestants, viz. the Mission of their Evangelical Preachers,
which they send into Foreign Countries, and of which number are all those
wretched Jesuits that come for England; and of whom I doubt not but there be
great Numbers still in that Kingdom. This I can assure you, That should the
Jesuits of Italy, and other Countries of the Roman Communion send thither their
Missionaries, proportionably to the Money that is given them for this purpose,
all the Fathers of that Order would not be sufficient to supply the places. It
is impossible to imagine the immense Sums are given them upon this account:
This is their great pretense, in the frequent Visits they make to the Palaces
of the Great Ones, as well as to the Houses of Widows and Rich Men, to induce
them to contribute to so Holy a Work. And after all, they content themselves
with sending only a certain Number of their Jesuits, whom they provide for,
employing the rest of the Money in Building those stately Houses, or rather
those sumptuous Palaces for themselves as they do, (for they will not have them
called Monasteries or Convents) and with the same Money they proportionably
increase the Rents and Incoms thereof. A poor Capuchin, who goes about Begging
an Alms, is very well content, if he gets but wherewith to fill his hungry
Belly; but the Pretext of the Jesuits is far more specious, it is for the
Conversion of Souls, and one must open wide ones Purse-strings to them, ad
majorem Dei gloriam; For the greater Glory of God; else they are not well
satisfied. In the mean time we see with our Eyes the Work they make in England,
insomuch as their Name is become execrable and abominable; not so much for
their earnest application to Convert, or rather to pervert Souls, as for the
Intriegues they carry on to trouble the public Peace: For finding it
impossible to persuade People by the weakness of their pitiful Arguments, they
endeavor to put a whole Kingdom into Combustion, and to set Protestants
together by the Ears, to the end, that having by their mutual Animosities and
Quarrels, plentifully drawn Blood from each other, some Catholic Prince may
afterward subdue them the more easily; and so bring about that by the Sword,
which it was impossible for them to do by their Reasons.

This is that I was told by a Jesuit of Milan, about Three Years since: Our
Reverend Fathers, the Jesuits in England (said he) write to us, That the
English are exceeding obstinate in persisting in their Heresy; and that the
only way of Converting them, is totally to exterminate and root them out. This
is that therefore ( continued he) for which our Fathers do incessantly labor;
and we hope within a short time to see, that God has blessed their Endeavors
with an answerable Success. Indeed, when I arrived at London, about a Year and
half ago, the Jesuits were become excessively Insolent. Being once occasionally
got into Dispute with them, and finding themselves pinched, without being able
to answer, they began to put it off with Raillery; and telling me, That all my
fine Reasonings would not hinder me from being damned at last. Another of them
more cunning, and very probably more Malicious too, told me, That he had at his
Lodging some Invincible Arguments set down in Writing; and if I would take the
pains to come thither, he would easily answer all the Objections I had made
against him. But I had a care of trusting so honest a Man, and I contented my
self with telling him, That he would do well, to go and fetch his Papers, or to
appoint another place for me to meet him, than at his own Lodging. But I found
him Deaf of that Ear. Soon after, I perceived the Jesuits had formed a Design,
to make me leave London; and to this purpose, because they could not do it
openly by Force, and for that they found me always upon my Guard, they sent out
a great number of Rogues and Cutthroats to dog me, who followed me every
where, to have an occasion to do me some Mischief; but forasmuch as I never
went abroad at Night, these good Missionaries failed of executing their Design;
and the Happy Revolution, that happened soon after, obliged them to cast their
Thoughts another way.

One thing here is Remarkable, which is, That we do not find the Jesuits so
zealous to go to other Protestant Countries, as they are to come for England;
for we meet but with very few of them in Switzerland, or Germany; the Reason
is, Because England is furnished with a Charm, that is irresistible for them;
it is a Country well stored with Money, and could they but once wriggle in
themselves, to be the Confessors and Directors of all the English Ladies, it
would be a very pleasing Employment for them. Besides, it is well known what
kind of Life they lead here, and that it is nothing less than a Penitential way
of Living, as they would make others believe. Wherefore I cannot see how their
Mission can be an infallible Mark of the Truth of the Roman Religion, as the
Papists pretend: But sure I am that this Mark (if there must be any at this
Time) may with greater Justice be attributed to those Zealous Protestant
Ministers, who having already suffered Imprisonment and Banishment for the
Defense of the Gospel, are privately returned to France, in the greatest Heat
of the Persecution, and betaken themselves to those Provinces where they were
altogether unknown, for to strengthen and encourage their Brethren, to
persevere in the Profession of the Truth, and to endeavor to Raise up those
again, who by their Frailty had Renounced it. Here, to be sure, were no
Temporal Advantages for them to hope for; and they could easily be assured,
That in case they were taken in the Fact, they would be sent to the Galleys, or
Condemned to Death, as has happened to many of them.

But as for the Jesuits, they are so well persuaded, that they are never like
to Suffer any thing here in England, upon the account of their Religion, that
notwithstanding all the Acts of Parliament, which are only levelled to prevent
their Wicked Designs, they still continue here very freely and openly: and yet
when they are got home, they will not be wanting to publish every where, as it
is their Custom to do, That they have been Persecuted; Clapped up in Prison;
Tormented; and had certainly been put to Death, had not the Intercession of the
Blessed Virgin, or of some Saint to whom they have devoted themselves, most
miraculously delivered them.

But it is time I return again to Italy, where I find yet another sort of
Missionaries, which are not be employed in Foreign Countries, but in Italy it
self: These are all Monks, sometimes of one, and sometimes of another Order;
but mostly Capuchins, and yet more ordinarily a certain sort of Friars, which
are called, The Fathers of the Mission: These, after they have furnished
themselves with a good Stock of Sermons upon different Subjects, they send to
Rome, and demand a Mission from the Pope; that is, Leave to go and preach their
Sermons in certain Towns and Provinces, with all the Indulgences and power to
Absolve in, reserved; as is customarily granted on like occasions.

The first I ever saw of this sort was at Montefiascone, Two days Journey and an
half from Rome. These were Capuchins, who besides their Habit, which was very
odd and antic, with their great Beards, they had on their Heads great Red
Calots, or Close-Caps, to signify their Zeal, and the Red-hot Ardour of their
Charity, for the Conversion of Souls: For this (if we will believe them) is yet
another Mark of the True Church; For even as the Holy Ghost did visibly descend
on the Heads of the Apostles in the form of Fiery Tongues; so there are to this
day found those Heads in the Church of Rome, whom the Fire of Scarlet
distinguishes from others; and that this also is the Reason, why the
Cardinals, who are all Divine Love, (or to speak more truly, who ought to be
so) wear Red Hats, and the Pope, a Cap of the same color. Well, to return to
my Red-Caps, I had the Curiosity to go and hear them Preach; I entered the
Church where I saw one of them in the Pulpit, with a great Rope or Cord about
his Neck, and a great Crucifix in his Arms, who did his utmost endeavor, to
excite Sensible Affections in the Hearts of his Auditors. The chief Aim of
these Preachers, is, to make the People Weep; if they can once effect this,
they are happy, and this is all they desire; for this procures them the
Reputation of being Great Missionaries, and Men of a true Apostolic Spirit. To
this end they make use of the most tender, melting, and affectionate
Expressions they can think of, to draw Tears from their Hearers.

The Preacher I heard at this time, was Paraphrasing the History of the Passion
of our Savior; and after he had employed his utmost Skill, in setting forth
our Savior as the most Lovely and Beautiful of all Men: He on the other hand
represented those pityless Tormentors, who with great Cords tied his Fair
Hands, white as the Driven-Snow, and beat his Lovely Countenance, where the
Lally and the Rose did urge for Mastery. He added to all these Expressions a
most lamentable and affecting Tone, with Gestures very proper, and according to
the Subject; whereby I perceived that this Father was an excellent Declaimer.
When on a sudden some good Women, wholly melted into Tenderness and Compassion
(as were those Women of Jerusalem, who Wept seeing Jesus Christ carrying his
Cross up to Mount Calvary, and whom our Savior bade, not to Weep for him, but
for themselves) caused their Sighs to be heard aloud; and a few Minutes after,
all that Quarter where the Women fat being all in Tears, the Emotion soon
caught amongst the Men also; so that the whole Church was filled with Groans,
Sighs, and Sobs. Whereupon the Capuchin resolved to prosecute his Conquest,
Cast himself down upon his Knees, and fixing his Great Crucifix upon the
Pulpit, he lifted up both his Hands to Heaven; and with a mournful and terrible
Voice, Twisting the Cord about his Neck as if he had a mind to strangle
himself, he cried out, Mercy, Mercy; and continued in the same manner, to
repeat the same Word about Forty or Fifty times, till he made all his Auditory
cry so after him. Then there was a most dreadful Noise heard in the Church,
which continued for a good Quarter of an Hour, till their Breaths being spent,
the Noise began to lessen by degrees, and at last ended in a great Silence;
which gave occasion to the Father to Resume his Discourse, which he continued
with the same Tender Affections to the End.

I don't pretend in the least to blame here the Sensibleness and Tenderness of
Men's Hearts, with respect to our Savior's Passion; I am so far from that, that
I wish it were in my power to make a most deep Impression thereof in the Hearts
of all Men: But withal, this shall never hinder me from averring, That these
Affections do ordinarily pass away like Lightning; and that good solid Motives
laid down in a Sermon, to engage People to a truly Christian Life, make a
longer stay in a man's Mind, and are there ready upon occasions to move the
Will; and this is that which these Missionaries wholly neglect. Accordingly we
don't find, that the Italians (after all these Missions) are ever a whit the
better Men. At the end of Three Weeks, or a Month, which commonly is the term
of these Missions, they go with a great deal of Solemnity and plant a Great
Cross of Wood, of about Thirty or Forty Foot high, on some Eminent place near
the Cities where the Mission has been discharged, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
This Action is performed with a great deal of Ceremony and Superstition;
thither they repair all, and Worship, Barefooted, and Cords about their Necks;
and here it is the Preacher Concludes and Seals his Mission, in giving the
People a grand Benediction, and all the Indulgences the Pope has afforded him.

It was once my hap to meet with some Missionaries on Mount Apennine, who came
from Preaching in a City belonging to the County of Urbain. A Lusty young Man,
who had been their Guide for Seven or Eight Miles together, and who had carried
them on his Shoulders over a Brook, declared, That he had never found any thing
more Light than they were, and that he thought that they weighed no more than a
Feather. The Hostess, at whose House they had Lodged, Answered Smiling, That
this Miracle did surprise her the more, because she had given them a good
Dinner just before their going away; and if there were nothing, but what they
had eaten, they must needs weigh something. The place where I met them was at
another Inn, where they notwithstanding caused a second Dinner to be prepared
for them. By this I perceived, That all these Zealous Missionaries, with their
Ropes about their Necks, are not always the greatest Lovers of Penance, herein
resembling the Pharisees, who though they carried the Commandments of the Law
written on their Foreheads, yet were not the strictest Observators of it. And
yet it is to these kind of Missionaries, the Roman Catholics assure us, That
the Gift of Preaching is particularly communicated by the Holy Ghost, in the
particular dispensation and division of his Graces and Gifts. For my part, I
should rather believe, That this excellent Privilege does in the first place
belong to the Bishops and Ministers of the Churches; these are the True
Pastors, whom the Sheep are to hear. Indeed we may say in one Sense, That the
Ministry of Preaching is quite ceased in Italy, where they hear in a manner
nothing else but the Voice of Strangers; I mean, of a vast number of Miserable
Monks, who are not Curates of Churches.

I have already mentioned in one of my LETTERS, That during the space of Seven
Years that I Lived there, I never heard any Man preach that had Ecclesiastical
Authority; that is to say, who was either Curate or Bishop, except only
Cardinal Visconti, Archbishop of Milan, whose Custom was to preach on the Four
principal Feasts or Holydays of the Year in his own Cathedral. And yet herein
also I found a great Inconvenience; for this Cardinal Archbishop, that he might
preach with the greater Magnificence, and probably also by a motive of
Vainglory, would not permit any Sermon to be preached that Day, neither in the
Morning nor Afternoon; and this in Milan, which is a very great City, and full
of People. The Church indeed is very spacious, but yet I don't believe it can
contain the Fiftieth part of the Inhabitants, at such a distance that they may
understand the Preacher: So that excepting only a certain Number of persons,
all the rest are deprived of Hearing the Word of God.

I went once to hear him preach on an Easter Day; I could say indeed, that I
saw him preach, but I could not hear him, the Sound of his Voice not reaching
so far as where I was; and because of the great Crowd, it was not possible for
me to get nearer. He was magnificently Apparel'd, in his Pontifical
Habiliments, with the Mitre on his Head; And the Pulpit of that Cathedral being
very spacious, he had several Canons that assisted on each side of him,
likewise dressed in all their most pompous Ornaments. Having therefore seen him
for a good while, shaking his Head, and casting abroad of his Hands, I went out
of the Church, without having understood one word that he said. And forasmuch
as I have now made mention of an Easter Day, I cannot refrain, Sir, from giving
you some account of a pleasant, but yet truly detestable and abominable Custom,
which takes place on Easter Day throughout all Italy, in reference to
Preaching. They tell us, That Easter Day is a Day of Merriment and Rejoicing
for Christians, applying to this purpose that Text of the Psalmist; Haec est
dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus and laetemur in ea; This is the Day which
the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice therein. And indeed it is such a
Day; but in another Sense than they take it. Wherefore, to make the People
merry, all the Preachers on that Day (how grave or serious soever they be) must
play the Merry Andrews in their Pulpits, and Act a kind of Comedy, that the
People may hear the Preacher with the greater pleasure and satisfaction. The
Sermon that is used to be preached, during Lent time, in the Morning, is on
Easter Day made in the Afternoon; because (as the Latin Proverb has it) Venture
jejunus non delectatur Musica; An hungry Belly takes no pleasure in Music. The
word Hallelujah is a common Text to all the Preachers on that Day, which Word
in its proper signification is as much as to say, Praise the Lord: But on
Easter Day (in Italy) it signifies, Gentlemen and Ladies, prepare your selves
for a sound Laughter. After they have named their Text, they enter upon Matter,
and vent all the most ridiculous Stuff they can think of. These Sermons
afterward serve all the Easter-time for Mirth and Pastime in Companies, where
every one takes delight in relating to others what he has heard.

Being once on an Easter Day in Bononia, I went to hear the Sermon at S.
Peter's Church, being the Cathedral of that City, the Archbishop himself being
then present. The Preacher was one of the Fathers Soccolanti. After that he had
turned several Texts of Scripture into Ridicule, he quoted the 2 d Verse of the
16 th Chapter of S. Mark, where it is said, That the Mary's came to the
Sepulcher, O^to jam Sole, after Sunrising, as it is in the Vulgar Latin; and
opposed this to the 1 st Verse of the 20 th Chapter of the Gospel of S. John,
where it is said, That they arrived very early, before it was yet daylight;
and then put the Question, how it were possible to reconcile these two places,
which seemed to contradict one another. For his part (he said) he believed,
That the M^ries did not Rise till long after the Sun was risen, and indeed till
it was near Noon: For we see (said he) that this goes for very Early Rising
with our Italian Ladies, who don't come to Mass on Sundays till it be half an
hour after Eleven or Twelve. And hereupon he began in a Comical manner to
represent a Woman's awaking out of her Sleep; the time she takes to rub her
Eyes, to stretch her Arms, and an hundred other impertinent Follies, which put
all the Church into a loud Laughter. Afterward (for this Father was very
fertile of his Curious Thoughts) he recalled himself, and said, That indeed the
Mary's were Risen very early in the Morning, but that they needed so much time
to Dress and Trick up themselves, that it was very late before they could get
out of Doors, which was the Reason they could not reach the Sepulcher till
after the Sun was risen; Orto jam Sole. Here he represented Women Dressing of
themselves; how much time they spend in dressing their Head, in laying on of
Paint, fixing their Patches, and making an hundred Faces before their
Looking-Glasses; and expressed all these particulars admirably well, with his
Mimical Gestures. This Curious Thought he immediately backed with another: I
cry Mercy! (said he) the Mary's were not such vain Women, as I have been just
now a describing: But they were Gossiping-Houswives; they rose, and went abroad
indeed betimes in the Morning, but before they could take their Leaves of their
Neighbors, much time was spent; so that they did not come to the Sepulcher
till it was late; Orto jam Sole. Here he enlarged himself on the Tattle and
Gossiping-Discourse of Women, and mentioned such ridiculous Stuff amongst it,
that the Cardinal-Archbishop, who was there, burst-out into a loud Laughter. He
continued his Easter-Sermon at the same rate, to the end of it, profaning
(after a most heinous and unworthy manner) so Holy a Day, and the Venerable
History of these Holy Women, who were judged worthy to be the first Witnesses
of the greatest Mystery of our Faith, viz. The Resurrection of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST.

Another Year, being at Venice on Easter Day, I heard a Benedictin, that was a
Genouese by Birth, who (amongst a great many foolish and impertinent Stories)
told this that follows, by which you may judge of the rest: A young Lady ( said
he) being newly Married, did extremely afflict her self, because her Husband
often told her, That he could not Love her so well as otherwise he would,
because she had not black Eyes. Whereupon she went and communicated her Grief
to her Confessor; the Good Father, whom she had chosen to be the Director of
her Conscience, bade her not to afflict her self, and that if she would but
bring him all the Jewels and Great Pieces of Gold, which her Husband kept very
charily in his Closet, he would by his Prayers obtain for her of God the favor
of having Black Eyes. The Lady in the earnest desire she had of becoming more
beautiful and pleasing to her Husband, followed her Confessor's Direction, and
brought him the Jewels and Gold, according to his desire: But her Husband
missing them soon after, and perceiving by the ambiguous and uncertain Answers
of his Wife, that she must be guilty of the Theft, Beat her most outragiously;
and to make her Confess, how she had disposed of them, made her Black and Blew
all over with the Strokes he had given her. The poor Lady in this pitiful
Condition, with Tears in her Eyes, returns to her Confessor, to acquaint him
how ill she had sped with his Advice, and to Redemand her Jewels; but the
Confessor absolutely refused to restore them to her, maintaining, That now they
were his own, according to the Bargain and Contract made between them;
forasmuch as she could not deny, but she had obtained her Desire, and got Black
Eyes with a Vengeance, as indeed they were with the Strokes and Bruises her
Husband had given her.

What think you, Sir, was not this a pretty Story, to be Told from a Pulpit on
Easter Day? It being moreover very probable, that this was only an Invented
Tale. Thus these Wretched Monks, instead of dispensing the Word of Truth to the
People, ordinarily feed them with nothing but Lies.

I suppose, Sir, you will not take it ill, if I venture upon another short
digression, referring to another pleasant Custom observed in Italy, viz. that
of Blessing Eggs at Easter, which are of great virtue to sanctify both Soul
and Body. On Easter-Eve, and Easter Day, all the Heads of Families send great
Chargers full of hard-Eggs to the Church, to get them Blessed, which the
Priests perform by Saying several Appointed Prayers, and making great Signs of
the Cross over them, and sprinkling them with Holy Water. The Priest having
finished the Ceremony, demands, how many Dozen Eggs there be in every Basin? to
the end he may know, how many of them came to his share; and sometimes are so
honest as to take Three or Four out of every Dozen, especially when they know
the persons that send them to be Wealthy. There be some of the poorer Sort, who
are apt to Cry, when they see the Priest take more than his due, or pick out
the Fairest and Greatest of them. These Blessed Eggs have the virtue of
Sanctifying the Entrails of the Body, and are to be the first Fat or Fleshy
nourishment they take after the Abstinence of Lent. The Italians do not only
abstain from Flesh during Lent, but also from Eggs, Cheese, Butter, and all
White Meats. As soon as the Eggs are Blessed, every one carries his portion
home, and causes a Large Table to be set in the Best Room they have in the
House, which they cover with their best Linen, all bestrew'd with Flowers; and
place round about it a Dozen Dishes of Meat, and the great Charger of Eggs in
the midst. It Is a very pleasant sight to see these Tables set forth in the
Houses of Great persons, where they expose on Side-Board Tables (round about
the Chamber) all the Plate they have in the House, and whatsoever else they
have that is Rich and Curious, in Honor to their Easter-Eggs, which of
themselves yield a very fair Show; for the Shells of them are all painted with
diverse Colors and Gilt. Sometimes there are no less than Twenty Dozen in the
same Charger, neatly laid together in form of a Pyramid. The Table continues in
the same posture covered all the Easter-Week, and all those that come to Visit
them within that time, are Invited to eat an Easter-Egg with them; which they
must not refuse.

I return now again to my Sermons, upon which Subject I have this only further
to add; That there is yet another sort of Preachers, who only preach before the
Nuns Grates. These are Finnical Preachers, of a sweet Countenance, and commonly
all of them handsome young Monks: For except Beauty and Sweetness do meet in a
Preacher, the Nuns, who have the Choice of them, will have none of him. All the
Study of these Men is, to find out pretty Words, and the most Tender and
Affectionate Expressions, and frequently to enlarge themselves in praise of the
Nuns, to whom they preach. I have heard many of these sorts of Preachers, and
amongst the rest a young Monk at Milan, Preacher to the Benedictin Nuns of the
Monastery called the Magiore. Scarcely could this Monk speak Three Words
together without some expression of the high Value and Love he had for them: My
most Dear and Lovely Sisters, whom I love from the deepest Bottom of my Heart,
said he, which was almost the constant Appendix of every Sentence he uttered:
So that having recollected all his Sermon with my self, I found that the upshot
(in a manner) of all that he had said, was, That he loved them the most
tenderly and affectionately that could be. When once a Monk has the good hap to
become a Preacher to the Nuns, and that he is liked of by them, he may promise
himself an happy Time of it ever after, and that he shall spend the rest of his
Days in a voluptuous delicacy and tenderness: For the Nuns have nothing so much
upon their Hearts, as to procure all manner of Ease to their Directors and
Preachers, to the end, to make them the more Indulgent toward them. They allow
them great Pensions every Year; they provide them with Linen, and furnish them
with Dry and Wet Sweetmeats; and send them every Day a Dish of what they judge
most pleasing and delicate, which they call the Preachers-Dish. So that indeed
it is no difficult thing for these handsome Monks, to declare from their Pulpits
the extraordinary Love they have for their Tender Nurses, and to be so lavish
in their praising of them.

This way of Praising others from the Pulpit, puts me in mind of another Custom
the Monks have introduced, to praise one another publicly, on certain Days of
the Year, which is commonly the Feast of their Blessed Founders. Thus, for
Example, on the Feast of S. Ignatius de Loyola, Founder of the Order of the
Jesuits, they make the Panegyric of that Saint in all their Churches; and
after having enlarged themselves in the praise of their Patriarchs, they
proceed to that of his Children and Disciples, that is, all those that follow
his Rule, and more particularly of the Fathers of that Convent where the Sermon
is preached. But forasmuch as according to the Common Proverb, Proprio Laus
sordet in Ore; That it is a base thing to praise one Self; they employ a
Religious of some other Order to preach in their Churches on that Day. It is a
thing but too Notorious, That the Monks do mortally hate one another; however,
the desire of being praised themselves in their Turn, prevailing beyond their
Hatred, makes them to undertake these otherwise unpleasing Panegyricks. The
Dominicans do publicly praise the Jesuits, and the Jesuits the Dominicans; and
so for the rest. They all agree, that these are the most difficult Sermons of
all others, and that rarely one comes off with Credit and Applause, partly by
reason of the too insatiable desire of the One party, to be praised beyond
measure; and partly, because it goes against the grain with the Other, to
praise them, which makes one in the midst of their Encomiums to discover
something of Force and Constraint, that evidenceth the Falsness of them.
Indeed, how is it possible to praise those heartily, whose Hearts one wishes
out of their Bodies?

A Cordelier preaching the Day of S. Francis Xavier, in the Church of S. Lucia,
belonging to the Father Jesuits of Bononia, praised them very pleasantly,
attributing Elogies to them, diametrically opposite to their known qualities
and practice. Do you see (said he) the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits of this
House, they are the best men that live on the Earth: They are as modest as
Angels, they never open their Eyes, to cast a Look upon the Ladies at Church:
They are such extraordinary Lovers of Retirement, that one never sees them in
the Streets: They are so in love with Poverty, that they despise and trample on
all the Riches of the World; they never come near Dying-persons or Widows, to
importune them to be remembered in their Last Wills; they never concern
themselves in making up of Marriages: They never go to Complement the Cardinal
Legate, or the Cardinal Archbishop. And in this manner he ran over every
particular of their Behavior and Conduct. All that were in the Church Laughed
at this pretty way of Commending them, the Cordelier had lighted on; but the
Jesuits were galled to the Heart, and put to the utmost Confusion. The
Cordelier having ended his Sermon, came down from the Pulpit; and instead of
going to the Jesuits Convent, there to be entertained, (according to the Custom
of Preachers in the like case) he went directly to the Gate; it seems, he
feared their giving of him the Lash, and (I suppose) that to avoid their
Revenge, he never afterward would appear in the City Bononia.

This, Sir, is the Substance of what I had to Write to you, concerning the
Manner of Preaching, and Behavior of the Preachers in Italy. It remains now,
that I should oppose to them, the way of Preaching used by our Protestant
Ministers, and their profound and solid Sermons; but lest you should accuse me
of being too lavish in praising my own Party, I shall at present content my
self with telling you, That they declare to the People The Word of God, with a
great deal of Modesty and Reverence; and what is the chiefest of all, they
always keep close to the Truth and Purity of the Gospel, in the which I desire
to Live and Die. I wish you the same Grace, and am, Sir, with all my Heart,

Your most Humble Servant, etc.

The Seventh LETTER, Of the Processions of Italy, etc.
SIR,
HAving passed the Lent Time at Rome, I departed thence some Weeks after
Easter, with an intent of Returning to France. I took my Journey through that
part of the Great Duke of Tuscany's Country, which Borders upon the Patrimony
of S. Peter, or the Popes Dominions. The Entrance into the Dukes Territories,
is by Il Re de Caphani; which is a very high Mountain, surrounded with many
great Woods, and is a very proper place for Hunting; where I saw several
Cardinals, who diverted themselves at that Sport. From hence it is Two small
days Journey to Sienna; in my Way thither, I met with nothing but Processions
all along the Road. It Is an Ancient Custom established in the Roman Church, to
celebrate frequent Processions after Easter, which they call Rogations, in
order to implore the Blessing of God upon the Fruits of the Earth. The Year
wherein I took this Journey, there was a more pressing need of it, than
ordinary, because of the great Drought, which threatened a Scarcity.

A Procession, according to the definition of the Papists, is, A Walking, or
Marching of People from one Church to another, under the Conduct of the
Priests, assisting with the Cross and Banner, there to Invoke, by the
Intercession of some He or She Saint, the extraordinary Assistance of God.
These Processions are sometimes Two or Three Days a Marching before they come
to the place designed; and when they have once dispatched the Singing of their
Letanies, they play the Fools, as much as the Pilgrims in their Pilgrimaging
do, according to the Account I have already given you in a former LETTER: So
that I wanted no Divertisement all the Way from the Re de Cophani, till I came
to Sienna, whither all these Processions were going. Only I found great
Inconvenience when I came to my Inn; because that wherever these Processions
pass, they cause great Scarcity, by reason of the great Numbers that compose
them. Being come to Sienna, I inquired what Church it was to which all these
Devotions were designed; and was told, That they all went to a Church of our
Lady, where they had lately uncovered a Miraculous Image of the Virgin; which
was only done at the end of every Forty years. My Curiosity invited me, to take
a View of it; but the Throng of the People was so great, that I had much ado to
Crowd into the Church. They told me, That this Thronging Concourse had already
continued for Eight Days, (for so long the Image had been Unveiled) and that
after Eight Days more, it was to be Veiled again with a great deal of
Solemnity. I took an exact View of this Image, which was about a Foot broad,
and a Foot and an Half high, the Countenance of it representing that of a very
young Girl; neither could I find any thing extraordinary in it, for which it
might seem to deserve the Adorations they gave it. I inquired of the Priests,
that served this Church, What might be the Reason, that this Image was only
Unveiled once every Forty Years? But they could give me no better than this,
That it had been a Custom observed Time out of Mind; and that they believed,
the first Rise of it was, An Order given by the Virgin her self, for so doing.

I have in Italy seen a vast Number of these sorts of Veiled-Images; not only
of the Virgin, but also of the Crucifix, and all other Saints; and I can say
with Truth, That there is scarcely a Church to be met with, which has not Two
or Three of them. Sometimes we meet with great Pictures in their Churches,
where several Saints are represented, and amongst them one only having his or
her Face Veiled, that being the Mysterious Saint. The Secret of which
Intriegue, as far I could pierce into, by the use the Priests and Monks make of
it, is plainly this: They find this way admirably well suited to advance their
Temporal Profit. The things we see every Day, become too common with us, and
make little or no Impression by reason of the Customariness of them on our
Imagination. There be some Parts of the World, where they have six Months of
Night, and six Months of Day; so that their whole Year consists but of a Day
and a Night. Now we are told, That the Inhabitants of these Countries, assemble
themselves in Crowds to see the Sun Rise; whereas in these Lands where the Sun
rises every Day, we don't find People concern themselves, to be present at his
Rising; and by a parity of Reason we may conclude, That the Images and Statues
of the Church of Rome, would make no great impression on the Minds of the
People, or be powerful enough to induce the opening of their Purse-Strings, if
the Priests had not found out this ingenious Invention of making them more
rare, and therefore the more desired. Yea, it seems also, that the long time of
their Veiling, begets something of a greater Veneration for them, and that the
Roman Catholics imagine, That when after so long a time they are uncovered,
they meet with in those Pictures, Images, and Statues, something more August
and Divine than ordinary. In a word, They do all believe, and take it for
granted, that when these are Unveiled here on Earth, the Saints whom they
represent, become more Liberal in Heaven, and more favorably inclined to grant
their Vows and Prayers. Thus you see whither Superstition, or rather Folly will
run, when those who ought to be the most Zealous to overthrow it, I mean the
Clergy, are the chief Contrivers of Ways and Methods to foster and encourage
it. The Profit which from hence accrues to the Priests is very great, as you
will be able to conceive from what I shall tell you of this Our Lady of Sienna.

I spent Nine or Ten Days in this City, and so had the leisure frequently to
Visit this Church of the Virgin; I confess, I cannot give you an exact account
of the Presents I saw there offered; and therefore shall content my self to
tell you, That I do not believe any Single person entered the Church without
giving something very considerable. And to encourage the People the more in
their Liberality, to exceed and outstrip one another, the Priests had had the
Cunning to prepare a place Rail'd-in with Balisters, near to the Altar of the
Virgin; where they exposed to View part of the Presents the People had offered.
Here were to be seen a vast quantity of whole Pieces of Cloth and Fine Linen,
Handkerchiefs, Shifts, many rich Jewels, and in particular, a prodigious number
of Great Tapers of White Virgin-Wax, whereof some of them could weigh no less
than Fifty pounds apiece, the least of them being about Four or Five pound
each, with the Names of the Donors upon them. As for the Money that was given, I
suppose the Priest put that into their Pockets, parting it among themselves;
for though the People were continually pouring in Money into the Basins, yet some
Hours after they were seen all Empty. Some Spanish Priests, that were
Traveling homewards, having presented themselves to Say Mass in the said
Church, whilst they were in the Sextry, had Rings presented to them by some of
the Country Gentry, who supposed them to be Priests belonging to that Church;
and had desired them, to get them fastened to some particular Picture; but they
conceived it more convenient, to put them into their own Pockets, and being got
out of the Church, prosecuted their Journey with a great deal of Cheerfulness
for the Booty they had so happily lighted on: One of them said merrily, That he
found no scruple in himself at all, for having committed this lawful piece of
Robbery, as being in much more want than the Image of the Virgin, who had no
need either to eat or drink, as he had.

The following Sunday, all the Inhabitants of Sienna and Neighboring places
met together in different Bodies, according as they were distinguished by their
Trades and Callings; and all of them together made a great Procession to the
Church of Our Lady, every Company marching under its own Cross and Banner,
different from the rest, as under their proper Standard. The Cobblers, as being
Inferior to all the rest, went first of all; the Arms portrayed on their
Banner were two Awls placed Salter-wise: These were followed by the Shoemakers;
and so all the rest in their Order. After every Banner followed a Man, carrying
a great Wax-Taper, which was that of the Company, being all Gilt, and adorned
with Ribands and Flowers, with a great Scutheon upon it. Besides which, every
Member of each Society or Company (which the Italians call Scuole) had their
own Tapers of about Three or Four pounds apiece. After the Cross, Banner, and
Taper, came a Man in a Surplice, carrying a great Purse, fastened to the End of
a fine Great Staff, curiously gilt and painted, which contained the Sum of
Money, that each Company were to present to the Image of the Virgin. Some of
these had about Ten Crowns apiece in them, and others Twenty, more or less,
according to the Ability of each Profession. In the Purse belonging to the
Company of Merchants, there were at least Two hundred Crowns, as I was informed
by one of the Merchants themselves.

All these Companies do not assist at these Processions only in their Ordinary
Clothes, as having over them great Vests of Fine Linen, died of different
Colors, to distinguish the Companies one from another; these they have girt
about them with curious Girdles, and upon the Breast or Arms, the Device or
Scutcheon of their Society; and have besides a great Cowl, hanging down on
their Backs. After the Company of Merchants, followed all the Religious Orders
that are in that City, or Neighboring places, which are very numerous: They
marched according to their Antiquity, or Standing in the City.

It Is on such occasions as these one may be diverted with the most pleasant
variety of Extravagant Dresses, that can be imagined: Some are dressed in Gray,
others in Brown, and others again in Black, etc. and all with their Frocks and
Cowls shaped in different Fashions, the pattern of most of which they pretend
to have received from no meane^ a hand than that of the Virgin, or even God
himself. Every one of these Religious Orders went under their own Cross and
Banner, the difference only was, that their Banners were not followed by either
Taper or Purse, they leaving that Ceremony to the Seculars; as being very well
pleased to see them bring plentifully to their Churches, and are not wanting to
encourage them thereto, by all the devices and ways imaginable; but as for
them, they take special Care the Seculars shall never be a Farthing the better
for them.

It would be an easy matter one would think, for the Italians to reflect a
little on these Practices, if once they were willing; but that is it which puts
out their Eyes, that they are unwilling to discover the Cheat. For to speak the
Truth, Sir, what does hinder these Monks, that are so Rich, and most of which
have great Revenues belonging to them, which they so prodigally spend at
Taverns and Bawdy-Houses; What hinders them, say I, from making up a Purse
amongst themselves, as well as the Seculars, and to be at the Charge of a great
Taper to present to the Virgin, as well as they; but that they do not find
themselves in the Humor, to furnish other Priests with Money; as knowing but too
well, how they use to spend it? And yet, if the poor Seculars should entertain
the same Thoughts of them, they would at the Tribunal of their Confession,
condemn such Reflections of great Impiety and Sacrilege.

After the Monks, or Regular Clergy, followed the Secular Clergy, viz. the
Priests, Curates, and Canons, who all appeared likewise with Empty Hands. The
Cardinal-Archbishop was somewhat indisposed, who (if he had been there) I am
sure he would, like all the rest, have assisted at the Ceremony without either
Purse or Taper. Both these Orders of the Clergy were followed by the
Magistrates of the City, and the Officers of Justice, all in their Robes of
Ceremony, with their Tapers and Purses. And last of all, the whole Procession
was concluded with a Company of young Gentlemen, and Swordmen.

This Procession marched on toward the Church of Our Lady in very good Order,
at the sound of Trumpets and Drums, and the Air resounding with continual Ora
pro nobis. All their Wax-Tapers and Purses were left in the Church, in the
Hands of the Priests, by which you may guess the great Advantage they make of
these Pageantries. For (as the Spaniard said very well) the Image do; not
stand in need either of Meat or Drink, and none but Men can make use of the
Money, and other Presents offered to it.

Two or Three Days after, as Children please themselves in imitating the
Practices of their Elders, the Boys and Girls of the Town, assembled
themselves in Companies. The Schoolboys and young Girls got their Masters and
Mistresses, to Conduct them to Our Ladies Church. They made Purses of about Two
or Three Crowns apiece; so that about Two days after the Great Procession, one
could scarcely walk through the Streets of Sienna; for they Boys had got great
Cords, which they held at both Ends, stretched out, to make all those that had
a mind to pass, to give somewhat to make up their Purses. Afterward they
provided themselves with Wax-Tapers, Little Crosses, and Banners, and so went
by way of Procession to the Church; where the Priests gave them a very kind
Reception, Weeping for very Joy, to see so good Beginnings in such Tender and
Young years.

The Sixth Day they uncovered the Image with a pomp and magnificence altogether
extraordinary; at which time there was a great Concourse of the Nobility and
Gentry of the City and Country. The Confluence was so extraordinary, that they
were forced to set a Guard at the Doors of the Church, who suffered none to
enter, but persons of Appearance and Quality. I heard an Old Gentleman, who
with a great Sense of Devotion blessed God with a Loud Voice, That he had
vouchsafed him the happiness of having seen the same Miraculous Image Two and
twenty times uncovered during his Life time. I was somewhat surpised at this
Expression of his; for had it been true, That the Image (as was said) had not
been uncovered more than once in Forty years, it must have followed, that at
that rate this Gentleman must be more Aged than Methusalem. But I was informed
afterward, That there seldom passed a Year, wherein (upon some emergency or
other of public Need requiring it) the said Image was not uncovered. This gave
me a full Notion of the Cunning of these Priests, who to procure the Vogue and
Devotion of the People for some of their Images, do Veil them withal, declaring
them to be Miraculous, and so trascendently Holy, that it is not lawful to
expose them to public and common View, more than once in several Years time,
except it be upon some extraordinary emergent Necessity: And yet, as soon as
they see that their Device has taken, that the Devotion of the People is
kindled, and that their Profits are sure, they have not the patience themselves
to stay out the time of their own prefixing, before they discover these their
Lucriferous Mysteries; but they lay hold of the opportunity of the first
Drought, or Wet Season; and declare, That Necessity having no Law, the Fruits
of the Earth being in great danger, they are forced to uncover the Image sooner
than they had designed.

And thus an Image, or Statue, which according to the first Institution was not
to be exposed more than once in Forty years, is set forth almost every Year.
Which proceeding of theirs is so far from being suspected by the deluded Laity,
that it gains them a great deal of Reputation, and the Esteem of very good and
honest Men, full of Compassion, and extremely desirous to obviate and prevent
(as far as in them lies) all public Calamities. The Monks and Priests do both
of them perfectly well agree and harmonize in this Point; for they have all of
them some hidden Idol or other in their Churches, which they uncover at certain
Intervals of Time, each in their due order, without interfering or clashing one
with another, playing Hodie mihi, cras tibi.

In those Monasteries where the Abbots, Priors, and Guardians are Triennial,
they have taken up the Custom of vouchsafing this Favor to the Public, at
their first Arrival in the Monastery, and this commonly either by exposing the
Holy Sacrament for Three days together, or by uncovering some miraculous Image
or other. Neither does the Idol lose a whit of Credit and Repute for all this,
because it is looked upon as an extraordinary Occasion, and cease not to pass
in the Minds of the People, for a Mystery not to be exposed, but once in such
an Interval of Years. This was the Rare Show I was entertained with at Sienna,
which at present is one of the most Superstitious Cities that is in all Italy,
and is commonly called by way of Prerogative and Excellence, Sienna the Devout.
This City also is very famous for the Purity of her Language, the best Italian
without contradiction being spoken here.

After that I had Visited all the Places of Devotion that are in it, I
prosecuted my Journey, and passing a Second time through Tuscany and Florence,
after two great days Journey I came to Bononia, which is a very fine City.
Formerly this place was a Commonwealth; but at present the Popes have reduced
it to their Obedience, and have a Legate there, who Commands in their Name. On
the great Gate of the Legates Palace, which is a very Ancient Structure, is a
Statue of Stone, representing a Woman with a Tiara, or Triple Papal Crown upon
her Head. They of Bononia say, This Figure represents RELIGION; but it seems
with more probability to be a Statue of Pope Joan: For that it is not the
former appears from hence, because the principal Marks with which the Papists
set forth Religion are wanting in this Statue, viz. a Cross in the one Hand,
and a Chalice with the Host in the other. Two days after my Arrival at Bononia,
I went to take a View of the Fair and Renowned Abbey of S. Michael in Bosco,
situate on a pleasant Hill, about two Musket Shot from the City. It seems to
have been placed on that Eminence, to be seen and admired by all Italy. Above
all other places, this is peculiarly Famous for the curious Paintings that
embelish it, Carache, Guido Rhenus, and many other Famous Painters seeming to
have deposited in this Building the whole Curiosity and Perfection of their
Art, to make it the more Recommendable to Posterity. The Religious that dwell
here are Olivetan-Monks; they profess the Rule of S. Bennet, and are habited in
White.

As I was taking a View of the Painting of the Grotto's, or of the first
Cloister, which is built with right Angles, the Abbot taking a Walk after
Dinner with some of his Religious, by an extraordinary piece of Civility drew
near to me, and took the pains himself to explain to me the Pictures, which
represent some very considerable Particularities of the Life of their
Legislator S. Bennet. After which he conducted me to their Library, which is
all curiously painted, and furnished with very good and fairly Bound-Books, and
certainly is one of the neatest I have seen in Italy. Where being entered into
Discourse concerning some of those Books, the Abbot made a proffer to me of
staying in the said Abbey, and Teaching Humanity and Rhetoric to his Religious;
telling me, That if I thought good to accept of it, I should be Entertained at
his own Table, and enjoy a very Competent Allowance. Though at this time I had no
design of staying in Italy, and that I was now actually engaged in my Journey
for France; yet this occasion so favorably presenting it self, and meeting
with a strong Inclination in me, to acquire a further perfection in the Italian
Tongue, after Two or Three days respit I had desired of the Abbot, to consider
of it, I accepted of his Offers. He appointed me a very good Salary, and
assigned me Twelve of his young Monks for my Pupils. They were almost all of
them either Earls or Marquisses; for these Fathers Receive none into their
Society, but persons of the Highest Quality. I continued Two whole Years in
this Employment, during which time I received a Thousand marks of Kindness and
Civility from my young Religious Scholars, besides the continual Experience I
had of the Bounty and Generosity of the Noble Prelat.

You cannot doubt, Sir, but that by this means I had the fairest Opportunity I
could wish for, to penetrate all the Secrets of Monkery, for they kept nothing
from me; and though I was not one of them, yet I lived and continually Conversed
with them, neither was any thing hid from me. Wherefore I may say, without
boasting, That I can speak of the Monastick-way of Living upon good grounds,
which I intend to do in my next LETTER to you. As for this I have now in hand,
as I have already begun it, with giving you some account of the Manner of their
Processions, so I intend to prosecute the same Subject; and the rather, because
I find here, in this City, Matter enough to Stuff it out, and such as is very
curious too; and therefore hope, that the Recital I shall make of it, will not
prove unacceptable or tedious to you. I shall begin with the Processions which
are celebrated during the Octave, or Week of the Holy Sacrament in the City of
Bononia: The Feast of the Holy Sacrament having been instituted on purpose, to
make the Host to Triumph, as the Papists say, they omit nothing that may render
that Day, and the Week following, the most pompous and solemn that may be. They
make many fine Processions, and carry the Consecrated Host, (which they say, is
the Living Body of our Savior Jesus Christ) through their Streets, with very
Magnificent Shows and Ceremonies.

In France, it is the Custom on this occasion, to Adorn the Fronts of Houses
with curious Tapestries, and to strew the Streets with Flowers and sweet
smelling Herbs. They erect Oratories, or Repositories, (as they call them) at
certain distances, there to repose the Holy Sacrament, as if it were very weary
with the March it had taken. They Dress up abundance of Little Children, like
Angels, to strew Flowers in the Way before it, and to Incense it: And in a
word, they make a Thousand Idolatrous Prostrations and Adorations to it. In
Germany they Adorn all their Streets with the Branches of Trees on both sides
of them, by this means turning their Cities into Parks, or Forests, or rather
into Fine Gardens, whereof every Street represents a Long Walk, as far as one
could see, all set with Trees and Verdure. But Italy being the most ingenious
of them all, as well as the most Superstitious, does by many degrees excel all
other Nations, that profess the Roman Catholic Religion; and the City Bononia
exceeds the rest of Italy in her Famous celebration of the Octave of the Holy
Sacrament.

Besides the great General Procession which is made throughout that City, the
Thursday after Trinity Sunday (which is the Day appointed for that Feast) at
which all the Clergy both Regular and Secular, with all the Magistrates of the
City do assist; there are every Year Three Parishes appointed, to furnish and
make the Preparatives for the Octave; and having discharged their Turn, they
are quit of that Expense for Twelve or Fourteen years after, until all the rest
have had theirs; this being a very Chargeable Office. About a Fortnight or
Three Weeks before the Feast, they Barricado all the Entries of the Streets of
those Parishes, to hinder Horses and Carts from passing that way, that the
Workmen may apply themselves to their Work without disturbance. The Chief Work,
and that which is most painful, and takes up most Time is, to cover all the
Streets, and Walls, with Veils of Silk, which are the Manufactory of that City,
and to form them into Figures and Histories. The several Parishes, when their
Turn comes, strive to outvy one another in some New Invention or other. Some
with these Little Veils represent all manner of Birds, others all Four-footed
Beasts, insomuch that a Man cannot so much as imagine any whole Figure is not
to be found there. Others endeavor to represent in the said Silken Figures,
Huntings, Battles, Triumphs, and in a word, an infinite Variety of things
extremely pleasing to the Eye. Moreover, they expose to public View in the
Streets, all the most curious Pictures which the Inhabitants of those Parishes
are Masters of, not excepting the Profane ones themselves; amongst which are to
be seen many infamous Naked Pictures, and Grotesques, to cause Laughter.

The Bononians are extremely curious in Pictures; all their Closets, Halls and
Chambers, are full hung with them; and forasmuch as they expose them to public
View at this time, Travelers meet with the satisfaction of seeing very Rare
and Curious Pieces of Art. Over and above all this, Altars are erected almost
in every Corner of the Streets, set forth and adorned with Statues, Images, and
Vessels of Gold and Silver; and upon every Altar there is always a
Representation to the Life, of some Mystery of our Religion, or of some Saint.
The Houses of the Great Lords of those Parishes, that furnish the Ornament of
the Feast, are open to all: As long as this Feast lasts, they take Care to
adorn their Chambers the most sumptuously they can, and to expose all their
Riches to view: There be some of them so splendid and liberal, to bestow
Cooling Liquors, called Sorbetti, upon all Comers, or at least upon all persons
who appear never so little Considerable; and in their Courts or Gardens, they
have Fountains Running with Wine in great abundance for the Common People.

All things being thus prepared, the Procession begins: This is a Work on which
the Priests exhaust their Invention, and rack their Brain, to bring forth
something New and Unlooked for, that may please the Spectators. They dress up a
great many Little Children like Angles, with Wings at their Backs; they make
very lively Representations of all the Figures and Types mentioned in the Old
Testament, which they conceive did prefigure their Holy Sacrament; as Abraham's
Sacrificing of his Son Isaac, the Offering of Melchisedeck, the Shewbread, the
Paschal Lamb, etc. They represent all the Prophets and Sibyls, that have
Prophesied of our Savior: And last of all, they make a Show of the Blessed
Virgin, the Twelve Apostles, and our Savior, who follows them with a Loaf in
his Hand, as if he were about to break it, as he did at the Celebration of his
Holy Supper. Besides these, they also give us the Representations of many of
their He and She Saints, which were the most devoted to the Holy Sacrament; as
S. Thomas Aquinas, S. Anthony of Padua, S. Rose of Viterbo, etc. All these they
represent not in Figures to the Life, but Living Figures, that is, young Boys
and Girls, choosing the prettiest and handsomest they can meet with. Above all,
I took notice of many Little S. John Baptists amongst them. To represent these
S. John Baptists, they take Little Children of Four or Five years of Age, strip
them stark Naked, and put nothing upon them besides a Colored Riband, which
like a Belt reaches from their Right Shoulder, to their Left Thigh; so as it
does not hinder their Nakedness from being exposed to public View. It is not
now only, that the Italians are accused of equally loving both Sexes; so that
no body needs to be surpised at their having so great Devotion to these Little
S. John's; of whom I very well remember, I counted no less than Twenty in one
Procession, following one another. In one Hand they hold a great Cross, made of
Reed, and very light; and with the other, they lead a little Lamb in a String.
After all this Pageantry, follow the Priests in magnificent Habits, and next to
them follows the Holy Sacrament, which is carried under a Rich Canopy,
surrounded with an infinite number of young Boys and Girls, attired like
Angels, who all the Way strew Flowers before it. Near to the Canopy there is
always an Excellent Company of Musicians, who sing Hymns and Songs of the Holy
Sacrament, being those the Church of Rome has composed since the Council of
Trent, in honor of it. The Canopy is followed by the Principal Men of the
Parish; and after them, to shut up all, a vast Crowd of People of all sorts. In
this manner they Walk Our Lord (to use their own Expression) throughout all the
Streets of the Parish; but yet so, as to give him leave to repose himself at
the End of every Street, on the Altars erected for that purpose.

When the Procession is ended, they do not for all that take away the Adorning
of their Streets, but leave them whole and entire for many days; to give the
Citizens leave to View them at their leisure, and to Walk the same Round the
Procession took; for in so doing they believe they shall merit much, and obtain
great Indulgences. All the Sbirris of the Legate and Archbishop, do guard all
these Pageants all Night, to prevent the Stealing of them. And it is chiefly at
Night, that the Gentlemen and Ladies of the Town walk abroad to take a View of
them, because then they make the finest Show; all the Streets being illuminated
with a vast Number of white Wax-Tapers, set thick in every Corner, which very
much exalt the splendor of those Rich and pompous Ornaments. Here it is they
Court their Mistresses, make Assignations, and dispatch Notes to one another,
and in the End, always some miserable Wretch or other, is left a cold Victim on
the ground, to the Revenge of his Enemies, or the Jealousy of his Rivals. All
the Ladies of Pleasure, in a particular manner, never fail of coming thither
toward Evening, where they continue till they have got their Prey. In a word,
it appears that the most Innocent are those, who repair thither only to
satisfy their Eyes, or please their Curiosity; for as for Devotion, there is
not so much as the least shadow of it to be discerned amongst them. Thus are
these fine gaudy Feasts, instituted on purpose to confound the Protestants,
within a short time, by a just Judgment of God, become the shame and confusion
of Papists themselves; and I have reason to fear, that our Lord Jesus will tell
them to their Faces, at that Great Day, in which he will come to judge both the
Quick and the Dead, that his Soul has abhorred their Feasts, and that their
Incense has been an Abomination unto him; because instead of advancing his
Glory by them, as they seem to pretend, they have only endeavored to satisfy
their own Curiosity, Vanity, and infamous Lusts.

I have been a Spectator of many other Processions, made in honor of the Holy
Sacrament at Venice, Milan, and other parts of Italy; but I will not take up
time to give you the Particulars of them, because they generally are the same
thing over again; except only, that their Adornings of the Streets are not so
Curious, neither continue so long a Time as those at Bononia. I cannot find
that the Priests reap any great Benefit from these Processions, but on the
contrary are at the Charges of Adorning their Churches and Altars: But however,
they hereby gain much Credit and Repute to their Priesthood and Masses; and
they appear at them with so much Majesty, and dressed with such pompous
Ornaments, and Habiliments, that it makes the People conceive a greater
Veneration for their Persons. However, they know very well how to Repay
themselves this Charge they are at, upon other Occasions: It Is but Unveiling
one of their Miraculous Images, when they have a mind to Reimburse themselves,
double and treble. And probably it is for this very Reason, that at Bononia, (a
short time after the Octave of the Holy Sacrament) they make that great
Ceremony and Procession of our Lady of S. Luke. To give you some Idea of it, I
shall tell you, that about Five Miles from Bononia, upon an high Hill called
the Mount de la Guardias, stands a Church, wherein is kept an Image of the
Virgin, which the Papists tell us was painted by S. Luke himself. The Priests
have so bestirred themselves, as to persuade the Magistrates, to put the City
under Her Protection, giving her the Title of Their Patroness and Conservatrix;
Patrona and Conservatrix Bononiae. They have caused a Coin to be stamped in
Honor of her, which on the one side bears the Representation of the Image
pretendedly Painted by S. Luke; and on the Reverse, the Arms of the City; which
Piece of Money they call a Madonnine. The Magistrates have made a Vow, to go and
fetch this Image every year, and carry it in Procession: They bring it from
Mount de la Guardia to their Town, to the end she may bless its Inhabitants.

Many days before this Solemnity, great Preparations are made to fetch her off
in Triumph. Having got her into the City, they make her stay there 8 Days,
during which time they remove her to two or three Churches; where the People
flock in throngs to Visit her, and Offer great Presents, all which accrue to
the profit of the Priests of those Churches. After that they have sufficiently
Idolized this Image, or Picture, they oblige her to give her Blessing to all
the People. To this purpose they fasten the Picture to great Staves or Poles,
supported by Men; and lifting it up on high, they make it bow and incline
toward the People, as if she Saluted them. This done, they lift her up a
little higher, and incline her downwards again; and then stoop her down toward
the Right and Left, that so she may make the Sign of the Cross over all the
People that are present; and this, forsooth, is her Blessing of the People. To
receive this Benediction with the greater Reverence, all the People are down
upon their Knees, with their Faces bowed down to the Ground. All this while the
Trumpets and Drums do Wonders. And after this Ceremony is over, she is
conducted back again, in the same Processional way, to the place of her Abode,
where she continues all the Year after, except some public Calamity oblige the
Magistrates, to permit the bringing of her extraordinarily to the City in
Procession; for in that case, they believe she will not fail of redressing all
the Evils they can lie under. Every Saturday there is a vast Concourse of
People comes to this Image from the City of Bononia, and adjoining places.

To make the Way more commodious for those devout Pilgrims, the Bononians have
undertaken to make a Covered-way, which begins at the Gate of the City, and is
intended to be carried on to that of the Church, where the Image resides. Above
half of this Way was already finished, when I was there. The Whole is composed
of great Porti^^'s of Brick, very large and high Roof'd, the Roofs being all
curiously painted; and the bottom is Paved very neatly with great square
Bricks. When this Portal is once finished, it will be one of the most Curious
pieces of Workmanship that is in all Italy. Many particular Noblemen, have
signalized their Zeal for carrying on of this Work, having each of them made
several Arches of it at their own Charges, on which they have caused their Arms
to be painted. But in the mean time, though this Work be already so far advanced,
yet some are afraid they shall never see it brought to perfection; because the
remaining part is the most difficult to compass, and will cost much more than
what is already done; for this Portal is now to be carried on, up the Mountain,
till it reach the Church of our Lady on the Top of it; and to this end they
must be obliged to Dig very deep, to find firm Ground whereon to lay a solid
Foundation. A good Curate perceivin^, that the Devotion of Contributing to this
vast Expense began to grow cold, found out a very ingenuous way to excite the
Drowzy and Lethargic Charities of the People, making use of the following
Device:

He acquainted his Parishioners, That he felt himself inspired by the Virgin,
to make a Procession to the Miraculous Image with Twelve Wagons laden with
Materials, for carrying on this Structure; he desired them to show their Zeal
in contributing to so good a Work; and that for his part, he would take care to
range the Procession in Order, according to the Model the Virgin had been
pleased to give him of it in a Dream. His Parishioners very punctually executed
the Orders he had given them, lading four Wagons with Bricks, four with Lime,
and four with Sand. The Curate seeing their forwardness, sent every where for
Flowers and sweet Herbs to cover the Wagons, and to make Garlands for the Oxen
that drew them; he got their Horns and Hoofs to be gilt, and set himself at the
Head of this Convoy, with the Cross and Banner, having procured several young
Girls with Timbrels in their Hands to play upon them, and Dance about the
Wagons, as David did before the Ark. In this Equipage he passed through all the
Streets of the City. He had the Approbation of the Italians, who are much
delighted with new and well contrived Inventions, and especially wherein Women
or Girls come to play their parts. The good Success this Curate met with,
besides the general Approbation, put all his Brethren upon doing something in
Imitation of him, and, if possible, to go beyond him. So that about a Fortnight
after there was to be seen a general Procession of all the Parishes with above
200 Wagons laden with Bricks, Lime, and Sand, drawn by Oxen with gilded Horns.
I never saw a more Extravagant Procession than this was, nor a more pleasant
one. The March advanced in very good order, with Crosses, Banners, Priests, and
the Girls that Danced, toward our Lady of S. Luke, and helped to build a great
part of that Portal. As soon as it is finished, they will be able to go (at all
Seasons, and in all Weathers) from Bononia to the place of Devotion, without
wetting or dirting themselves, any more than if they were in their own Houses.

But that I may not wander too far from my Subject of Processions, I shall
further acquaint you, that the Monks do far excel the Priests in their
In^vention on these Occasions. There is scarcely an Holiday or Sunday passes
over their heads, with^out some Procession or other made in their Monasteries.
The Dominicans make a Procession of the Rosary every first Sunday of the Month,
and the second Sundays the Carmelites make one in honor of the Scapulary; the
third Sundays, the Soccolanti celebrate a Procession in honor of S. Anthony of
Padua. It Is in these Monkish Processions that all is put in practice, wherewith
Lewdness and Vanity are capable of Inspiring the most loose and effeminate
Souls; so far are they from being Religious Employments, and fitted for
Devotion, as they pretend them to be. By the small taste I shall here give you
of them, you may be able to judge of all the rest. I shall begin with a
Procession of the Rosary, which I saw at Venice, made by the Dominicans of
Castello, which was ordered in this manner:

Next after the Cross and Banner, went about Two or Three hundred Little
Children, dressed like Angels, and others like little He and She Saints, amongst
which they did not forget to place a good number of Little S. John Baptists:
These were followed by Thirty or Forty young Women, representing so many Saints
of their Sex. One of them represented S. Apollina; and to distinguish her from
the rest, she carried in her hand a Basin gilt and enameled, in which there
were Teeth; another represented S. Lucia, and carried in a Basin two Eyes; a
third, S. Agnes, who carried in her Arms a Living Lamb; and so of the rest,
every one of them being Characterized by their Marks of distinction. There were
some of them that were prepared on purpose to make People Laugh, and above all
the rest, a Saint Genevieve, who had a lighted Wax-Taper in one hand, and in
the other a Book wherein she read, or at least made show of doing so; and round
about her there were Seven or Eight young Boys dressed like Devils, all over
black as a Coal, with great long Tails, and very extravagant and ridiculous
Countenances, and great Horns on their Heads; these skipped about the Saint,
and made a Thousand Ridlculous postures, Apish Tricks, and Faces, to endeavor
to distract and divert her from reading of her Breviary, by making of her
Laugh. The Maiden who acted the Personage of this Saint, had been chosen by
them on purpose of a Melancholy Temperament, who accordingly Acted her part
very well; she always kept her Eyes fixed on her Hours, without giving the
least show of a Smile; though all the Spectators that were present could not
contain themselves from bursting out into loud Laughter, to see the Ridiculous
Postures those Little Devils put themselves into, and who were certainly most
impudent and pickel'd Youths; forasmuch as many times they made a show of
taking up her Coats. This Saint was followed by another, as fit to make the
People Laugh as the former; this was a S. Catherine of Sienna, who had by her
side a pretty Little Boy, with a Broom in one Hand, and a pair of Bellows in
the other; for they hold, that this Saint (who was a Religious of the Dominican
Order) had so great a Familiarity with the Child Jesus, that that Divine
Infant, to ease her when she was weary, frequently came and swept her Chamber,
and kindled her Fire. After these good She Saints came all those whom they call
Figures, comprehending all those Holy Women, who according to them did
represent the Blessed Virgin in the Old Testament; they were carried upon
Frames on Men's Shoulders. Amongst the rest there was Jael to be seen in her
Tent, with Sisera lying at her Feet, who was a Beautiful young Youth, dressed in
the Garb of a Warrior, and she with a Great Nail and Hammer, making show as if
she had been ready to pierce his Temples: After this Figure came a Dalila,
sitting in an Elbow Chair with a comely young Youth between her knees; she had a
pair of Scissors in her Hand, as if she had been about to cut off his Locks.
After these appears Judith: This was a fine Figure indeed; for on the Frame
where she was, there were above Twenty persons, it being the Representation of
Judiths Return to Bethuliah in Triumph with Holofernes his Head, when the
Priests and People came out to meet, and sung a Song in praise of her. This
Judith was one of the most Beautiful young Women of Italy, and very
Lasciviously dressed; round about her (upon the same Frame or Pageant) they had
placed several excellent Musicians, who sung most Ravishing Stanza's in honor
of her. The following Pageant, as if they had a mind to oppose Deformity to
Beauty, supported a good Old Woman, without any Teeth in her Head, and very
deformed; who muttered something within her Gums, and represented Hannah the
Mother of Samuel. I was astonished to see a Woman of her Age would trust her
self on a Pageant. She was followed by many more Pageants, which were in all
Eighteen in number, with their different Figures; but I shall not insist upon a
particular description of any more of them, that I may not tire you out; and
shall only tell you, that the last of them all was the Truth of all these
Figures, and the Person typified, viz. the Blessed Virgin, who was represented
by a very comely and Beautiful Maid, very Richly dressed, with a great Royal Robe;
she held a great Rosary or Beadrow in her left Hand, and in her right Hand a
Scepter. She had a rich Crown upon her Head, set thick with Pearls and Diamonds.

People of Quality in Italy take it to be a Meritorious piece of Service to
accommodate the Saints of both Sexes, with their richest Jewels, at these
Processions; which is the Reason, that very frequently on these Occasions great
Riches are exposed to view.

I observed, that when this young Woman, who represented the Blessed Virgin
past by, carried on a Pageant, no Body stirred their Hats, no Body bowed
themselves, or fell down to Worship her, or call upon her; but a little while
after, when the Wooden Image of the Virgin came to pass by them, (which is the
same that stands on the Altar of the Chapel of the Rosary of the Dominicans of
Castello) all the People fell down on their Knees, and beating their Breasts,
called her the Mother of God, and prayed to her. They made her, at certain
distances, to bestow her Salutations and Benedictions upon the People, in the
same manner I related to you, speaking of our Lady of S. Luke of Bononia, and
which were received by them with a great deal of Acknowledgment, as a very
great Favor. Having applied my Mind to find out the Reason, why the Papists do
not pay their Adorations to Living Figures, though they indeed represent the
Virgin more naturally, than a piece of Stone or Wood can do; and yet are so
exact in bestowing them on their Inanimate Statues: After having spent some
Thoughts upon it, I could not light upon any other Reason but this; That Human
Nature having a kind of Horror impressed upon it, of rendering to the Creature a
Worship that is due to GOD only, all Living Figures (and especially those of
Men and Women) do more fully discover to the Sense their weak dependent
Creatural Being, than Inanimate things do, in which they suppose there is some
secret adherent Divine Virtue. Though, to speak the Truth, this is no other than
the highest pitch of Folly, and the root and rise of all Idolatry. But I return
to our Procession.

This Image of Wood was carried in the midst of the Father Dominicans, who were
to the number of about an Hundred; for they having many Convents in Venice,
they are ready to assist one another upon the like Occasions. Nothing can be
imagined more loose and lascivious than they appeared in all their Deportment;
they had great Rosaries on their Arms, but there was none of them that troubled
himself to say them, except it were some Old Father amongst them, that was
going out of the World, and was no more fit to make any Figure in it; but all
the rest of them, strutted and marched in a most Wanton manner in their Fine
white Habits. All the way they went, they Talked and Laughed together, casting
their Eyes this way and that way on the Ladies that looked out of Windows, or
stood in the Streets, to see the Procession march along.

I do not think, Sir, it will be necessary for me, to desire you to make some
Reflection on these kind of Proceedings; because you cannot but take notice from
the Recital I give you, what all these Processions aim at. Certainly, they are
at the best no better than Entertainments for Children, or rather ridiculous
Farces to please Fools; but which at the same time expose the Christian
Religion to the reproach and derision of Atheists and Infidels. Some Persons
reported to me of a Truth, that they had overheard some Turkish Merchants, who
were Spectators at this Procession, saying to one another, Have you ever seen
the like Extravagant Fooleries? And, must not a Man be bereft of his Senses,
before he can ever be persuaded to embrace such a Religion? The Papists boast
themselves in this, as an infallible Mark of the Truth of their Religion, That
there is no one Christian Society in the World, that take more pains for the
Conversion of Infidels, and who are blessed with greater Success in that
Undertaking, than themselves. But supposing all they say to be True, yet I am
sure it may be said (with much more Truth,) That there is no Christian Church
in the World, is a greater Obstacle to the Conversion of Infidels than theirs
is, and that for One whom they Convert, they hinder a Million from being
Converted, who probably might come to the Light of the Gospel, had they not
been Eyewitnesses of the gross Folly and Idolatry of their pretended Religious
Practices: Yea, they are even found in the use of those things which make their
own Roman Catholics of Foreign Countries to Blush for them, when they are told
of it. The English Papists look upon such Relations barely as Exaggerations and
Calumnies devised by their Enemies, to blacken them. All that I can say to this
sort of People is, That if they please to go to Italy, their own Eyes will be
able to convince them of more and greater Extravagancies, than those I have
related to you in any of my LETTERS. The very same Follies were formerly in
Vogue and Practice in France; but the sight only of the Protestants that were
mingled amongst them, have made them drop a good number of them. Thus by a
special effect of the Goodness of God, the Presence only of Protestants carries
a kind of Blessing with it, which secretly reproves and corrects Vice,
confounds Error, and inspires Truth.

I will add to this Procession I saw at Venice, another I have seen at Milan:
This was celebrated by the Carmelites in Honor of the Little Scapulary,
wherewith I have entertained you in a former LETTER; and that I may not trouble
you with Repetitions of the Angels and Figures, which were of the same kind, as
those I have already given you a description of; I shall only take notice to
you of such Particulars as were singular, and different in this Procession from
those before related. One thing very remarkable in this Procession was, That
most of the young Gentle-women of the Town assisted at it in their Richest
Clothes, and adorned with all their Jewels. They marched Four in a Rank, with
great white Wax Tapers in their Hands, and all the way they went, sung the
Psalms and Hymns to the Blessed Virgin, that are used in the Roman Church. The
Women in Italy are not wont to Sing in their Churches, it being forbidden them,
except those only who are of some Religious Order. However the Carmelites made
bold to introduce this piece of Novelty, either to give themselves the
satisfaction of being Charmed with so may sweet Voices, or at least to flatter
and please the Humor of the Milan Gentlemen, who were extremely pleased with
the Device. They were ranged on both Sides of the Street, to see the young
Ladies pass by, who went with Naked Breasts, and with an Air of Wantonness,
proper to inspire their Lovers with a Devotion indeed, but very different from
what was pretended.

It was about an hour and half in the Night when the Procession began to set
forth, and the Light of the Wax-Candles and Torches, much advanced the luster
of the Beauty and Ornaments of this Choice Band. All the Way they past, the
Streets rung with nothing but, Ay, this is a fine Show indeed! O, the Lovely
Procession! See, how gracefully the Lady of N. carries her Taper! What a
Majestic and becoming Gate that Lady has? O, the charming Voice of this Sweet
one here! Others again more impertinent than the former, cast out Words to them
(as they passed by) of a double meaning, which in the midst of so holy an
Exercise, as (forsooth) they will needs have it to be, were pregnant Instances
of the Profaness and Filth of their Hearts. After the Ladies, came the Fathers
Carmelites, Two and Two together; so that this whole Procession was only
composed of Women and Monks; with a Wooden Image representing the Virgin, which
brought up the Rear, and to which all the Spectators paid their Adorations,
Kneeling down in the Streets when it passed by, to receive its Salutations and
Benedictions, which the good Fathers Carmelites, that bore the Statue, made her
bestow upon the People.

The Monks and Priests please themselves extremely in making such like
Processions in their several Churches; because it is upon these Occasions, that
they appear with a pomp and luster, that dazles the Eyes of People, and makes
the Simple imagine, they discern something in their Persons that is more than
Human; though indeed all this be at the bottom no more than a foolish Vanity, and
a pure Illusion of the Spirit of this World. We don't find them so zealous for,
and ready to assist at those Processions, that have any thing that is painful
annexed to them; and at which the Ladies cannot conveniently assist. This is
what I observed at Milan, at the time of the Rogations that are kept in
Ascension Week. It Is a Custom observed in all Countries that are of the Romish
Communion, to make Processions the Three days before Holy Thursday; that is to
say, to go with Cross and Banner from one Church to another, to say their
Prayers.

Now at Milan this Procession begins not till an Hour after Midnight, and does
not end till the next Day at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon. All the Priests
of the City, and adjoining Places, are bound to assist at them, not excepting
the Stranger Priests that are in the City. They must precisely meet at the Hour
appointed, at the Sound of the Great Bell of the Cathedral, in order to Range
themselves under the Cross and Banner. But because the great Allurement is
wanting in these kind of Processions, the Priests had rather Sleep far in the
Day, than to take the pains to assist at them: But the Cardinal Archbishop,
though he does not care for going himself, has at last found out a way to make
them go, though sore against their Wills; for by his Order all the Sbirris of the
Archbishopric being joined with those of the Town, to the number of an Hundred
and Fifty, Armed with Blunderbusses, Pistols, and Bayonets, divide themselves
into several small Parties of Five or Six together, and go the Round through
all the Streets of the City, to look for the Priests, that are absent from the
Procession; they go and search for them in their very Houses, and in case they
find any, they tie their Hands together on their Backs, and in this Infamous
manner, drag them to the Archbishops Prisons. When they are come to the Prison
Gates, then Sbirris search their Clothes and Pockets, and after having very
Abusively treated them, they take from them all they find about them, and
thrust them down into a Dungeon; where they remain, till they be Summoned to
Appear in the Archbishops Court; where at last they are acquitted, after a
small Reproof, and a Mulct of Twenty Crowns to the Archbishop. The Priests
seeing that there was no way of exempting themselves from assisting at the
Procession, found out the Secret however, of making it somewhat more sweet and
easy to them.

The Procession goes in One Morning only to Ten or Twelve Churches, where they
enter, and stay for some considerable Time, to Sing their Litanies; but
forasmuch as the Priests, by reason of their great Numbers, cannot all enter
into the same Church, the far greater part of them being obliged to stand
abroad in the Streets, about the Church; but they not liking this Waiting
abroad, found a means to take up all the adjoining Taverns and
Victualling-Houses, and there made much of themselves, whilst their Brethren
were Singing in the Church; and after they had well solac'd themselves, went
and relieved their Brethren, giving them an occasion to do as they had done;
and by this means the Office was dispatched with much more Courage and Vigor.
But the thing in it self being so base and scandalous in the Eyes of the
Seculars, and some Complaints having been made of their disorderly Carriage to
the Archbishop, he ordered some Thirty of his Sbirris should always Coast about
the Procession, and search all the Taverns for Priests, and if they find any,
to drive them thence; so that the poor Priests being so nearly watched, are
debarred of the Opportunity of Refreshing themselves with a Glass of good Wine.
However this does not hinder, but that some of them take care to have a Bottle
of Wine in their Pockets, or some other Convenience, under their Surplices; and
when they have a mind to take a Sup, they pray some of their Brethren to stand
round them, and stooping a little, that they may not be perceived by the
Sbirris, they very dexterously Refresh themselves, in spite of the Machinations
of their Enemies.

When the Procession enters into any Churches belonging to Monks, the Priests
get themselves into the Convent which joins to it, where the Monks (that any of
them are acquainted with) treat them with Meat and Drink, as much as they
desire; and here they are secured from the Search of the Sbirris, who have no
power to look for them there; and should they attempt such a thing, would find
but a very bad Welcome. As soon as the Procession is arrived to a certain
Church, specified by the Archbishop, the Twelve Ecclesiastical Praefects of the
Twelve Gates of Milan, which are all Arch-Priests, and who have the inspection
of all the Clergy divided amongst them, assemble themselves in some great
Place, and every one of them having a List of all the Priests that are under
his Jurisdiction, they Read their Names aloud one after another, being all of
them obliged to Answer to their Names, and present themselves. If any one be
found wanting, the same day a Note is sent to his House, to pay the Twenty
Crowns mulct for his Absence. The whole Ceremony being finished, the Procession
returns to the Cathedral. It is commonly Three of the Clock in the Afternoon
before the Procession enters the Cathedral; and then upon the Ringing of the
Great Bell, every one of them has leave to return home, the Sbirris having no
further power to meddle with them; but they Scuffle home with that
precipitation, as makes the Spectators Laugh heartily, to see Hungry Priests
post away to their long-look'd-for Dinners.

Now it is apparent, that these Rogation Processions are so very displeasing to
them; because, first of all, there is nothing to be Gained by them. In the
second place, there are no Ladies to assist at them. And thirdly, there are
neither Angels nor Figures, to give them the least Sport or Diversion. In the
fourth place, they are not permitted to Solemnize these Processions in their
pompous Habits, but simply with their Surplices and square Bonnets; which is
the cause why the Seculars will not so much as step out of their way to see
them pass. Fifthly, the Procession being enjoined them, under rigorous Mulcts
and Punishments, this is that which makes it go most of all against their
Stomach to assist at it; for as much pleasure as they take in imperiously
Commanding others; so much regret they have to obey and be subject to the
Command of their Superiors. And last of all, in these kind of Processions,
there are some Inconveniences to be endured; they must leave their Beds long
before Day; they must take many large Turns and wearisom Steps, and Sing long
without either Eating or Drinking; which does not very well sort with their
Humor.

The Jolly Processions of the Holy Sacrament have much more Charms for them; or
the Unveiling of some Miraculous Image; or the pompous Procession of the Holy
Nail, which is Celebrated every Summer in Milan, and to which not only the
Inhabitants of that City, but all the Nobility and Gentry of the Neighboring
Towns and Provinces do flock in Crowds, to be the Spectators of that Ambulatory
Pomp and Magnificence. In this case there is no need of the Sbirris, to oblige
the Ecclesiastics to assist at it: The Cardinal Archbishop himself. assists in
person at it, and carries the Relick of the Holy Nail. According to their
Tradition, this is one of those Nails that pierced the Adorable Body of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he was Nailed to the Cross; which
Constantine the Great having met with, in Honor to it, made it part of his
Horses Bridle. It is now exposed to View, enclosed in a very fair Crystal,
fixed upon a large Pedestal of pure Gold, of incomparable Workmanship, and
embelish'd with Precious Stones; and is certainly one of the richest and finest
Pieces that can be seen, and so heavy, that the Cardinal had much ado to carry
it. The Nail is crooked, as having been made a part of a Bridle.

The Reflection I have made upon this Nail is, that according to the History it
self, which the Papists give us of it, it appears, That the Relics, and
specially the Instruments of the Passion of our Savior, to which they at
present pretend we are obliged to render Latria, that is, Divine Worship, did
not in Ancient Times receive any such Honor, since Constantine (as they own
themselves) made that Nail a part of his Horses Bridle; which no Body will be
so impertinent as to own for a piece of Divine Honor. He did not cause it to
be set upon the Altar, as it is at present; neither did Men Kneel before it, as
the practice of the Papists is at this Day; for otherwise it would have
followed, That wherever Constantine's Horse passed, all Persons must have
prostrated themselves before it; which is very absurd, and besides is not
hinted to us in any part of the History of that Great Emperor.

And since I am insensibly fallen upon the Processions that are in Vogue at
Milan, I think my self bound to give you the description of one of the most
Famous that City can boast of, being the same which is put in practice the Eve
of Holy Friday. This Procession is celebrated by Torch-Light, and proceeds in
the Order as follows:

Immediately after the Cross and Banner, follow the Cross-Bearers; these are
Men that carry great Crosses on their Shoulders, fifteen or twenty Foot long;
they are very great and heavy in appearance, but hollow within, and indeed are
nothing but Four thin Boards glu'd together: Yet I am apt to believe, That by
reason of their great Bulk, they are a reasonable good Burden for a single
Man, and troublesome enough to those that bear them; and accordingly they tell
us, That these Cross-Bearers perform this piece of Devotion from a Spirit of
Repentance and Penance, and to imitate our Savior Jesus Christ, when he
carried his Cross up to Mount Calvary. There are no less commonly than two or
three Hundred of them, and the most of them have Ropes about their Necks, and
great Chains on their Legs, which Trail on the Ground after them, and make a
hideous Noise. Their Faces are covered with great Cowls.

These Cross-Bearers put me in mind of certain Heretics, mentioned by Baronius
in his Ecclesiastical Annals, who were called Cruciferi. It seems they took
that place of the Gospel according to the Letter, He that does not take up his
Cross and follow me, cannot be my Disciple* And accordingly they had got great
Crosses, which they bore on their Shoulders, and running like Madmen over
Mountains and through Deserts, they never quitted them, till Hunger, Thirst,
and Weariness, thrust their Souls out of their Bodies. I must confess, That
those who assist at these Processions, do not strain their Devotion to this
pitch; bnt still there is somewhat of resemblance in their Actions.

In the midst of these Cross-Bearers was carried on a Pageant, a Figure of our
Savior going up to Mount Calvary. After these Cross-Bearers followed the
Discipliners, as they call them; these also had their Faces covered with great
Cowls, and having their Backs stark Naked, with great Disciplines they had in
their Hands they cruelly beat themselves, making the Blood to run down their
Shoulders in a manner, that caused Horror to Nature. In the midst of these
Flagellators, was carried a Representation of the Scourging of our Savior,
tied to a Pillar. After these followed several Companies of Soldiers, with
their Muskets and Pikes, the Points downwards, and their Colors in like
manner. All the Drums were covered with Black Cloth, and beating upon it made
the Sound very doleful. After the Soldiers, followed a Living Figure of our
Savior, which was a young Man dressed in a large Purple Robe, with a Crown of
Thorns on his Head, and bearing a great Cross on his Shoulders: He had round
about him near a Score of Youths habited like Jews, who put themselves into an
hundred ridiculous Postures, and made Faces at him after such a manner, as
forced the Spectators to Laugh, at a Sight, which ought to have melted their
Hearts into sorrow and compunction; neither was this a strange thing amongst
them, their holy Representations being very surely exempt from some Notorious
Profanation: There was no Kneeling to this Figure, because it was a Live one.
This Figure was followed by all the Confraternities of the City or Scuole,
which are very numerous. They marched Two and Two with Wax-Tapers lighted in
their Hands; and after them followed another Figure of our Savior laid in his
Sepulcher. As soon as this came by, though it were only made of Wood, all that
stood in the Streets, fell down on their Knees and worshipped it. About this
Figure, there marched a Company of Women all in Mourning, who held their
Handkerchiefs before their Eyes, as if they had wept. Next to these Women
followed the Priests, and after them a Statue of the Blessed Virgin, having her
Heart pierced with Seven great Swords, that stuck fast in it: They commonly
call this, Our Lady of Pity; and wherever it passed, they paid to it the same
Prostrations and Adorations, as to the Statue of our Savior. A great Throng of
People, last of all, concluded the Procession.

I know well enough, that the Papists will not only excuse these kinds of
Processions, but will also exalt them far above their plain Ones; alleging.
That these are all of them Holy Representations, which renew in our Minds, the
Idea of what past long ago on Mount Calvary: But for my part, I believe, that
the Time they take to dispose and regulate these kind of Processions, and which
the Spectators spend in seeing them pass by, would be much better employed in
Reading and Meditating of the History of our Savior's Passion in private, in
order to the enkindling of holy Affections, suitable to that great Occasion.
This, I say, would in all probability be a far more efficacious Means to obtain
this Holy End, than to dress up a Man like our Savior, and turn all to a
Farce, to make the people Laugh at so tremendous a Mystery; for this indeed,
however they may otherwise disguise it, is the End of all.

Thus likewise it is, when five Weeks after Easter they represent the Ascension
of our Savior Jesus Christ into Heaven; they have a great Statue of Wood to
represent him, which they tie with great Cords about the Head, and just at
Noontide of Ascension-day, at the Ringing of all the Bells in Town, and in the
presence of all the People, certain Persons placed on the Roof of the Church,
draw it up by Cords into the Air; the Priests in the mean time Singing the
Anthem, Viri Galilaei quid admiramini aspicientes in Coelum? etc. When the
Statue is ready to enter into the Hole, which they have made on purpose in the
Roof for it, there are Men posted, who from the high Galleries of the Church
cast some twenty or thirty Pails of Water on the Spectators; so that many of
them are made wet to the Skins, which makes the rest break out into loud
Laughter. This is the devout End of this fine Ceremony, or holy Representation,
as they are pleased to term it. I have seen this particularly practiced in
Germany; where I have also seen a great number of Cross-Bearers and
Discipliners, as in Italy. And indeed, to judge by outward appearance, one
would believe these Persons to be animated by a great Spirit of Devotion and
Mortification; but having made it my business to search into the Matter, I
found that the most of them are engaged to do it for Interest sake, being paid
for Lashing of themselves, because the Ecclesiastics think it a shame, if in a
Lent. Procession they should not have a good Number of these Men of Discipline,
and Cross-Bearers. Others again do it, because their Confessors have enjoined
it them, as a piece of Penance.

I know indeed no Reason, why the Priests should pride themselves with this;
but sure I am, I have often heard them Reproach one another, that they had
none, or very few Scourgers in their Processions. It Is possible, that by a
sottish kind of Vanity they may suppose that the Glory of these kind of public
Penances reflects upon themselves, as being the Imposers of them, in which case
their Vainglory is no better founded, than the Crow's in the Fable, who prided
himself with that was none of his. They are very well pleased, to see others
Lash themselves; but not so much as one of them will be an Example of it to
others; for never in my Life did I see either Priests or Monks whip themselves
in public. These Whippers and Cross-Bearers, for the most part, to make this
piece of Penance more tolerable to them, drink themselves to a good pitch
before they set out a Processioning.

Whilst I was at Mentz in Germany, I saw a great Inconvenience and
Disappointment happen upon this Occasion; where many of these Cross-Bearers, in
the midst of the Procession, threw down their Crosses in the Streets, and very
fairly set themselves down upon them, saying, That they had born them long
enough, and that it was but fitting the Crosses should now bear them. Besides,
many of the Discipliners fell a Singing and Dancing, and Vomiting the surplus
of the Wine they had taken. Most of them were Jesuit Scholars, whom their
Regents had forced to this involuntary Mortification.

By this, Sir, you may easily discern, that the Papists will make all things
bend and stoop to their Fancy and Humor. They have almost framed to themselves
a New Gospel; and they interpret the Mysteries of it so materially and grossly,
that in the end they will probably persuade People, That to bear their Cross in
this World, is nothing else, but to go a Processioning with great Crosses of
Wood upon their Shoulders; and consequently maintain, That it is a mere Heresy
to believe with the Protestants, That true Mortification is that of an humble
and contrite Heart, and of a Soul pierced with an holy Sorrow and Repentance
for Sin. It Is scarce possible to make the Popish Jesuits and Priests, that come
into England, acknowledge, That these sort of foolish Exercises of Devotion,
are at this Day the most frequent Employments of their Roman Catholics, in
those Places where that Religion takes place. They are so ashamed to own these
their Follies, that at present none but Travelers are able to convince them
thereof, who can tell them, that they have seen with their own Eyes, what they
so impudently deny with their Mouths. It was from an effect of this Shame, that
made some Italian and German Jesuits (in my presence) Treat a Chapter of a
certain Book, as containing nothing but mere Calumnies, because it mentioned a
Devotion which is still every Year practiced in Italy and Germany at
Christmas, which is the Ceremony of Rocking the Cradle of the Child JESUS. And
yet there is nothing more true, than that this Custom is much in Vogue amongst
them, my self having seen it done several times. Their way is this: They make
on an Altar, or in some Chapel of their Churches, a Representation of the
Stable at Bethlehem, with great Figures representing the Blessed Virgin, S.
Joseph, and the Child JESUS lying in his Manger. The Italians do excel all
others in making those kind of Representations, and make them their Pastime and
Diversion all the Christmas Holydays; and the Women have leave at that time to
go from Church to Church, to see these Pageants, and under pretext of
frequenting these Devotions, many Bargains are struck, little suiting with the
pretended Holiness of the places where they are made.

It cannot be denied, but that there is something in these Representations,
that does extremely take the Eye: You have a pleasant prospect here of Rocks,
Fountains, Forests, and delightful Green Plains expressed to the Life, and
Shepherds feeding their Flocks upon them: You see People from all parts coming
through Lanes and Paths, to offer their Presents to the Child JESUS. All this
is very naturally represented, and there is always some Merry Conceit or other
joined with them, to make People Laugh. But the principal Point I aim at in
this Description is, That there are many great Ribbands, or Cords, tied to the
Cradle of the Child Jesus, which the Spectators that are there present, (and
upon their Knees) do pull toward them very devoutly, to Rock the Cradle, in
like manner as we see Nurses do their Children; and then sing what in Italian
they call their Na, Na, which are Songs commonly sung, to Rock Children asleep;
Sleep my Little Jesus, Sleep my Dear Love, Sleep; Na, Na, Na, Na. But that
which surpised me beyond measure was, to see sometime Old Men and Women rise
up from their Knees in a great Anger, when they heard too much Noise made in
the Church, and bidding them be Hushed, for that else they would awake the Child
Jesus; which notwithstanding is no more than a piece of Wood, or Past-Board
painted over: Yea, there be some so fearful of offending this way, that they
pull off their Shoes, as soon as they enter the Church, for fear of Troubling
the Child's Rest; whilst (in the mean time) their Monks and Priests, standing
behind in their Sextries, Laugh at all these their Follies.

I can say, that I never saw any of them lay hold of the Cords to Rock the
Cradle, and would be sore ashamed to be found so sottishly employed. And
probably, they would be understood in this sense, when they say, that this is
never practiced amongst them, because they do not do it themselves; but they
are very glad to see the Seculars so well employed for their Diversion. Neither
is this Child's Play altogether without Profit to them; for there be many of the
Visitants, who bring some of them fresh Eggs, and others Pullets and Capons, to
make Caudles and Broths for the Virgin; all which they lay in the Stable, near
to the Image: Others bring Cheeses and great Bottles of Wine, which they lay
^ear to the Image of S. Joseph; and others cast large ^ieces of Money into a
great Basin, which the Priests ^eld out to them, and which (as they tell them)
is to be laid out, to buy Necessaries for the Child Jesus.

I happened once to be at Mentz in Germany, in the Sext^y of the Fathers Jesuits,
with five or six of them. It was a diversion to us, to see the Presents they
made to the Manger. A poor Country-Fellow (amongst the rest) brought with great
Simplicity and Devotion a great Truss of Hay, and laid it down in the Holy
Stable, between the Ox and the Ass^* but the Jesuits perceiving it, said to one
another; Eye, Eye, this must be taken away immediately, it will prove a very
bad Precedent; at this rate they'^ bring nothing but Grass and Hay for the
Beasts. No, this must not be; they had much better bring good Gammons of Bacon
and Neats Tongues for S. Joseph. The Sexton accordingly ran to take it away;
but the Countryman briskly opposed him, saying* That he could not endure to
see the Ox and the Ass die for Hunger, whilst the rest were so well provided.
But they endeavored to appease him, by telling him, That the Child Jesus would
take care to sustain them by his Divine virtue, rather than that should happen.
Thus, for a miserable and base Interest, they most outragiously Abuse the poor,
and keep them in Ignorance, and afterward to advance their Impiety to the
highest degree, they make a Virtue of it, giving it the Name of Simplicity and
Innocence. It Is before these sort of Mangers, that (according as I have told
you in a former LETTER) they set Little Children to Preach.

I have made bold upon this Occasion to make (...) short Digression, which I
hope will not prove unpleasing to you. I return now again to our Pr^cessions,
or rather I shall conclude this LETTER* in like manner, as I have begun it, by
giving you a Relation of another Unveiling of an Image of the Virgin I have
seen at Milan, and which (as I was told) was only done once in 50 years. All
the Corporations of the City, and of the Neighboring places, made their Visits
to it Processionally, with Wax-Tapers, Purses, Presents, and Ceremonies, not
much unlike those I have already related to you* The only thing singular in
this Uncovering was, That all the while the Image was Unveiled, there was a
great Concourse from all parts of Possessed persons, the Priests being very
busy in all Corners of the Church, to Exorcise them. The Papists maintain,
That their Priests in their Ordination receive the Power of Casting out Devils,
and that the Effect shows they are successful in it. For my part, I have seen
very many of these Possessed Persons, and I have diligently applied my self, to
search into and examine the Matter; but could never discover any able to
persuade me, that those Effects or Operations proceed rather from the Devil,
than from a strong Imagination or some violent Distemper. Besides, I seldom met
with any, but Women that were Possessed; and I would gladly be informed, why
the Devil should rather attack them than Men. Indeed, the true Reason of this
is, That in Italy the Women are more than ordinary subject to fall into
Phrensies and strange Imaginations. Their Parents, or their Husbands, keep them
always shut up in their Chambers or Garrets, without permitting them to go
abroad, except it be sometime to Church: And being naturally of an Hot and
Amarous Temper, a flattering and pleasing Object they may by chance have espied
from their Windows, or at Mass, does so far transport them, that they are
wholly possessed with it, and not with the Devil, as is supposed. Their Thoughts
are strongly fixed on it Day and Night, and the force of their Imagination,
making a wonderful impression upon their Vital Spirits, does extremely agitate
and confound them; and from thence proceed all that disorder, and those
Convulsions that appear in their Bodies.

The Church I speak of was full of this sort of Possessed persons. Amongst the
rest I perceived in one of the Chapels, a very Beautiful young Gentlewoman,
who continually beat her Breast with her hand, and cried out, as if she had
felt something that would have choked her. She had many Priests about her,
Reading of Exorcisms; but amongst the rest there was a very Handsome Priest, who
did Wonders, and indeed outdid them all. The Possessed Party seemed to have no
consideration for any of the rest, but for him only, and whenever he touched
her, the Devil to appearance being overcome by the force of his Exorcisms, left
off to Torment her. I was astonished to see the Liberty this young Gentleman
took with his Possessed; for sometimes he would Embrace her Body, he handled
her Hands and Arms, and almost continually gave her little Flaps on the Cheek.
They tell us, That the Devil being a proud and haughty Spirit, cannot endure to
be humbled; which is the Reason of their Boxing and Affronting the Possessed.
The other Priests that were about her, sometimes stretched forth their Hands to
Box her, (as he did) but she showed her self Enraged against them, and would
not suffer them to touch her; so that they were fain to content themselves with
abusing the Devil in Words, whilst the young Priest alone was admitted to Flap
her on the Cheek. This Proceeding at last stirred up some Jealousy amongst
themselves; and one of the Old Priests said to this young Blade, in a smart way
of Raillery, Dom Pietro, I see well, that this Devil likes none so well as your
self; and if I been't much mistaken, you would well enough agree together.

But whatever the Priests of Rome may pretend, certain it is, That the Absolute
Power they claim over the Devils, is not so evidently verified in them, as they
would make the People believe it is. I have seen Possessed Persons, and
Exorcisms pronounced over them in quantity; but I never saw any of them freed
of their Possession by this means. I know it is commonly said, There are many
Beggars who counterfeit themselves Possessed, that by this means they may
procure a good Maintenance all their Life after; and as for these indeed, I
question not but the Priests have power to deliver them of their Counterfeit
Possessions. This Cheat of the Beggars procures vast Credit to their Mysterious
Images, which are but once Unveiled in 50 Years time. But I Will leave these
Possessed, to come to a Conclusion of what I have said concerning Popis^
Processions, which they define, as I hinted at the beginning of this LETTER, a
Marching, or Walking of the People from one Church to another, under the
Conduct of their Priests, with the Cross and Banner, there to Invoke the
Extraordinary Assistance of God. But indeed and in truth, according to the
account now given you of them* does it not appear to you, Sir, That they may
with much more right be defined, Pompous and Magnificent Walks, invented on
purpose to enhance the Credit and Repute of the Monks and Priests, and to abuse
and gull the People* for their own Advantage?

We have not the least Footsteps of these kind of Processions in the Primitive
Centuries of the Church, as being only an Invention of the Popes Brain; and if
I been't much mistaken, S. Gregory the Great was the first that instituted them
at a time of the Plague. In his time they were celebrated with abundance of
Modesty; but the Luxury and Ambition of the Clergy have in process of time so
much amplified them, that it is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, they serve for
no other use at present, but to give them the Advantage, and make them triumph
over the Seculars. Besides, they serve for public Marks of Honor, whereby
they are distinguished amongst themselves. There is nothing they are more
jealous of, than their precedence in Processions, the Priests and Monks often
quarrel with one another on this occasion; and sometimes their Contests break
out into great Disorders, as it happened not long since at Dijon, a Parliament
City in France, where the Monks of S. Bennet having undertaken to go a
Processioning, with great Canes in their Hands, as an Ensign of their Authority
over the rest of the Clergy; the Canons of the Holy Chapel rose up against
them, which occasioned a furious Skirmish between them, with their Crosses and
Banners.

The Order observed in all Processions, is, That the Meanest march first, and
those of the highest Rank and Quality last of all; so that the Bishop is always
the last Man that shuts up the Procession. The Jesuits being of so late
standing in the Church of Rome, and not having been able to obtain the
Precedence they affected of their Senior Orders, at Processions, have wholly
renounced them, and never assist at them. Only at Venice, the Senate obliges
them to go in Procession with the rest; and to avoid mingling themselves among
the Priests or Monks, they rather choose to march amongst Tradesmen. The
Cobblers, Shoemakers, and Tailors, march first of all, and after them come the
Jesuits, who are followed by the other Trades.

I shall here conclude this LETTER, and without detaining you with an ample
Moral Application of all this, shall only tell you, That forasmuch as it is so
apparent and visible, that these kinds of Processions in the Church of Rome,
are only made to serve the Ends of Ambition and Temporal Interest of the
Clergy; that the best Processions we can make, are not to march from one Church
to another; but to advance from one Virtue to another, until we arrive at the
Holy Mount of God, viz. a Blessed Eternity. Optima Processio sit procedere de
virtute in virtutem, usque ad Montem Domini. I remain, Sir,

Yours.

The Eighth LETTER, Of the Corruption of the Italian Priests and Monks in their
Devotion and Morals, etc.
SIR,
I Have already acquainted you in my Last, that my Abode for two years together
in the City of Bononia, at the Abbey of S. Michael in the Wood, afforded me a
very favorable Opportunity of penetrating into the Lives and Manners of
Monasticks; and I might have staid there much longer, if the Persuasions of a
Noble Venetian had not prevailed with me, to go with him to Venice. It seems,
as if a Divine Providence had conducted me thither, to put me in a station
where I might take a nearer View of the Conduct and Conversation of other
Ecclesiastics, commonly called Secular Priests; not so much, because I was
ignorant before of their way of Life, having been always brought up amongst
them, and one of them; but because I found a considerable deal of difference
between the Secular Clergy of Italy, and those of France, amongst whom I had my
Education. The former of these live without any Restraint, and without being
much observed or taken notice of by their own Countrymen, whom they have
corrupted as well in their Practice, as in their Principles, as I shall more
particularly make out to you in the Sequel hereof; whereas the latter, (that is
to say, the Ecclesiastics of France) have studied the Art of Dissimulation,
and are more upon their Guard, to avoid their being exposed to the Censure of
Protestants, whom they regard as so many Spies upon them.

I was no sooner arrived at Venice, but I had the good luck to procure my self
the Protection of some of the most considerable Persons in that Republic; so
that in less than a Months time I was provided of three Small Benefices, in
Three different Churches, which gave me an occasion of Conversing with a vast
number of Clergymen of all Nations, who Resorts to this City of Liberty, there
to enjoy the Pleasures of this Life. After I had staid Three years here, I
undertook another Journey to Rome, having been drawn thither by the Promises of
a Cardinal, who died Eight Days after my Arrival there. This unlooked for
Accident having defeated the Hopes I had formed of making a longer stay in that
City, I departed thence some Months after: Having Visited before the City of
Naples, I took my Journey toward Milan, without any design of making any stay
there; but the persuasion of some Noblemen of that Country made me change my
Resolution. The Abbot of Great S. Victor, amongst others, made me very
considerable Offers, to oblige me to stay in his Abbey, and to take upon me the
Care of Instructing his Religious, according as he knew I had done in the Abbey
of S. Michael, in Bononia, that was of the same Order as his; which at length
induced me to yield to his Desire. By this means I found my self anew engaged
with Monks.

I have here on this Occasion, Sir, hinted to you several parts of Italy, where
I have made my Abode for some time, and the Employments I have had there; but
without the least intent of Boasting my self on that account, but only to
inform you, that what I take upon me to speak here concerning the Priests and
Monks, is from a thorough Knowledge and Experience, as having had abundant
Opportunities to make those Observations, which many (who have handled the same
Subject,) have been wholly deprived of. I have had several other Employments,
both in Italy and Germany, which I might with more Reason boast of, if I was so
minded; but they having no reference to the Subject in hand, I pass them by in
Silence. Though indeed it be not altogether out of the way, for one in my
Circumstances, to make mention of the Employments he has had beyond the Seas,
and the Honorable way of Subsistence he has been in, if it were only to
confute the Calumnies the Papists are wont to cast upon the Priests of their
Religion, who leave their Communion, to satisfy their Consciences by joining
themselves to that of the Reformed Churches: Their common Cry is, That such are
either mere Vagabonds, or Persons that had nothing to live on at home in their
own Country, and who were weary of the condition they were in, for want of some
good Benefice wherewith plentifully to maintain themselves; or else, that it is
nothing but a Spirit of Libertinism, that prompts them to make this Change.
This last Aspersion being the most odious and reflecting of all, made me very
careful (when I was in Italy) to obviate it, by taking Attestations of my Good
Behavior and Manners from all the places where I had made any stay, that I
might have them in a readiness, to clear my self from any such Reproach, in
case any should be found Malicious enough to rank me in that Number; so that
indeed (by the Grace and Goodness of God) I may now speak boldly and openly,
without the least danger or apprehension from the most envenomed Tongues. Yet
for all this, I must profess, that the Subject of this Last LETTER is very
averse to my Natural Humor and Inclination, viz. to expose the Vices and
Defects of others: But yet, when I consider on the other hand, that Jesus
Christ often declaimed very severely against the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and
Pharisees of his Time, and this, to inform the People, and deter them from
following their ways; I conclude, it cannot be unlawful (upon good ground and
occasions) to publish the Sins of those, who are not only the main Corrupters
of the Morality, but also of the Principles and Doctrins of the Gospel, to the
end, we may oblige others, to be warned and take heed of them, as of Wolves in
Sheeps clothing; Cavete a fermento Pharisaeorum; Tahe heed of the Leaven of
the Pharisees. By this means also it will appear, what use is made of all those
vast Sums of Money, which accrue to the Priests of the Church of Rome, by those
Subtle Inventions and Religious Artifices wherewith I have entertained you in
my Foregoing LETTERS: For it is evident, that Gold and Silver can serve only
for the use of Men; and by the use they make of it, we may easily judge of the
End they propounded to themselves, in searching for the Means to obtain it.

Having therefore more especially applied my self (during my Abode in Italy) to
find out the Ways the Priests and Monks had, to dispose of and spend their vast
Revenues, I found, that it was only to satisfy and glut their Domineering
Appetites, Lusts, and Passions. Some of them are such Idolaters of Mammon, that
the more they heap up, the less they think themselves possessed of; and thus dye
(like little Croesus's, or rather like bad Rich Men) in the midst of their
Riches, from which nothing but Death could separate them. It Is the common Cry
of the Poor in that Country, That nothing can be more inexorable, more
insensible, or more pityless than the Clergy. It Is mere Labor lost, to address
ones self to them for an Alms; for at the best one meets with a Denial, and
very often with Scornful and Taunting Words: So that their Covetousness is like
an unsatiable Gulf, which swallows all, and gives up nothing again. I have
known several Priests, who had their Coffers full of Gold, and notwithstanding
grutch'd themselves a piece of dry Bread; and some of these were so dextrous,
as to make their sordid Avarice, pass for a Love of Abstinence and
Mortification; but in the mean time were so far from bestowing the least Alms
on the Poor, that they could not endure that any one should ask them a Charity;
whence it was obvious to make this discovery, That so fair a Virtue as
Abstinence is, could not be the Inmate of such sordidly Covetous Breasts: For
according to that Saying, Sublevamen Pauperis sit Abstinentia Jejunantis; The
Abstinence of him that Fasts, ought to be a Relief for the Poor.

Others bestow their Money in Building Palaces for themselves; I say, Palaces;
for though indeed it would much better become their Profession, to provide for
themselves Houses, in which some Marks of that Christian Humility might be
discerned, which is so indispensable a Qualification of Ministers of the Altar;
yet so far are they from this Temper, that they spare no Cost to erect for
themselves most stately and sumptuous Fabrics, beyond the Magnificence of the
Palaces of the greatest Princes. For proof of what I here allege, we need only
cast an Eye upon all the Monasteries of Italy; and those who have Traveled
those Countries know, That the fairest Palace which is found near the Church,
is always the Curates House. Others consume their Revenues in Making much of
Themselves, and contriving Ways for their Pleasure and Diversion: For seeing
they have no Families to provide for, It would be a Profanation, say they, of
the Gifts of God, (so they call the immense Riches they have got by their
Masses) in case they should not make use of them, to make much of themselves in
this World, who do so much good to the Souls of Purgatory in the other. For
this Reason it is we see their Tables so deliciously and profusely covered, and
that they Entertain one another by Turns with such Exquisitness, Splendour, and
Magnificence; insomuch that their inclination this way has authorized that
Proverbial Expression, so common in Italy, by which they call any extraordinary
Dainty; Boccone di Preti o di Cardinali; A Bit for a Priest or Cardinal. What I
have here said concerning those Objects that please the Pallat, is to be
understood proportionably concerning all other things that do any way
contribute to a delicious and luxurious Life, which they take care to procure
for themselves with a superfluous profuseness, altogether inexcusable. Should
any many be tempted with a desire to see the very utmost height of Vanity, of
Wantonness, and of Effeminacy, he needs only to take a View of the Court of
Rome; which, as it is composed only of Priests and Monks; so its boasts it
self, of surpassing in Gallantry, Pomp, and Magnificence, those of the greatest
and most potent Monarchs of the Earth.

Here you will find Bishops that have two or three Bishoprics, and Abbots that
have five or six Abbeys apiece. It Is a kind of disgrace for an Ecclesiastic,
to have no more than one Benefice; for indeed without a great Revenue, one can
make no Figure in this Court of Priests. Yea, the Vanity of this Court is
mounted to that Excess, that the Members of it are so far from Blushing at it,
that they make it the principal Matter of their glory and boasting. A Cardinal
or a Bishop does not make an Hunting Match, does not Feast his Consorts, but
the whole World forsooth must Ring of it. All the Gazets we have from Rome are
stuffed full of such Vanities as these, That my Lord the Cardinal N. has given a
Visit to one of his Colleagues; That another was at the Opera; or caused a Rich
Livery to be made for his Retinue, and appeared in public with a Train of so
many Coaches. I have often made it my diversion, whilst I was at Rome, to see the
Cardinals (on Sunday Mornings) Ride to the Vatican, when the Pope held Chapel
there. They are tricked up like so many Scarlet Puppets in their Coaches, and
all their Creatures are about them, with an Air that proclaims them extremely
Eff^minate and Wanton. After all* I confess, a Man must needs have a very
strong Faith to believe, that this sort of People are no sooner met together in
a Chamber, but the Holy Ghost is instantly in the midst of them, to give Law to
the Consciences of all Men. If to meet together with such Excess of Ambition
and Vanity, be to Meet in the Name of the Lord, it is certain our Savior Jesus
Christ, who appeared in so mean and humble a condition, did not come into the
World in the same Name. Every Cardinal has his Nephew or Nearest Kinsman with
him, who holds his Scarlet-Hat in the Boot of the Coach; which is a signal
Honor to him, and a Mark of his being the most beloved Creature of the
Cardinal.

It Is this Nepotism, that made such a Noise in the Time of the late Pope
Innocent the XI th, and which he (who, to give him his due, was a Man severe
enough in his Morals) resolved wholly to extirpate, having begun the
Reformation in his own House; but we see now, that things are quietly and
without Noise returned to their old Channel. All the Endeavors of Pope
Innocent the XI th were only like the sprinkling of a little cold Water upon
Red-hot Iron, which serves only to make it more fiery and glowing: And, for my
part, I must own, That I cannot conceive how a Church (where Flesh and Blood
ride so glouriously Triumphant, and prevail to that excessive Degree) can ever
have the Face to boast, That the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against Her.
This! Nepotism, or Exaltation of their Nephews, does not only take place at the
Court of Rome, but (whether from Imitation, or by Natural inclination of
promoting those who are nearly related to us) we find it obtain amongst all the
rest of the Clergy, who are not perfect Slaves to Avarice, or the love of
Pleasure. They think of nothing else, but how they may enrich those of their
Family, whose Humor pleases them best. I confess indeed, that this is the most
commendable and most innocent way of employing their Treasure, as carrying some
appearance of Charity in it; though (to speak Truth) we can never make a
Christian Virtue of it, as being common to us with the Heathens themselves: The
Turks do good to those of their Kindred and Friends, as well as the Priests of
the Church of Rome, and probably also do it during their Lives, which these
latter are very seldom found guilty of, because they commonly do not dispose of
their Riches to those of their Family, till they see Death ready to snatch them
from them. This Nepotism therefore is a vast Gulf, which swallows a great part
of the Ecclesiastical Revenue; but there is another Abyss that devours
incomparably much more, and in a way that is not only a Scandal and Reproach to
their Profession, but even to Nature it self; and, is in a word* the abominable
Commerce they drive with both Sexes.

All the World knows that it is not lawful for the Priests and Monks of the
Church of Rome to Marry, as having protested against Marriage at their
Ordination, and in their several Professions and Orders, as against a thing (to
use their own terms) which defiles and pollutes a Man, and makes him incapable
of duly and purely serving at the Altar. It Is upon this Principle they refuse
to Marry, and the Priest that can be convict of violating this Law, must be
burnt alive. But for all this their Huffing, they perceive well enough, that
all this while they reckon without their Host, and this great Undertaking of
theirs proves quite another thing in effect, than it was in Speculation. Take
but a little leisure to Read their Lives, and you will find, they have no sooner
made their Vow of Chastity; but they study and invent (with all the Application
imaginable) how to break it. They have voluntarily debarred themselves from
honest and lawful Wedlock, and must now betake themselves to Fornication,
Adultery, Incest, and Sacrilege, to satisfy their Concupiscence, and glut
their infamous Lusts.

Now to do this, there must be Money, because the Debauched Sex is doubly
concerned for having to do with them, and therefore do not afford them so good
Quarters as they do to others; and their Wenches have the Boldness to tell
them, That since it is a greater Sin to have to do with them, than with others,
it is but just they should pay accordingly. The Clergy therefore finding that
the World carries it somewhat Uncivil toward them in this regard, and groaning
to see themselves in a condition to stand in need of them, resolve on their
side (as far as possible) to be even with them; and accordingly they will not
Say a Mass, or Prayer, or go a step upon any score whatsoever, without being
well paid for it. If they be sent for to Baptize an Infant, to Exhort a Sick
Body, or to Bury a Corpse, they first demand what they will give them for their
pains, and budge not till the Bargain be made. They solicit for Money toward
their Confraternities, their Festivals, Processions, Benedictions, and
Devotions for the Souls in Purgatory, with incredible Importunity and
earnestness, as being a prompt and effectual Expedient, to fill their Purses.
There is nothing disquiets them more, than the persuasion which possesses the
Sex they Love, That to have to do with Men consecrated to God, (as they are) is
a kind of Sacrilege, and the worst of all Crimes. This indeed is a
Consequence, which very plainly follows from their Principles; but which they
notwithstanding endeavor to Veil as much as ever they can. You seldom hear
them Preaching against Wanntoness, Incontinence, Adultery, etc. and, if at any
time they do, it is without being Invective, and so as to diminish the Horror
any one might have conceived of these Crimes. Yea, some of them are arrived to
that degree of Impudence, to publish, That these are the most Innocent of all
other Vices, and that God considering, that they are born and grown up with us,
and have their rise from the Blood and Body that surrounds us, is very ready to
forgive and pardon them. They say, That such Sins as these are Instances of
Human frailty; and provided a person be only convinced of his Weakness therein,
Confess them, and be humbled for them, it is enough; and one Ave Mary, or the
Sign of the Cross, with a sprinkling of Holy Water, is all the Penance that is
ordinarily enjoined for such Peccadillo's as these.

They are wont also, to treat Seculars very smoothly in this Point, at their
Confessions, and in particular the Female Sex; Lest (say they) by treating them
too harshly, they might be discouraged another time to Confess them with all
their Circumstances. But the true Reason is, that in so doing they may oblige
the Seculars, to be as favorable toward them in their Censures on the like
occa^ion, and that they may not be too strictly observed themselves, when they
fall into the same Crimes. Indeed Auricular and Secret Confession, is the most
commodious way the Priests have to lodge their Game; it is there they put Women
to the Question, and by this means accustoming them (by little and little) from
their Youth up, to speak with Confidence of their secret Sins, they make them
at length lose that Natural Shamefacedness, which otherwise they would be
sensible of, in making the least mention of such Filthiness. Being therefore by
this means informed of their Inclinations and Weak-side, if they find them to
be of an Amorous Complexion, it is an easy thing for them to speak for
themselves, and to insinuate their own Passion. It is notoriously evident, that
commonly none but Women go to Confession; for as for Men, they seldom use it
more than once a Year, and that toward Easter. The Reason whereof having been
once asked in my presence, a Person of a very good Sense, returned this Answer,
That the Reason why none but Women were seen to Confess, was, because Men were
Confessors; but, that if Women were once possessed of the Chair of Confession, we
should soon find the contrary, and that none but Men would appear before them.
The Reason is, because Women for the most part take pleasure in their
Confessing, being well assured, that their Confessors will put such Questions
to them, as cannot much displease them; and knowing, that how openly soever
they may declare their Sins, the Seal of Confession will always put them out of
danger of running any Risque thereby: Yea, there are not wanting a vast Number
of those, who relying upon the Secrecy of this Tribunal, and encouraged by the
Exhortations of their Priests, of hiding nothing from them, no not so much as
their impure Thoughts, make no difficulty ingenuously to declare, That they
Love them; that they can neither by Day nor Night rid their Spirit from running
out after them; and their Amorous Temptations are so violent, that except God
be pleased to Restrain them, or they take some Compassion on them, it will make
them infallibly go Mad and Distracted.

The Men (especially in Italy) go but seldom to Confession, because they do not
love to be Questioned or Examined about their Amors. A Capuchin Friar (who was
very Ugly, and the very picture of a Satyr, with his great Beard) told me once
Smiling, That his Confession-Seat was a Scarecrow to Women; but that, to make
amends for that, he was the great Confessor of Jealous Lovers. His meaning was,
That Women did not care to Confess to him, because he was Ugly; but that on the
other hand, Men did choose to Confess to him the rather, because he was so, as
judging him incapable of Injuring them by becoming their Rival. A Confessor,
who has a design to make a bad use of his Minsterial Function, may easily find
means, by the Questions he can put, and to which his Penitent is obliged to
Answer, to discover the person he speaks of, and accordingly may afterward
find means of attempting her.

A young Noble Venetian having been upon a time too indiscreetly Questioned by
a Monk in his Confession, where his Mistress dwelt, Swore, he would never
Confess upon that point any more, except it were at the point of Death, or at
least when he should be weary of his Misses, and no more apprehend, to have a
Competitor in his Love. I have been told by several Gentlewomen, That
Confessors have come to Visit them in their Houses, being led thither only by
the Light they have got from the Confession of their Penitents. This Confession
is one of the New Sacraments of the Church of Rome, and we see to what goodly
Ends it is made use of, and the Interest the Priests and Monks have to preserve
it. This is that which makes them so boldly to protest against Marriage, which
they care so little for; the Corruption of Man's Nature being so great, that it
represents Sin more sweet and pleasant to him, than that which is honest and
lawful.

I remember a Saying of a Regular Abbot of a Monastery in Italy, who talking
with me about Women, said, Melius est habere nullam quam aliquam; That it was
better to have none than any; And having demanded of him what he meant by those
Words; Because (said he) when a person is not tied to one, he may make use of
many. This you will say was a fine piece of Morality; and, to give this Prelate
his due, his Practice was very Conformable to his Doctrine. He Entertained above
a Score of Women with the Revenues of his Abbey; he had many Country-Houses,
which he turned into as many Brothel-Houses for himself and his Friends* where
he splendidly Entertained them; and the excessive Expenses he was at in these
places of Pleasure, procured him the Surname of Liberal. But he was not of the
same Humor toward his poor Farmers, who labored hard to make the best of his
Incoms, and to Till his Ground; for he was to them an insatiable Exactor and
Oppressor, insomuch as they could scarcely get out of him some part of the
Money, which was of Right due to them. These poor Men finding themselves so ill
Treated by him, resolved on a time to have their full Revenge of him, and to
play their Master such a Malicious Trick, as he might have Reason to remember
ever after. They knew very well the Archbishop was a sworn Enemy to Monks and
Abbots, and therefore questioned not, but They would find him in a disposition
of favoring their Enterprise. They went therefore and complained to him, of a
Scandalous Life their Abbot led, who was at that time Three Leagues distant
from Bononia, at one of his Country-Houses, with Three young Women, who lay in
the same Bed with him every Night. The Archbishop having taken their
Information, lost no time, but the same Evening, sent away all his Marshalsey,
composed of the Barigel or Provost, and Threescore Sbirries or Sergeants well
Armed, with Orders to seize the Abbot, and the Women that were with him. They
arrived at the Abbots Country House but a moment after he was gone to Bed. The
Farmers, who had the Word, and the Keys of all the Doors, made the Provost,
with his Sbirries, enter to rights into the Prelates Chamber; who (you may
easily imagine) was extremely surpised with this unwelcom and unlooked for
Visit. He desired to compound with the Provost, and the Sbirries, as he had
often done before; and to persuade them the better, opened to them a Purse full
of Gold; but their Orders were too express to be so eluded, and the Farmers,
who out of pure Revenge had solicited the Seizing of their Landlord, were in
presence, and would not have failed to give in their full Information
concerning all that had passed, to the Archbishop: So the Barigel and Sbirries
(though People otherwise of base and covetous Minds) upon this occasion showed a
forced Resolution, not to be corrupted by the Prelates Gold. Accordingly they
took the Abbot stark Naked, as he was, without suffering him to put any thing
upon him, besides a Morning-Gown; and in this Equipage having Mounted him with
his Three Concubines, upon an old Cart they found in a back-Yard of the House,
they tied them all together Back to Back, and thus led them in Triumph in the
most ignominious and reproachful manner into the City of Bononia, before the
Archbishop. It was about Midnight when they arrived, and the thick Darkness of
the Night favored the poor Abbot very much, sparing him a great deal of
Confusion, he would otherwise have been put to. The Archbishop seeing him in
this condition fell a Laughing, and by way of Raillery told him, That since it
was not lawful for him to take any Cognizance of the Affairs of Monks, he was
willing so far to honor them, as to make themselves the Judges of their
Brethren; and so ordered him with his Wenches, at that very instant, to be
carried in the same posture to S. Michael in the Wood, a Monastery of the same
Order, about a Canon-Shot distance from the City. It was about One of the Clock
in the Morning when all this goodly Train arrived there. The Sbirries Knocked
with that violence at the great Gates of the Monastery, and made such a
Hollowing and Shouting, that the Abbot himself was fain to Rise, and to go
(accompanied by all his Monks) to the great Gate, where he met with a Sight he
had little dreamt of. He at first would not acknowledge the Old Abbot for his
Brother, upon pretext forsooth he was in his Nightgown, without the Habit of
his Order, and refused to receive him into the Monastery: But the Sbirries told
him, That if he was so resolved, they had no more to do, but to carry him back
again to the Archbishop, who would not fail to send for his Habit, and to send
him back the next day at High Noon in his Prelates Habit, and accompanied with
his Doxies, as now he was. The Abbot perceiving, that nothing could be gained
this way, but a double Reproach and Confusion, commanded his Friars, to go and
unloose him, and so admitted him into the Monastery, and let the Women go. The
Penance imposed upon this Abbot, for the Affront and Scandal he had given, was
this; To abide 15 Days in the Monastery without stirring abroad: Which was the
more easy for him to submit to, because the Noise of this gallant Story being
spread through the whole City, he could not well any sooner (without great
Shame and Confusion) have appeared in the Streets. The General, who might
easily have Deposed him from his Charge of Abbot, was of Opinion, That for so
light a Fault as this, it was not worth the pains to proceed to so rigid a
Censure; and thus by a Spirit of Charity, which will not permit us to do that
to another, which we would not have others do to us, especially when we find
our selves in the same Circumstances, contented himself to make him exchange
his Abbey for some time, and Entertained him at his own Monastery of Mount
Olivet.

I have given you a true and faithful Relation of this History, as having been
an Eyewitness of part of it my self, because it happened during the time that I
was in the Monastery of S. Michael in the Wood. This Accident gave me the
occasion of making a very pleasant Discovery; for upon the Sbirries entering
into the Monastery, a young Religious being extremely affrighted, and
apprehending lest they might make a narrow search into his Chambers, where for
Three Weeks time he had kept a young Lass, came directly to me; and without
much considering to whom he addressed himself, desired me, for the Love of God,
to hide his Mistress in one of the most private Chambers of my Apartment, until
the Storm were over. But notwithstanding the extreme Earnestness wherewith he
solicited my Consent, I did not think it fit to expose my own Credit, to save
his; and knowing withal how dangerous it is, to give a downright Refusal to an
Italian, and more especially to a Monk; I in the mildest way I could, wished
him to Address himself to the Apothecary of the Abbey, who was a young Man of
his own Country, and who was not so scrupulous in that point, as I was: The
Religious following my Counsel, found the Apothecary very ready to comply with
his desire, and without making any difficulty, took her from him, and shut her
up in one of the Large Presses of his Shop; where she continued the rest of
that Night, and the Day following, in deadly Fears. The young Monk came to me
the next Morning, to Excuse himself, and (as it is likely) being troubled, that
he had given me an occasion, (by the discovery he had made to me) to believe,
That the rest of his Brethren were better than he; he took the freedom to
discover to me several things, which till then I was ignorant of, though I had
now already continued six Months amongst them: He told me, That most of his
Brethren had their Wenches, whom they kept in their Chambers; and that they got
them in from abroad from time to time, where they kept them, some a Week,
others a Fortnight, or a Month, according to the Bargain they had made with
them, and the Ability of their Purse: The Abbot himself was not ignorant of it;
but prevalent Custom had reduced things to that pass amongst them, that he was
fain to wink at all, and content himself with the Presents they made him from
time to time for so doing: The most convenient time they had to get their
Wenches into the Abbey, was about the beginning of the Night; who being come to
a place (according to Appointment) and precisely at such an Hour; the Monks,
who had sent for them, brought them Cowls* and Frocks, and so dressed them in
their own Habit; which done, these good Friars entered all without distinction
into the Monastery, in greater Number than they were gone out.

I had indeed formerly often been surpised, to see several new Figures of
Monks entering into the Dormitories, which I had never seen before; and upon my
Enquiry, they had always made me believe, that they were some Stranger-Monks,
that were come to Lodge with them. Most of the Religious have double Rooms,
whereby they have a great Convenience of Entertaining their Women unperceived.
The Abbots make their Profit of it; for a Religious cannot have one of these
Double-Chambers, without paying about an Hundred Crowns for it; and they are
very well acquainted what it is designed for; but provided their Religious only
take care, to manage the Matter so, as that it may not come to the knowledge of
Seculars, they do not trouble themselves about it; neither does this hinder
them from being advanced to Religious Charges and Employments, as much as if
they were the Holiest persons of the World.

I was acquainted at Venice with a Regular Canon of the Abbey of S. Savior, who
was a young Man of considerable Learning, and who publicly taught Philosophy.
This Man entertained the most infamous Whore that was in the whole City, and
who commonly served for a Model to the Lim^^rs of the Academy. It was above a
Year that he had had commerce with her, and his Abbot gave him leave (every
Evening) during Shrovetide, to dress himself in Masquerade, and to go to her
Lodging, and lead her thence to the Opera or Comedy; after which, he either
brought her along with him to his Chamber in the Monastery, or else past the
rest of the Night with her at her own Lodging. Now, as long as the Matter was
carried secretly, and without making any Noise abroad, the Abbot^ let the young
Monk take his swing, without giving him the least Check or Reproof for it; and
having a particular Kindness for him, he had already disposed all things in
order to his being chosen Abbot; when (by Ill-luck for this young Friar) a
great number of Artizans, who lived in the same Street with this Courtizan, and
who probably were displeased with his frequent Visits to her, came and made
their Complaints to the Monastery. The Abbot having heard what they had to say,
endeavored what he could to sweeten them, and to excuse the Monk; but all this
did but incense them the more; and the next Sunday they gathered together in
the Church, near to the Chapel where this young Religious was wont to say
Mass, being resolved publicly to Affront him, and to stop him from going up to
the Altar; but the Abbot having notice of it, sent them a piece of Money, to
make them desist from prosecuting their Design; whereupon they retired without
more ado: But the Abbot perceiving the thing had taken Wind, and was become the
public Talk of the City, thought it now high time to declare himself against
the Monk; and notwithstanding he had never before given him the least Reproof
for this high Misdemeanour, he then wrote a Letter to the Father General of the
Order, to deprive him of his Salary; and about a Fortnight after there came an
Order, by which he was put out of his place of Philosophy Lecturer, and sent
away to a small Monastery in the Country. His Crime, as far as I could search
into the matter, was not for having Entertained an infamous Familiarity with a
Common Prostitute, for this his Superior had been well acquainted with a year
ago; but his Fault was, That he had been so unhappy, not to use that Caution,
as to prevent its coming to public Knowledge.

Italy, without contradiction, is accounted by all for a very Corrupt and
Debauched Country; and it is as sure, that the Priests and Monks (a sort of
People, who have Vowed Eternal Chastity) are the main occasion of her being
branded with this just Reproach. The immense Treasures they possess, are a
Scandal and Stumbling-Stone unto them, and Loose-Women, who are not ignorant of
this, account themselves happy to be taken into their Favor; it being a
Proverb in Italy, That the Wench of a Priest, or Monk, can never want any
thing. The Monks, besides the Vow of Chastity, have also taken upon them that
of Poverty, and accordingly ought never to possess any Money of their own; but
the Avarice of the Popes of Rome have made them, in direct opposition to their
Vow, Proprietors. To what purpose is it, to cover the Institution of Monastic
Orders under the fair pretext of leading a more Perfect and a more Christian
Life, than Secular Men do; when it is so apparent, that the principal Motive of
their Institution was the filling of the Pope's Coffers, and the enriching of
the Prelates of the Court of Rome? Let any one go and search as long as they
please in Cloisters for that Spirit of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, which
in them is expressly professed, and after all, it is certain he will find there
less of these than in many Secular Families: But sure it is, the Pope always
finds them ready to furnish him with what Sum of Money he stands in need of. The
Reason why the Popes institute so many New Orders, is, because they are morally
certain, they will not stand long, without falling and departing from the Rules
and Strictness of their first Institution, and that this will make way for
their Suppression, which cannot but be of vast advantage to them. It Is not long
since that one Pope suppressed Three of them all at once, viz. the Order of S.
Jerome, that of the Jesuats, and that of the Waters, who likewise professed the
Rule of S. Jerome. The Institution of this last Order was a very pleasant one,
and their Exit was as ridiculous.

The First Fathers of this Order being Inspired (as they said) by the Holy
Ghost, set themselves to Distill Waters and Spirits, for the relief and service
of poor Sick^ People; and this their Distilling of Waters, was their Character
of distinction from others, and made them to be called Fathers of the Waters. A
short time after, all this Spirituality was reduced to a Distilling of
Beautifying Waters for Ladies, to make their Hands white, and to preserve or
augment their Beauty. All these Three Orders were become extremely Rich and
Scandalous, when the Pope thought fit to suppress them, and to unite to the
Patrimony of the Church all their Possessions, giving their Churches to other
Monks, who at the bottom were never a whit better, than those they were taken
from. This was indeed a very rude Treatment for them, thus at once to divest
them of all their Revenues and Incoms, and to force them, though sore against
their Will, to the practice of their Vow of Poverty, by reducing them to
Beggary, and the Charitable Benevolence of their Friends and Acquaintance. This
is that which makes the Monks so much to dread these Suppressions; and the
Popes, who are not ignorant of it, have nothing to do, but to threaten them
therewith, whenever they have a mind to squeez a considerable Sum of Money from
them; which Method the late Pope Innocent the XI th several times put in
practice, as well against the Order of the Canons Regular, as several other
Congregations of the Order of S. Bennet.

The Order of Mount Olivet alone, at one time, made him a Present of an Hundred
Thousand Crowns, to appease his Anger; though it was not long before this, that
another Pope had squeezed out of them, by the same Artifice, the Sum of 400000
Crowns; and because for this Reason it was impossible for them to raise that
Sum in Ready Money, within the short term was allotted them for it, he gave them
leave to engage their Fonds, and to Mortgage the Land belonging to their
Monastery; which they did accordingly, and making a dextrous use of this
Conjuncture, by striking whilst the Iron was hot, they desired of the Pope,
whom they found at that time in a good Humor, to give them leave to receive
Pensions from their Kindred and Relations, and of possessing Land in Propriety;
which was in effect to request, That notwithstanding their Vow of Perpetual
Poverty, it might be lawful for them, to be as Rich as any other Seculars; and
yet as contradictory to their Vow, as their Request was, the Pope had the
Conscience to grant it, not only to them, but to all other Religious Houses,
from whence he drew vast Sums of Money.

This is that which at this day makes the Monks of Italy so full of Money, and
so well Lined; for besides the competent Allowance they have for their
Subsistence from the Monastery, they enjoy besides considerable Annual Pensions
from their Families, which they spend at their pleasure, and to satisfy their
Lusts. I have known some of them my self, that had no less than 1000 l.
Sterling, Annual Pension. The Cardinals perceiving that the Popes draw so
considerable Advantage from Religious Orders, are not wanting on their side, to
make them as profitable to themselves, as they can; and to this end have found
out the way of Selling them their Protection, for as much Money as they can
raise them to. Each Order has its Cardinal Protector, to whom they allow an
Annual Pension of 3 or 4000 Crowns; and this, for to obtain their Favor and
Protection at the Court of Rome, upon occasion. The Abbots of the Congregation
of Mount Olivet, finding that Innocent the XI th was resolved to suppress them,
or at least made a show to be so, they immediately had recourse to their
Protector, the Cardinal Faschinetti; they writ a Letter to him, wherein they
declared, the great Danger in which their Congregation was, and earnestly
entreated him, to make use of all his Credit with the Pope, to stave off this
fatal Blow from them, and that in consideration of this his seasonable Service,
they would augment his Pension with the additional Supplement of 1000 Crowns a
Year. I was present at the very time when the Cardinal opened this Letter, and
having read the Promise they made him of 1000 Crowns Augmentation, he Cried out
in a most tender and affectionate Tone; Ah my Dear Congregation of Mount
Olivet, I will never suffer it to be said, That so great an Affront should
happen unto thee, whilst I am thy Protector; and immediately thereupon sent his
Secretary to the Vatican; to desire Audience of the Pope, upon a Matter that
was extremely pressing, and of great importance. He had the good luck to be
admitted to Audience, at the very time when the Act for Suppressing the Order,
was actually Drawing up. His Eminence cast himself at the Pope's Feet, and told
him Weeping, That if he did proceed in his Resolution, it would certainly be
his Death. The Pope seeing him in this posture, lifted him up with a great deal
of Kindness, and the Cardinal being his old Friend, he Promised, That for his
sake he would not suppress the Order, as he had intended; and accordingly we
see it subsist until this Day, though the Monks of it be never a whit better than
others, who have been Suppressed.

It would be matter of Astonishment to see so many Monasteries and Convents
suffered in Italy, full of a sort of People, who being under a Vow of
Obedience, take the full swing of their own Wills and Inclinations, who
professing Poverty, are more Proprietors than Men of the World, and who having
consecrated their Virginity to God, live the most scandalous and debauched
Lives that can be ^magin'd; I say, this would be matter of Astonishment, but
that it is notorious, That Gold is more powerful at Rome, than God himself. Can
any thing be conceived more Infamous and Licentious, than the Lives of Monks?
He that doubts of it, needs only to go to Rome, Venice, or other principal
Cities of Italy, at Shrovetide, where he shall meet with nothing in the
Streets, but Monks in Masquerade, with their Whores; all the Theaters of
Comedies and Opera's, and all places of public Shows and Pastime, are thronged
with them; yea, and they glory in these their Excesses, which ought to be the
greatest matter of Shame and Confusion to them.

I have been acquainted with a vast Number of Monks, who at Shrovetide seeing
me, would draw near to me, and take off their Vizards on purpose that I might
take notice of them; they had each of them a Wench by the Hand, and the next
Morning in the Sextry, before they went to the Altar to say Mass, all their
Discourse was about the Debauches and Licentious Pranks they had played the Day
before, and of those they intended to play the same Day, after their Drudgery
of Saying Mass was over. I call to mind a Story one of these Monks on a time
told me, which because it contains some rare extraordinary Circumstances, I
think worthy of my communicating to you. The History I am about to tell you
happened at Venice. This Monk told me, that it was about Three Weeks since, that
he had met with a very happy Adventure; which was, That as he was going one
Evening to the Playhouse, he met with a Lady of Quality in Masquerade, whom
(as far as he could guess from all Circumstances) he met with afterward, was a
Noble Venetian though at first, because she was alone, and because she rather
Addressed her self to him, than to her, he took her to be a Lady of Pleasure; and
in this persuasion he desired her to go along with him to the Playhouse; the
Lady very readily accepted his Offer, which being ended, he offered her his
Service to lead her home; and she who desired nothing more, presently made a
sign to the Men (that waited for her coming at the Wate-side in her Gondola) to
come and take her in. The Monk stepped in with her, and spied at the farther-end
of the Boat a Gentleman in Masquerade, who received him with a great deal of
Civility. The Lady fearing lest the unlooked for Meeting with this Gentleman,
might affright or discompose her New Galant, bid him, Not to fear any harm; and
commanded the Boat-men, to pull away. It was about One of the Clock in the
Morning when they entered the Gondola, and the Moon being in the Wane, and the
Heavens all covered with Clouds, made that nothing could be discerned by any
Light from thence; and the Boat-Men made so many Turnings and Windings through
the Canals of Venice, that it was impossible for him to discern in what part of
the City he was. All that he could take Notice of was, That the Gondola stopped
at a back Gate of a stately Palace, whence immediately many Vizarded Lackeys
came forth with Flambeaus to Light them in. He was conducted by a Private pair
of Stairs into a spacious Dining Room, where he likewise met with several
Persons with Vizards. The Monk, though he was a person of great Confidence and
Resolution, confessed to me, That he was seized with an extreme Terror, which
received a considerable addition, after the Lady was withdrawn, and he saw
himself left all alone with the Gentleman, and some of his Domestics, all
Masked; for, as he assured me, he expected nothing less than Death. But the
Gentleman, on the other hand, used his utmost endeavors to assure and rid him
of his Fears. Soon after the Table was covered with a sumptuous Collation, and
he was served with several sorts of the choicest Wines. After which he was
showed to a rich Bed, where he was bid to Lie down. The Monk seeing there would
be danger for him, not to comply readily with every thing they would have him
to do, gave a ready Obedience to all their Orders. He was no sooner got into
Bed, but the Fire and all the Tapers in the Room were put out, and immediately
after the Lady entered, and came to Bed to him, giving him a Thousand
Assurances, that not the least hurt should happen to him, and therefore wishing
him to discard all Fear. He was thus kept and served for a Fortnight together,
in the manner as I have just now related, without ever being able to discover
where he was, or who any of the Persons were, that accompanied him, or waited
on him. All that he could guess from the Ladies Discourse was, That because she
could have no Children by her Husband, he had consented to avenge himself of
some of his Nearest Relations, to whom he was unwilling to leave his Estate
after his Death, that she might find out some Expedient to have an Heir; and
that they had not judged any way more proper for their Design, than to make use
of a young and handsome Monk, as he was, to obtain their Desire. Thus after many
Civilities received, and very kind and great Entertainment (but withal, after
having committed a great Sin) he was sent away with the Present of about Fifty
Guinea's value in Gold; and having in a dark Night put him into a Gondola,
after many Turnings and Windings, they Landed him near the place, where they
had taken him in; neither was it possible for him ever after to make any
further discovery about this Matter. He himself related to me this Adventure
with such a Transport of Joy, (and this too, when he was upon the point of
going up to the Altar to say Mass) as made it evident, he would have been
extremely satisfied, to find himself again in the same Circumstances.

I have heard of another Monk, who (in a much like case) met with a very
different Success; for having been brought by a Lady of Quality into her House,
during her Husbands absence, and probably with the same design of providing him
an Heir; but by Mishap for him, her Husband being unexpectedly returned,
surpised the good Friar, and took him Napping; and having kept him a close
Prisoner in a Chamber for about a Fortnight, till a certain Holiday, on which a
General Procession was to be celebrated; which the Gentleman knew was to pass
by his Door; as the Procession was approaching, he caused his Prisoner to be
stripped stark Naked, and after he had been soundly Slasht by four of his
Lackeys, just at the midst of the Procession, as the Fathers Carmelites passed
by, of whose Order this Friar was, he turned him out of Door stark Naked, with
a Written Paper on his Back, spec^fying his Crime, and forced him thus to run
through the Procession. This gave a very great Offense, and the Fathers
Carmelites, who found themselves most outragiously Affronted thereby* went and
complained to the Inquisition, pretending that the Gentleman, who had thus
horribly e^pos'd one of their Brotherhood, could be no other than an Heretic,
and a sworn Enemy to all Religious Orders, whom he had so outragiously abused
in the Person of their Brother* but however, notwithstanding all their Rage,
the Honest Man made a shift to defend and justify his Proceeding against the
Diabolical Malice of these Monks.

I could furnish you here with an infinite number of curious Stories,
concerning the Amors and Intriegues of Monks and Priests, if I were not
persuaded, That it is the Duty of every Honest Man, not to speak, but with
great Moderation of a Vice, whereof the Discovery is equally dangerous, to him
that makes it, and to those to whom it is made. And therefore shall only tell
you, that I may out short here, That I never in my life conversed with any one
Monk or Priest of the Church of Rome, for so long a time as was sufficient to
penetrate a little into their Manners and Course of Life; but that I found at
last, that they had secret Commerce with Women, or, which is worse, and what I
would not willingly name, viz. That they were addicted to the abominable Sin of
Sodomy. And yet many or those were mere Saints to outward appearance, all their
Discourse was of the Blessed Virgin, and of Purgatory; and the only Reason why
I desired their Friendship, was because at first I took them to be very good
and honest Men; but sometime after I found to my great Regret, that I had been
deceived by my too favorable Opinion of them.

I was acquainted (during my stay at Venice) with one of them, that was the
Steward of a Religious House. He was a Man of the most promising Physiognomy
that could be; and I was much edified to see how Modest and Humble he was in
his Garb and Behavior. For, whereas most of the Monks of Italy wear curious
shining Stuffs, fine Hats, Silk Stockens, and neat Shoes, he had nothing about
him but what was very plain and simple: He wore a great old Hat, with a brim of
a Foot and an half broad, which flap'd down over his Ears, with a great Pater
Noster of Wood hanging down from his Girdle; and besides this, had an Air and
Port that breathed nothing but Devotion; and his Masses, which others have
found a way to expedit in less than a Quarter of an Hour, always lasted an Hour
and an Half. He was also a great Lover of Books, as being of some competent
Learning. These good Qualities I observed in him, joined with some others that
he possessed, and the good Report he had every where, though indeed acquired by
his Hypocrisy, were the Motives that engaged me, to endeavor an Acquaintance
with him; and I looked upon my self as very happy, in meeting with a great deal
of Facility in the executing of this my Design. During a Seventh Months
Conversation I had with him, I perceived nothing by him but what was good and
honest: Yea, he seemed to have something of a Spirit of Prophecy; for what he
had publicly foretold of the Raising of the Siege of Vienna, and of the total
Defeat of the Turkish Army, very particularly came to pass. It had been happy
for him, could he as well have foreseen the ill Consequences, which the
licentious and flagitious Life he led in Secret, would draw down upon him, in
order to have prevented them. This good Monk (for so he was as to all outward
appearance, and whom I looked upon as a Man come from Heaven) was obliged by a
troublesome Accident that happened to him, to discover to me all his Wicked Life:
A Lewd Woman, whom he had kept for several years, was resolved at last to ruin
his Reputation; She being perfectly well acquainted, how great a Lover this
Hypocritical Monk was of Vainglory, she had already for some Months threatened
to expose him in his own Colors to the World, in case he did not furnish her
with the Sum of Money she demanded of him. She had already, by these her
Menaces, drawn from him at twice an 100 Crowns, and was now come for the Third
time, to demand the like Sum, neither would he have mended himself a whit, by
complying with her Demand, because she would not have failed within a Fortnight
after to come with the same Threats, viz. That she was resov'd to declare in
presence of the Prior of the Convent, and all the Religious, That he (through
whose hands all the Money of the Convent passed) had not only ravished her
Daughter; but also abused one of her Boys, in the most abominable manner
imaginable. The Monk owned, that he had to do with the one, and the other, and
the Mother too; but that he had not been the first; forasmuch as long before
his Aquaintance with them, they had been Prostitutes, and that besides they had
been well paid for it: That in the mean time, to put some stop to her
Impudence, he desired me, to go and warn her seriously, That if she would not
be satisfied with the Money he had already given her, he was resolved to get her
Murdered. I was so far from offering him my Service in this Affair, that from
that time forwards I conceived the greatest horror and aversion for him, and
took a firm Resolution never to see him more. However, I had the Curiosity,
before I took my last leave of him, to ask him, What was the Reason why the
went so strangely Dressed, and such a slouching Hat hanging over his Ears; he who
took such great pleasure in Courting of Women? He told me, That he had found
the Habit he wore very advantageous and useful to him, that being an Officer of
the Monastery, when he went to receive any Rents, the Persons concerned had the
greater Respect for him; and besides this, That it was also very beneficial to
fill his own Purse, which he showed me how. For as our Monasteries (said he)
are never without Suits at Law, every one knows what is the set price of an
Assignation, a Warrant, a Contract, an Acquittance, and an hundred other
Formalities used in Law. It is sufficient when I give in my Accounts, that I
have made use of so many Assignations, Consultations, Acquittances, etc. which
do amount to such a Sum: All or most of which is my Profit; for sometimes I
have disburs'd nothing at all for them. I go to the Lawyers, the Attorney, and
Notary with my great Slouching-Hat, and in a pitiful Whining-tone I represent,
to the utmost of my power, the extreme Poverty of our Monastery, and that so
effectually, as often to move them to compassion; and so they either take no
Money at all of me, or else content themselves with a very little: So that the
Money of these Formalities of Law comes most into my Pocket, neither am I
obliged to give any account thereof to my Superiors, as being the fruit and
product of my own Industry. Whereas (said he) should I present my self to these
Men of the Law with a little Hat, and a neat Habit, they would presently twit
me with a, See here a Company of good Fat Monks, who live at ease and pleasure,
and have wherewith to pay well, and so they shall; and accordingly would make
me pay for all these Writings to the utmost Rigor. And as for Women (said he)
I am always assured, That though my Person may not please them, yet my Money will;
and that as long as I am stored with that, I shall never fail of being Welcome
to them.

The Discourse made me conceive, That all those great flapping Hats, those old
and Threadbare Cowls, the long Beards of the Capuchins, and the high Collars of
the Jesuits, are no certain Proofs (as some suppose) that those who wear them
are good and honest Men. The knowledge also I have had of their Disorders, has
powerfully convinced me, that the Sin of Uncleanness is that which reigns most
absolutely, and without control amongst them; and that of all these Vowers of
Chastity, there are but a very few, and may be, none at all that observe it
indeed and in truth; for God will never afford his Blessing to foolish
Confidences, or Rash Vows.

From all that has been said, it will not be difficult to conceive, how the
Roman Clergy can make away with those vast Revenues they are possessed of, this
Sin of the Flesh being one of those Vices that requires great Expenses to
maintain it. True it is, that Priests and Monks are not all of them equally
Rich; for there be some of them, that have neither Benefices nor Pensions, and
who consequently are not in a condition to spend as high as others, who yet
spend proportionably to their Incoms. I have known some of them who had nothing
to live upon, but the Money they received for their Masses, who did almost
starve themselves with Hunger, to spare something to enable them to Visit a
Whore-House once a Fortnight, or at the least once a Month. There are others of
them who have such base and mean Souls, that they learn Handicrafts, and
exercise them in private, to gain some Money: Yea, there be not wanting some of
them who learn to make Women's Clothes; as, Mantoe's, Stays, and Petticoats;
that by this means they may have an occasion of freer access to them; some of
them profess the Art of Fortune-Telling, and some are downright Negromancers.
Lastly, there be others who are not only base and mean, but also Sacrilegious;
for though (according to their Principles) to celebrate more Masses than one a
day, be one of the greatest Profanations a man can be guilty of, yet these
Priests and Monks, who sacrifice all that is Sacred and Holy to their own
Interest, do easily get over this difficulty, and say sometimes three or four
Masses a day in several places.

Once on a Holiday I heard Mass said very early in the Morning in the Church of
S. Mark at Venice, by a poor Priest of my Acquaintance; and having occasion the
same Morning to go to Muran, which is but a little League distant from Venice,
as I past through a Church, I saw the same Priest celebrating another Mass.
About Two Hours after I was obliged to go to a place called la Judeka, and
there I again found the same Priest saying Mass in a Convent of Nuns. This
Priest turning himself to the People at Dominus vobiscum, perceived me, and
knowing he was discovered, he became seized with such an excessive Fear and
Restlesness, during the rest of the Mass, that he scarcely knew or minded what
he said; he left out some of the accustomed Collects and Benedictions, and
after he had consecrated the Cup, he forgot to lift it up on high, for the
People to worship it, according to Custom. As soon as he had made an end of
Saying Mass, he put off his Habit with an extraordinary precipitancy, and
taking his Hat and Cloak, ran away without ever demanding his Money for the Mass
he had said. I could easily have caused him to be seized; but knowing it to be
a matter belonging to the Inquisition, and having never had any liking for that
Tribunal, I would not concern my self with it. Besides, I knew that he was not
the only Man, that was guilty of this Fault, but that many others committed the
same every day. My Pen is weary of setting down all those infamous and
scandalous Actions; but yet, because there is no Evil from whence some great
Good may not be drawn, I heartily wish, Sir, that from what I have here
written, as well as in all my other LETTERS, you may at least derive this
Benefit, to be convinced, That the first Argument which put me upon Writing
these LETTERS, and upon which you rely so much for your confirmation in the
Romish Religion, is a very poor, weak, and dangerous one; viz. That it is not
possible, that such a great number of Monks and Priests, who sit at the Helm of
your Church, should be all of them in an Error, and consequently, that they may
be very safely relied upon. This is one of those Arguments we call Circulus
Vitiosus, a Vicious or Faulty Circle. The Seculars repose themselves in matters
of Faith upon the Priests and Monks; and if we divide the Priests and Monks, as
they divide them at Rome; viz. into Priests on this side, and on the other side
the Alps; we find that the latter rely on the former, who are Italians; and
these again repose themselves wholly on those at Rome, that is, upon that
number of Ecclesiastics that are about the Pope, and who in their Opinion pass
for very great Doctors. Now these again on the other hand, do not rely so much
upon their own Science or Learning, which they know to be very mean, as upon
the great number of Priests and Seculars, who believe them. This made one of
their great Preachers declare from the Pulpit; That it was an invincible
Argument to prove the Truth of Transubstantiation, because there was such a
vast number of those who believed, in comparison of the inconsiderable Number
that denied it: That their Catholics being twenty to one, were to be accounted
as the strongest, so the truest.

I shall not employ my time here to show, how weak and frivolous those
Arguments are, that are drawn either from the Number, or Dignity of the Persons
that profess it. It shall suffice me, that I have exposed to your View the
discovery I have made of the Unfaithfulness and Falsness of your Pastors, and
how much it is their outward Interest to abuse you, and to deceive themselves
whilst they impose upon you. For as they are well-pleased to be made use of by
the Multitude, as an Argument to enforce their Belief; so God suffers them to
make the same Multitude, an Argument to confirm their own Belief. If one
Blind-man leads another, they must both of them fall into the Ditch; and if one
leads Twenty, they must still undergo the same Fate. It Is a much surer way for
us to rely upon something we know to be fixed and solid, (such as we know the
Scriptures to be, and to endeavor to penetrate the true Sense thereof,) than
to repose ones Confidence upon Men, who being blinded by their Interests, or
Passion, may afterward blind and deceive us also for Company.

I shall conclude this account of my Journey, or rather the Remarks I have made
during my stay in Italy, with the recital of some small Circumstances which
deserve to be taken notice of. From Milan I took my Journey toward the Lake de
Como, where I Embarked to go to the Valtelline; and from thence I again past
over the Mountain Splug, where (in my way) I gave a Visit to the Curate of
Campodolcino, my old Acquaintance, who was a Doctor of Milan. He was much
surpised to see me there again, and especially when he understood by me, That
my intention was to take another Journey through the Country of the Grisons into
Switzerland. He advised me very seriously to beware of the Heretics, and to
Converse with them as little and as cautiously as might be. I told him, it
would be a very difficult Task, to avoid their Conversation in a Country, where
they are every where mixed with the Catholics, or so much as to know and
discern them. Whereupon he told me, That I might easily discern them by their
manner of Discourse; For (says he) you shall not be a quarter of an Hour in
any of their Company, but you shall hear some of these Words coming from them,
The Purity of the Gospel; the Liberty of the Children of God; the Written
Truth; the Testament of Jesus Christ, and other like Expressions, tending to
exalt the Holy Scripture above the Authority of the Sea of Rome. But this
Notion the Doctor gave me of the Protestants, was so far from giving me an
undervaluing Conceit of them, that on the contrary, I took notice of something
very pleasing and excellent in it, and which rendered them the more amiable in
my Eyes.

And as I was passing over the Alps, meditating on the description the Doctor
had given me of the Protestants, I conceived, That what was objected to them as
a Crime, might very well be looked upon as an Apology for them. Whilst my Mind
was taken up with those Thoughts, I perceived afar off a Company of Little
Children, who came Running toward me from a little Hamlet, upon the Mountain,
to Beg an Alms of me: I observed, that these Children begged only in the Name of
God, and for the Love of Jesus Christ, by which I knew them to be Protestants.
And though I was not then so well stored with Money to be liberal to them; yet
they were very thankful for the Little I gave them, and returned peacably to
the Village, having first bestowed a Thousand Blessings upon me. As I Traveled
forwards, and was coming down the Mountain, I met with another small Hamlet,
from whence also came forth a Company of Children upon the same design as the
former; but their Form of Begging was very different, for they entreated my
Charity for the Love of the Blessed Virgin, of S. Anthony of Padua, and the
Souls of Purgatory. Neither were they contented with the small Gift I had
bestowed upon the other Children, but followed me with great Importunity above
a quarter of a League, repeating a great Number of Ave Mary's, and Prayers for
the Dead; and after all, seeing they could get no more of me, they changed
their Prayers into a Thousand Curses, and took up Stones, which they flung at
me. I perceived by this Action, that these Little Catholics were not so well
Taught and Educated as the Children of Protestants; and that the Doctrine
instilled into them, did not produce so good Fruit, as the Purity of the Gospel
did in the others. In this manner I continued my Journey through the Country of
the Grisons, and of the Swisses; and without tying my self to observe the
Advice of the Curate of Campodolcino, I indifferently Conversed with the
Protestants and Catholics.

I know it is a difficult thing for People of a different Religion (though living
under the same Laws and Government, as the Swisses are) perfectly to love one
another. However, I observed, That the Papists spoke with a great deal more of
Bitterness against the Protestants, than the Protestants did against them, though
indeed these latter had much more Reason so to do; for it was at the time when
the Persecution was carried on against the Protestants with a great deal of
Fury. I was very much edified with the Example of several French Protestants,
fled into Switzerland, who were so far from complaining of the Miseries they
had suffered, that they exhorted one another, (with Words of Holy Scripture) to
bear patiently those further Sufferings their Exile might expose them to.
Neither could they endure to hear others speak ill of their Persecutors, and
testified themselves to desire nothing more, than that it would please God to
Pardon and Convert them. There was an old Gentleman, who in my hearing, with a
great deal of Charity reproved a young French Soldier for being transported in
Passion against the French King; asking him, Whether the Reading of the Holy
Bible had taught him so to do? The Young man was dashed with this Check, and
desired him, to excuse a Fault he had committed, by the Regret he had, to see
himself reduced to the condition of a Soldiers Life for a poor Subsistence,
after having lost all his Estate in France.

When I was in Switzerland, and so near to Geneva, I resolved to spend Three or
Four Days there. I was Lodged at the House of a good Widow, who was a very
Zealous Protestant, and by this occasion found my self many times engaged, to
dispute about Matters of Religion: And forasmuch as I was then maintaining a
Weak Cause, I found the Arguments put to me to be very strong; and though I did
not immediately give up the Cudgels, yet those I discoursed with, took notice
of the Moderation wherewith I gave in my Answers; which made one of the
Ministers who was then present, say, That it were greatly to be wished, that
all the Priests of Rome had the same command of their Spirits; because by this
means Truth would have the better Opportunity of discovering her self unto
them; but that commonly by their Passionateness, and their scornful and
injurious Expressions, they broke off all Disputes, as soon as they found
themselves pinched with the Evidence of Truth. The Truth is, they behaved
themselves toward me with a great deal of Kindness and Civility; and after the
Dispute was over, a Fine Collation was Dressed up, to which they Invited me,
desiring only of me (by a kind of secret Reproach, which did not displease me,
because I knew it to be Just) that I would be pleased to make this Reflection
upon their Carriage, That their Spirit was not like that of the Papists: For
(said they) Sir, you know very well, that if we had Disputed as much either in
France or Italy, to maintain our Faith, as you have done here to defend yours,
we should have been abused, Clapped up into Prison, yea, and Burnt alive; but as
for us, we are so far from having any recourse to such barbarous and horrid
Means, that we do not so much as upon that account think the worse of you;
neither shall you perceive any thing from us, but the kindest Entertainment we
are able to afford you. I cannot but own, that I found in this their Behavior
something of that Spirit of Beneficence and Sweetness, wherewith Jesus Christ,
and his first Preachers of the Faith, did Convert such Crowds of Infidels and
Sinners. The Idea whereof has been ever since impressed on my Mind, and put me
upon applying my self to the Reading of the Writings of Protestants, and to
weigh their Reasons with a more unbiased Temper; and having found them Solid,
and founded on the Word of God and the Practice of the Reformed Churches,
conform to those of the First Ages of the Church, God had been pleased to give
me his Grace, to dispose my Will to embrace it, by abjuring all the Errors of
the Church of Rome, which I have, and utterly do renounce from all my heart,
and wish you (in Christian Charity) the same Happiness, as being,

SIR, Your most Affectionate, etc.

FINIS.

