Al-Man-Sir OR, RHODOMONTADOS OF THE Most Horrible Terrible and Invincible
CAPTAIN Sr Fredrick Fight-all.

English and French.

Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo. If that the Gods wont lend an
ear, then Hell
Shall quake when I my dreadful stories Tell.
LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, for Philip Briggs living in Mermaid Court
at the lower end of Paternoster Row. 1672.

The most incomparable Sir Frederick Fight-All to the Reader.
Reader,
I Suppose thee both Noble and Valiant, or else thou would not presume to
handle this Book, or hazard thy understanding in reading such, and so many
prodigious Achievements contained therein. To hear of thousands killing
thousands, is no more then the death of one man by another, but for a single
person to slay a thousand, and they all Emperors, Kings, and Princes is a work
impossible for any but me Sir Frederick Fight-All: I can outdo, what e're was
heretofore accounted Fabulous, and incredibly dangerous; were the Centaure
living, I would make him crawl away upon his Hands for safety, leaving his
Headless Horse a sacrifice to my Fury. O that I could but see whether one of
the Cadmean Race durst peep his Head above ground, I would quickly make him
hide himself in the next cavern to the Center. This may be proved, and more,
from what I have done, the truth whereof, if any are such impudent Infidels as
to question, let them be ramm'd through the body of the Earth, that the
Antipodes may satisfy their unbelief.

It is a thing for School boys to admire a Garagantua, a Mandevill, a
Scarecrow Drake, with puny deeds of Chivalry, poor Pigmy-Crane oppugnors!

Let Mars and Hercules astonished stand,

Hearing the direful deeds of my right hand.

Methinks I could unhinge the Poles, and were they not too big to grasp, I
would tear the World to Rags. It has been hitherto for the sake of my own
Country, (which Cannibals admire for giving me breath) that I did not wish (as
Archimedes did, that Rodamontado Kickshaw compared to me) that I might find
some other Footing, than what is common to Mortals, that I might twirle the
giddy Inhabitants of this World into a perpetual motion.

Many such trifles I Am ashamed to own,
Which are but foyls to deeds which I have done.
Let it suffice to give you an account why I describe my own Heroic Actions,
and not leave it to the care of my admirers: Caesar writ the Commentaries of
his own victorious Life, then why should not I write mine; He was afraid some
detracting Writer might lessen his Worth to men, but my Fear is they would
overvalue mine to the Gods, and so by jealousy incense their Deities, to whom
I shall ever bear an amicable respect, whilst I am the Bulwork of Christendom,
and the most Invincible

Sir Frederick Fight-All.
From Hercules Pillars the 5th. of the Month Javan.


To the Elli-mi-hammi-rammi-ziragian Elixir, and Deusnoetous Rhapfodist of
Enigmaticall and occult Fancy, Captain Robert (alias Jack) Pommell,
Metropolitan Hydro-mel-mercurialist of Fleet Street.
SIR,
I Implore your pardon on the flexed knees of that grand respect which I must
show diurnally, and owe you diuturnally for this Pyramidall presumption of
obstetricating this Gygantick Birth, under your Pegasian, or rather Helliconian
Patr^^age.

Your rash Negation will but irritate Al-Man-Sirs, and my just passion, in
denying that Protection, which the Gods have courted us to accept under the
Heaven-spreading lofty Wing of Joves Eagle, when she sits abrood on a Cloud to
hatch Lightning and Thunder, with which her Master does Tonnitruate and
Fulminate the aff^ighted inhabitants of the Universe into a Nonentity of
rational Intelligence.

That Pallas was the product of Jupiters Headache, Manu-ducted into the Society
of Celestial existencies, by Vulcanian Midwifry, is an opinion not to be
opposed, if we believe, no Fabulous dotage in Veterane Parnassites, or
Hypocrenians: but who the Gossips were to this Jovial Offspring, comes not
within the vierge of our stricktest indigation, if none; a great oversight in
the Gods to act against approved custom.

To avoid which error (for it seems the God^ of old, were subject thereunto as
well as Mortals) I have ^udiciously elected you as Godfather for the Recipr^cal
Reputation of you both; your lofty expressions, and Al-Man-Sirs loud actions,
having already timpani^'d Fames Cheeks into the danger of a Rupture. For at the
Inauguration of your vulgar-non-intelligible-invisible conceits (invisible I
call them, because they soar out of the ken of dim-sighted Mortality)
Opht^olmick Fame stood on Tip Toe, ready for the Wing, who, as soon as she
heard you named, commenced her Commission thence, and flew first through
Englands Metrapol^s, in all the secret recesses thereof, then to its adjacent
Suburb^carians, and in all places, with her Trumpet sounded the harmonious
Levets of P^mm^llian Eulogies.

And that your Cheek may not seem to borrow tincture from Aurora's complexion,
for Patronizing what cannot claim desert, or merit know, that Al-Man-Sir may
boast of as much Deity as Pallas, and not inferior in Metaphysical extraction,
if you observe this parallel between them: Pallas proceeded from Joves Head,
Al-Man-Sir from Mars h^s Buttocks, by a slash in Battle, the first and Virgin
cut of that bloody, yet bawdy Cornuter, thus you see he was begot by a Sword,
conceived in a wounds Womb, and obstetticated, with the blood which flowed from
the profundity thereof. Both their Genitors were Deities, yet differ in this,
one is of the upper house, the other of the lower.

My final, and ultimate request is, that you, being placed in the Zenith of
sublime fancy, will so instruct this Stripling, that he may no^ fall into the
Nadit of low, and popular expression; cloth his understanding out of your
Wardrope of hard words, such, so difficile, long, and Syllabically extended,
that each word may require an half hour in the pronunciation; and when
delivered and stretched out, a whole league by the chain in length, and let them
have so insufferable a sound, they may as infallibly kill, as Cannon-shot at
the same distance. This will be a great ease to Al-Man-Sirs hands, and feet;
the one will not be troubled to foot out their Revenge, nor the other to hack
and hew out the way, if his tongue, by your help may be furnished with words
shall kill, as sure as his Sword, by this means, that, with his Battoon, will
have some respit from their bloody Sweats, and labors, and for the ease you
give those dreadful Executioners, their Master shall give you the Turn-over of
their future Service, and I shall daily pay you the tribute of my just
admiration, whilst I am known to be,

R. H.

RHODOMONTADO'S
I. WHen I came into the World Mars (the God of War) did sit astride my
Shoulders, Hercules was at my Right Hand, and Samson on my Left. Atlas at my
Thighs, Mercury on my Head, Venus in my Eyes, Cupid in my countenance, Nero in
my Heart, Jupiter in all my Body. In such sort that when I walked it was with
such wonderful Force and Strength I caused the Earth to tremble, the Heavens
were astonished, the Wind ceast, the Sea became calm, Women big with child
miscarried, Men in general every where fled before me, and the most valiant and
courageous, seeing me cried out one and all: Libera me Domine.

II. I Swear -- Villain if I come there, I will give thee such a blow with this
battoon, it shall drive thee six foot within the Earth, so that there shall
nothing remain of thee above it, but thy right hand to put off thy Hat when
thou shall see me pass that way.

III. CErtainly when I consider how many graces Fortune has endued me with, I
have not time sufficient for so many considerations: For in the first place she
has heaped on me force, and overwhelmed me with strength, she has quallified
me with courage to the least punctilio, and has formed and fashioned me out of
the greatest valor. So that I am as a Colomn in France, a Bastion in Spain, a
Fortress in Italy, a Castle in England, a Citadel in Germany, a Tower in
Poland, a Rock in Armenia, a Wall in Denmark. To be short I am generally better
quallified then all the men in the world, being a refined metal taken out of
the bowels of the fat of the Earth and conceived by generosity.

IV. I Swear by the bones of the Sun it is as impossible for my right hand to
strike any with my Battoon, and not to kill, as for the Sun to cease from
running his daily course through the Heaven.

V. TRuly (and witout swearing by the beard of my great Grandfather) I do not
believe there is any thing in the whole world, which can equal the horrible,
dreadful and furious terribility of my courage. And what is there think you in
the whole world which will not honor and obey me, if so that I can make the
earth tremble, the Heavens afraid, the Stars to disappear, the savage beasts of
lofty Mountains, and craggy Rocks to hide themselves therein. And moreover the
birds which people the Airy Region, the Fish whose Kingdom is the sea, and men
the most valiant and courageous, with one sole angry glance of my eye, I reduce
them to the Chaos of their first principles.

VI. GO to my Cook, and tell him, it is my command that he spit me immedately a
dozen and half of Demicannon, larded with Pi^es, Muskets, and Halberds, which I
have taken from my enemies in pitched Battles, and let there be the Bandeleers
of a Foot-company to hang about instead of Sassages, having done this, let him
put over the Grid-Iron, and broil me three or four dozen of Carbines, with a
score or two of pocket Pistols, fried with Brimstone, and Salt-peeter sauce,
and then come and sup with me, for this is the Food which I am accustomed to
feed on.

VII. I Am King of Paladins, the terror of the World, the flower of the
Nobility of Rhodomontado's, Furioso's, Superboso's, Rolands, and Olivers,
beautified with infinite Graces, fait as an Angel, the heart and courage of
Lucifer, a Servant to the mighty Queens of the Earth, a Friend to distressed
Ladies, and the Sovereign Prince of the Anthropophagi or Man-Eaters.

VIII. ONe day in battle I found out the Queen of the Amazons, she seeing me
resolved that I should fall by no other hand than that of so great and mighty a
Queen, and thereupon raiz'd her hand with her Sword therein, but I not willing
to loose any time struck her, at which she fell to the Earth; then taking her
by the hair of the head I threw her with such fury and force that she flew to
the fifth Heaven, and fell upon Mars as he was sporting with Venus, the fall of
whom broke his head. Venus being greatly afraid cried out for help, at whose
cry the Gods came running to her aid, but were much astonished when they saw
Mars stretched out upon the place. Hereupon Jupiter thrust his head through the
casement, and saw me distributing wounds among my enemies with so much anger
and fierceness that the fire which flew from every blow, resembled another
Mont-Gibel or Aetna: Therefore Jupiter said to all his Brother Gods that none
of them should stir or make any further noise of what was done, since it might
be supposed, that he which had killed Mars the God of War, was every whit as
able to kill the rest of the Gods which yet remained living.

IX. HAve a care Sits, stand back there at a distance, till I have put on my
Cloak, for the very wind that comes from the bare Cape thereof is sufficient to
fan ye five hundred leagues distant from the Pyrenean Mountains.

X. JF my Sword could express what wonders it has done, yet would it want time
to discover all. What is it if not that, which has peopled all the
Churchyards in the Universe? What is it, if not my Toledo which has inricht
the Chyrurgeons of this Terrestial Globe? What is it that has sent so many
continually to the Sword-cutlers? What is that which has cut in pieces the
best coat of Mail? What is that which so derides the Bucklers of Barcelona,
which hews the cabaces of Calatayud if not my Sword. For it did cut the
Head-peece vizors of Almazen with as much ease, as if they had been made of a
Melon or Cucumber.

XI. THese twenty years my Sword has provided for me, by which I am feared of
men and beloved of Women.

XII. ONe told me that the Grand Seignor had committed lately great slaughters
among the Christians depriving them in a barbarous manner of their Legs and
Arms, but if I come there, I shall soon cool his courage, for I know by the
living bones of my Father, he will no sooner see m^, but he will lay on his own
life violent hands, to avoid falling into mine.

XIII. WHen I speak my voice penetrates the depths of Hell, where ever I
appear, the World offers me a free subjection from East to West. It is well
known, that where ever I am my Bedstead is made of the ribs of Giants, the
ticking of my bed is filled with the Moustacho's of the Masters of the Camp to
the Grand Turk, my Bolster with the Brains which I boxt out of the heads of his
Captains, my clothes are made of the Hair of Amazons, my coverlids are composed
of Switzers-beards, my curtains of the hair of the eyebrows and eyelids of
Hungarians and Germans, and the wall of my lodging is built not only with the
pieces of Head-peeces but the entire heads of the standard bearers to the Queen
of England, which I lopt off with my dreadful and formidable Sword, the floor
of my house instead of Brick is paved with Janazaries Teeth, my tapistry are
the skins of Arabians and Sorcerers whom I unbarkt with the point of my Dagger,
the tiles which cover my house are the nails of Monarchs and Kings, whose
bodies long since in despite of them and those miserable carcasses they
endeavored to defend, with a kick of my Foot I tumbled into their sepultures.

XIV. SCorning to draw my Sword against a bravado English Captain, I gave him
such a kick in the breech, that he mounted into the Air and knocked his head
against the Sun with such great force, that he was the cause of it is Eclipse
for five days; immediately this Captain kneeled before Jupiter, praying him to
pardon me all my offenses, in recompense of the kindness I had done him, by
that kick of the Arse I had given him, which sent him to Heaven among the
Stars, since it lay in my power to send him as far (a contrary way) to Hell
among the damned.

XV. WIth one single hair of my Moustachos which I will dart at thee, I will
make so great a gap in thy body that the whole Infantry of Spain, and Cavalry
of France shall be able to pass through without touching either the one side of
thee or the other.

XVI. LAdy of my heart command me something which belongs to my Profession, for
I swear to you by the great snaggy Tooth of Cerberus, to defye for your sake
ten men together, and would scorn to fly, came there as many more. Command me
to kill one, two, three, four, fifty, or sixty persons: to cut off the Legs,
Arms, or gash the Face of any one that dares equal her self to you, for these
things shail be sooner done then commanded.

XVII. WIth this most redoubted Sword, I ruin, I set on fire, and put all into
a flame, tryumphing over Armies, laying wast Cities, Castles, Towers, Walls,
and invincible Fortresses. With my presence I make Jove hide himself, Mercury
fly, Cupid tremble, Mars disguize and tranform himself, and make him stand and
seem take the Tribute, which Venus gives me, to let him know and see, I Am
more her Gallant now than He.

XVIII. WHere ever I am Death is continually with me, because he finds more
profit from me, then if he were General of one hundred thousand men to fight
the Turk or Devil. He knows it well and therefore continually follows and
accompanies me in the conquest of the Kingdoms of the Grimanians, Dicenians,
Dinamians, Alopitiars Pitanians and Espinomenians, so that to sp^ak the truth,
without his company I should walk alone, because I find none like me, and none
I like but him.

XIX. AS the World is divided into four parts three whereof Africa, Asia, and
Europe, and these three are encompassed and environed by the Sea, so my heart
is divided into three other parts, of a Nature affable, terrible, and cruel,
and these three parts are surrounded not with Water, but with living Flames of
scorching fire. And as the fire is, so is (by reason of Love) my heart, by
which means I am so intaged that with three blows of this my good chopping
blade, the fore-stroke, back-blow, and thrust, I could slay all mankind, making
Rivers of blood longer then Ganges, broader then the Po, and more terrible then
the Cataracts of Nile. But the World may be thankful I am in love, for but a
little while before I was so, I killed every day for a whole Month, three or our
dozen persons, and but even now I killed more than half a score, only to show
the greatness of affection to my Mistress.

XX. I Have in me the nature of a Basalisk and something more; for if he with
his looks can kill one, I when angry with mine, can destroy an hundred, as if
my eyes were Cannon Chain shot.

XXI. IF that true valor which my soul possesses could be purchased by Money,
all Traffic would cease by Sea and Land, and no more talk of Merchants or
their commodities. For every one would then labor and employ their industry to
the utmost, who should get the greatest share in me, one would aim at one of my
Arms, another a Leg, one a Finger, a fourth a Nail, a fifth a Hair of my
eyelids, and this to no other end, than that he might become valiant. But I
rejoice that this cannot be by any means affected, because it is one of the
greatest causes of the very great repose and quiet of all those Kings,
Monarchs, and Princes, which are all my very good friends.

XXII. WHo is so shamelesly impudent, as not to fall in love with this strong
thigh of mine, with this powerful arm, with this breast, stuffed with valor and
courage, with this face, fairer and more pleasant than that of Ganimede, Dido,
or Absalon.

XXIII. MY Bawd, my old Whore Fortune, gave me some offense; so that I became
more displeased with her than formerly, she was beloved by me, in so much that
if she performed not her Articles with me, I swore by Pluto's Horns, by the
beard of Mars, by Samsons Whiskers, and by Mahomets Alcoran, that I will
deprive her of her Prerogative of mutability, and inconstancy, and as to her
body, with one shock I will dispatch her to Terra Incognita, her Limbs so
shattered, that at the very instant of her arrival thither, she shall be
reduced to powder, which shall be by some or other gathered and preserved for
my use, that is, to throw as dust or Sand on those Letters I send to my
Mistress.

XXIV. I Have in two days more augmented the Stigian Kingdom of Pluto, and
peopled with Subjects his black, dark, and smoaky Realm, then ever did
Rodomont, Rolant, Renand, Mandrigard and Radamante, having made the hearts of
more valiant and courageous men in a thousand and a thousand places to tremble;
let those which inhabit the East, West, North and Equanoctial Line be my
Witnesses.

XXV. THe great Turk is much afraid of my valor, for my Arm has given him to
know more than ten Armies joined together: for being one day in the War of the
Venetians against the Grand Seignor, I gave Abenhamet Master of the Camp so
great a blow that I st^uck his Head off his Shoulders, with the stroke it
immediately hopt to Constantinople,, carrying thither the news of the loss of
the Turkish Army. When the Inhabitants of that great City, saw the Head without
a Body, they all fled into their houses, making fast their doors, with such
dread none would venture to stir out in six years for fear of me, till that I
according to my accustomed magnificence gave them permission to appear abroad
and walk as they were wont to do, which accordingly was performed.

XXVI. WHen I walk in the streets of the City a thousand Ladies run to meet me;
one takes me violently by the Cape of my Cloak, another gives me a wink,
another beseeches me to sup with her, another makes me a present, another
kisseth my hands, and blesses that Mother that brought me into the World,
adjudging her self the happiest of Women, may she have the opportunity of lying
with me but one night, to no other end, then that she may have a child of the
race, of so great and worthy a personage as my self.

XXVII. IF the force of my members was distributed among faint hearted persons,
and seditious Spirits, the World would be put into a general revolt, and
nothing would be seen therein, but Battles, and Conquests; the Bells never
heard, day nor night, but for the interment of some dead body. Chyrurgeons
would never stir out of their houses, but to heal the wounds of Swords, cut and
thrust, and to reunite Fractures or bones broken. Divines would be continualy
employed in comforting Widows for the loss of their Husbands, Children for the
loss of their Parents, and young Women in the death of their Sweet-hearts.

XXVIII. BY the stately gravity of my Forefathers, I cannot but laugh when I
think on the ignorance of the Gods in Deifying Hercules, and giving him the
appellation of one of them, calling him God, and this only because he slew an
Hydra, twisted an Horn out of a Bulls-head, cut in pieces a Dragon, overcame a
Lion, and destroyed the Centaure and fierce Boars. Because through fear he made
the Harpies to fly, and killed Cete and Achelois, conquered Diomelles King of
Thrace, and defeated Gereone Queen of the Amazons, and lastly because he
erected those Colomns which are now called Hercules Pillars. In effect these
things are nothing but mere fables, and the ^ctions of young Girls compared
with m^ f^rce and courage, who had neither the puissance of Da^ius King of the
Persians, nor of Alexand^^ the great; nor of Samson the strong, nor the
powerfulness of the Trojan Hector, nor of valiant Achilles, nor of Roland the
Furious, nor of stout Gridace nor of sturdy Sacripant^, nor of terrible
Mandricard, nor of famous Roger, nor of strong Agrican, nor of horrible
Rodomont. None of these ever equaliz'd my horrible, formidable and invincible
courage.

XXIX. IF I come to thee, with my Foot I will kick thee so high into the Air,
that had thou with thee ten Cart load of bread, thou should be in greater
fear of starving then falling.

XXX. MY Arm trembles when I deliberate with my self what to do for my
Mistress, for continually I am thinking how I may render her content, and can
never obtain it. The last night I dreamed, in favor of her, I fought ten men,
six whereof I killed: one of those that fled which saved his Life, in gratitude
to my mercy, cut off his Left Arm, and laid it at my Feet. But how much better
shall I do such things in the day when I am awake, if any one shall take the
boldness on him to touch her slipper.

XXXI. ONe day playing with Destiny, in the presence of Time, Fortune, and
Nature, we wrangled about a Cast, in such manner, that I laid my hand on my
Sword. Time, Fortune, and Nature, which were Friends to Destiny, interposed
between us to keep the Peace. But I which am truly stout extended my Right
Foot, and gave Time such a kick I sent him to the Skies, with another I tumbled
down to the Earth; where she now lies; Fortune I divided in the middle,
throwing one half of her where the Sun rises, and the other half where he
sets. I gave also Nature such a back-blow, that the wound to this day is
incureable, through which all the Year long issue Rivers of Blood.

XXXII. ONe day recreating my self at Ball, I struck it with such force that it
flew to the third Heaven, falling and trundling before the Gods, which were
then and there assembled in Council; the one looking on the other were greatly
astonished, not being able to utter one word, till such time as their senses
were returned to them; and then they concluded it requisite, Jupiter should
descend to the Earth, and kneel before me, and quitting his Scepter and Crown,
should humbly devote it to my service, Venus should proffer her self to be my
Chambermaid, Mars my Laquay, and Mercury my Pander.

XXXIII. BEing desirous Pluto should pay me that tribute which other Kings pay
me, I went strait to Hell, where I found him walking, accompanied with five
hundred and forty six millions, three hundred ninety and six thousand Legions
of Devils which followed him. And as soon as he saw me afar off, he immediately
advanced toward me to render himself my Prisoner. Then I laid my hand on my
Sword; Pluto perceiving me in a passion, and having known who I was fled
immediately, and sunk into the profound depths of Hell with all his Followers,
commanding strictly the Gates thereof to be close shut, and locked. I for my
part resolved to be obeyed, and walking to the Gates, I sneez'd them open, and
thereupon entered. In a moment I took Prisoner, Grand Satan, Prince Pluto, and
fair Proserpine, whose hands I firmly bound with an hair of my Moustacho.
Nevertheless seeing the tears they shed, and lamentations which they made, I
made use of the ancient magnificence of my nature, and unbinding them set them
all at liberty.

XXXIV. I Had one day a quarrel with a French Gentleman, who defied me, saying,
draw if thou dare, considering with my self that I am all courage, refused so
to do, because the French being cold, and without choler, I might have given
him five hundred thrusts, and as many slashes, without killing him; but as for
me, who am wholly filled, and made up of Courage and Choler, with the least
blow in the World, he might have sent me to the Devil.

XXXV. BEing on a time without the Trenches of Ostend, a Cannon-bullet entered
my Mouth, loosening two of my Teeth without farther harm. At the same time
being full of anger, I took the Bullet into my hand, and throwing it against
the enemy, by chance it fell against a Tower on the Wall, the which by that
means in a moment was reduced to dust, ^illing to the number of one thousand
fifty and five Soldiers which guards it.

XXXVI. ON a time I entered Hell, where I found sitting at a Table, Pluto,
Proserpine, and Death; they seeing me in their dark, dismal Cell, were struck
with an amazing Fear, but knowing their want of Courage comparative to mine,
and to dismiss their Fear, without sitting down, I presently danced before them
a Levant, according to the French fashion, cutting a caper somewhat too high,
my head broke through the roof of Hell, and so past out, the noise whereof made
^he City of Constantinople to tremble, and tumbled into ruins, eight hundred
and eighty five houses in the next Town.

XXXVII. I My self Hercules, Death, and Cupid, by chance traveled one day
together, each of us had his Bow and Quiver; and made a bargain, that he which
should do the greatest execution, should have the greatest Honor. Hercules
began first, and with his Bow and Arrows, killed all the Panthers, Lions,
Tigers, Bears, Wolves, Bulls, Camels, and Elephants, with all sorts of Wild
beasts. Cupid took his Bow next, in drawing of which he made Gods, Giants,
Amazons, Men, and Devils to fall up to the Ears in Love, I only excepted on
whom the God of Love had no power. Death next resolved to try what he could do,
and with the flight of his Arrow killed all the Creatures on the Earth. I at
last disdaining them all, and being in a very great passion, I resolved to be
revenged on them, so taking an Arrow, I shot and killed Death, Cupid and
Hercules.

XXXVIII. MAdam and Mistress of my Life, be neither jealous, nor displeased,
that I am sought after, and beloved of so many Ladies, and Princesses, for in
so doing, they but abuse th^mselves and loose their time. I do not love or
affect any other but your Highness (dear Mistress) since that you are endued
with more beauty then Diana, with more graces and better mien then Pallas, with
more sweetness th^n Venus; dispising these three Sovereign Goddesses, you are
alone that proper obj^ct, to which I dedicate my heart. Consider then that I
love you, and do not forsake me for another, since that I am more then a
Gentleman. And if you will be married to me, I swear by the Faith of a Captain,
and by the Life of the King my Father (for I never knew any other name He had)
to get on you the first night, a regiment of Soldiers, which shall conquer the
World.

XXXIX. I Kiss the Soles of the Feet of your Highness, Mistress of my Heart,
Princess of my Breast, Duchess of both Arms, Marquess of my Courage, Countess
of my Valor, Queen of my Strength; and absolute Dame of my whole Person.

XL. ARriving near Constantinople, I understood that fifty Snips were just
entering into the Port, I presently betook my self to a place where I might most
commodiously board them, but as they approached near, I was constrained by a
fit of a through-gonimble to let down my breeches, and planting my Globular
Posteriors toward the Water, to the intent that I might free my self from that
violent Chollick, which then seized me, I did let so great a Fart, that it
raized as great a storm as has been seen on the Oc^an, which blew one hundred
and fifty Vessels, with such tempestuous Fury t^^^ they were wrackt against the
(...)

XLI. IT is true I am ill clad, but it is neither carelessness, nor extreme
poverty which obliges me to appear in this manner, but a solemn vow, not to
buy any kind of stuff, to make me a suit, till first I have found one hundred
and fi^ty doz^n of the Heads of my Enemies, that they may serve instead of a
set of Buttons, for my Suit, also the Boyaux instead of Lace thereon.

XLII. MArs being overjoyed to have met with me, asked if I were willing to pass
away the time with him at Picquet, but I answering him, that my recreations lay
in more violent exercises, he though^ himself obliged to propound to me a Game
at Ball, which I accepted o^; as he was about to find out a B^ll for himself,
he was amazed to see me take the Terrestial Globe, and struck it so violently,
that it mounted almost to Heaven, where Jupiter being aston sht, sent Mercury
speedily away to apprehend the cause of this sudden accident, and just as he
was descending, I st^uck the Earth the second time on the rebound, in such
sort, that rencountring the messenger of the Gods, it broke his Nose, he
striking it back to me, made it fly against the Face of the Moon so strongly,
that it made it as flat as a Milan. Chee^e.

XLIII. IT is said that Hercules got an hundred Maiden-heads in one night, but
I was more valiant than that Whore-master, for in five hours time I begat an
hundred Hercules.

XLIV. MArs puffed up with vain presumption, and being so impudent to attribute
to himself in my presence, that glory which my valor had lawfully acquired,
made me so angry; that in the height of my fury, I took him by the Foot, and
twirl'd him into the Air, making him move circularly with such rappid violence
that before he fell, he made more turnings and roundings in the Air, then the
Heavens has done since the first day of its Creation.

XLIV. J Swear I am almost distracted, since I despair of finding a man that
shall cry me mercy. All my pride consists in finding a man on whom I may
discharge my passion and revenge; but I see it is impossible, since their swift
flight secures them from my Fury. How can I then demonstrate my power, since
none against me dates make opposition.

XLV. BY the blood of those many Giants I have slain, I know not what Death to
inflict on two Rascals, that looked a skew on me as I walked in the streets. In
order thereunto, I examined my Magazine where I found six hundred sixty and
five several instruments of War, out of which I endeavored to choose one most
agreeable to my purpose. The Armor I usually wore was so cut and slash^, that
like a Beggars ragged Coat, 'twould hardly hang together, wounded in every part
without blood shed. At last I resolved to bastinado them soundly, that I might
give some respit and rest to my blood thirsty Sword and Dagger.

XLVI. WHat is it that I fear in Asia, Europe, and Africa? were the Alps set
on the Shoulders of the Pyrenean Mountains, seven Dragons, eight Elephants, ten
Tigers, twenty two Lions, sixty five Bulls, with all the Swi^zers in France to
guard them, I would ascend to their utmost height by the slaughter of them all.

XLVII. MY Shoemaker one morning brought me home a pair of Shoos too straight
for my Feet, which so enraged me, that with a blow I struck him so far into the
E^rth, that I made a passage into Pluto's Kingdom. Hereupon Beelzebub, Satan,
Pluto, Barrabas, Judas, with a many more Princes of those obscure
tenebrosities, were strangely startled; Cerberus bark't, Proserpine tore her
Hair, weeping most bitterly, because she saw the affrighting Light, invade her
dark Kingdom. The little Devils hid themselves here and there, and some of them
fled away, part whereof live at this time in the Air, (and are called Aiereal
Spirits) others dwell on the Earth (and are called Subterraneau) daily
tormenting the ^^^^itants thereof.

XLVIII. MAdam you may justly lay aside the name of Dame Beatrice, and assume
for the time to come that of Emperess, Queen, Princess, Marquess, Countess,
etc. Sinc my two thighs, those Herculean Pilla^s, which sust in the whole
World, are at your serve, I would say this ( British o^) C^stillian body
crammed with the valor of courageous Men of War, which makes this breast; and
this arm more strong th^n the Tower of Babylon, and chiefly when it is assisted
with this my redoubted Sword because the fire which proceeds from it,
penetra^es farther, and surpasses by much in splendour the bright Rays of the
illum^nating Sun.

XLIX. I Am the Man alone which is void of fear, threatening the Sky, and the
Air, the Fire and the Earth, Jupiter and Hell, as far as the Elements I desire
to wage War with them. I value not a Tempest, a Thunderbolt, Lightning; nor
Thunder, and before it be long, I will make my self Grand Seignor of the upper
Regions, and the lower. I both will and can do it, for my power is
proportionable to the Enterprise.

RHODOMONTADO'S
I. QVand ie vins au monde, Mars m'entra dans les espaules, Hercules dedans le
bras droit, Samson au gauche, Atlas es iambes, Mercure en la test, Venus aux
yeux, Cupidon en mon visage, Neron en mon coeur, Jupiter en tout le corpse. De
maniere qu'auec l'abondance de ma force quand ie chemine, ie fais trembler la
terre, le Ciel s'espouuante, le vent cesse, and lamer deuient calm les femmes
grosses auortent, les hommes fuyent qui deca qui dela, and les plus vaillans
and courageux voyans ma presence disent tou^ d'vne voix: Libera me Domine.

II. IE jure Dieu, vilain, si it vois la ie te donneray un tell coup anec ce
baston, queie te feray entrer six pieds dedans laterre, telliment qu'il ne
restera rien detoy horsd'icelle que ton bras droit, pour m'oster ton chapean
lors que tu me verras passer.

III. CErtainement quae quand ie considere, combien la fortune ^' a do^e de
graces, le temps me defaut a fair toutes ces considerations: pource qu' elle
m'ae premierement co^ble de forces, elle m'a quallifie de courage, elle m'a
fabrique de tres grande valeur: comme vne Colomne en France, un Bastion en
Espagne, vne Forteresse en Italy, un Chasteau en Angleterre, vne Citadelle en
Allemagne, vne Tour en Polongue, vne Roque ^n Armenie, vne Muraille en
Dannemarc, and ^'a or ne generalement sur tous les hommes du mo^de, moy qui
suis un metail purify sorty des entrailles de la grass de la terre and
eng^^dre de gener^site.

IV. IE iure parles os du Soleil, qu'il n'est pas plus possible a mon bras
dextre de donner coups de baston sans tuer, que au Soleil de cesser de fair sa
course par le Ciel.

V. VEritablement ie ne croy pas qu'u y ait chose au monde qui puisse esgaler
l'horrible, espounentable and furiense terribilite de mon courage. Et quelles
sont ces chooses creees en ce monde, qui m'honorent and obeyssent, si moy auec
ma grand force ie fay trembler la terre, espouuenter le Ciel, secher les
planettes, cesser levent, arrester la mer, les bestes des hautes montagnes, and
les bestes sauuages qui habitent es petites montagnettes ou colines se caches
en icelles. Et qui plus est les oyseaux qui volent par l'air, les poissons qui
nagent en la mor, and les hommes les plus vaillans and courageux auec un soul
regard de mes yeux ie les mets en la sepulture.

VI. ALlez a mon Cuisinier, dites lay qu'il met en la broche douzaine and
demie de coups d'artilleries lardez avec infinies troncons de picques and
hallebardes, que i'ay surmonte en ce monde: and deux ou trois douzaines de
mousquets and pislolets sur le gril, and vous viendrez souper auec moy. Car
c'est la viande de laquelle i'ay accoustume de manger.

VII. IE suis Roy des Paladins, la terreur du monde, la fleur de la noblesse
des Rodomonts, Rolands, and Renaud, dove d'infinies graces, beau comme un Ange,
coeur and courage de Lucifer, seruiteur des Dames, and Prince souuerain de la
compagnie des matois.

VIII. VNiour ie trouue en vn^ bataille la Foyne des Amazones, l^quelle me
voulant tuer de son espee, haussa le bras, and moy sans perdre temps ie luy
coupe, and aussi tossed la iette par terre puis la prenant par les cheueux ie la
iette de tell fu^ie and violence en l'air qu'elle donna and passa insques au
cinquieme Ciel, rer contrant Mars qui jouoit aux cent auec Venus, auquel elle
r^mpit la test. Vtnus grandement espounentee, s'^scria demandant setours, and
a son cry accour^nt tous les dieux, lesquels demeurerent fort estonnez voyans
Mars estendu sur la place. Lors Jupiter mist la test a la fenestre, and me vit
iettant coups d'espec contre mes ennemis de tell cholere, que le feu qui
sortoit d'icelle sembloit este un aeutre Mont-Gibel ou d'Ethne. Partant J^piter
dit a tous les Dieux, qu'il ne se remuassent ou fiss^nt aucun bruit, d'autant
que celuy qui auoit tue Ma s estoii assez suffisant pour t^er encore tout
autant de Dieux qui restoient en v^e.

IX. GArdez-vous (mes Seigneurs) retirez vous un peu iusques a ce que i'aye mis
ma cape ou manteau, pource que le vent d'icelle est suffisant pour vous enuoyer
cinquantes lieues loin par dela les monts Pyrenees.

X. SI mon espee pouuoit dire ce qu'elle fait, le temps luy defaudroit pour en
discorrir. Qui est-ce sinon elle, qui peuple plus tous les cymetieres qui sunt
au monde? Qui est-ce qui fait rich les Chirurgiens de ceste terrc? Qui est ce
qui done continuellement de la besongne pour trauailler aux armuriers? Qui
est-ce qui rompt la maille plus fine? Qui est-ce qui se mocque des boucliers de
Barcelona, qui 'taille les cabacez de Calatayud sinon elle? Carles casquets
d'Almazen elle les coupe autant facilement comme s'ils estoient fatis de melon.

XI. ILy a vingt ans que cette espee me done a manger. Par elle ie suis craint
des hommes: and aim des femmes.

XII. ON m'a dit que'le grand Turc commet plusieurs meurtres, qu'il coupe
iambes and bras: mais par la vie des os de mon pere, si ie voy la il n'aura
plus de hardiesse: pource que voyant deuant luy ma prosence, il se donneray
luy-mesme la mort de fa propre main, afin qu'il ne vienne a tomber es miennes.

XIII. AVec vne seule voix ie penetreray and enforceray l'Enfer, and de maseule
presence i'assuietti^ ay tout le monde depuis l'Orient iusques a l'Occiden,
mesme que ie le pilleray, and ravageray and me^tray en pieces les hommes qut
sont nais en iceluy. Puis on scait par tout que ie suis. Que i'ay mon lict
dresses^r des costs de Geants, les matlas sont remplis de moustaches de
Maistres de Camp du grand Turc, and les Traversins de ceruelles qu' a coups de
soufflers i'ay tirez de la test de Capitaines, les draps sont tissus de
cheneux d'Amazones, les conuertures de barbes de Suisses, les courtines de
sourcils, and paupieres de Hongres and Allemans: Et la muraille de mon logis
est bastie de pieces tant de casques que de testes entieres des Port enseignes
de la Royne d'Angleterre, lesquelles i'ay trenchees auec ceste crainte and
formidable espee: le plancher dema maison est en lieu de carreaux accommode de
dents de Ianiceres: La tapisserie sont peaux d'Arabes and sorciers que i'ay
escorchez auec la point de ma dague and les tuilles qui conurent ma maison
sont ongles de Monarques and Roys, les corpse desquels il y a ia longs temps
qu'en despit d'eux and a leurs corpse deffendant, i'ay mis a coups de pied en la
sepulture.

XIV. IE mesprise de mettre la main a l'espee contre vnbrauache Captain
Anglois ie luy done un tell coup de pied, qu'il alla frapper de sa test dans
le Soleil de tell force, ce qu'il le fit eclipser l'espace de quinze iours,
and de la en apres ce Captain s'est agenou ille deua^t Jupiter le priant de
me pardo^ner mes pechez en recompense de ce qu'avec ce coup de pied ie l'auois
mis au Ciel avec les estoilles, moy le povant envoyer en enfer auec les
malheureux and damnez esprits.

XV. AVec un poil de ces moustaches que ie te ietteray, ie feray vne tell
ouverture en ton corpse, que toute l'Infanterie Espagnolle and la Caualerie
Francoise asseront au travers sans toucher a l'un ny a l'autre cost a'icelle.

XVI. DAme de mon coeur, commondez moy quelque chose qui soit de ma vocation:
car ie vous iure par la gross dent de Cerbere de deffier pour l'amour de vous
dix hommes ensemble, and quand il en viendroit d'auantage ie ne m'en voudrois
fuir. Commandez moy de tuer un, deux, trois, quatre, cinquante, soixante
persons: couper iambes, bras, taillarder le visage de quelqu' vne, qui se
soit ose esgaler a vous: car ces tells chooses seront plustost faites qu'elles
n'auront este commandees.

XVII. AVec cette tres redoutee espee, ie ruin, i'embraze, and mets tout en
feu, rompant les Armees, les Citez, les chasteaux, les fossez, les Tours, les
murailles, and les forteresses inexpugnables. Et avec ma presence ie fais
cacher Jupiter, fuir Mercure, trembler Cupidon, desguiser and transformer Mars,
and fay qu'il voise prendre le tribut que Venus me done, pource que ie suis
son amoureux.

XVIII. ET quelque part que ie sois la mort est tousiours avec moy, pource
quelle a plus de profit uvec moy que si elle estoit au milieu des plus
sanglantes and furieuses guerres du monde, and m'a tousiours suivi and
accompagne en la conqueste des Royaumes dis Grimeens, Diceens. Dinameens,
Alopitiens, Pitaniens and Espinomeens, aussi que tell est la verite que sans
elle ie cheminerois tousiours seul, and de nuict: pource que ie ne trouve autre
qui me resemble and me plaist plus qu'elle.

XIX. COmme le monde est divise en quatre parties desquelles les trois sont
Afrique, Asie and Europe: and ces trois sont entourees and enuironnees de l
mer: ainsi mon coe^r est divise en trois autres parties d'vne nature affable,
terrible and cruelle, and ces trois parties sont evirennees, non pas d'eau,
mais de viues flammes ardantes de feu. Et comme ce feu (a cause de l'amour) si
tant doux (que meilleur me seroit s'il estoit amer, a ce que ie ne tiens
captive ceste poison qui est mo^ coear) de mesme l'est mo^ coeur. Pource
qu'auec trois coups de ceste bien treuchante espee l'vn done detaille, l'autre
de reuers, and l'autre de point, ie voudrois mettre par terre tout le genre
humain faisant les ruisseaux de sang plus long que le Gange, plus large que
n'est le Po, and plus terrible que le Nil. Mais que le monde remercie de ce que
maintenant ie suis amoureux, car au precedent que ie le susse, ie tuois chacuu
iour pour le moins trois ou quatre douzains de persons, and maintenant ie
mets a mort pas plus qu'vne douzaine and ce a cause de l'affection tres grande
que je port a ma Maistresse.

XX. J'Ay en moy la nature du Basilic, and encore quelque chose de plus: car si
luy avec son regard en tue un, moy regardant les hommes avec cholere ie les
fais tomber dix a dix comme si mo^ regard estoit des balls d'artillerie.

XXI. SI mon tant valeureux courage que i'ay en mon ame se pouvoit achapter a
prix d'argent, il n'y auroit plus aucun trafique en la mer ny en la terre, and
ne parleroit on plus de marchands ny de marchandises: person ne se priseroit
ou tacheroit plus de s'adonner a tell vacation: pour autant que tous
procureroient d'employer leur industry, pour acquerir la force d'vn de mes
bras, d'vne iambe, a'vn doigt, d'vne ongle, d'vne paupiere de mon oeil, du plus
petit poil de ma test, and ce seulement pour estre vaillans: car c'est ce que
maintenant on prise le plus. Mais ie me refiouys que cela ne se peut fair, a
cause que cela est cause d'vn plus grand repos de tous les Roys, Monarques, and
Princes qui sont tous mes amiss.

XXII. QVi sera ceste tres grande eshontee qui ne deviendra amoureuse de ceste
forte cuisse, de ce bras puissant, de ceste poictrine plain de toutes forces
and vaillantise, de ce visage plus beau que celuy de Ganimede, que celuy de
Didon, ny encore que celuy d'Absalon?

XXIII. MA Maqeerelle vielle putain de fortune, n'a done parole, que ie
iouyray de cefle Dame laquelle ie suis tant amoureux, que si elle ne me tient
promise se iure par les corns de Pluton, par la barbe de Mars, par la
machoire de Samson, and par l'Alcoran de Mahomet que ie luy osteray and feray
perdre toute son inco^stance and variable roue, and quant a son corpse d'vne
estocade ie l'enuoyray a Valdolid, brise en tant de petites pieces, qu a
l'heure qu'il arriuera, on en pourra recueillir de la poudre, pour ietter sur
les lettres que ie dois enuoyer a ma maistresse.

XXIV. I'Ay plus augmente en deux iours le Royanme stigiux de Pluton, and
peuple de subiets, sa sale tenebreuse and enfumee que n'ont fait Rodomont,
Rolant, Renand, Manaricard and Radamante, ayant rendu craintifs en mill and
mill lieux le: coeurs plus vaillans courageux. Tesmoins en sont les Orient
aux, les Septentrionaux, les Occidentaux, and ceux qui habitent le Midy.

XXV. LE grand Turc a plus de crainte de ma valeur que ce bras luy a fait
cognoistre que dix armees iointes ensemble, pource que moy me trouvant un iour
en la guerre des Venitiens contre le mesme grand Turc, ie done tell soufflet a
Abenhamet son Maistre de Camp, que ie luy oste la test de sur les espaules,
and du coup elle sauta jusques en Constantinoples, y portant les nouvelles de
la perte de fon armee. Et quand tous les siens virent cette test sans corpse,
ils s'enfuyrent en leurs maisons fermant bien leurs ports sureux avec tell
crainte que de six ans ils n'ont ose sortir dehors, pour la crainte qu'ils
avoient de moy, iusques a ce que moy us ant de mon accoustumee magnificence, ie
leur permis qu'ils peussent sortir librement, and se promener comme de
coustume: ce que puis apres ils ont fait.

XXVI. QVand ie march par les ri^es de la Cite, mill Dames me viennent
audevant; l'vne me tire par la cap^; l'autre me fait sign de l'oeil: l'autre
me pry d'aller souper avec elle, un autre me fait un present: un autre me
baise les mains, and benist la mere qui m'a enfante, se reputant tres heureuse
qu'elle aye en ce bon-heur de coucher vne nuict avec moy, a celle sin seulement
qu'elle puisse avoir un enfant de la race d'vn tant grand personnage comme moy.

XXVII. SI la force de mes members estoit departie enter persons poltronnes
and esprits mutins, le monde seroit mis tout en revolte, and ne verroit on
autre chose en iceluy sinon Conquestes and Batailles; les cloches ne se
sonneroient de iour and de nuict, sinon pour un sign de quelque enterrement de
corpse morts, les Chirurgiens ne sortiroient de leurs maisons, sinon pour
recoudre les coups d'espees, guarir les estocades, en remettre and renouer les
iambes rompues, les femmes pour pleurer la mort de leurs maris, les petits
enfans la perte de leurs peers, and les ieunes Dames la disgrace qu'auroient
encouru leurs amoureux.

XXVIII. POur certain que ie meris quand ie me souviens de l'ignorance des
Dieux, qui ont desfie Hercules, and luy ont mis le nom d'vn d'iceuz l'appellant
Dieu, and ce seulement pource qu'il a tue l'Hydre, qu'il a oste la corn au
Taureau, mis en pieces le Dragon, deffait le Lyou, surmonte le Centaure and le
^^er Sauglier, and aux vus and aux autres fait perdre la vie: pource qu'il a
fait de crainte enfuir les Harpies, qu'il a tue Cete and Achelois, vaincu
Diomede Roy de Thrace, and deffait Geroues Royne des Amazones, finablement
pource qu'il a plant des Colomnes en plusieurs endroits. En effect toutes ces
chooses ne sont qu'vne pure fable and actions de petites femmelettes comparees
avec mon courage and ma force que ny la puissance de Daire Roy des Perses, ny
du grand Alexandre, surnomme le Grand, ny le fort Samson, ny le puissant Hector
Troyen, ny le valeur^^x Achiles, ny le furienx Roland, ny le vaillant Gridacb,
ny le galliard Sacripante, ny le terrible Mandricard, ny le fameux Roger, ny le
robuste Agrican, ny l'horrible Rodoment, null de tous ^ceux-cy ne se penvent
esgaler a mon horrible, espouventable and furihonde force.

XXIX. SI je voy a toy je te donneray tell coup de pied t'eslevant en haut,
tellemement qu'estant charge de dix charettes de pain tu auras plus de peur de
la faim, que la cheute.

XXX. LE bras me tremble de ce que je me delibere de fair pour ma Maistresse,
car continuellement ie pense comme je la tiendray content, and iamais ie n'y
puis parvenir. La nuict passee ie songeois que je faisois fait d'arme^ en sa
faveur contre dix hommes desquels i'en tue six and de ceux qui s'enfuyrent
celuy qui se sauva avec plus de sante me laissa un bras gauche a mes pieds.
Puis (bon Dieu) comment le feray ie beaucoup mieux de iour moy estant esueille,
quand quelqu' un prendra la hardiesse de toucher a son patin.

XXXI. MOy iouant un iour avec la Destinee en la presence du Te^ps, de la
Fortune and de la Nature, sur un hazard nous eusmes vne difficulte: de tell
maniere que ie mis la main a l'espee. Le Temps, la Fortune, and la Nature que
estoient amiss de la Destinee se mirent enter deux pour fair la paix. Ie qui
suis Espagnol, ie mets le pied droit dehors, and done un tell coup au Temps que
ie le iette enter le Ciel and la Terre ou il se tient a present, and a la
Fortune ie luy done un oeillade par le milieu de la Ceinture, iettant l'vne de
ses moitiez la ou le Soleil se leave, and l'autre moitie ou il se cache. Et
quand a la Nature ie la frappe d'vn e l revers luy faisant vne play toute
profonde and incurable, que ny Medicin, ny Chirurgien, ny barbier, ny
Apoticaire n'ont este assez suffisant pour la guerir: tellement que vous verrez
tous les mois de l'an qu'elle jette d^ sang par cette play.

XXXII. UN jour moy iouant au Balon, je le frappe de tell force, qu'il fut
port iusques an troifieme Ciel, tombant and sautillant devant les Dieux qui
estoient assemblees pour tenir conseil, lesquels lors se regardans l'vn l'autre
demeurerent grandement esbahis, tenant labouche ouverte sans pouvoir dire vne
seule parole l'vn a l'autre, jusques a ce que leurs sens estant revenus en eux,
ils trouverent qu'il seroit bon que Jupiter descendit en terre, and s'agenou
illast devant moy, and que quittant se^ scepter and Couronne, il s'offrist
humblement a mon service, Venus pour ma servante, Mars pour mon laquais and
Mercure pour mon Maquereau.

XXXIII. DEsirant que Pluton me payast le tribut ordinaire que me paycroit les
autres Roys, ie m'en all droi^ en l'Enfnr ou i^ trouvay Pluton qui se prome
noit accompagne de cinq cens and quarante cinq millions, and traize cens
nonante and six mil legions a^ Diables, qui le suivoient. Et aussi tossed me
voyant venir de loin, il s'achemine droit a moy pour se re^d^e mon prisonnier.
Alors ie mis la main a l'espee^ and Pluton come il me voit in cholere, and
aya^t recogn^ que i'estois Espagnol, il s'enfuit droit au plus profond de
l'Enfer avec toute sa suite, and ferma bien les ports. Et moy voulant qu'il
m'obeist, march pas a pas comme ceux de ma nation ont de coustume, and d'vn
esternuement que ie fis, ie romps toutes les ports and enter dedans. En un
moment ie tris trisonnier le grand Satan, le Prince Pluton and la be^^
Proserpine, ausquels ie lie fermement les maius avec un poil de cette
moustache. Toutes fois voyant les larmes and lamentations qu'ils faisoient
i'usay de la magnificence Espagnole, and les destache les remettant en leur
liberte.

XXXIV. I'Eus un iour une querelle avec un Gentil-homme Francois, il me desia
me disant que ie miss la main a l'espee: moy qui suis du tout courageux, ne le
voulus fair pource que le Francois estant froid and sans cholere, je luy eusse
tire cinquante estocades, and antant de coups de tailles sans le pouvoir tuer,
mais a moy qui suis tout rempli and confit de courage and cholere, avec le
moindre coup du monde il m'eut envoye aux enfers.

XXXV. EStant vne fois horse les trenchees d'Ostende, vne balle d'artillerie
m'entra en la bouche, m'esbranlant deux dents, sans me fair autre mal. A
l'heure mesme plein de cholere ie pris cette balle en mes mains and la iettant
contre les ennemis, elle tomba fortuitement contre vne Tour de la muraille,
laquelle fut en un moment reduite en poudre, tuant iusques a mil cinq cens
cinquante and cinq Soldats qui la gardoient.

XXVII. VNe fois i'en trayaux enfers, ou ie trouvay assis a table, Pluton,
Pros^rpine and la Mort; Ils ^urent vne tell crainte me voyant en leurs
tenebres, que connoissant leur peu de courage sans m'arrester je fis vne
cabriole a la Francoise, and avec le plus haut de mon chappeau je rompt le
toict de l'Enfer, and sortant dehors, le bruit que je fis fut tant grand que la
Cite de Lisbone en trembla, ruinant huict cens octante and cinq maisons de la
rue de Boaviste:

XXXVII. MOy, Hercules la mort, and l'amour nous trouvasmes fortuitement un
jour ensemble en un quarfour, chacun de nous ayant son arc and sa fleche, and
tous trois nous fismes cet accord, que celuy qui de son traict feroit vne plus
grande execution auroit pour recompense l'honneur. Hercules commenc a le
pre^^ter, and avec sa fleche il sit mourir toutes les Panthers, Lions, Tygres,
Ours, Loups, toutes bestes sauvages, Dains, Elephans, Chameaux and Taureaux.
L'Amour prist sa fleche, en tirant de laquelle il fit que les Dieux, les Geans,
les Amazones, les hommes and les Diables tomberent tous sous le ioug amoureux,
moy seul except sur lequel l'amour n'a aucune puissance. La mort se resolut de
tirer son traict, avec lequel elle fit mourir toutes les creatures qui estoient
sur la terre: Moy m'indignant contre eux, and esta^t un peu mis en cholere pour
me vanger D'eux tous, ie mets ma fleche a mon arc, faisant comme dernier mon
traict, avec lequel ie tue Hercules, l'amour and la mort.

XXXVIII. NE vous ennuyez Maistresse and Dame de ma vie, and nayez aucune
fascherie si je suis recherche and ame de tant de Dames and Princesses,
lesquelles vivent estant, abusees and perdent leur temps en vajn: car je n'aime
and ne port affection a autre qu'a vostre seigneurie (Maistresse) puis que
vous estes douee de beauty plus que Diane, de bonnes graces and plaisant
maintient plus que Pallas, de douceur plus que Ve^us: toutes trois souveraines
Deesses and vous vous estes la mie^ne propre, a laquelle i'ay baille mo^ coeur.
Co^siderez do^c que je vous aim, and ne me quittez pas pour un autre, puis que
je suis plus que Gentilho^me. Que si vous mariez avec moy; je vous jure foy de
Captain and par la vie du Roy mon pere (car ie n'a sceu iamais autrement son
nom) de vous fair la premiere nuict un regiment de soldats qui conquesteront
tout le monde.

XXXIX. IE baise la plant des pieds de vostre Seignurie Maistresse de coeur,
Princess de cette poictrine. Duchess de ces bras: Marquise de mon courage,
Comtesse de ma valeur, Royne de mes forces, Dame absolve de toute ma person.

XL. ARrivant pres de Lisbonne, i'appris que cinqua^te vaisse aux estoient
prests d'entrer au port, aussi tossed je fus me pourmener sur la falaize pour les
voir aborder plus co^modement mais comme ils estoient fort pres, je me trouvay
contraint par un flus de ventre de mettre le haut de chausses a bas, and
opposant mes Globes terrestres a celuy de l'eaus pour me guarantir d'vne
violente colique qui me vouloit saisir, je lasche vne petarade si violente,
qu'elle suscita la plus violente tempeste qui ce soit jamais veue sur l'Ocean,
qui repoussa cent cinquante vaisseaux avec tant de fury qu'ils s' allerent
fracasser center les roches de l'Amerique.

XLI. IL est vray que ie suis mal vestu, mais ce n'est pas vne nonchalance
nyvne pauvrete extreme qui m'oblige a paroistre de la sort, mais bien un voeu
solennel que i'ay fait de n'acheter iamais d'estoffe pour me fair un habit
qu'au prealable je n'eusse trouve cent cinquante douzaines de mes ennemis que
je veux terrasser pour m'en servir a couvrir mon habit en guise de boutons,
comme aussi de leurs boyaux en guise de passemens.

XLII. MArs joyeux de m'avoir rencontre m'a demand si je voulois passer le
temps a^ Picquet, mais luy ayant respondu que mes contentemens ne se trouvoient
que dans les exercices violence, il se sentit oblige a me proposer le jeu du
balon que i'acceptay and comme il estoit en peine d'en fair recherche d'vn, il
fut estonne quand il me veit prendre toute la terre, and la pousser avec tant
de roideur qu'elle alla donner jusques au Ciel, ou Jupiter estonne envoya
vistement Mercure pour apprendre la cause de cet accident, and iustement comme
il descendoit, ie repoussois la terre pour la second fois, de sort que
re^contrant ce Messager des Dieux, elle luy cossa le nez, and Ie repoussant
contre mont luy fit donner si fort d^cul contre le visage de la Lune, qu'il luy
a fait aussi plat qu'vn fromage de Milan.

XLIII. ON dit qu' Hercules a delpucelle cent silles en vne nuict. Mais moy
plus courageux que luy paillard, en cinq heureres de temps i'ay fait cent
Hercules.

XLIV. MArs port d'vne vain presomption, ayant ^u la hardiesse de s'attribuer
a ma presence vne gloire que ma veleur s'est legitimement acquise, m'a fasche
de tell sort que tout en celere je l'ay pris par le pied and le jettant en
haut je luy ay done un mouvement circulaire avec tant de violence
qu'auparavant de tomber, il a fait plus de t^^rsend'air que le Ciel n'en a fait
depuis le premier jour de sa creation.

XLIV. IEfay voeu a Dieu qu^ jes^is sans s^n^ and a demi desespere de tell
maniere, que je ne voudrois pas maintenant trouver homme qui me demandast la
paix, toute ma glory se^oit de tronver quelqv'n sur lequel je p^usse
descharger ma cholere and me venger, p^is que je ne l'ay peu fair contre ceux
qui me l'ont occasionnee a cause de leur legere and bastive s^ite, lacoit que
c'est la verite que je ne m^ suit iamais monstre pouvoir beaucoup contre ceux
qui peuvent peu.

XLV. IE ne scay quel genre de mort je dois choistr pour punir deux vilains qui
m'ont oeillade ce jourd'huy en la rue de mauvais oeil de travers: je desire de
regarde^ mon repertoire ou i'ay remarque sept cens soixante and cinq especes,
pour voir laquelle maniere me sera plus agreeable, iacoit que celles don't i'vse
maintenant coustumierement, and qui me sont ordinaires aux mains soient coups
d'espees sans sang, coups de plombe au d'espee, ou un Revers industrieux and
subtle, les autres je les troue comme un crible a coups de poignard vne taille
large, vne estocade dangereuse, un coup mortel, and quelquefois je do^ne des
coups de bastons a celle fin que je laisse reposer and se resiouyr mon espee.

XLVI. QV' est-ce qu' Asie, Europe, Afrique, es monts Pyrenees and les Alps,
les vnes mises sur les autres, sept Dragons, huit Elephans, dix Tigres, vingt
deux Lions and soixante cinq Taureux? Cela pour moy n'est rien.

XLVII. MOn Cordonnior un matin me chau^^a^^, un de mes souliers se trouva trop
estr^it, je frappe avec c^luy tell coup en terre, que i'ou^rois la terr^ jusques
aux enfers, Belz^buth, Satan, Pluton, Barrabas, Seigneurs and Princes des
tenebrenses obscuritez, demeurerent beaucoup estonnez: le grand Cerbere donna
de grand cris and abois: Proserpine ^arrachoit les cheveux, pleurant amorement
pour ^^ qu'elle voyoit son royaume tenebreux recevoir quelque clarte. Les
petits diabl^ti^s se cachoient qui deca qui dela, and quelques vns s'enfuirent
lesquels font demeurez depuis ce temps la par l'air, and d'autres par la terre
tourmentant quelques persons, comme on voit aduenir par chacun iour en (...)
monde.

XLVIII. MAdame vous pouvez a just tiltre laisser ce nom de Dame Beatrix, and
vous appeller d'ores en avaunt Imperatrix ou Emperiere, Royne, Princess,
Marquise, Co^tesse, Dame and Damois lle, puis que ces deux colomnes d'Hercules
qui soustiennent tout le monde sont tant a vostre service, je veux dire ce
corpse Castillan rempli d'vne abo^dance de courageux gens ^'armes, qui sont
ceste poistrine and ce bras plus fort que la Tour de Babylone, and
principalement quand il est aid de ceste redoutee espe^: pon^ce que le feu du
fill d'icelle penetre and surmonte e^ splendeur les rayons lumineux du Soleil.

XLIX. IE suis seul sans crainte, menacant le Ciel and l'Air, le Feu and la
Terre, Jupiter and l' Enfer; in sques aux Elemens, je desire leur fair la
guerre: je ne crains point la tempeste, la foudre, le tonnetre and l'esclair.
Et deva^t qu'il soit peu de temps je me veux fair Seigneur du Ciel, de la
terre and l'Enfer: je le veux and je le peux, car mes forces sont demesurees
pour ce fair.

L. IEsuis vieil a tout travail, and je suis nouveau a souffrir moy lequel
depuis moy enfance and des le temps que s'estois encor au berceau Venus ia
accoustume teter en lieu de laict des feux, des souspirs and des larmes.

The Most Valiant Sir Frederick Fight-All's Panagyrick on himself.
I Never yet could find that daring He,
Durst whisper, any yet has conquered me.
I Have fought the Champions of the Earth all round;
And either slew, or made them quit their ground.
From Pole to Pole such mighty things I Have done,
That from all Heroes, I their Glory won.
So that the wonder of Mankind I Am styled,
And chief in Valors Register I Am filled.
Yet still I must Act more, that labr'ing Fame,
May Reel, and Tire, and Sink, to bear my Name.
And when ten thousand miracles I Have done,
Out shining far the luster of the Sun;
When by the envy of the Gods I Am whirled,
Ravished, and snatched, up to the higher World;
When Heaven is of my company grown proud;
You shall behold me perching on a Cloud.
Could I to fearful Man my Soul infuse,
'Twould teach him how aright his Sword to use,
How he should take in Cittadels, and Towns,
Kingdoms and Nations conquer, ravish Crowns,
Raise Seiges, vanquish enemies; and all
Those deeds in Valors sacred List do fall.
Sometimes a single Kingdoms part I take,
Then with my looks I make the rest to quake,
Where e're I go, my presence conquest brings,
My single hand can sway the fate of Kings.
I Have Ensigns snatched often from an Armies head,
And at my Feet laid prostrate Giants dead.
Out Hectored Champions, and out foamed wild Bores,
Out bluster'd billows, breaking on the shores.
Out fought Briareus, with his hundred hands;
Out walked the Tigers on the Arabian Sands.
Out star'd the Face of death in Blood and Wars.
Out shined the Moon, out shot the falling Stars.
Out lightened Lightning, and out thundered Thunder;
Gut did great Mars in Field, and outvy'd Wonder.
Astonished Ages from these deeds shall learn.
Which way I move, that way the World shall turn.
If you are with this not satisfied enough,
I Will of my Valor give you urcher p^oof.
I by an Host surrounded was in fi l^,
Whose General cried, fight not st^ut man, but yield.
I, daunted not, rusht in, and with one swing.
Before my Feet, I laid his breathless King,
At which a Neighboring Prince his quarrel took;
From his broad Shoulders, his proud head I struck,
So quick, the head after it fell it cursed.
The next advanced whose Fate was like the first.
Him I beheaded so most vig'rously,
That with the force, his falli^g head killed three.
Then being beset with an united power,
With my long Sword n^xt pass, I thrust through four.
With Carcasses I made long Lanes, and to be short,
In one hours space, I made this bloody sport.
Here scattered Swords, there Woods of Lances stood;
Here heaps of bodies lay, there streams of blood.
With open mouth there lay a gasping head;
As if it thirsted for the blood it shed.
Here a lopt head cut capers, as if 'twoud
Have danced up to the Shoulders, where it stood.
There lay dismembered arms, in their own gore,
Which stretched, and graspt to reach the Swords they bore:
The object looked as if it had expressed
A thousand Victims offered by a Priest.
When I Would done all, and heaps on heaps compiled,
I fairly turned about my self, and smiled.
How ill these mortals managed their command,
Although all Hero's nothing in my hand.
Thus I do never stoop to little things,
I seldom vanquish any under Kings.
When none can kill me, I my self must doom,
And call upon the Gods to make me room.
Thus when I please I mortal blood can spill;
Yet know, that I can cure; as well as kill.
Dismembered Trunks (which welter in their gore)
That hand them lopt can them again restore.
Quack Aesculapius of Cures may boast,
And in that thing, a very Knight o'th Post.
Conf^st, He did some petty things, what then?
But I of mortals, make immortal men.
Did He now live, He might imboldned be
By his great skill, as to compare with me.
But I de convince the Slave, ^is only I
Have power to guide a Monarchs Destiny:
Such proud Quack salvers must not be endured,
Who never saw the wounds which I have cured.
My hand the rule of humane Fate has swai'd,
Cured wounds as mortal, as my Sword has made.
My hand men's tottering Fabrics can er^ct,
And be the lesser worlds great Architect.
I with my Sword have often dug a grave,
And from its fatal brink, as often did save.
Al-Man-Sirs Art has Natures power withstood;
The old let out, I have infused new blood.
Nay when men's looks do wear, more horrid forms,
Then the Grimaces of a Sea in Storms,
I have made horror, pains, and torture cease:
'Twixt Death, and sickly man, I Have made a peace.
Decrepit Nature, bedrid, at my sight,
Has roused, and rose, and walked, and stood upright.
My power has made declining lives stand fixed,
And with new Heat, has Cooling Vitals mixed.
Nay more, when Death has his bold entrance stole,
And given defiance to a struggling Soul,
I Have made fierce Death look pale at my approach,
And trembling, not dare strike, where I dare touch.
It Is no great thing to do, if true that all
The powers of art, within my circuit fall.
So that over mortal men I have this odds,
Cure wounds, not only made by man, but Gods.
In short, my art such wonders did afford,
I have lost a ms, eyes, heads, nay lives resto^'d.
These and ten thousand such I Have done, all true,
Yet have not spoken half, what I can do.
I Now exp^ct, that some cowardly Curs w^ll bark at these my unparalleled, and
se^mingly i^credible acts, such whose valor lies in their tongues, not hands:
by o hers who dare not kill otherwise, than with Pen, Ink, and Paper. Let these
boasting Mount banks, first resolve me these Questions, or they are not like
to live in our thou^hts.

1. Why one poor Platonic Idea, fluttering upon the O^^fice of the Chaos,
should chac^, or drive away the invincible Squadrons of Democratical Atoms? 2.
Why that one man should be like the Sun, wrapped in a tear of Snow, and another
to bloom like a Northern blast gu lt over with Thunder? 3. And lastly, Why your
warbling Saty^, clad in dew, whose Zodiac toils in pa^ched steel, cleft like a
living Cloud, Loves arrow-field, should confront a Sable Emerauld asunder?
To those impudent Mi^midons, who dare compare with me, I shall propose them
this task to perform, without which, they share in no part of our estimation.
WIth a small switch the Sea divide;
And with one whistle stop the Tide.
Ketch the wild Winds within thy fist,
And let them blow, but when thou list.
Or creep to Neptunes watery bed,
And force a Mermaids Maidenhead.
Then soar more high, and fetch me down
Fair Ariadny's Starry Crown.
Or bring me Berenices Hair,
A Perriwigg for me to wear.
Make Mars and Saturns aspects mild;
And get the Virgin Star with Child.
Go Ring the snout of the North Bear;
Then sit in Casseopeia's Chair,
Or if thou have that daring Soul?
Go whip the Bear about the Pole.
If thou can do all these, I cannot deny,
But thou in time may be as stout as I.
FINIS.

