A LETTER TO THE Superiors, (Whether Bishops or Priests) Which Approve or
License the Popish Books IN ENGLAND, Particularly To those of the Jesuits
Order, CONCERNING LEWIS SABRAN a Jesuit.

Imprimatur hic Libellus cui Titulus, A Letter to the Superiors, etc.

Jo. Battely.
June 7. 1688.


LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1688.

A LETTER to the Romish Superiors In ENGLAND.
Reverend Sirs,
YOU will not wonder at my making this Address to your selves, since you were
so lately pleased to allow Mr. Sabran to set me an Example of it; and cannot
therefore disallow that in me, which was so commendable in him. When I wrote my
last Letter to Mr. Sabran, I was so weary of such an Adversary, that I promised
him never to answer him more, if he pursued the methods of his Challenge
defended. This I will believe was the reason why it was thought expedient to
trouble the Reverend Mr. Needham with the Controversy, who has a much better
Employment upon his hands, than to answer every Caviller that would be drawing
him off from his better Services to our Church.

I have not forgot my Promise of troubling my self no more with Mr. Sabran; and
yet cannot be just to my own self, if I do not take some care to purge my self
from some Wrongs he has done me in that Letter to Mr. Needham: you were pleased
to allow of those Abuses to the Press, and therefore must give me leave not
only to make my Complaints to you, but to expect that you will do me all the
Right herein that one Christian ought to do to another.

I need not inform you how I came engaged with Mr. Sabran, that it was
concerning a Sermon de Sanctis, which Mr. Sabran had quoted in his Pulpit as
St. Austin's, and I denied it to be his. Some of you were pleased not only to
allow that Sermon, with that Passage in it, to the Press, but to approve of all
the unlearned Arguments and Fetches which he afterward used in defense of
himself. What Services you did your Cause or your Church by that business, your
selves by this time, I presume, are able to tell. I am very well satisfied with
all I wrote against him upon that account, and am so fully persuaded that I was
perfectly in the right in that Affair, that I am confident there is not one
Learned Bishop, Priest, or Deacom in your own Church beyond Seas, that is not
of the same mind with me about that Sermon.

I will not appeal to any of you in England, because you have made your selves
Parties to his Quarrel by Licensing his Papers; and Learning may be a different
thing in England, from what it is beyond Seas.

I will not presume any more to think that any of you did violence to your own
Judgments in Licensing of Mr. Sabran's Papers: far be it from me to have so
uncharitable a thought of Persons of your Characters and Station. However, to
convince you that what he wrote, and you approved, about that 35 Sermon de
Sanctis, was contrary to the Judgments of all men of Learning in the World,
(your selves only excepted here in England); I do here offer and undertake to
refer the Determination of that Controversy betwixt Mr. Sabran and me, to any
Learned Persons or Societies beyond the Seas. I will refer it, if you please,
to the Benedictines (Congregationis St. Mauri) at Paris, concerning whom, you,
Gentlemen of the Jesuits Order, must pardon me that I think them to be as far
before your Order in Learning and Knowledge in Antiquity, as their Order was
before you in standing.

But if Exceptions be made against them as Parties on my side, (which I cannot
deny them to be) that have already determined against Mr. Sabran, and those
that allowed his Papers to the Press; I am as willing to refer it to those
learnedest men now in France, Father Mabillon, Monsieur Baluze, and Monsieur
Bigot, or any two of them; and do here make you (Reverend Sirs) this Proposal,
That what has been written on both sides, shall be faithfully communicated to
them; and that if you can procure a Letter from them that they are satisfied
with Mr. Sabran's Arguments, that that 35 Sermon de Sanctis was St. Austin's, I
do here engage my Reputation to you and the World, that I will not only beg Mr.
Sabran's Pardon, but make my Recantation as public to the World as this
Challenge is.

You cannot but think, Reverend Sirs, that I have very good grounds for all I
wrote against Mr. Sabran, that dare put this matter to such an issue before men
of your own Persuasion, before men that look upon me as a downright Heretic,
and therefore cannot be suspected of showing me the least favor herein.

I am convinced to a demonstration, that what I wrote in that Controversy was
the very Truth, and that what you allowed to the Press, could not be so. I will
not be so bold as to call upon you to do St. Austin and me right, in retracting
what you have done for Mr. Sabran herein; but I cannot but entreat you that for
your own sake, for Truths sake, and for the Worlds sake, you would not allow
for the future such things to the Press, because against us, which are
condemned not only by us, but by all the men of Learning of your Church beyond
Sea, who cannot but be ashamed of any Violences done to Truth, Learning, or
Ingenuity.

This Controversy with Mr. Sabran, about St. Austin, is that which gave
occasion to our Second Controversy, about Invocation of Saints: and the
Management of the first did prepare me to expect all the outrageous and
indecent Usage I have had from your Champion in the second; I have been treated
by him, with your leave, with such Language as I could not have expected from a
Scholar, or a Christian. I have too great a respect for you, as well as for my
Reader, to foul this Address to you with any of it: and I cannot think any
among you can be willing to be entertained with such stuff, excepting those who
allowed the Letter to Mr. Needham to the Press; if such Language pleases them,
I must entreat them to take up the Letter itself which they Licensed, and there
they will find entertainment enough. As for the rest of you, Reverend Sirs, I
must entertain you with Complaints and Requests, instead of bad Language.

I will not trouble you or my self so far as to run over again what I have
written and urged out of Antiquity against your Invocation of Saints. I am sure
I have demonstrated it through the First, Second, Third, Fourth, and part of
the Fifth Ages of the Church of God, that Invocation of Saints was so far from
being the Practice, that it was expressly against the Doctrine of the Martyrs
and Fathers of those Ages: Mr. Sabran had the courage to venture upon one Page
of that large Historical Account of the Fathers, and to make his Exceptions
against it, which I took care to remove very soon after, and which I did very
easily do, since besides some harsher Mistakes than he had hitherto made, there
was little but mean Cavils.

As mean however as these Cavils were, he was pleased to cook them up anew, and
to make them the Subject of his cavilling Letter to the Learned Mr. Needham; I
am not willing to throw away my time in answering again those mean Objections,
but am very well assured, that every one that will impartially read and
consider my Historical Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints, and my Third
Letter to Mr. Sabran, in defense of it, will be as much persuaded as my Friends
who have read them are, that I ought not to trouble my self or the World with
entering the Lists again upon that Subject with such a Trifler.

But there are some things there, which I could not pass over without making
some defense for my self: they are his charging me with falsifying the Fathers
Words and Sense: and this I can assure you (R.R. Sirs) is an Accusation I
cannot lie quietly under, but must complain to those who gave Mr. Sabran leave
to print it.

Since I became a Writer in Defense of my Dear Mother, the Church of England, I
have been chiefly concerned with those of your Party, who laid their
Pretensions to Antiquity, as if she had been on your side against us: in my
Answer to the Convert, Mr. Sclater of Putney, and to the Nubes Testium, and in
my Primitive Fathers no Papists, I have had occasion to make abundance of
Citations out of the Fathers Words; I thank God that I can affirm it, that as I
saw all I quoted (excepting one little Passage in Veteres Vindicati) with my
own eyes in the Fathers themselves, so I am not conscious that I ever
misquoted, or altered, or falsified any one Passage of them all, though so
numerous: and therefore after so much care, and pains and sincerity used
herein, to be posted up for a falsifier of Fathers, was very uneasy, and what
I cannot bear; especially since I am no such person, as I am confident I can
convince every one of you, to whom I make this Address, if you will but give
your selves the small trouble to examine this business betwixt him and me.

In Mr. Sabran's Challenge defended, he had quoted a Passage out of St.
Athanasius, in favor of Invocation of Saints. In my third Letter to him, I
showed not only that the Tract out of which he had it, was owned to be spurious
by your latest Critic, Monsieur du Pin, but that had it been St. Athanasius's,
the Passage was urged by St. Athanasius in a direct contrary sense to that
wherein Mr. S. had urged it. This I showed not only from the Design of the
whole Tract, but from the Passage itself, which was abused by him.

His Answer to this in his Letter to Mr. Needham is, That I, to keep my hand in
(for it seems this is not the first time I have been guilty) must falsify and
mis-apply the passage, and then gives the Words as they stand in the Cullen
Translation, which he had by him of the year 1617. If you adore the Man Christ,
because the Word of God dwells there, in the same manner adore also the Saints
on the account of God, who has his dwelling in them. Now that above the Holy
Ghost, that is, above God a Man be honored and glorified is the highest
Impiety. These says Mr. Sabran, are the holy Doctor's words. And these I am
accused of falsifying: whether I am guilty or no, shall quickly appear; and to
this purpose I entreat you all, you especially that did License this Accusation
to the Press, to look into your own Edition of St. Athanasius's Works, printed
at Paris in Greek and Latin, by Morel and Cramoisy 1627, in the first Tome at
p. 593. you will find the passage quoted by us both: Which I will present in
Greek to those that understand it, and in English to those that do not.

Wherefore if you Adore the Man with God the Word, (...). D. Athan. de Incarn.
Verbi Dei, p. 593. Tom. 1. Edit. Paris. Gr. L. 1627.
because he dwells there, Adore the Saints also, for God dwells in them too:
AND IS NOT THIS ABSVRD? And for a Man to be honored above the Holy Ghost, that
is, above God, is the highest Impiety.

And now Reverend Sir, I appeal to every one of your own Consciences, whether I
am guilty of falsifying this passage, in putting in those words, And is not
this absurd? is not the (...) in the Text? is not this your own Edition of St.
Athanasius out of a Popish Press? and can any of you deny this to be the truest
and best Edition of that Fathers Works? If none of these things can be denied
by any men of Virtue and Honesty, much less by men of your Character and
station; what satisfaction do you owe to me as well as to Truth and to the
World, who did allow Mr. Sabran in print to affix so false a scandal upon me? I
pray God to forgive you, and do assure you, that I have already done it.

In his Quotation of St. Cyril concerning the Virgin Mary, I told him that the
(...) (which he made such use of in his Translation, and upon which the stress
of the whole passage did depend) belonged to the Virgin's Womb, and not to the
Virgin her self. In his Letter to Mr. Needham he calls this a gross Cheat,
which any Grammar Scholar can easily find out, and very decently asks him
whether he did not blush when he read this, and yet Licensed it.

It was not Mr. Needam but Mr. S. that should have blushed at this, for Reverend
Sirs, let me entreat you to look in St. Cyril himself, and you will not for the
future License such Language and such Behavior.

I will to convince you as well as the World, set down the passage as it is in
St. Cyril himself; and as it was Translated by Mr. Sabran; and as it ought to
have been Translated from the Original.

Mr. Sabran's Translation.
Hail Virgin, BY WHOSE MEDIATION the Holy Trinity is glorified and honored
through the whole World; IN WHOM Heaven exults, Angels and Archangels rejoice,
by whom the Devils are put to flight.

A True Translation.
Hail you that bore him that is incomprehensible in your Holy Virgin Womb, by
which, or, by reason of which the Trinity is glorified; by which Heaven
rejoices, by which the Angels and Archangels are joyful, by which the Devils
are put to flight.

The Text of St. Cyril.
(...). S. Cyril. Alexand. Homil. Diver. Tom. 5. Pars 2. p. 355. Edit. Paris
1638.

You see, Reverend Sirs, the Text and the Translations together, and now I
cannot but ask you, whether the first (...) (which Mr. Sabran had Translated By
whose Mediation) does not follow immediately after the (...) the Virgin's Womb,
and is connected relatively to it; I will hope that the sight of these things
will not only acquit me in your Consciences from the Accusation of a gross
Cheat which M. S. had laid to my charge, but that you who Licensed that Letter
to Mr. Needham to the Press, will not for the future suffer Mr. Sabran to lay
such very false and groundless Accusations either unto mine, or any of our
Writers charge. If you do, notwithstanding this discovery of him and his
strange practices suffer him to go on in his way, we shall for the future be
obliged to lay any such Slanders at your doors, Reverend Sirs, who License them.

Another Accusation as heavy as either of these, he does advance against me,
about the Words of the Council of Chalcedon: He tells Mr. Needham, in that his
obliging Letter to him, That I, having made way for a Forgery, falsify that
Council's words.

I have got it seems of late a very unlucky hand, or a very unjust Adversary;
but you, Reverend Sirs, shall determine whether it is. I hope I need not tell
you the History of Stephen and Bassianus, nor remind how it was upon the
mention that Flavianus had communicated with Bassianus the rejected Bishop of
Ephesus, that the Bishops which belonged to Constantinople rose up and cried
out, This is the Truth, we all say the same, the Memory of Flavian is eternal;
behold the Truth, Flavian lives after death; the Martyr shall entreat you for
us; Flavian is here, Flavian judges with us.

My crime here is that I have Translated the words of the Council different
from him: but why so many hard words upon it. He Translates the words,
Flavianus lives after death, that the Martyr pray for as; but I with my
Forgery, The Martyr shall entreat you for us. I will put down the Text it self:
(...).

I do not entreat you, Gentlemen, to trouble your selves to end this doughty
terrible Quarrel betwixt Mr. Sabran and me. I hope some of Mr. Pulton's
Scholars at the Savoy, are so much Proficients as to tell what Mood and Tense
(...) is of: If they be, I will even leave it to them, and trust the Lads with
it, who will certainly be Degraded if they be not on my side.

I will trouble your Reverences no further with Mr. Sabran's Accusations of me,
I hope these I send you may have so much success as to discover the Man to you;
which is the utmost of my Intentions in this Letter against him; for I am very
certain, that such a knowledge and insight into the Jesuit, and his Behavior
will procure him a Quietus from you, who cannot love to have your Cause
defended by such disingenuous and unaccountable ways as this Mr. Sabran is got
into. However, the least I can hope for at your hands is, that when this Mr.
Sabran sets up for Writer again, you would lay your Commands upon him, to leave
out such defamatory Language, and to have a care of Forgeries and
Falsifications, and that you would let him know withal, that if he does not
leave off such Practices, you cannot in Honor or Conscience give your License
or Allowance to his Books, since he has been not only accused, but proved
before your own faces to have been guilty of such behavior as is not only
dishonorable to your Religion, but Christianity itself.

But after all, I am not of such a temper as to believe that Mr. Sabran, or any
of your other Authors are of such a Nature as to love these unaccountable
Practices for their own sakes, or to calumniate others for Calumnies sake; no I
profess my belief to be that what any of them have been guilty of herein, is
matter of necessity and not their own choice; that it is the very great badness
of your Cause, and not their own Inclinations that puts them upon such
dangerous things: and this gives me occasion to address my self to your selves,
Reverend Sirs, and to beg of you, that you would so far lay by all prejudices,
and partial interests, as to admit a serious consideration of this one thing
into your minds, that that cannot be either a good, a true, or a safe Religion,
that is forced to make use of such Arts and Arguments in the defense of her as
are a blemish to our common Christianity.

I have the charity to believe, that were your Church of Rome as pure now as it
was in the Apostles time, or as pure as our Church of England (blessed be God
for it) is, and our Church as corrupt as we know yours to be, that you would
have the same tenderness for our immortal Souls as we have for yours, and that
you would with all the earnestness and concern imaginable call upon us, and
exhort us, and beseech us to come out of the Church of England, and forsake all
dangerous and unlawful Doctrines and Practices.

Give me leave therefore, Reverend Sirs, who have this very care and concern
for all your Salvations, to be as earnest with you as such a thing, and your
condition does require at our hands.

That your Condition, as Members of the Church of Rome, is most dangerous and
unsafe to your Souls, I need not tell you now; especially since all that care
and pains, and unwearied diligence has been taken by the Church of England, to
convince you of the Errors and Dangers of your Ways. They have left you now
unexcusable, if you do not betake your selves, as bound in conscience, into the
Bosom of your most tender, but neglected Mother, the Church of England, by
having proved it so plainly and so fully, that your Religion is not the true
Religion of Christ: They have proved, that your Romish Religion has no
Foundation nor Countenance in the Word of God, and where, I beseech you, should
the Christian Religion be found, if not in the Holy Scriptures; does it want
that advantage the Jewish has of being visible in the Old Law? The Clergy of
this City have almost gone through all your Romish Doctrines and Practices, and
made it apparent, that those very few Texts of Scripture which you lay claim to
in defense of your Religion, are most directly against it.

As they have shown, that the Holy Scriptures are not for you, so they have
proved, that your Religion had no being till Christianity had been above three
hundred years in the World; your selves cannot be ignorant of the Truth of
this, you cannot deny that when your Writers are challenged to produce the
Examples of the three first and purest Ages of the Christian Church, that they
dare not undertake it: I will instance in your Representer who wrote the Nubes
Testium, and in Mr. Sabran himself, who has not given one word of answer to my
challenge, to show me that your Invocation of Saints was taught and practiced
in the three first Ages of the Church.

This is a mighty and unanswerable Prejudice against your Romish Religion; for
where, in God's Name, should we look for sincere Christianity, and where should
we expect to find it, if not in the Records of the Sacred Scriptures, and in
the Practices of the first and purest Ages of the Christian Church.

I will not descend to the particular Controversies betwixt you and us, it is
too tedious for the end of a Letter: but will beg of you, that your Religion
and ours may be tried by this evident and plain Principle, That that Religion
ought to be preferred to any other, which does most tend to the promoting and
propagating the Glory of God and of our blessed Savior, and securing the
Edification of the People of their Communion.

Now in the fear of God, and with his assistance, let us impartially examine
both Churches by this Rule; you your selves shall be Judges here as to the
first, whether that Church does not more promote the Glory of God, that is for
dedicating and attributing all Religious Worship to God alone, than that Church
which does divide it betwixt God and his Creatures, betwixt God and Stocks and
Stones, and the Bones of Dead Men? if the more we worship God, the more we
honor him, that Church must honor him most of all, which worships him most of
all, and that the Church certainly does, which makes all Religious Worship
whatever peculiar to his Infinite Majesty alone.

And for the Glory of our blessed Savior, does not that Church honor him
most, that makes him the Sole Mediator, that offers up all her Prayers in his
Name and for his Honor? does not she honor him far more than that Church,
which makes Saints and Angels Joynt-Mediators with him, and worships them for
that, which is to be done by him alone, and for which all that worship ought to
have been paid to him. The greatest Honor we can do our blessed Savior
certainly is to rely wholly upon his Mediation, and to place our whole
confidence in him.

And for the Edification of the People, does that Church consult it so much, as
has its Prayers in a Language the People do not understand, as that Church
which puts up such Prayers as all the People can understand and join with? This
is so evident against the Church of Rome, that we need neither Scripture nor
Fathers to urge against you, since the very Light of Nature does so absolutely
condemn such dumb unintelligible Service.

It were easy for me to urge these things further upon all your Consciences,
but I can only now entreat you, that as you love your own Souls, you would give
way to such further Reflections upon these three points as will be apt to
suggest themselves, if you be resolved to lay aside all Prejudices from
Education, Station, or Interest. It will be more glory for any one of you to
embrace the true Faith and Protestant Religion now, than at any other time,
since this will convince the World that it was the pure Dictates of your
Consciences, and the concern for your immortal Souls, that made you leave the
dangerous Communion of the Church of Rome, and renounce all her Errors and
corrupt Doctrines. Do not despise, Reverend Sirs, the Concern I discover for
your eternal Interest; you will join your Prayers to mine, that after the
proving of all things, you may have the Grace to hold that which is good: and
then I am certain you cannot continue in the Communion of the Church of Rome.

In the mean time I have this further Charity for you, to believe that if the
Church of England be a true Church of Christ, and her Doctrines pure, and her
Worship holy, (as I am certain it is, and ready to seal my Belief with my
Blood) that you will join your Prayers with mine, for the Prosperity of this
Church of England, that God would abate the Pride, and assuage the Malice of
all its Enemies, and that he would confound the Devices of all and every
Society or Party of Enemies against this most Holy and Apostolic Church of
England.

In the Confidence of this your Christian Charity, I cannot but subscribe my
self,

Reverend Sirs, Your most hearty Well-wisher, and humble Servant in Christ, E.
G.


