THE COURT'S Apology. Containing a short VINDICATION OF THE COVRTIERS. FROM THE
Common Aspersions and misreports of Ignorance and Envy.

By L. G. A Daily Observator.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDGLXIII.

THE COURTS Apology, etc.
IT IS not my design so much to consult the Persons or Capacities of those to
whom I address my Vindication, as the Qualities and Occasions of those whose
Patronage I have undertaken. The Impertinence of the Detractours, deserves not
satisfaction, but the Demeanours of the Slandered do necessarily exact a Cloak.

I am not ignorant with what resentment my Clyents will entertain an Advocate
of their own Alliance Had it been an Exotic, or an unacquaintance, their
longanimity might have bribed their longer Ears to an Audience; but it is not
their custom to relish a tedious acquaintance, neither do they love to hear
their own.

I pretend not an Apology for Ladies, against whom the clamours of the people
cannot raise a scandal of prevalence, the downright language (which proves
usually succesful with others) becoming uneffectual with Ladies of a Court
Complexion; Since the Raylery of the Vulgar, and the Pourtraicture of a
Satyrist (though never so much displaying them) must alike despair to make them
blush, who can always put a good Face upon it. I do not enterprise then a
description of those; they alone can paint themselves in their proper Colors.

But although I may not presume to obtrude upon the World a Vindication of
Lady's Repute, yet I shall not make so far a digression from them, as to leave
the Courtiers (their Proselites and Appendixes) unexcus'd, and to omit an
Apology for those in whose faces it is most usual to cast dirt. It Is my aim to
wipe those whom the Rout bespatter; and to new shadow them whose honor is
eclipsed; and herein I cannot despond of good reception; For how can they, with
whom a painted sace is so attractive, disgust a draught that so much resembles
them?

The first allegation wherewith people keep their tongues in action, and amuse
themselves into wonder, is the exorbitancy of Array and Attire expensive beyond
the precincts of their annual sufficiencies. Whereas I cannot but admire that
men should so much scandal their own judgments, as to libel and decry the
Courtiers good Apparel, since rich Attire is more dispensable and of a cheaper
bargain with them, whose wits go still a wool gathering.

The next, forsooth, wherewith we are acquainted, is a Gallimaffry of Nations
from whence the Court derives a Motley Countenance, representing Babel in its
Epitome, composed of nothing but the confusion of Languages. No, no, those
whose inclinations are so biased toward Females, must unavoidably affect
their Mother tongue. But what though there were a mixture of Speeches? Methinks
that should not give occasion of disgust to those (whose Palats seldom
disrelish an Oleo or Kickshaw) the Court it self being nothing else but a
French dish A diversity of Language in White Hall, is not (I hope) grown
inexcusable; especially since there is large amends made for their difference
in Tongues, by their agreement in thought, and their being of one mind, each
man having resolvedly determined to defraud his Master.

The next thing whereby our Slanderers animate others to the disaffecting of
Courtiers, is A pretense of Bribery and Extortion; in that they weigh not what
disposure they make of places, 'cause they are procured by pounds, giving
occasion to some of prophesying, that the Court will Break, 'cause Offices fall
to Pieces. But had they not more mind to cavil, than receive satisfaction, they
might acquiesce in consideration of the necessity of such Transactions,
assuring themselves that there must needs be Corruption, where the Court is
composed of such a Generation. And what though there be Corruption? Yet it is a
Place of little infection; the Itch being the distemper most regnant, which
renders them so desirous to be scratched, and for which we can prescribe no
better a Remedy than a Purgation. As for the Gout, the Plague in the Purse is
not only a prevention of that, but antidotes all other Malignities.

Nor does their next aspersion more participate of veracity; they themselves
becoming injurious unto truth, while they challenge Courtiers of injustice, and
disregard of merits, in the conferring either reward or punishment. For did
they not proposito hoodwink themselves, how easily might they be convinced of a
contrary deportment? since the Courtiers are so ambitious (ad amussim) to
resemble Justice it self, that their distributions are made with the most
accurate Blindness.

The fifth Stratagem whereby they work easy Ignorance into Credulity, is to
lay deficiency of Alms at the Courtiers door, and to cast want of Charity into
his Dish. Persuading men into an apprehension that they are Charitable to
themselves alone. For the silencing this Calumny, we might tell them that
charity begins at home. But alas, this is but the beginning of Charity,
whereas that of Courtiers is gone farther, and come even to it is utmost End.

And next (lest peradventure their Learning and Knowledge might stipulate either
for their pretended Crimes or Deficiencies) They are indicted of Ignorance and
contempt of Literature. Whereas, how easily are they acquitted from this
Slander and Impeachment? In that it is impossible with sound reason to accuse
them of Ignorance, who are, each man, able to confound the wise, the Court it
self being the very confusion of wisdom. Nor does it less partake of
absurdity, to asperse them with neglect of Learning, who are so much addicted
to Books; each Shopkeepers Book can show it.

That it is not Conscience, but Interest, (whatsoever appearances they make)
which raises these Clamours, to the Infamy of the Court; and that their
Concernments prompt them to these accusations, is easily visible in the next
Impeachment; wherein we have Courtiers represented as backward in discharging
all debts, (except those that Women demand) insomuch that Creditours are
necessitated to that incivility of dunning them at their Lodgings. Alas, how
miserably do our Accusants mistake themselves, in alleging that for a Crime,
which I am ready to produce in their Vindication? For in this demeanor of
Courtiers, I apprehend nothing else than honesty in the engaging themselves to
an acknowledgment of their Debts, it being impossible for them to refuse the
Child when it is brought home to their own Doors. But we shall not gratify our
Adversaries so far, as to confess the fact, since this scandal of remissness
in paying Debts is unmeasurably false; Neither do Courtiers trouble their
scores to be brought home, but meet them half way, and generously discharge
them in the middle. Let not then any mis-reports excite their Creditours to
mistrust, or Jealousy, since I dare safely pronounce them no Cheats; For there
must unavoydably be honest Dealing, where there is so much Shuffling.

The eighth Cavillation whereby the Courtier is exposed to Censure and
Misprision, is Pride, and a violent Ambition of being admired. Whereas, could
we withdraw the vizard of Spleen and Malevolence, we should have a prospect of
qualities of another Complexion, and we might easily behold them courteous,
loving and affable, courting their own shadows, and complementing the very
looking-glass. And as for their desire of being wondered at, there is no such
thing; For they have now taken the course to save others the expense of
admiration, since they have learnt each man sufficiently to admire himself.

Partiality is the next which is foysted in to make up the number of the
pretended Crimes of Court. Whereas the most superficial scruting will convince
us, that with Courtiers there is no respect of Persons; In that they can pass
by their old and intimate Acquaintance, without taking the least cognizance or
notice of them.

Nor is it the Courtiers happiness to be the Object of these Scandals alone;
but they are also traduced for not being stocked with Loyalty proportionable to
their Promotions, as not having shared in those sufferings which sunk the old
Cavaliers. But an easy Vindication will expunge this obloquy, and undeceive
the abused multitude, by signifying to them, That the Persons now preferred,
have been, and are the greatest sufferers, suffering the greatest Crimes to be
acted under their Nose; with impunity. Neither have they been (if well
considered) less loosers. The Kings old Soldiers lost indeed their Estates
and Fortunes, but these have lost their honesty in his Majesty's service.

Much stir there is, about the quarrelsome disposition regnant in the Court,
which indisposeth men for peace upon the least foul language; And it is
accounted vanity in Courtiers to stand so much upon their honor. But these
dis-resentments are taken up without cause, and the occasion will not justify
the Cavil: For as to the first, they are so little addicted to take exceptions
at foul language as that they delight in nothing more, insomuch that it is not
without some reason, many of them are thought to have been begotten in the
Stews; their Discourse being made up of nothing else but ribaldry. And as for
the other, I think they have reason to stand upon their honor, whose carriage
is the only cause that it is so much trodden under foot. Besides, their
Bickerings and Duels (which give greatest disgust) will be more pardonable if
well considered, for they do not (as we erroneously apprehend) fight to
vindicate good repute, and honorable name, but merely out of a design to get
one, because they are conscious they never had any before.

It Is alleged moreover, that they much in poverish his Majesty by importuning
his Revenues, and procuring his Manors for themselves, it being thought
necessary that that King must needs be poor, whose Courtiers are al^ Beggars.
But this is but an inconsiderable detraction, and it is hoped the future
proceedings of the Court will give it the Lie; especially since some have given
them a good example, by taking a course not to scandal the Court by open
begging from the King, but by private, both taking from him and their brethren.

Again, the undecency of their Carriage, made up of so many ridiculous
gestures, accompanied with the continual motion and coranto of the legs and
head, and attended with postures too light for the gravity of a Court; becomes
the next Impeachment. But I do not conceive what other Behavior we can expect:
How can we hope for any other carriage than what is composed of Antic tricks,
since the French have supplied us with such a generation of Apes? Insomuch,
that many suppose Aesop's experiment might afford his Majesty very good
divertisement; and that the scattering of a Bag of Nuts would show him all
his Court together by the Ears.

The next thing wherewith the people vex themselves, is the Courtiers youthful
Indiscretion, and their assumed locks of borrowed hair: As to the first, it is
true they are generally young in countenance, but their brains do much
participate of gravity and age, for I Am sure they are worme-eaten. And as for
the last, it finds an obvious Apology, since there is such a Correspondence
between Periwiggs and their heads, which being so furnished with news, are
nothing else but so many Barbers Shops.

But all this while we have not questioned their Religion, which the
mis-apprehensions of the vulgar deem to be none at all, or (at least) nearly
allied to Popery. Here I could wish my Apology might find acceptance, and that
I might not be esteemed partial in my attempting to justify their Divinity
both in it is Practice and Theory. If I may be credited then, I can assure the
Reader, that they are so far from being of no Religion, as that they are of
all, and so far from running into the old one from whence we reformed, as that
it is to be hoped they have found a newer way to Heaven than the Word of God,
since they can laugh at Scripture and deride a Sermon. Nor is their practical
Theology far behind their Speculative; for it is expected every day that they
will enter into a course of repentance, they are so addicted to whoring; and
that lying will be out of fashion, they are so given to swearing.

As for Popery, it is true they seem inclinable thereunto; since while they
prostitute their devotion, and address their zeal to an handsome face, they do
(with Papists) nothing but adore a Picture. But yet I dare defy the
Intromission of Romish Rites into our Court, especially since the Ladies bear
such a resolved antipathy to Nuns.

Hitherto have I been the Advocate of their Religion; If the Reader has a
desire to know more, let him consult their Faces, which speak them (in some
sense) Saints, in that it presents many (like the Almanac) in red letters; and
others of more handsome features in the resemblance of those Saints they
worship, viz. Ladies; for their faces as well as their manners pronounce them
effeminate: Only there lies this difference between their Visages and those of
the Ladies, that the countenance of these, when amiss, is either patched up
from their own boxes, or supplied from the Painter's Shop; Whereas the
Courtiers face, when it has got a brack, may be recruited by a Brazier.

I hope my reserving the encomium of their faces to the posteriors of my
Vindication, will not make them discountenance the rest; but rather by their
wincking at this hysteron proteron, engage the farther endeavors of their
inconsiderable Advocate

L. G.


